in leafy gametophores, ppα-dox is expressed in auxin producing tissues, including rhizoid and axillary hairs.
ppα-dox transcript levels and ppα-dox activity increased in moss tissues infected with botrytis cinerea or treated with pectobacterium carotovorum elicitors.
in addition, ppα-dox overexpression and treatments with ppα-dox-derived oxylipins reduced cellular damage caused by elicitors of p. carotovorum.
in b. cinerea infected leaves, ppα-dox-gus proteins accumulated in cells surrounding infected cells, suggesting a protective mechanism.
however, overexpressing ppα-dox, or incubating wild-type tissues with ppα-dox-derived oxylipins, principally the aldehyde heptadecatrienal, resulted in smaller moss colonies with less protonemal tissues, due to a reduction of caulonemal filament growth and a reduction of chloronemal cell size compared with normal tissues.
plant α-dioxygenases catalyze the incorporation of molecular oxygen into polyunsaturated fatty acids leading to the formation of oxylipins.
recombinant ppα-dox protein catalyzed the conversion of fatty acids into 2-hydroperoxy derivatives with a substrate preference for α-linolenic, linoleic and palmitic acids.
α-dioxygenasesphyscomitrella patensdevelopmentdefensepectobacteriumbotrytis cinereaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
in flowering plants, two main groups of α-doxs have been described.
while the α-dox <dig> isoforms are mainly involved in defense responses against microbial infection and herbivores, the α-dox <dig> isoforms are mostly related to development.
ppα-dox is expressed during development in tips of young protonemal filaments with maximum expression levels in mitotically active undifferentiated apical cells.
targeted disruption of ppα-dox did not cause a visible developmental alteration and did not compromise the defense response.
our study shows that the unique α-dox of the primitive land plant p. patens, although apparently not crucial, participates both in development and in the defense response against pathogens, suggesting that α-doxs from flowering plants could have originated by duplication and successive functional diversification after the divergence from bryophytes.
