compared with the corresponding discrete criteria using experimental data at the measurement time points only, numerical results of the erk kinase activation module show that the continuous absolute-error criteria using both function and high order derivatives generate estimates with better accuracy.
simulation results show that the models with estimated parameters using continuous fitness functions have better robustness properties than those using the corresponding discrete fitness functions.
this suggests that the continuous absolute-error criteria lead to more accurate estimates than the corresponding discrete criteria.
we use three case studies to demonstrate the accuracy and reliability of the proposed new approach.
this result is also supported by the second and third case studies for the g1/s transition network and the map kinase pathway, respectively.
the advances of systems biology have raised a large number of sophisticated mathematical models for describing the dynamic property of complex biological systems.
the expanded dataset is the basis to infer unknown model parameters using various continuous optimization criteria, including the error of simulation only, error of both simulation and the first derivative, or error of simulation as well as the first and second derivatives.
the inference studies and robustness analysis suggest that the proposed continuous optimization criteria are effective and robust for estimating unknown parameters in mathematical models.
the number of unknown parameters in mathematical models may be larger than the number of observation data.
to address the issue of inadequate experimental data, we propose a continuous optimization approach for making reliable inference of model parameters.
we also study the robustness property of these three models to examine the reliability of estimates.
this approach first uses a spline interpolation to generate continuous functions of system dynamics as well as the first and second order derivatives of continuous functions.
parameter inferenceregulatory networkmathematical modelcontinuous objective functionrobustness analysisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
one of the major steps in developing mathematical models is to estimate unknown parameters of the model based on experimentally measured quantities.
the imbalance between the number of experimental data and number of unknown parameters makes reverse-engineering problems particularly challenging.
