the experiment results show that knowpredsite achieves higher prediction accuracy than ngloc and blast-hit method.
the experiment results show that even though the sequence similarity is low, the local similarity is effective for prediction.
experiment results show that knowpredsite is a highly accurate prediction method for both single- and multi-localized proteins.
it is worth-mentioning the prediction process of knowpredsite is transparent and biologically interpretable and it shows a set of template sequences to generate the prediction result.
many studies have shown that proteins may simultaneously locate or move between different cellular compartments and be involved in different biological processes with different roles.
the study of protein subcellular localization  is important for elucidating protein functions involved in various cellular processes.
when predicting the localization annotation of a query protein, we search against the knowledge base and used a scoring mechanism to determine the predicted sites.
we construct a knowledge base to record the possible sequence variations for protein sequences.
in this study, we propose a knowledge based method, called knowpredsite, to predict the localization site of both single-localized and multi-localized proteins.
knowpredsite demonstrates the power of identifying related sequences in the knowledge base.
however, a significant number of eukaryotic proteins are known to be localized into multiple subcellular organelles.
for single-localized proteins, the overall accuracy of knowpredsite is  <dig> %.
for multi-localized proteins, the overall accuracy of knowpredsite is  <dig> %, which is significantly higher than that of ngloc by  <dig> %.
however, determining the localization sites of a protein through wet-lab experiments can be time-consuming and labor-intensive.
most of the psl prediction systems are established for single-localized proteins.
based on the local similarity, we can identify the "related sequences" for prediction.
7– <dig> september  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  eighth international conference on bioinformatics  singapore
