this study demonstrates that dna pooling allows fast and high-throughput determination of allele frequencies in atlantic salmon enabling cost-efficient identification of informative markers for discrimination of populations at various geographical scales, as well as identification of loci controlling ecologically and economically important traits.
in this article we have tested the effectiveness of dna pooling to obtain accurate allele frequency estimates for atlantic salmon  populations using an illumina snp-chip.
our results also indicate that even relatively small dna pools  can provide accurate allele frequency estimates for a given sample.
we developed an efficient quality control filter which enables exclusion of loci showing high error rate and minor allele frequency  close to zero.
concurrently, improvements to genotyping technology have now made it possible to efficiently genotype large numbers of genome-wide distributed snps enabling genome wide association studies .
however, genotyping significant numbers of individuals with large number of snps remains prohibitively expensive for many research groups.
a possible solution to this problem is to determine allele frequencies from pooled dna samples, such ‘allelotyping’ has been presented as a cost-effective alternative to individual genotyping and has become popular in human gwas.
despite of higher level of variation associated with array replicates compared to pool construction, we suggest that both sources of variation should be taken into account.
in total,  <dig> atlantic salmon dna pools from  <dig> populations were analyzed on an atlantic salmon snp-chip containing probes for  <dig> snp markers,  <dig> of which were bi-allelic.
dna poolingatlantic salmonsnpallele frequency estimationallelotypingpopulation genomics
we observed high concordance  between allele frequency estimates derived from individual genotyping and dna pools.
after applying multiple quality control filters we obtained allele frequency estimates for  <dig> bi-allelic loci.
