coordinate reductions in fluorescence intensity of arclight and ci-vsd-containing derivatives were observed at both the plasma membrane and nuclear membranes following eatp treatments.
in an ongoing effort to adapt tools of optical electrophysiology for plants, we describe here the expression and testing of arclight and various derivatives in different membranes of root cells in arabidopsis thaliana.
transgenic constructs were designed to express arclight and various derivatives targeted to the plasma membrane and nuclear membranes of arabidopsis root cells.
the dispensability of the ci-vsd suggests that in plants, where h+ ions contribute substantially to electrical activities, the voltage-sensing ability of arclight is subordinate to the ph sensitivity of its sephluorin base.
such tools will assist analyses of ph as a signal and/or messenger at the cell surface and the nuclear periphery in living plants.
nevertheless, arclight and derivatives situated in the plasma membrane and nuclear membranes may offer robust, fluorescence intensity-based ph indicators for monitoring concurrent changes in ph at these discrete membrane systems.
developed by neuroscientists to chart neuronal circuits in animals, gevis comprise a fluorescent protein that is fused to a voltage-sensing domain.
the transient reduction of arclight fluorescence triggered by eatp most likely reflects changes in ph and not membrane voltage.
the ph sensitivity of arclight precludes its use as a direct sensor of membrane voltage in plants.
however, similar responses were observed for derivatives lacking the ci-vsd.
arclight consists of super-ecliptic  phluorin  with an a227d substitution, which confers voltage sensitivity in neurons, fused to the voltage-sensing domain of the voltage-sensing phosphatase of cionaintestinalis .
one well-known gevi, arclight, undergoes strong shifts in fluorescence intensity in response to voltage changes in mammalian cells.
in transgenic seedlings, changes in fluorescence intensity of these reporter proteins following extracellular atp  application were monitored using a fluorescence microscope equipped with a high speed camera.
it is increasingly appreciated that electrical controls acting at the cellular and supra-cellular levels influence development and initiate rapid responses to environmental cues.
an emerging method for non-invasive optical imaging of electrical activity at cell membranes uses genetically-encoded voltage indicators .
