the work demonstrates that the global transcriptional analysis provided an exhaustive view of genes involved in pathogen recognition and signaling, and controlling activities of different tfs, phytohormones and secondary metabolites, that contribute to host resistance against f. verticillioides.
currently, chemical and agronomic measures to control fusarium ear rot are not very effective and selection of more resistant genotypes is a desirable strategy to reduce contaminations.
after f. verticillioides inoculation, a similar response was observed in both genotypes, although the magnitude of induction was much greater in the resistant genotype.
a next-generation rna-sequencing approach was used for the first time to study transcriptional changes associated with f. verticillioides inoculation in resistant co <dig> and susceptible co <dig> maize genotypes at 72 hours post inoculation.
interestingly, strong differences in expression between the two genotypes were observed in secondary metabolism category: pathways related to shikimate, lignin, flavonoid and terpenoid biosynthesis were strongly represented and induced in the co <dig> genotype, indicating that selection to enhance these traits is an additional strategy for improving resistance against f. verticillioides infection.
co <dig> genotype showed a higher level of expression of genes distributed over all functional classes, in particular those related to secondary metabolism category.
a deeper knowledge of molecular events and genetic basis underlying fusarium ear rot is necessary to speed up progress in breeding for resistance.
more than  <dig> million sequence reads were generated for inoculated and uninoculated control plants and analyzed to measure gene expression levels.
rna-seq analysisfusarium ear rotconstitutive defensesecondary metabolismcandidate geneszea maysissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
comparison of expression levels between inoculated vs. uninoculated and resistant vs. susceptible transcriptomes revealed a total number of  <dig>  differentially expressed genes.
fusarium verticillioides causes ear rot in maize  and accumulation of mycotoxins, that affect human and animal health.
this response included higher activation of genes involved in pathogen perception, signaling and defense, including wrky transcription factors and jasmonate/ethylene mediated defense responses.
