the objective of this study was to develop new microsatellite loci that have the ability to distinguish among c. tropicalis isolates.
this is the first attempt to develop new microsatellite loci for c. tropicalis.
microsatellite-based typing methods using sets of genetic markers have been developed and reported for population structure analysis of c. albicans, c. glabrata, and c. parapsilosis, but no studies have been published for genetic analysis of c. tropicalis.
dna sequences containing over  <dig> bi- or tri-nucleotide repeats were selected from the c. tropicalis genome database.
sixty-five independent c. tropicalis isolates were genotyped using these  <dig> markers.
the comparisons showed that microsatellite analysis and mlst had the similar discriminatory power for c. tropicalis, which were more powerful than pcr-fingerprinting.
these newly developed markers will be a valuable resource for the differentiation of c. tropicalis isolates.
more c. tropicalis isolates will need to be sequenced and analyzed in order to fully show the potential of these newly developed microsatellite markers.
genotyping results obtained by microsatellite analysis were compared to pcr-fingerprinting and multi-locus sequence typing .
the discriminatory power of the six loci ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> .
candida tropicalis is considered to be the leading pathogen causing nosocomial fungemia and hepatosplenic fungal infections in patients with cancer, particularly those with leukemia.
candida tropicalismicrosatellite markerspopulation structuremolecular typingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
thirty pcr primers sets specific for the microsatellite loci were designed and tested using eight clinically independent isolates.
based on these analyses, six microsatellite loci were confirmed, although two loci were found to be with unstable flanking areas.
according to the amplification efficiency, specificity, and observed polymorphisms, eight markers were selected for further population structure analysis and molecular typing.
