having coupled these systems, we constructed stochastic models for use in our frequency domain analysis.
we have thus found our technique of frequency domain analysis to be a valuable benchmark systems-biological tool.
by measuring crosstalk between subsystems it can also indicate mechanisms by which such systems may be controlled in experiments and therapeutics.
as our focus we construct a novel coupled oscillatory model of p <dig>  nf-kb and the mammalian cell cycle, based on recent experimentally verified mathematical models.
the technique is able to characterise precisely the distance in behaviour between different models, different systems and different parts within the same system.
our methodology is particularly relevant for oscillatory systems, though not limited to these, and is most revealing when applied to the results of stochastic simulation.
while detailed dynamical data exists about individual pathways, the task of combining such data without further lengthy experimentation is highly nontrivial.
informed by online databases of protein networks and interactions, we distilled their key elements into simplified models containing the most significant parts.
constructing predictive dynamic models of interacting signalling networks remains one of the great challenges facing systems biology.
the computational burden of estimating parameters increases exponentially with increasing system size, so it is crucial to find precise and efficient ways of measuring the behaviour of systems, in order to re-use existing work.
we find that the interactions between the networks we study are highly complex and not intuitive:  points of maximum perturbation do not necessarily correspond to points of maximum proximity to influence;  increased coupling strength does not necessarily increase perturbation;  different perturbations do not necessarily sum and  overall, susceptibility to perturbation is amplitude and frequency dependent and cannot easily be predicted by heuristic measures.
