in situ hybridization analysis showed that hypoxic induction of omtert mrna was clearly evident in hepatocytes in the caudal region of liver and in spermatogonia-containing cysts in testis.
motif e is the most highly conserved showing  <dig> –100% overall identity among the fish terts and  <dig> % overall identity among vertebrates.
it contains all of the functional motifs that are conserved in other vertebrate terts.
analysis of the 5'-flanking sequence of the omtert gene identified two hre  cores.
the omtert gene is ubiquitously expressed in fish under normoxia, albeit at varying levels, where highest expression was observed in gonads and the lowest in liver.
current understanding on the relationships between hypoxia, hypoxia-inducible factor- <dig>  and telomerase reverse transcriptase  gene expression are largely based on in vitro studies in human cancer cells.
this study demonstrates for the first time, hypoxic regulation of tert expression in vivo in a whole fish system.
thus far, it remains uncertain whether these findings can be directly extrapolated to non-tumor tissues in other whole animal systems in vivo.
overexpression of the hif-1α induced omtert promoter activity as demonstrated using transient transfection assays.
our findings support the notion that hypoxia upregulates omtert expression via omhif- <dig> in non-neoplastic fish liver and testis in vivo.
although several reports demonstrated hif-1- mediated upregulation of the human tert gene under hypoxia, conflicting findings have also been reported.
overall, the structure and regulation of the tert gene is highly conserved in vertebrates from fish to human.
in vivo expression of omtert was significantly upregulated in testis and liver in response to hypoxia , where concomitant induction of the omhif-1α and erythropoietin  genes was also observed.
the adult marine medaka  was employed as a model fish in this study.
while fish often encounter environmental hypoxia, the in vivo regulation of tert by hypoxia in non-neoplastic tissues of fish remains virtually unknown.
