we examined gene expression by intracellular b. cenocepacia using selective capture of transcribed sequences  combined with microarray analysis.
deletion of various scots-identified genes affected bacterial entry into macrophages and intracellular replication.
affected genes represented all aspects of cellular life including information storage and processing, cellular processes and signaling, and metabolism.
we identified  <dig> genes with significantly different levels of expression by intracellular bacteria, of which  <dig> showed increased expression and  <dig> showed decreased expression.
burkholderia cenocepacia is an opportunistic pathogen causing life-threatening infections in patients with cystic fibrosis.
in particular, genes involved in bacterial motility, cobalamin biosynthesis, the type vi secretion system, and membrane modification contributed greatly to macrophage entry and subsequent intracellular behavior of b. cenocepacia.
in general, intracellular gene expression demonstrated a pattern of environmental sensing, bacterial response, and metabolic adaptation to the phagosomal environment.
we hypothesize that b. cenocepacia undergoes changes in gene expression after internalization by macrophages, inducing genes involved in intracellular survival and host adaptation.
b. cenocepacia enters macrophages, adapts to the phagosomal environment, replicates within a modified phagosome, and exhibits cytotoxicity towards the host cells.
the analysis of the transcriptomic response of intracellular b. cenocepacia reveals that metabolic adaptation to a new niche plays a major role in the survival of b. cenocepacia in macrophages.
we also show that intracellular b. cenocepacia is cytotoxic towards the macrophage host, and capable of spread to neighboring cells, a role dependent on scots-identified genes.
the bacterium survives within macrophages by interfering with endocytic trafficking and delaying the maturation of the b. cenocepacia-containing phagosome.
further investigation into the remaining scots-identified genes will provide a more complete picture of the adaptive response of b. cenocepacia to the host cell environment.
