a variety of expression patterns of ccch genes were observed during populus development, of which  <dig> genes highly express in root and  <dig> genes show the highest level of transcript abundance in differentiating xylem.
the expression profiles of all populus ccch genes have been digitally analyzed in six tissues across different developmental stages, and under various drought stress conditions.
in each subfamily, the gene structure and motif composition were relatively conserved.
our results presented here may provide a starting point for the functional dissection of this family of potential rna-binding proteins.
in the present study, a comprehensive analysis of the genes encoding ccch zinc finger family in populus was performed.
particularly, some ccch genes may be involved in wood development while others in drought tolerance regulation.
using a thorough annotation approach, a total of  <dig> full-length ccch genes were identified in populus, of which most contained more than one ccch motif and a type of non-conventional c-x11-c-x6-c-x3-h motif was unique for populus.
thirty-four paralogous pairs were identified in populus, of which  <dig> pairs  might be created by the whole genome segment duplication, whereas  <dig> pairs seem to be resulted from tandem duplications.
comprehensive genomic analyses suggested that segmental duplications contribute significantly to the expansion of populus ccch gene family.
all of the populus ccch genes were phylogeneticly clustered into  <dig> distinct subfamilies.
quantitative real-time rt-pcr  was further performed to confirm the tissue-specific expression and responses to drought stress treatment of  <dig> selected populus ccch genes.
transcriptome profiling provides first insights into the functional divergences among members of populus ccch gene family.
these ccch proteins have been shown to play diverse roles in plant developmental processes and environmental responses.
in  <dig> ccch proteins, we also identified  <dig> putative nucleon-cytoplasm shuttling proteins and  <dig> typical rna-binding proteins.
this study provides the first systematic analysis of the populus ccch proteins.
