we aimed to demonstrate that df stem cells from impacted molars and canines can be used to improve bone regeneration on titanium implants surfaces.
ti ha implants proved to be more favorable for adhesion and proliferation of df stem cells in first days of cultivation.
additional bmp- <dig> in the medium did not allow df stem cells to develop a more mature phenotype, leaving them in a pre-osteogenic stage.
long term culturing  on titanium surfaces of df stem cells in standard medium without soluble osteogenic inducers, indicated that ha coating is more favorable, with the acquisition of a more mature osteoblastic phenotype as shown by immunocytochemical staining.
these findings demonstrated that even in absence of exogenous osteogenic factors, tiha implants and in a lesser extent tictrl and tisio <dig> implants can induce and sustain osteogenic differentiation of df stem cells, by their chemical and topographical properties.
our research demonstrated that df stem cells have a spontaneous tendency for osteogenic differentiation and can be used for improving bone regeneration on titanium implants surfaces.
this study highlights the presence of stem cells in df, their potential to adhere and differentiate into osteoblasts on different types of titanium surfaces.
the best sustained mineralization process evaluated by immuno-cytochemical staining, scanning electron microscopy and ca2+ quantification was observed for tiha implants with a higher expression of alp, collagen and ca2+ deposition.
differentiation into bone cells was induced in presence or absence of bmp- <dig> and tgfβ <dig>  the presence of growth factors until 28 days in medium maintained the cells in an earlier stage of differentiation with a lower level of specific bone proteins and a higher expression of alkaline phosphatase .
the influence of titanium coatings and osteogenic differentiation mediums with or without growth factors were evaluated.
influence of titanium implants with different bioactive coatings, hydroxyapatite  and with silicatitanate , and porous ti6al7nb implants as control , was studied in terms of cell adhesion and viability.
dental follicle stem cellsbone regenerationbone regeneration on titanium implantsimpacted canineimpacted molarosteogenic markersthis paper was published under the frame of european social found, human resources development operational programme 2007- <dig>  project no.
isolated cells from the harvested df tissue from impacted canine/molars, expressed stem cells markers.
