however, the transporter characters are mainly acquired from mtp crystal structures which are hard to crystalize.
therefore, it is desirable to develop bioinformatics tools for the effective large-scale analysis of available sequences to identify novel transporters and characterize such transporters.
it is hypothesized that, after filtering substrates, the hydrated water molecules need to be released from the pore regions.
identifying putative membrane transport proteins  and understanding the transport mechanisms involved remain important challenges for the advancement of structural and functional genomics.
the scmmtp training and test accuracy levels respectively reached  <dig> % and  <dig> %.
the test accuracy of support vector machine  using a complicated classification method with a low possibility for biological interpretation and position-specific substitution matrix  as a protein feature is  <dig> %, thus scmmtp is comparable to svm-pssm.
to identify mtps, scmmtp is applied to three datasets including: 1) human transmembrane proteins, 2) a photosynthetic protein dataset, and 3) a human protein database.
the scmmtp produced estimating propensity scores for amino acids and dipeptides as mtps.
scmmtp yields estimating propensity scores for amino acids and dipeptides as mtps, which can be used to identify novel mtps and characterize transport mechanisms for use in further experiments.
this work proposes a novel method  based on the scoring card method  using dipeptide composition to identify and characterize mtps from an existing dataset containing  <dig> mtps and  <dig> non-mtps which are separated into a training dataset consisting  <dig>  proteins and an independent dataset consisting  <dig> proteins.
membrane transport proteindipeptide compositionphysicochemical propertyscoring card methodsupport vector machine9- <dig> september  <dig> joint 26th genome informatics workshop and asia pacific bioinformatics network  14th international conference on bioinformatics  tokyo, japan
mtps showing α-helix rich structure is agreed with previous studies.
