overall, parasite community composition differed significantly between populations of different colour morphs.
differences in parasite community composition were stable in time.
correlations between parasite community composition and tropheus genetic differentiation were not significant, suggesting that host dispersal does not influence parasite community diversification.
the second prerequisite is that these infection levels cause divergent selection and facilitate adaptive divergence.
the genetic structure of tropheus populations was strong and showed a significant isolation-by-distance pattern, confirming that spatial isolation is limiting host dispersal.
subject to alternating episodes of isolation and secondary contact because of lake level fluctuations, tropheus colour morphs are believed to accumulate and maintain genetic differentiation through a combination of vicariance, philopatric behaviour and mate discrimination.
the third prerequisite is that parasite-driven adaptive divergence facilitates the evolution of reproductive isolation.
provided that the observed contrasts in parasitism facilitate adaptive divergence among populations in allopatry , and promote the evolution of reproductive isolation during episodes of sympatry, parasites might facilitate speciation in this genus.
parasites and pathogens have been suggested to initiate or accelerate speciation by triggering both natural and sexual selection.
multiple characteristic traits of cichlids, targeted by natural or sexual selection, are considered among the driving factors of these radiations.
adaptive divergenceectoparasiteendoparasiteecological speciationhost-parasite associationsnatural selectionparasite-driven speciationsexual selection
macroparasite communities were screened in eight populations belonging to five different colour morphs.
adaptation to different ecological environments is thought to drive ecological speciation.
three prerequisites for parasite-driven speciation can be inferred from ecological speciation theory.
this phenomenon culminates in the radiations of cichlid fishes in the african great lakes.
the first prerequisite is that different populations experience divergent infection levels.
in two consecutive years , we observed significant variation across populations for infection with acanthocephalans, nematodes, monogeneans of the genera gyrodactylus and cichlidogyrus, and the copepod ergasilus spp.
parasite communities were mainly composed of acanthocephalans, nematodes, monogeneans, copepods, branchiurans, and digeneans.
