computational approaches in the identification of drug targets are expected to reduce time and effort in drug development.
although several studies have been conducted for distinguishing drug targets from non-drug targets, they mainly focus on the sequences and functional roles of proteins.
when we predicted drug targets by combining previously known protein properties and proposed new properties, an f-score of  <dig>  was obtained.
when the newly proposed properties are integrated, the prediction performance is improved and these properties are related to drug targets.
advances in genomics and proteomics provide the opportunity to uncover properties of druggable genomes.
we found that  drug targetability and protein essentiality are decoupled,  druggability of proteins has high expression level and tissue specificity, and  functional post-translational modification residues are enriched in drug target proteins.
in addition, to predict the drug targetability of proteins, we exploited two machine learning methods .
we confirmed and extended that drug target proteins  are likely to have more hydrophobic, less polar, less pest sequences, and more signal peptide sequences higher and  are more involved in enzyme catalysis, oxidation and reduction in cellular respiration, and operational genes.
drug targetbioinformaticsproteomicsdtmbio 2016: the tenth international workshop on data and text mining in biomedical informatics dtmbio 2016indianapolis, in, usa 24- <dig> october  <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
in this study, we proposed new properties  for effectively identifying drug target proteins.
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
we believe that our study will provide a new aspect in inferring drug-target interactions.
using the drugbank  database containing nearly  <dig>  drug entries including  <dig> fda-approved drugs and  <dig> of their targets and human uniprot/swiss-prot databases, we defined  <dig> non-redundant drug target and  <dig>  non-drug target proteins.
we first reassessed the widely used properties of drug target proteins.
