collagen gel invasion assays, histology, immunohistochemistry, real-time rt-pcr, optical coherence tomography, and echocardiography were used to evaluate emt and tgfβ signaling in the endocardial cushions, and morphogenesis, ecm composition, and function of the heart valves.
adult mbnl1∆e3/∆e <dig> mice exhibit valve dysmorphia with elevated tgfβ signaling, changes in ecm composition, and increased pigmentation.
mbnl1∆e3/∆e <dig> mice also have a high incidence of ostium secundum septal defects accompanied by atrial communication, but do not develop overt cardiomyopathy.
muscleblind-like 1transforming growth factor βepithelial-mesenchymal transitionendocardial cushionsheart valvesmouseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
we previously identified the rna binding protein muscleblind-like  <dig>  as a negative regulator of tgfβ signaling and emt in chicken endocardial cushions ex vivo.
the endocardial cushions are remodeled into the valves at post-emt stages via differentiation of the mesenchyme and changes in the extracellular matrix .
development of the valves and septa of the heart depends on the formation and remodeling of the endocardial cushions in the atrioventricular canal and outflow tract.
this is accompanied by a high incidence of regurgitation across both inflow and outflow valves.
transforming growth factor β  signaling has been implicated in both the induction of emt in the endocardial cushions and the remodeling of the valves at post-emt stages.
as in chicken, the loss of mbnl <dig> promotes precocious tgfβ signaling and emt in the endocardial cushions.
here, we investigate the role of mbnl <dig> in endocardial cushion development and valvulogenesis in mbnl1∆e3/∆e <dig> mice, which are null for mbnl <dig> protein.
surprisingly, this does not lead to the production of excess mesenchyme, but later valve morphogenesis is aberrant.
together, these data indicate that mbnl <dig> plays a conserved role in negatively regulating tgfβ signaling, and is required for normal valve morphogenesis and homeostasis in vivo.
