we were able to separate ripening specific isoforms within gene families and to identify ripening related genes which appeared strongly regulated also by the seasonal weather conditions.
about 19% of the core gene set was characterized by genes involved in regulatory processes, such as transcription factors and transcripts related to hormonal metabolism and signal transduction.
fruit ripening in the non-climacteric crop species vitis vinifera l. has been investigated at the transcriptional level by the use of the affymetrix vitis genechip® which contains approximately  <dig>  unigenes.
the pre-véraison phase represents a reprogramming stage of the cellular metabolism, characterized by the expression of numerous genes involved in hormonal signalling and transcriptional regulation.
in addition, an oxidative burst, previously not detected in grapevine, characterized by rapid accumulation of h2o <dig> starting from véraison and by the modulation of many ros scavenging enzymes, was observed.
the time-course gene expression analysis of grapevine berry development has identified the occurrence of two well distinct phases along the process.
transcripts annotation by gene ontology vocabulary revealed five overrepresented functional categories of which cell wall organization and biogenesis, carbohydrate and secondary metabolisms and stress response were specifically induced during the ripening phase, while photosynthesis was strongly repressed.
the post-véraison phase is characterized by the onset of a ripening-specialized metabolism responsible for the phenotypic traits of the ripe berry.
despite this relevance, little is known about the transcriptional changes and the regulatory circuits underlying the biochemical and physical changes occurring during berry development.
auxin, ethylene and light emerged as the main stimuli influencing berry development.
the large number of regulatory genes we have identified represents a powerful new resource for dissecting the mechanisms of fruit ripening control in non-climacteric plants.
between the two phases, at véraison, an oxidative burst and the concurrent modulation of the anti-oxidative enzymatic network was observed.
