thus, we aimed to optimize transmitter implantation to improve telemetric signal recording in exercising mice as well as to establish a postoperative care regimen that promotes convalescence and survival of mice after major surgery in general.
to promote convalescence of the animals after surgery, we established a regimen for postoperative intensive care: pain treatment  and fluid therapy  were administrated for  <dig> days.
recovery and survival rates of mice after major surgery were significantly improved by careful management of postoperative intensive care regimens including key supportive measures such as pain relief, administration of fluids, and warmth.
telemetry yields reliable and accurate measurement of blood pressure in the free-roaming, unanaesthetized and unstressed mouse, but data recording is hampered substantially if measurements are made in an exercising mouse.
we report an optimized telemetric transmitter implantation technique  for subsequent measurement of arterial blood pressure during maximal exercise on a treadmill.
furthermore, fixation of the blood pressure transmitter provided constant reliable telemetric recordings in exercising mice.
however, experiments requiring major surgery frequently lead to serious postoperative complications and death, particularly if genetically modified mice with anatomical and physiological abnormalities undergo extensive interventions such as transmitter implantation.
the refined postoperative care and surgical technique were particularly successful in genetically modified mice with severely compromised physiological capacities.
in addition, warmth and free access to high energy liquid in a drinking bottle were provided for  <dig> days following transmitter implantation.
this technique was used on normal  mice and on transgenic mice with anatomical and physiological abnormalities due to constitutive overexpression of recombinant human erythropoietin.
telemetric transmitters are used to study cardiovascular physiology and diseases.
the laboratory mouse is commonly used as a sophisticated model in biomedical research.
