to study the combined effects of articulation and phonation we presented vowels with either high  or low  formant frequencies which were driven by three different types of excitation: a natural periodic pulseform reflecting the vibration of the vocal folds, an aperiodic noise excitation, or a tonal waveform.
more specifically, the combined effects of the harmonic comb structure originating from the natural voice excitation caused by the fluctuating vocal folds and the location of the formant frequencies originating from the vocal tract leads to asymmetric behaviour of the left and right hemisphere.
the n1m responses for the six stimulus types displayed a considerable dynamic range of 115– <dig> ms, and were elicited faster  by the high-formant /a/ than by the low-formant /u/, indicating an effect of articulation.
in the present study, we investigated how the spectral cues caused by articulation are reflected in cortical speech processing when combined with phonation, the other major part of speech production manifested as the fundamental frequency  and its harmonic integer multiples.
the auditory n1m response was recorded with whole-head magnetoencephalography  from ten human subjects in order to resolve whether brain events reflecting articulation and phonation are specific to the left or right hemisphere of the human brain.
the variations in the latency and strength of the auditory n1m response can be traced back to the spectral structure of the stimuli.
the cortical activity underlying the perception of vowel identity has typically been addressed by manipulating the first and second formant frequency  of the speech stimuli.
while excitation type had no effect on the latency of the right-hemispheric n1m, the left-hemispheric n1m elicited by the tonally excited /a/ was some  <dig> ms earlier than that elicited by the periodic and the aperiodic excitation.
these two values, originating from articulation, are already sufficient for the phonetic characterization of vowel category.
also, stimulus type had a marked  effect on the source location of the n1m, with periodic excitation resulting in more anterior sources than aperiodic and tonal excitation.
the amplitude of the n1m in both hemispheres was systematically stronger to stimulation with natural periodic excitation.
