a naive approach exhaustively searches all the possible restructured problems.
however, representing and incorporating domain information in the learning process is, in general, a challenging problem.
empirical results demonstrate that our method is capable of selecting a proper discrete or categorical attribute to simplify the problem, i.e., the performance of the classifier built for the restructured problem always beats that of the original problem.
in this research, we consider domain information encoded by discrete or categorical attributes.
a discrete or categorical attribute provides a natural partition of the problem domain, and hence divides the original problem into several non-overlapping sub-problems.
the goal of this research is to develop an algorithm to identify discrete or categorical attributes that maximally simplify the learning task.
we consider restructuring a supervised learning problem via a partition of the problem space using a discrete or categorical attribute.
it is computationally prohibitive when the number of discrete or categorical attributes is large.
it is quantified as a conditional entropy achieved using a set of optimal classifiers, each of which is built for a sub-problem defined by the attribute under consideration.
to avoid high computational cost, we approximate the solution by the expected minimum conditional entropy with respect to random projections.
the proposed conditional entropy based metric is effective in identifying good partitions of a classification problem, hence enhancing the prediction performance.
computational biology and bioinformatics for a new decade college station, tx, usa
1- <dig> april  <dig> eighth annual mcbios conference.
in this sense, the domain information is useful if the partition simplifies the learning task.
this approach is tested on three artificial data sets, three cheminformatics data sets, and two leukemia gene expression data sets.
it is commonly believed that including domain knowledge in a prediction model is desirable.
we propose a metric to rank attributes according to their potential to reduce the uncertainty of a classification task.
