based on immunohistochemistry and confocal laser scanning microscopy, supported by tem and live observations.
to date, a morphological comparison with other spiralian taxa lacks detailed information on the nervous and muscular system, which is here presented for lobatocerebrum riegeri n. sp.
shows similarities to those of meiofaunal annelids such as dinophilidae and protodrilidae, yet likewise to gnathostomulida and catenulid platyhelminthes, all living in the restrictive interstitial environment among sand grains.
it therefore suggests an extreme evolutionary plasticity of annelid nervous and muscular architecture, previously regarded as highly conservative organ systems throughout metazoan evolution.
the microscopic worm group lobatocerebridae has been regarded a ‘problematicum’, with the systematic relationship being highly debated until a recent phylogenomic study placed them within annelids .
the rostrum is supplied by longitudinal muscles and only a few transverse muscles.
the neuromuscular and glandular system of l. riegeri n. sp.
the glandular epidermis has at least three types of mucus secreting glands and one type of adhesive unicellular glands.
no exclusive “annelid characters” could be found in the neuromuscular system of lobatocerebridae, except for perhaps the mid-ventral nerve.
the musculature is organized as a grid of longitudinal muscles and transverse muscular ring complexes in the trunk.
the intraepidermal central nervous system consists of a big, multi-lobed brain, nine major nerve bundles extending anteriorly into the rostrum and two lateral and one median cord extending posteriorly to the anus, connected by five commissures.
nervous systemmusculatureglandular systemmeiofaunaannelidaspiraliaclsmimmunohistochemistryultrastructurehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008398villum fonden 102544worsaae katrine association of european marine biological laboratoriesevolution of two enigmatic invertebrate families with proposed annelid affinity - the lobatocerebridae and nerillidaeworsaae katrine issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
