over the course of dorsal closure, the tissue solidifies and effective stiffness doubles as net contraction of the tissue commences.
our results show that in an epithelial tissue undergoing net contraction, stiffness and stress are coupled.
we show that their emergent mechanical behaviour can be described by a linear viscoelastic rheology at timescales relevant for tissue morphogenesis.
we show that the relationship between apicomedial myosin fluorescence intensity and strain during fluctuations is consistent with a linear behaviour, although with a lag.
the drosophila amnioserosa epithelium progressively contracts over  <dig> hours of dorsal closure, during which cell apices exhibit area fluctuations driven by medial myosin pulses with periods of  <dig> – <dig> min.
dorsal closure cell apical contraction is driven by the medial region where the relative increase in stress is greater than that of stiffness.
amnioserosa cells can be described as a contractile viscoelastic fluid.
combining our findings with those from previous laser ablation experiments, we show that both apicomedial and junctional stress also increase over time, with the relative increase in apicomedial stress approximately twice that of other obtained measures.
insight is often limited to the ratios of mechanical properties obtained through disruptive manipulation, and the appropriate models relating stress and strain are unknown.
we present a novel framework to measure in a continuous manner the mechanical properties of epithelial cells in the natural context of a tissue undergoing morphogenesis.
we thus used myosin fluorescence intensity as a proxy for active force generation and treated cells as natural experiments of mechanical response under cyclic loading, revealing unambiguous mechanical properties from the hysteresis loop relating stress to strain.
for the first time, we establish relative changes in separate effective mechanical properties in vivo.
at junctions, by contrast, the relative increase in the mechanical properties is the same, so the junctional contribution to tissue deformation is constant over time.
viscoelastic fluidmechanical propertiesapical contractionactomyosinoscillationshysteresisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
an increase in myosin activity is likely to underlie, at least in part, the change in medioapical properties and we suggest that its greater effect on stress relative to stiffness is fundamental to actomyosin systems and confers on tissues the ability to regulate contraction rates in response to changes in external mechanics.
force generation and the material properties of cells and tissues are central to morphogenesis but remain difficult to measure in vivo.
