the presence of copa genes encoding the multi-copper oxidase that confers cu-resistance in bacteria was detected by pcr in metagenomic dna from the three cu-polluted soils, but not in the non-polluted soil.
c <dig> possess plasmids containing the cu-resistance copa genes.
the amino acid sequences of copa from sphingomonas isolates , stenotrophomonas strain  and arthrobacter strain  are closely related to copa from sphingomonas, stenotrophomonas and arthrobacter strains, respectively.
in this report, the effects of cu pollution on bacterial communities of agricultural soils from valparaiso region, central chile, were studied.
copper mining has led to cu pollution in agricultural soils.
ninety two cu-resistant bacterial strains were isolated from three cu-polluted agricultural soils.
this study suggests that bacterial communities of agricultural soils from central chile exposed to long-term cu-pollution have been adapted by acquiring cu genetic determinants.
five isolated strains showed high resistance to copper  and also resistance to other heavy metals.
five bacterial isolates showed high copper resistance and additional resistance to other heavy metals.
cu-resistant bacterial strains were isolated from cu-polluted soils and characterized.
the number of cu-tolerant heterotrophic cultivable bacteria was significantly higher in cu-polluted soils than in the non-polluted soil.
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis  of the 16s rrna genes was used for the characterization of bacterial communities from cu-polluted and non-polluted soils.
dgge showed a similar high number of bands and banding pattern of the bacterial communities from cu-polluted and non-polluted soils.
strains o <dig>  a <dig> and a <dig> and stenotrophomonas sp.
detection of copa gene in plasmids of four cu-resistant isolates indicates that mobile genetic elements are involved in the spreading of cu genetic determinants in polluted environments.
o <dig> possesses the copa gene, but plasmids were not detected in this strain.
