genomic and cdna sequence alignments as well as chromosome localization using nullisomic-tetrasomic lines provided strong evidence for three expressed gene copies located on homoeolog chromosomes for task <dig> as well as for task <dig>  predicted proteins displayed a clear gsk signature.
in this study, molecular characterization, chromosome localization, kinase activity test and phylogenetic analysis  clarified the homologous/paralogous versus homoeologous status of task sequences,  pointed out their affiliation to the gsk multigene family,  showed a functional kinase activity,  allowed a classification in clade ii, members of which are involved in br signaling and  allowed to gain information on acquisition and retention of gsk paralogs in angiosperms in the context of whole genome duplication events.
here, we report the identification and structural characterization of two gsk homologs named task <dig> and task <dig> in the hexaploid wheat genome as well as a widespread phylogenetic analysis of land plant gsks.
our results provide a framework to explore liliopsida resp poaceae gsks functions in development.
in vitro kinase assays showed that task <dig> and task <dig> possessed kinase activity.
a phylogenetic analysis of land plant gsks indicated that task <dig> and task <dig> belong to clade ii of plant gsks, the arabidopsis members of which are all involved in brassinosteroid signaling.
they are key regulators of brassinosteroid signaling and are also involved in the cross-talk between auxin and brassinosteroid pathways.
in contrast to the human genome that contains two genes, plant gsks are encoded by a multigene family.
based on a single ancestral gene in the last common ancestor of all land plants, paralogs were acquired and retained through paleopolyploidization events, resulting in six to eight genes in angiosperms.
plant glycogen synthase kinase 3/ shaggy-like kinases  have been implicated in numerous biological processes ranging from embryonic, flower, stomata development to stress and wound responses.
