some serological assays for pedv have been previously described, but few were readily available in the u.s. several u.s. laboratories quickly developed indirect fluorescent antibody  assays for the detection of antibodies to pedv in swine serum, indicating prior exposure.
receiver operating characteristic  analysis was performed using swine serum samples .
recent, severe outbreaks of porcine epidemic diarrhea virus  in asia and north america highlight the need for well-validated diagnostic tests for the identification of pedv infected animals and evaluation of their immune status to this virus.
well-validated ielisa, belisa and fmia assays for the detection of pedv antibodies were developed and showed good correlation with ifa and each other.
therefore, the objective of this study was to develop and validate multiple improved serological assays for pedv, including an indirect elisa ; a highly specific monoclonal antibody-based blocking elisa ; fluorescent microsphere immunoassays  that can be multiplexed to monitor exposure to multiple antigens and pathogens simultaneously; and a fluorescent focus neutralization assay  to measure functional virus neutralizing antibodies.
the ffn assay allows relative quantitation of functional neutralizing antibodies in serum, milk or colostrum samples.
the roc analysis for the fmia showed estimated sensitivity and specificity of  <dig>  and  <dig>  %, respectively.
porcine epidemic diarrhea virus serologyelisafluorescent microsphere immunoassay fluorescent focus neutralization issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
a recombinant north american nucleoprotein  based ielisa was developed and validated along with a belisa using newly developed pedv-np specific biotinylated monoclonal antibodies  and an fmia using magnetic beads coupled with expressed na pedv-np.
no cross-reactivity with the closely related coronaviruses, transmissible gastroenteritis virus  or porcine respiratory coronavirus  was noted with these assays.
measurement of neutralizing antibody responses using the ffn assay may provide a valuable tool for assessment of vaccine candidates or protective immunity.
