haematology, blood biochemistry, ctroponin i levels and echocardiography results did not change significantly following vaccination.
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
the goal of this study was to investigate clinical signs, microscopic agglutination test  titres, haematology, blood biochemistry, cardiac  troponin i levels and echocardiography before and after vaccination with this tetravalent vaccine.
mild and transient clinical signs within 5 days following the first and second vaccination occurred in 23% and 10% of the dogs, respectively.
clinical signs following vaccination with nobivac® l <dig> were transient and mild in all cases.
median to high titres  were most common to the serovar canicola  and less common to the serovars australis , grippotyphosa , bratislava , autumnalis , pyrogenes  and pomona .
before the first vaccination , all dogs showed negative mat titres for the tested serovars except for canicola .
before vaccination  and 16–31 days after the second vaccination , mat , haematology , blood biochemistry  and ctroponin i measurements  were performed, and mat was repeated 347–413 days after the second vaccination .
nobivac® lepto 6leptospiratetravalent vaccinevaccinationseroconversionmicroscopic agglutination testadverse eventsforschungskredit, university of zurichfk-53210-01-01spiri andrea m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
at t <dig>  positive mat titres  were found in 2–18% of the dogs to serovars of the vaccine serogroups and in 2–18% of the dogs to the non-vaccine serovars pomona, autumnalis, pyrogenes and ballum.
seroconversion differed considerably among individual dogs and among the vaccine serogroups.
leptospirosis is a re-emerging bacterial zoonosis caused by spirochetes of the genus leptospira.
severe disease has been reported in dogs in europe despite vaccination with bivalent leptospira vaccines.
at t <dig>  positive mat titres to the serovars canicola , australis , grippotyphosa , bratislava , autumnalis , copenhageni , pomona , pyrogenes  and icterohaemorrhagiae  were found.
