in bread wheat, aneuploid stocks have been extensively used to assign markers linked with genes/traits to chromosomes, chromosome arms, and their specific bins.
based on these mapping data, we have now anchored  <dig>  repeat junction probes and  <dig>  gene probes, corresponding to  <dig>  gene markers, to the delineated deletion bins of the d genome.
the order of the gene-based markers within the deletion bins of the chinese spring can be inferred based on their positions on the ae.
analysis of the probe sequences against the chinese spring chromosome sequence assembly database facilitated mapping of the nimblegen probes to the sequence contigs and allowed assignment or ordering of these sequence contigs within the deletion bins.
wheat deletion binsmolecular markersrepeat junction markersnimblegen arrayrecombinationgenetic mapissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
a specific database was developed to allow user to search or blast against the probe sequence information and to directly download pcr primers for mapping specific genetic loci.
although the abundance of repetitive sequence may pose common problems in genome analysis and sequence assembly of large and complex genomes, they provide repeat junction markers with random and unbiased distribution throughout chromosomes.
hence, development of a high-throughput mapping technology that combine both gene-based and repeat junction-based markers is needed to generate maps that have better coverage of the entire genome.
a nimblegen array containing both gene-based and repeat junction probe sequences derived from ae.
tauschii was developed and used to map the chinese spring nullisomic-tetrasomic lines and deletion bin lines of the d genome chromosomes.
in this study, the available genomics resource of the diploid aegilop tauschii, the d genome donor of bread wheat, were used to develop genome specific markers that can be applied for mapping in modern hexaploid wheat.
the resources developed herein can aid map-based cloning of traits of interest and the sequencing of the d genome of hexaploid wheat.
the accumulated length of anchored sequence contigs is about 155 mb, representing ~  <dig>  % of the d genome.
through this study, we added thousands of markers to the existing wheat chromosome bin map, representing a significant step forward in providing a resource to navigate the wheat genome.
mapping and map-based cloning of genes that control agriculturally and economically important traits remain great challenges for plants with complex highly repetitive genomes such as those within the grass tribe, triticeae.
