the shared roll-tilt dependent modulation of trial-to-trial variability for both svv and shv, on the other hand, indicates that the perception of earth-verticality is dominated by the same sensory signal, i.e.
compared to svv, shv variability near upright and upside-down was non-significantly  larger; both showed an m-shaped pattern of variability as a function of roll position.
the reduction of adjustment errors by eliminating visual input supports the notion that deviations between perceived and actual earth-vertical in roll-tilted positions arise from central processing of visual information.
trial-to-trial variability was minimal in upright position, increased with increasing roll  and decreased to intermediate values in upside-down orientation.
when roll-tilted, the subjective visual vertical  deviates up to 40° from earth-vertical and trial-to-trial variability increases with head roll.
the inverse of trial-to-trial variability, is less influenced by the experimental setup and mainly reflects properties of the otoliths.
twelve healthy right-handed human subjects  adjusted a rod with the right hand along perceived earth-vertical during static head roll-tilts .
whereas the accuracy of verticality adjustments seems to depend strongly on the paradigm, we hypothesize that the precision, i.e.
imperfections in the central processing of visual information were postulated to explain these roll-angle dependent errors.
counter-clockwise rod rotations yielded peak shv deviations in clockwise direction of  <dig> ° and an average clockwise shv shift over all roll angles of  <dig> ° .
shv adjustments showed a tendency for clockwise rod rotations to deviate counter-clockwise and for counter-clockwise rod rotations to deviate clockwise, indicating hysteresis.
here we measured the subjective haptic vertical  and compared findings with previously reported svv data.
for experimental conditions devoid of visual input, e.g.
the otolith signal, independent of whether the line/rod setting is under visual or tactile control.
