very little attention has been given to other fundamental cellular processes such as the folding of proteins.
combined over-expression of osm <dig> and ero <dig> led to the same diversion of carbon from glycerol to acetate and had a stronger detrimental effect on the growth in complex medium.
under anaerobic conditions the folding of proteins is directly connected with fumarate metabolism and requires two essential enzymes: fadh2-dependent fumarate reductase  and ero1p.
analysis of previously measured transcript levels in a recombinant xr/xdh-strain showed a wide down-regulation of genes targeted by the unfolded protein response during xylose fermentation.
so additional components of the protein folding mechanism that were identified in transcription analysis of upr related genes may also be limiting.
over-expression of frd <dig>  alone or in combination with ero <dig>  did not have any significant effect on xylose fermentation in any medium used.
saccharomyces cerevisiaexylose fermentationprotein foldingtranscription analysisfumarate reductaseendoplasmic reticulumdisulphide bond formationfrd1osm1ero1
the growth and fermentation performance was evaluated in defined medium as well as in a complex medium containing glucose and xylose.
in this study we tested whether these enzymes impair the protein folding process causing the very slow growth of recombinant yeast strains on xylose under anaerobic conditions.
this includes i) the transcription factor encoded by hac <dig> ii) the activity of pdi1p and iii) the requirement of free fad during anaerobic growth.
over-expression of osm <dig>  on the other hand, led to a diversion of carbon from glycerol to acetate and a decrease in growth rate by 39% in defined medium and by 25% in complex medium.
increasing the activities of the fr enzymes and ero1p is not sufficient to increase the anaerobic growth on xylose.
efficient utilization of both glucose and xylose is necessary for a competitive ethanol production from lignocellulosic materials.
