despite its popularity, tools are lacking for quantitative analysis of flip experiments.
we present two complementary methods for quantitative analysis of flip experiments in living cells.
we show by reaction–diffusion simulations, that the strexp function can describe both, binding/barrier–limited and diffusion-limited fl kinetics.
by pixel-wise regression of that function to fl kinetics of enhanced green fluorescent protein , we determined in a user-unbiased manner from which cellular regions egfp can be replenished in the bleached area.
the second method combines single particle tracking with multi-compartment modelling of fl kinetics in moving ib’s to determine exchange rates of egfp-tagged mthtt protein  between aggregates and the cytoplasm.
fluorescence loss in photobleaching  is a widely used imaging technique, which provides information about protein dynamics in various cellular regions.
in the first approach, a stretched exponential  function is fitted to fluorescence loss  inside and outside the bleached region.
polyglutamine  disease proteins like mutant huntingtin  can form large aggregates called inclusion bodies .
they provide spatial maps of exchange dynamics and absolute binding parameters of fluorescent molecules to moving intracellular entities, respectively.
in flip, a small cellular region is repeatedly illuminated by an intense laser pulse, while images are taken with reduced laser power with a time lag between the bleaches.
spatial variation in the parameters calculated from the strexp function allow for detecting diffusion barriers for egfp in the nucleus and cytoplasm of living cells.
typically, the user defines regions of interest  for further analysis which is subjective and does not allow for comparing different cells and experimental settings.
it makes it therefore possible to compare release kinetics of egfp-mthtt between different cells and experiments.
our methods should be of great value for quantitative studies of intracellular transport.
