we present an efficient variable selection strategy by consecutively applying univariate as well as multivariate methods followed by graphical models.
for multivariate variable selection a maximum likelihood  discriminant function within galgo, an r package based on a genetic algorithm , was chosen.
by using groups of five genes  in the discriminant function and repeating the genetic algorithm separately four times we found eleven genes occurring at least in three of the top ranked result lists of the four repetitions.
hyperactivity and impaired negative feedback regulation.
thereby, variable selection using different optimization algorithms based on linear classifiers as well as the nonlinear random forest method resulted in congruent candidate genes.
additionally, the differential expression of the identified target genes was confirmed experimentally.
in every case we obtained a clear overlap of the selected genes independently confirming the results of mlhd in combination with a genetic algorithm.
in addition, we compared the results of ga/mlhd with the alternative optimization algorithms greedy selection and simulated annealing as well as with the state-of-the-art method random forest.
the topmost genes representing major nodes in the expression network were ranked to find highly separating candidate genes.
with two unsupervised algorithms, principal component analysis and graphical gaussian models, putative interactions of the candidate genes were determined and reconstructed by literature mining.
differential regulation of six candidate genes was validated by qrt-pcr.
the combination of supervised and unsupervised algorithms in this study allowed extracting a small subset of meaningful candidate genes from the genome-wide expression data set.
therefore, we analyzed crh/crhr1-dependent gene expression data obtained from the pituitary corticotrope cell line att- <dig>  a well-established in vitro model for crhr1-mediated signal transduction.
first, feature preselection was used to exclude genes not differentially regulated over time from the dataset.
