estimates of historical migration rates indicated recolonization in a north-eastern direction, suggesting that all except the baltic sea population predominantly represent postglacial recolonization via the ancient elbe river.
fishes of the c. lavaretus complex in the jutland peninsula originate from the same recolonization event.
bayesian cluster analyses of genetic differentiation identified four major groups, corresponding to nsh and three groups of elw .
the objectives were to: 1) analyse postglacial recolonization of whitefish in the region; 2) assess the evolutionary distinctiveness of nsh, and 3) apply several approaches for defining conservation units towards setting conservation priorities for nsh.
yet, application of several approaches for defining conservation units generated mixed outcomes regarding its conservation priority.
the highly endangered north sea houting  has been considered a separate species from european lake whitefish  due to morphological divergence and adaptation to oceanic salinities.
its uniqueness and high conservation priority is more evident at a local geographical scale, where conservation efforts will also benefit populations of a number of other endangered species.
we analysed microsatellite dna polymorphism in nine populations from the jutland peninsula and the baltic sea, representing nsh  and elw .
adaptive radiation within fishes of the coregonus lavaretus complex has created numerous morphs, posing significant challenges for taxonomy and conservation priorities.
thus, reproductive isolation of nsh was not absolute, although possible interbreeding beyond the f <dig> level could not be resolved.
nsh has evolved recently and its species status may be questioned due to incomplete reproductive isolation from elw, but it was shown to merit consideration as an independent conservation unit.
contemporary gene flow has not occurred between nsh and elw, with a divergence time within the last  <dig>  years suggested from coalescence methods.
however, its evolutionary and taxonomic status is controversial.
