the method was applied to analyze four microarray datasets and one next generation sequencing  dataset: the mice apo a <dig> dataset, the whole genome expression dataset of mouse embryonic stem cells, expression profiling of the bone marrow of leukemia patients, microarray quality control  data set and the rna-seq dataset of a mouse genomic imprinting study.
we developed a statistical way, based on the concept of confidence interval, to determine the minimum support and minimum confidence for mining association relationships among items.
with the minimum support and minimum confidence, one can find significant rules in one single step.
in the paper, the well-established association rule mining technique from marketing has been successfully modified to determine the minimum support and minimum confidence based on the concept of confidence interval and hypothesis testing.
in this paper, we propose the dynamic association rule algorithm  which helps ones to efficiently select a subset of significant genes for subsequent analysis.
the dar algorithm is based on association rules from market basket analysis in marketing.
it can be applied to gene expression data to mine significant association rules between gene regulation and phenotype.
association rulesgene expression databioinformaticsdata miningtranscriptome analysisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
the purpose of gene expression analysis is to look for the association between regulation of gene expression levels and phenotypic variations.
statistical analyses on microarray data have been developed to resolve gene selection issue.
we first propose a statistical way, based on constructing a one-sided confidence interval and hypothesis testing, to determine if an association rule is meaningful.
four gene expression datasets showed that the proposed dar algorithm not only was able to identify a set of differentially expressed genes that largely agreed with that of other methods, but also provided an efficient and accurate way to find influential genes of a disease.
the proposed dar algorithm provides an efficient way to find influential genes that underlie the phenotypic variance.
based on the proposed statistical method, we then developed the dar algorithm for gene expression data analysis.
the dar algorithm was then developed for gene expression data analysis.
a comparison of the proposed method with the t-test on the expression profiling of the bone marrow of leukemia patients was conducted.
