concerning individual eye movements, rem duration was longer and amplitude was lower during rem sleep than nrem sleep.
eog electrodes were bilaterally and chronically implanted with placement of the electrodes directly between the musculus rectus superior and musculus rectus lateralis.
subsequent to the implantation process, we developed and validated an eye movement scoring in mice algorithm  to detect rem as singularities of the eog signal, based on wavelet methodology.
in humans, rapid eye movements  density during rem sleep plays a prominent role in psychiatric diseases.
the distribution of wakefulness, non-rem  sleep and rapid eye movement  sleep was typical of nocturnal rodents with small amounts of wakefulness and large amounts of nrem sleep during the light period and reversed proportions during the dark period.
rem density was significantly higher during rem sleep than nrem sleep.
during rem sleep rem density showed an ultradian course, and during nrem sleep rem density peaked at the beginning of the dark period.
the majority of single rem and rem bursts were associated with micro-arousals during nrem sleep, but not during rem sleep.
especially in depression, an increased rem density is a vulnerability marker for depression.
in clinical practice and research measurement of rem density is highly standardized.
sleep-stage specific distributions of rem in mice correspond to human rem density during sleep.
rem density, now also assessable in animal models through our approach, is increased in humans after acute stress, during ptsd and in depression.
in basic animal research, almost no tools are available to obtain and systematically evaluate eye movement data, although, this would create increased comparability between human and animal sleep studies.
rem bursts were detected more often at the end of the dark period than the beginning of the light period.
after recovery, eeg, emg and eog signals were obtained for four days.
this relationship can now be exploited to match animal models more closely to clinical situations, especially in animal models of depression.
