accordingly, gsea is a time-consuming task due to the large number of required permutations to accurately estimate the nominal p-value – a circumstance that is even more pronounced during multiple hypothesis testing since its estimate is lower-bounded by the inverse number of samples in permutation space.
nominal p-value estimation of  <dig>  gene sets on a data set consisting of  <dig>  unique gene symbols and  <dig> patients  each probing one million permutations takes  <dig> hours on a xeon cpu and less than one hour on a geforce titan x gpu while the established gsea tool from the broad institute  takes roughly  <dig> days.
ompgsea provides around one order-of-magnitude speedup to broadgsea on a standard xeon cpu.
cudagsea is a cuda-accelerated tool using fine-grained parallelization schemes on massively parallel architectures while ompgsea is a coarse-grained multi-threaded tool for multi-core cpus.
an established measure of inter-class deviation, the enrichment score, is usually computed using a weighted running sum statistic over the whole set of gene symbols.
we present rapidgsea – a software suite consisting of two tools for facilitating permutation-based gsea: cudagsea and ompgsea.
gene set enrichment analysis  is a popular method to reveal significant dependencies between predefined sets of gene symbols and observed phenotypes by evaluating the deviation of gene expression values between cases and controls.
due to the lack of analytic expressions the significance of enrichment scores is determined using a non-parametric estimation of their null distribution by permuting the phenotype labels of the probed patients.
cudagsea outperforms broadgsea by around two orders-of-magnitude on a single tesla k40c or geforce titan x gpu.
cudagene set enrichment analysisgene expression dataresampling statisticsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the rapidgsea suite is open-source software and can be downloaded at https://github.com/gravitino/cudagseaas standalone application or package for the r framework.
