heterochromatin plays an important role in chromosome function and gene regulation.
gene ontology analysis revealed that heterochromatin is enriched in genes with dna-binding and regulatory activities.
our results demonstrate that anopheles polytene chromosomes and whole-genome shotgun assembly render the mapping and characterization of a significant part of heterochromatic scaffolds a possibility.
these results reveal the strong association between characteristics of the genome features and morphological types of chromatin.
despite the availability of polytene chromosomes and genome sequence, the heterochromatin of the major malaria vector anopheles gambiae has not been mapped and characterized.
gambiae genome, genes were physically mapped to the euchromatin-heterochromatin transition zone of polytene chromosomes.
to better understand the molecular differences among chromatin types, novel bayesian statistical models were developed to analyze genome features.
gambiae chromosomes with antibodies against drosophila melanogaster heterochromatin protein  <dig>  and the nuclear envelope protein lamin dm <dig> identified the major invariable sites of the proteins' localization in all regions of pericentric heterochromatin, diffuse intercalary heterochromatin, and euchromatic region 9c of the 2r arm, but not in the compact intercalary heterochromatin.
we also provide evidence that the diffuse intercalary heterochromatin has a higher coverage of dna transposable elements, minisatellites, and satellites than does the compact intercalary heterochromatin.
the investigation of 42-mb assembly of unmapped genomic scaffolds showed that it has molecular characteristics similar to cytologically mapped heterochromatin.
the study found that heterochromatin and euchromatin differ in gene density and the coverage of retroelements and segmental duplications.
the pericentric heterochromatin had the highest coverage of retroelements and tandem repeats, while intercalary heterochromatin was enriched with segmental duplications.
gambiae heterochromatin provides a framework for its functional characterization and comparative genomic analyses with other organisms.
