using our method to create the domain landscapes of mutations in colon cancer, we were able to identify somatic mutations with high potential to drive cancer development.
most studies take a gene-based approach to identifying driver mutations, highlighting genes mutated in a large percentage of tumor samples as those likely to contain driver mutations.
we mapped somatic mutations from the protein coding regions of  <dig> colon adenocarcinoma tumor samples to the genes and protein domains in which they occurred, and constructed topographical maps to depict the “mutational landscapes” of gene and domain mutation frequencies.
these domain “peaks” were enriched with functions important to cancer development including kinase activity, dna binding and repair, and signal transduction.
in addition, we found significant mutation frequency within specific domains located in these genes, as well as within other domains contained in genes having low mutation frequencies.
in addition, mapping mutations to specific domains provides the necessary functional context for understanding how the mutations contribute to the disease, and may reveal novel or more refined gene and domain target regions for drug development.
here we introduce a novel method for mapping mutations to distinct protein domains, not just individual genes, in which they occur, thus providing the functional context for how the mutation contributes to disease.
therefore, themethod shows good potential for identifying rare driver mutations in current, large-scale tumor sequencing projects.
large-scale tumor sequencing projects are now underway to identify genetic mutations that drive tumor initiation and development.
these highly mutated domains potentially reveal disruptions of protein function necessary for cancer development.
furthermore, aggregating mutations from all genes containing a specific protein domain enables the identification of mutations that are rare at the gene level, but that occur frequently within the specified domain.
we found significant mutation frequency in a number of genes previously known to be somatically mutated in colon cancer patients including apc, tp <dig> and kras.
however, this gene-based approach usually does not consider the position of the mutation within the gene or the functional context the position of the mutation provides.
interestingly, the majority of the genes involved have a low mutation frequency.
