however, this method provides no means for verifying its success other than sequencing the putative mutant construct: this can quickly become an expensive method for screening for successful mutations.
thus, the novel restriction site can be used as a marker for successful mutation which can be quickly and easily assessed.
sitefind is an intuitive, web-based program that enables the user to introduce a novel restriction site into the mutated nucleotide sequence for use as a marker of successful mutation.
the user enters a nucleotide sequence, specifies what amino acid residues should be changed in the mutation, and sitefind generates a list of possible restriction sites and what nucleotides must be changed to introduce that site.
an alternative to sequencing is to simultaneously introduce a restriction site near the point mutation in manner such that the restriction site has no effect on the translated amino acid sequence.
however, finding a restriction site that does not disturb the corresponding amino acid sequence is a time-consuming task even for experienced researchers.
we wrote a computer program, called sitefind, to help us design a restriction site within the mutation primers without changing the peptide sequence.
since the list of possible restriction sites for a given dna sequence is not always obvious, sitefind automates this task.
a fast and easy to use computer program is needed for this task.
the number of possible sequences a computer program must search through increases exponentially as the sequence length increases.
as a demonstration of its use, we successfully generated a single point mutation and a double point mutation in the wild-type sequence for krüppel-like factor  <dig>  an epithelium-specific transcription factor.
sitefind uses a novel "moving window" algorithm to reduce the number of possible sequences to be searched to a manageable level.
site-directed mutagenesis is a widely-used technique for introducing mutations into a particular dna sequence, often with the goal of creating a point mutation in the corresponding amino acid sequence but otherwise leaving the overall sequence undisturbed.
because of the redundancy of genetic code, a given peptide can be encoded by many different dna sequences.
