nrfa reductase is localized in the cell periplasm and uses no <dig> as an electron acceptor to create a proton gradient; nirb reductase is restricted to the cytoplasm and metabolizes excessive nitrite inside the cell, the uptake of which is mediated by the transporter protein nirc.
it is not sufficient to consider molecular-genetic mechanisms of nrfa reductase activity regulation to describe the nitrite accumulation dynamics in the chemostat in the micromolar range  of added nitrite concentrations.
using a mathematical model describing the nitrite utilization in e. coli cells cultured in a flow chemostat, the role of enzymes involved in nitrite metabolism and transport in controlling nitrite intracellular levels was investigated.
at nitrite concentrations in the media more than 2 mm, the model adapted to the experimental data on nitrite utilization dynamics in e. coli cells cultured in the flow chemostat demonstrates the largest contribution of genetic mechanisms involved in nrf and nir operons activity regulation to the control of nitrite intracellular levels.
due to a high toxicity of nitrite and its metabolites, it is of high interest to study mechanisms underlying the low no <dig> level maintenance in the cell.
analysis of different hypotheses has shown that the mechanism of local enzyme concentration change due to membrane potential-induced diffusion from the cytoplasm to the periplasm at low nitrite levels is sufficient to explain the nitrite accumulation dynamics in the chemostat.
escherichia colianaerobic respirationmathematical modelgene expression regulationnitrite reductasenitrite transportmembrane potentialthe 7th international young scientists school “systems biology and bioinformatics”  novosibirsk, russia 22- <dig> june  <dig> http://conf.nsc.ru/plantgen2015issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the model predicts a significant contribution of the membrane potential to the periplasmic nrfa nitrite reductase activity regulation and nitrite utilization dynamics at substrate concentrations ≤1 mm.
it was demonstrated that the model adapted to the experimental data on expression of nrfa and nirb genes encoding nrfa and nirb nitrite reductases, can describe nitrite accumulation kinetics in the chemostat in the millimolar range of added substrate concentrations without any additional assumptions.
