although, the number of different fimbrial clusters in individual gallibacterium genomes was low, there was substantial amino acid sequence variability in the major fimbrial subunit and the adhesin proteins.
fimbriae are bacterial cell surface organelles involved in the pathogenesis of many bacterial species, including gallibacterium anatis, in which a f17-like fimbriae of the chaperone-usher  family was recently shown to be an important virulence factor and vaccine candidate.
this is the first approach establishing a systematic fimbria classification system within gallibacterium spp., which indicates a species-wide distribution of γ <dig> cu fimbriae among a diverse collection of gallibacterium isolates.
the absence or scarce expression of the two other common fimbrial subunits  indicates that their expression may require other in vitro or in vivo conditions.
to characterize the fimbriae in depth evolutionary analysis and in vitro expression of the most prevalent fimbrial clusters was performed.
the distribution of cds among fimbrial clusters, analysis of their flanking regions, and evolutionary comparison of the strains revealed that gallibacterium fimbrial clusters likely underwent evolutionary divergence resulting in highly host adapted and antigenically variable fimbriae.
all fimbriae were assigned to γ <dig> clade of the cu fimbriae of gram-negative bacteria and were organized in four-gene clusters encoding a putative major fimbrial subunit, a chaperone, an usher and a fimbrial adhesin.
to reveal the distribution and variability of cu fimbriae  <dig> genomes of the avian host-restricted bacteria gallibacterium spp.
overall  <dig> cu fimbriae were identified in the genomes of the examined gallibacterium isolates.
fimbrial clusters were classified using phylogeny-based and conserved domain  distribution-based approaches.
five fimbrial clusters  and eight conserved domain groups were defined to accommodate the identified fimbriae.
this information is important for future attempts to understand the role of gallibacterium fimbriae in pathogenesis, and may prove useful for improved control of gallibacterium infections in chickens.
in vitro, only the fimbrial subunit flfa was expressed in most gallibacterium strains encoding this protein.
