an sbn can also implement the function of an asynchronous pbn and is potentially useful in a hybrid approach in combination with a continuous or single-molecule level stochastic model.
the proposed approach can further predict the network dynamics when the genes are under perturbation, thus providing biologically meaningful insights for a better understanding of the dynamics of grns.
these findings are supported by the simulation results of a simplified p <dig> network, several randomly generated networks and a network inferred from a t cell immune response dataset.
this paper presents a novel implementation of pbns based on the notions of stochastic logic and stochastic computation.
since the minimum sequence length required for obtaining an evaluation accuracy approximately increases in a polynomial order with the number of genes, n, and the number of boolean networks, n, usually increases exponentially with n, l is typically smaller than n, especially in a network with a large number of genes.
the applications of pbns, however, are hindered by the complexities involved in the computation of the state transition matrix and the steady-state distribution of a pbn.
furthermore, a time-frame expanded sbn enables an efficient analysis of the steady-state distribution of a pbn.
as a logical model, probabilistic boolean networks  consider molecular and genetic noise, so the study of pbns provides significant insights into the understanding of the dynamics of grns.
for a pbn with n genes and n boolean networks, the complexity to compute the state transition matrix is o or o for a sparse matrix.
hence, the computational efficiency of an sbn is primarily limited by the number of genes, but not directly by the total possible number of boolean networks.
stochastic boolean networks  are proposed as an efficient approach to modelling gene regulatory networks .
the state transition matrix is computed in an sbn with a complexity of o, where l is a factor related to the stochastic sequence length.
the algorithms and methods described in this paper have been implemented in matlab packages, which are attached as additional files.
various computational models have been of interest due to their use in the modelling of gene regulatory networks .
the sbn approach is able to recover biologically-proven regulatory behaviours, such as the oscillatory dynamics of the p53-mdm <dig> network and the dynamic attractors in a t cell immune response network.
an sbn provides an accurate and efficient simulation of a pbn without and with random gene perturbation.
this stochastic implementation of a pbn is referred to as a stochastic boolean network .
