using illumina hiseq  <dig>  rna-seq was performed with a pool of three tissues  from s. muricatum and s. caripense, generating almost  <dig> , <dig> reads among the two species.
a high quality de novo transcriptome was assembled from s. muricatum clean reads resulting in  <dig>  unigenes with an average length of  <dig> bp.
the comparison of s. caripense reads against s. muricatum assembled transcripts resulted in thousands of intra- and interspecific nucleotide-level variants.
we used blast2go, to conduct an exhaustive study of the gene ontology, including go terms, ec numbers and kegg pathways.
candidate genes related to traits of interest in other solanaceae were evaluated by presence or absence and compared with s. caripense transcripts.
caripensepepinopotatotomatosolanaceaefunctional annotationphylogenycandidate genesmolecular markershttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004233universitat politècnica de valènciaprograma fpi de la upv-subprograma 1/2013gramazio pietro issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
pepino unigenes were compared to both potato and tomato genomes in order to determine their estimated relative position, and to infer gene prediction models.
among the wild species, s. caripense is prominent due to its major involvement in the origin of pepino and its wide geographical distribution.
despite the value of the pepino as an emerging crop, and the potential for gene transfer from both the pepino and s. caripense to potatoes and tomatoes, there has been virtually no genomic study of these species.
the high quality of the transcriptome presented here also facilitates comparative studies in the genus solanum.
this study represents the first genomic resource for the pepino.
basarthrum is phylogenetically very close to potatoes  and tomatoes , two groups with great economic importance, and for which solanum sect.
in addition, more than  <dig> ssrs were identified in the pepino transcriptome.
this section includes the important regional cultigen, the pepino , and several wild species.
basarthrum represents a tertiary gene pool for breeding.
