in order to elucidate the varietal dependent developmental regulation of primary and specialized metabolism, berry skins of cabernet sauvignon and shiraz were subjected to gas chromatography–mass spectrometry  and liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry  based metabolite profiling from pre-veraison to harvest.
nevertheless, towards maturity the extent of change in the major organic acid and sugars  and precursors of aromatic and phenolic compounds such as quinate and shikimate was greater in shiraz compared to cabernet sauvignon.
generally, shiraz displayed greater upregulation of the entire polyphenol pathway and specifically higher accumulation of piceid and coumaroyl anthocyanin forms than cabernet sauvignon from veraison onwards.
correlation analysis confirmed the tightly coordinated metabolic changes during development, and suggested a source-sink relation between the central and specialized metabolism, stronger in shiraz than cabernet sauvignon.
the analysis of the metabolite data revealed similar developmental patterns of change in primary metabolites between the two cultivars.
transcript profiling revealed coordinated increased transcript abundance for genes encoding enzymes of committing steps in the phenylpropanoid pathway.
in contrast, distinct directional projections on the pca plot of the two cultivars samples towards maturation when using the specialized metabolite profiles were apparent, suggesting a cultivar-dependent regulation of the specialized metabolism.
compared with cs, shiraz showed higher number of significant correlations between metabolites, which together with the relatively higher expression of flavonoid genes supports the evidence of increased accumulation of coumaroyl anthocyanins in that cultivar.
trehalose, stilbene and aba in shiraz berry-skin are consistent with its relatively higher susceptibility to environmental cues.
rnaseq analysis also revealed that the two cultivars exhibited distinct pattern of changes in genes related to abscisic acid  biosynthesis enzymes.
