dung beetles  are popular model organisms in ecology and developmental biology, and for the last two decades they have experienced a systematics renaissance with the adoption of modern phylogenetic approaches.
here we propose the revision of the concepts for the tribes deltochilini , dichotomiini and coprini; additionally, we redefine the tribe sisyphini.
as a result of the proposed changes a large number of genera previously assigned to these tribes are now left outside the redefined tribes and are treated as incertae sedis.
in order to test the sensitivity of results to different analytical treatments, we evaluated alternative partitioning schemes based on secondary structure, domains and codon position.
we assessed substitution models adequacy using bayesian framework and used these results to exclude partitions where substitution models did not adequately depict the processes that generated the data.
in the class insecta it is uncommon for the results of molecular phylogenetic analysis to lead to substantial changes in classification.
however, the results presented here are congruent with recent morphological studies and support the largest change in dung beetle systematics for the last 50 years.
the present study provides a robust phylogenetic framework and a revised classification of dung beetles.
we assembled the so far largest molecular dataset for dung beetles using sequences of  <dig> gene regions and  <dig> terminals including the outgroup taxa.
the present study redefines dung beetles classification and gives new insight into their phylogeny.
it has broad implications for the systematics as well as for various ecological and evolutionary analyses in dung beetles.
dung beetlesscarabaeinaescarabaeidaemodel adequacyclassificationmolecular phylogenysynthesys issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
this dataset was analyzed using bayesian, maximum likelihood and parsimony approaches.
we show that exclusion of partitions that failed the model adequacy evaluation has a potential to improve phylogenetic inference, but efficient implementation of this approach on large datasets is problematic and awaits development of new computationally advanced software.
within this period  <dig> key phylogenies and numerous additional studies with limited scope have been published, but higher-level relationships of this pivotal group of beetles remain contentious and current classifications contain many unnatural groupings.
we provide and illustrate synapomorphies and diagnostic characters supporting the new concepts to facilitate diagnosability of the redefined tribes.
