the data represent the first methylome blueprint for spatio-temporal analyses of lesion susceptibility predisposing to endothelial dysfunction in complex flow environments in vivo.
complete methylated dna immunoprecipitation sequencing  identified over  <dig> endothelial differentially methylated regions .
dna methylation is a powerful epigenetic regulator of endothelial transcription recently associated with flow characteristics.
an endothelial methylome analysis identifies epigenetic dmr characteristics associated with transcriptional regulation in regions of atherosusceptibility in swine aorta in vivo.
spatial transcriptome profiling of endothelium in pre-lesional arteries has demonstrated differential phenotypes primed for athero-susceptibility at hemodynamic sites associated with disturbed blood flow.
genome-wide dna methylation was profiled in endothelial cells  isolated from two robust locations of differing patho-susceptibility: − an athero-susceptible site located at the inner curvature of the aortic arch  and an athero-protected region in the descending thoracic  aorta.
we investigated differential dna methylation in flow region-specific aortic endothelial cells in vivo in adult domestic male and female swine.
dmr density was significantly enriched in exons and 5’utr sequences of annotated genes,  <dig> of which are linked to cardiovascular disease.
gender-specific dmrs associated with ciliogenesis that may be linked to defects in cilia development were also identified in aa dmrs.
examination of the relationship between dmr and mrna in hoxa genes demonstrated a significant inverse relationship between cpg island promoter methylation and gene expression.
methylation-specific pcr  confirmed differential cpg methylation of hoxa genes, the er stress gene atf <dig>  inflammatory regulator microrna-10a and arhgap <dig> that encodes a negative regulator of rho gtpases involved in cytoskeleton remodeling.
endotheliumdna methylationepigeneticshemodynamicsdisturbed flowhox genesatherosclerosisendothelial gene transcriptionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
the set of dmr-associated genes was enriched in transcriptional regulation, pattern specification hox loci, oxidative stress and the er stress adaptive pathway, all categories linked to athero-susceptible endothelium.
