non-pathogenic clavibacter strains isolated from tomato seeds are particularly problematic because they affect the current detection and identification tests for clavibacter michiganensis subsp.
the genome sequence of the non-pathogenic clavibacter strain lmg  <dig> and the comparative analyses with other pathogenic clavibacter strains provided a better understanding of the genetic bases of virulence and adaptation mechanisms present in the genus clavibacter.
the genome of this non-pathogenic clavibacter strain contained also a high number of transporters and regulatory genes.
genes received that way and coding for antibiotic resistance may provide a competitive advantage for survival of lmg  <dig> in its ecological niche.
non-pathogenic clavibacterbacterial wilt and cankertomato seedsgenome sequencingquarantineplant pathogenissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
their misidentification as pathogenic cmm hampers a clear judgment on the seed quality and health.
this explains its apparent non-pathogenic nature in tomato plants.
to get more insight in the genetic features linked to the lifestyle of these bacteria, a whole-genome sequence of the tomato seed-borne non-pathogenic clavibacter lmg  <dig> was determined.
to gain a better understanding of the molecular determinants of pathogenicity, the genome sequence of lmg  <dig> was compared with that of the pathogenic cmm strain .
although the vast majority of clavibacter strains are pathogenic, there is an increasing number of non-pathogenic isolates reported.
michiganensis , which is regulated with a zero tolerance in tomato seed.
moreover, the genome analysis of lmg  <dig> detected sequences from a plasmid originating from a member of enterobacteriaceae/klebsiella relative.
the comparative analysis revealed that lmg  <dig> does not contain plasmids pcm <dig> and pcm <dig> and also lacks the majority of important virulence factors described so far for pathogenic cmm.
genetically, lmg  <dig> was the most similar to the pathogenic cmm ncppb  <dig> but contained more mobile genetic elements.
the genus clavibacter harbors economically important plant pathogens infecting agricultural crops such as potato and tomato.
