therefore, a global transcriptome analysis on a. mongolicus tissues was performed to identify the genes essential for the metabolism and to profile their expression patterns in greater details.
unigenes associated with secondary metabolism, especially those with isolavonoids and triterpene saponins biosynthesis were characterized and profiled.
for triterpene saponin biosynthesis, we found the genes in mva and non-mva pathways were differentially expressed among three examined tissues, indicating the parallel but compartmentally separated biosynthesis pathways of ipp and dmapp in a. mongolicus.
the first committed enzyme in triterpene saponin biosynthesis from a. mongolicus, cycloartenol synthase , which belongs to the oxidosqualene cyclase family, was cloned by us to study the astragalosides biosynthesis.
the results revealed a comprehensive profile for metabolic activities among tissues, pointing to the equal importance of leaf, stem, and root in a. mongolicus for the production of bioactive compounds.
the genomic resources regarding the biosynthesis of these metabolites in a. mongolicus are limited.
although roots are the primary material harvested for medical use, the biosynthesis of the bioactive compounds and its regulation in a. mongolicus are not well understood.
rna-sequencing was performed for three different a. mongolicus tissues: leaf, stem, and root, using the illumina hiseq <dig> platform.
the presence of the large cyp <dig> families in a. mongolicus was further compared with those from medicago truncatula and arabidopsis thaliana, and the diversity and phylegenetic relationships of the cyp <dig> families were established.
a transcriptome study was performed for a. mongolicus tissues to construct and profile their metabolic pathways, especially for the important bioactive molecules.
this work provides valuable resources for bioengineering and in vitro synthesis of the natural compounds for medical research and for potential drug development.
a total of  <dig>  transcription factors  were identified, in which the four largest families, bhlh, myb, c3h, and wrky, were implicated in regulation of tissue development, metabolisms, stress response, etc.
among many secondary metabolites it produces, the effective bioactive constituents include isoflavonoids and triterpene saponins.
among them,  <dig>  unigenes  were annotated using four public databases , and  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  unigenes were found to express in leaves, roots, and stems, respectively.
further co-expression analysis indicated the candidate cyp450s and glycosyltransferases  in the cascade of triterpene saponins biosynthesis.
mongolicus  hsiaotranscriptomeherbmetabolitesisoflavonoidstriterpene saponins4- <dig> december  <dig> the international conference on intelligent biology and medicine   <dig> san antonio, tx, usa
most genes involved in the isoflavonoids biosynthesis had the lowest expression in the leaves, and the highest in the stems.
