we propose that the choice of sequencing platform and experimental design needs to be taken into consideration in the early stage of a project by running a small trial consisting of several hypervariable regions to quantify the discriminatory power of each region.
we demonstrate that library preparation methodology can affect data interpretation due to different error and chimera rates generated during the procedure.
therefore, it is critical to benchmark the various methodologies for interrogating the composition of microbial communities, so that we can assess their strengths and limitations.
the results of this study will serve as a guideline for making decisions on which experimental condition and sequencing platform to consider to achieve the best microbial profiling.
we have assessed a range of experimental conditions across several next generation sequencing platforms using the most up-to-date configurations.
we assembled  <dig> synthetic communities with an even  and uneven  distribution of archaeal and bacterial strains and species, as metagenomic control material, to assess performance of different experimental strategies.
the  <dig> synthetic communities were used in this study, to highlight the limitations and the advantages of the leading sequencing platforms: miseq , the pacific biosciences rsii,  <dig> gs-flx/+ , and iontorrent .
we describe an extensive survey based on synthetic communities using  <dig> experimental designs  across the  <dig> hypervariable 16s rdna regions.
the observed community composition was always biased, to a degree that depended on the platform, sequenced region and primer choice.
we also suggest that the use of a synthetic community as a positive control would be beneficial to identify the potential biases and procedural drawbacks that may lead to data misinterpretation.
however, crucially, our analysis suggests that 16s rrna sequencing is still quantitative, in that relative changes in abundance of taxa between samples can be recovered, despite these biases.
the most common phylogenetic marker for microbial community diversity studies is the 16s ribosomal rna gene and in the last  <dig> years the field has moved from sequencing a small number of amplicons and samples to more complex studies where thousands of samples and multiple different gene regions are interrogated.
