different alleles in some of these genes have been associated with behavioral differences between modern dog breeds, suggesting an important role for this pathway at multiple stages in the domestication process.
dogs  were the first animal species to be domesticated and continue to occupy an important place in human societies.
while much progress has been made in identifying the genetic basis of phenotypic differences between dog breeds we still know relatively little about the genetic changes underlying the phenotypes that differentiate all dogs from their wild progenitors, wolves .
strong selection in the initial stages of dog domestication appears to have occurred on multiple genes involved in the fight-or-flight response, particularly in the catecholamine synthesis pathway.
we identify putatively functional genomic variants that are segregating or at high frequency  for alternative alleles between dogs and wolves.
we identify  <dig> genes with putatively functional variants fixed for alternative alleles between dogs and wolves.
with the increasing availability of whole-genome sequence data it is possible to try and directly identify the genetic variants contributing to the phenotypic differences between dogs and wolves.
we present the first genome-wide analysis of the different categories of putatively functional variants that are fixed or segregating at high frequency between a global sampling of dogs and wolves.
we find evidence that selection has been strongest around non-synonymous variants.
we analyse the largest available database of genome-wide polymorphism data in a global sample of dogs  <dig> and wolves  <dig>  we perform a scan to identify regions of the genome that are highly differentiated between dogs and wolves.
recent studies have begun to reveal when and where dog domestication occurred.
therefore, selection for tameness was likely a necessary prerequisite for dog domestication.
the segregating variants in these genes are strong candidates for having been targets of selection during early dog domestication.
