eli lilly authors created a complimentary sprague dawely rat mirna tissue atlas and demonstrated increased pancreas enriched mirna levels in circulation, following caerulein administration in rat and dog.
micrornas  are varied in length, under  <dig> nucleotides, single-stranded noncoding rna that regulate post-transcriptional gene expression via translational repression or mrna degradation.
the identification of mirna biomarkers requires a systematic approach: 1) determine the mirna tissue expression profiles within a mammalian species via next generation sequencing; 2) identify enriched and/or specific mirna expression within organs of toxicologic interest, and 3) in vivo validation with tissue-specific toxicants.
while mirna tissue expression has been reported in rodents and humans, little data exists on mirna tissue expression in the dog, a relevant toxicology species.
dogs with elevated serum levels of mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> had a correlative increase of alanine aminotransferase, and microscopic analysis confirmed liver damage.
the generation and evaluation of the first dog mirna tissue atlas is described here.
the dog mirna tissue atlas provides a resource for biomarker discovery and can be further mined with refinement of dog genome annotation.
the  <dig> highly enriched tissue mirnas identified within the dog mirna tissue atlas could serve as diagnostic biomarkers and will require further validation by in vivo correlation to histopathology.
because of their remarkable stability, ease of detection in biofluids, and tissue specific expression patterns, mirnas have the potential to be specific biomarkers of organ injury.
analysis of  <dig> tissues from five male beagle dogs identified  <dig> tissue enriched mirnas,  <dig> of which were highly enriched in a single organ, and thus may serve as biomarkers of organ injury.
a proof of concept study in dogs dosed with hepatotoxicants evaluated a qpcr panel of  <dig> tissue enriched mirnas specific to liver, heart, skeletal muscle, pancreas, testes, and brain.
elevated levels of mirnas can be detected in systemic circulation after tissue injury, suggesting that mirnas are released following cellular damage.
