tandem duplicate genes were enriched in the co-expression pattern where co-expressed genes were nearly identical for the duplicates in the network.
our work provides a comprehensive analysis of maize co-expression network divergence for three different types of gene duplications and identifies potential relationships between duplication types, duplication ages and co-expression consequences.
however, the landscape of co-expression network divergence of duplicate genes in maize is still largely uncharacterized.
to address the consequence of gene duplication on co-expression network divergence, we developed a gene co-expression network from rna-seq data derived from  <dig> different tissues/stages of the maize reference inbred-b <dig>  wgd, tandem and inserted gene duplications exhibited distinct regulatory divergence.
overall, non-syntenic genes primarily from inserted duplications show more co-expression divergence.
moreover, subgenome dominance was not observed in the co-expression networks – maize <dig> and maize <dig> exhibit similar levels of intra subgenome correlations.
inserted duplicate genes were more likely to be singletons in the co-expression networks, while wgd duplicate genes were likely to be co-expressed with other genes.
intriguingly, the level of inter subgenome co-expression was similar to the level of intra subgenome correlations, and genes from specific subgenomes were not likely to be the enriched in co-expression network modules and the hub genes were not predominantly from any specific subgenomes in maize.
gene duplications can be classified as whole genome duplication , tandem and inserted .
older gene duplications exhibit more extensive co-expression variation than younger duplications.
in maize, wgd resulted in the subgenomes maize <dig> and maize <dig>  of which maize <dig> is considered the dominant subgenome.
gene duplication is prevalent in many species and can result in coding and regulatory divergence.
gene duplicationgene expressionco-expression networkregulatory divergencemaize http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundation09538810953881briskine roman schaefer robert issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
also, such enlarged co-expression divergence is significantly related to duplication age.
