to address these issues , we introduce hic-bench, a configurable computational platform for comprehensive and reproducible analysis of hi-c sequencing data.
we have also embedded various tasks that perform quality assessment and visualization.
hic-bench performs all common hi-c analysis tasks, such as alignment, filtering, contact matrix generation and normalization, identification of topological domains, scoring and annotation of specific interactions using both published tools and our own.
hic-bench consists an easy-to-use and extensible platform for comprehensive analysis of hi-c datasets.
this unique feature facilitates the design and execution of complex benchmark studies that may involve combinations of multiple tool/parameter choices in each step of the analysis.
additionally, the user can readily perform parameter exploration and comparison of different tools in a combinatorial manner that takes into account all desired parameter settings in each pipeline task.
hi-cchromosome conformationcomputational pipelinedata provenanceparameter explorationbenchmarkingamerican cancer society rsg-15-189-01-rmctsirigos aristotelis http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100005189leukemia and lymphoma society8007-17tsirigos aristotelis issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
we expect that it will facilitate current analyses and help scientists formulate and test new hypotheses in the field of three-dimensional genome organization.
to demonstrate the usefulness of our platform, we performed a comprehensive benchmark of existing and new tad callers exploring different matrix correction methods, parameter settings and sequencing depths.
hic-bench is implemented as a data flow platform with an emphasis on analysis reproducibility.
analysis of hi-c data is complex and computationally intensive involving multiple tasks and requiring robust quality assessment.
this has led to the development of several tools and methods for processing hi-c data.
most importantly, investigators need to be ensured that slight changes in parameters and/or methods do not affect the conclusions of their studies.
chromatin conformation capture techniques have evolved rapidly over the last few years and have provided new insights into genome organization at an unprecedented resolution.
