we investigated the distribution and dynamics of endosymbiotic bacteria and bacteriocytes at different stages during development of the animals from larva to imago by confocal laser scanning microscopy.
this implicates an important function of blochmannia in this developmental phase during which the animals are metabolically very active but do not have access to external food resources.
c. floridanus is a holometabolous insect which undergoes a complete metamorphosis.
during pupal stages a complete restructuring of the inner organs including the digestive tract takes place.
the number of bacteriocytes in relation to symbiont-free midgut cells varied strongly over different developmental stages.
previous experiments have shown a nutritional contribution of the bacteria to host metabolism by production of essential amino acids and urease-mediated nitrogen recycling.
the transformation of the entire midgut into a symbiotic organ during pupal stages underscores the important role of blochmannia for its host in particular during metamorphosis.
in fact, during this phase some bacteria were also found in midgut cells other than bacteriocytes indicating a cell-invasive capacity of blochmannia.
during this developmental stage the midgut itself became a huge symbiotic organ consisting almost exclusively of cells harboring bacteria.
the carpenter ant camponotus floridanus harbors obligate intracellular mutualistic bacteria  in specialized cells, the bacteriocytes, intercalated in their midgut tissue.
the diffuse distribution of bacteriocytes over the midgut tissue is in contrast to many other insects carrying endosymbionts in specialized tissues which are often connected to the midgut but form a distinct organ, the bacteriome.
our data show how the endosymbiont is retained within the midgut tissue during metamorphosis thereby ensuring the maintenance of the intracellular endosymbiosis despite a massive reorganization of the midgut tissue.
in adult animals the number of bacteriocytes generally decreased.
