in vivo knockdown of c/ebp postponed recovery of locomotory activity following nerve crush.
to identify genes that are involved in the robust regenerative capacity observed in l. stagnalis, we designed the first gene chip covering ~ <dig>   <dig> l. stagnalis cns est sequences.
our qpcr analysis confirmed that ccaat enhancer binding protein  was up-regulated following nerve injury in a time-dependent manner.
we have recently conducted a partial neuronal transcriptome sequencing project and reported over  <dig>  est sequences which allowed us to develop and perform a large-scale high throughput microarray analysis.
we conducted microarray analysis to compare the gene expression profiles of sham-operated  and crush-operated  central ganglia of adult l. stagnalis.
our study demonstrates the usefulness of the large-scale gene profiling approach in this invertebrate model to study the molecular mechanisms underlying the intrinsic regenerative capacity of adult cns neurons.
neuronal regeneration in the adult mammalian central nervous system  is severely compromised due to the presence of extrinsic inhibitory signals and a reduced intrinsic regenerative capacity.
thus, l. stagnalis has served as an animal model to study the cellular mechanisms underlying neuronal regeneration.
taken together, our data suggest both somatic and local effects of c/ebp are involved in neuronal regeneration.
we reported that  <dig> genes were regulated following central nerve injury in adult l. stagnalis and provided the first evidence for the involvement of local c/ebp in neuronal regeneration.
this is the first high-throughput microarray study in l. stagnalis, a model of axonal regeneration following cns injury.
knockdown of c/ebp following axotomy prevented extension of the distal, proximal and intact neurites.
in contrast, the cns of adult lymnaea stagnalis , a freshwater pond snail, is capable of spontaneous regeneration following neuronal injury.
the expression levels of  <dig> genes were found to be significantly altered  following nerve injury.
