our study shows that regions of ambiguous alignment may provide useful phylogenetic signal when secondary structure information is used to guide the alignment procedure and provides an r implementation to the bayesian relative rates test.
with this dataset, we conduct a series of phylogenetically explicit tests of chelicerate and acariform relationships and present a phylogenetic framework for internal relationships of acariform mites.
thus, we update currently the accepted taxonomic classification to reflect these results: the superfamily halacaroidea murray,  <dig> is moved from the infraorder eupodina krantz,  <dig> to anystina van der hammen, 1972; and the subfamily erythracarinae oudemans,  <dig>  is elevated to family rank, erythracaridae stat.
before turning those findings into nomenclatural changes, however, we consider that our study calls for  finding shared apomorphies of the early derivative endeostigmata clade and the clade including the remaining acariformes;  a well-supported hypothesis  for alicorhagiidae placement;  sampling the families proterorhagiidae, proteonematalycidae and grandjeanicidae not yet included in molecular analyses;  undertake a denser sampling of clades traditionally placed in eupodina, anystina  and palaeosomata , since consensus networks and internode certainty  and ic all  indices indicate high levels of conflict in these tree regions.
non-trivial relationships recovered by our analyses with high support  had been  proposed by previous underappreciated morphological studies.
our molecular data strongly support a diphyletic acari, with acariformes as the sister group to solifugae , the so called poecilophysidea.
marine mites  were traditionally regarded as the sister-group to bdelloidea , but our analyses show their close relationships to parasitengona.
previous molecular studies recovered acari either as monophyletic or non-monophyletic, albeit with a limited taxon sampling.
labidostommatina was inferred as the basal lineage of prostigmata.
desmonomatan oribatid mites  were recovered as the monophyletic sister group of astigmata .
similarly, relationships between basal acariform groups  and major lineages of acariformes  are virtually unknown.
