a coalescent-based analysis rejected a null hypothesis of allopatric divergence, suggesting a complex history.
bayesian analysis favored mountain tapir  paraphyly in relation to lowland tapir over reciprocal monophyly, corroborating the inferences from the fossil data these species are sister taxa.
based on the geographic distribution of haplotypes we propose  a central role for western amazonia in tapir diversification, with a key role of the ecological gradient along the transition between andean subcloud forests and amazon lowland forest, and  that the amazon river acted as an barrier to gene flow.
from a conservation perspective, we did not find a correspondence between genetic structure in lowland tapir and ecogeographic regions proposed to define conservation priorities in the neotropics.
climatic events at the end of the pleistocene, parapatric speciation, divergence along the andean foothill, and role of the amazon river, have similarly shaped the history of other taxa.
nevertheless further work with additional samples and loci is needed to improve our initial assessment.
here, we investigate the history of lowland tapir as revealed by variation at the mitochondrial gene cytochrome b, compare it to the fossil data, and explore mechanisms that could have shaped the observed structure of current populations.
understanding the forces that shaped neotropical diversity is central issue to explain tropical biodiversity and inform conservation action; yet few studies have examined large, widespread species.
finally, the branching patterns and estimates based on nucleotide diversity indicate a population expansion after the last glacial maximum.
separate methodological approaches found mutually exclusive divergence times for lowland tapir, either in the late or in the early pleistocene, although a late pleistocene divergence is more in tune with the fossil record.
a pleistocene diversification is inferred for the genus tapirus from the fossil record, but only two species survived the pleistocene megafauna extinction.
lowland tapir  is the largest neotropical herbivore whose ancestors arrived in south america during the great american biotic interchange.
this study is the first examining lowland tapir phylogeography.
