measuring isotopic enrichment in metabolites provides quantitative insights into the biosynthetic network and enables flux analysis as a function of external perturbations.
a novel simulated annealing/genetic algorithm, called 'genetic algorithm for isotopologues in metabolic systems'  was developed to find the optimal solutions to a set of simultaneous equations that represent the isotopologue compositions, which is a mixture of isotopomer species.
this is the first such analysis of udp-glcnac dynamics, and the approach is generally applicable to other complex metabolites comprising distinct metabolic subunits, where sufficient numbers of isotopologues can be unambiguously resolved and accurately measured.
stable isotope tracing is a powerful technique for following the fate of individual atoms through metabolic pathways.
we utilized a stable isotope resolved metabolomics  approach to determine the timecourse of 13c incorporation from -glucose into udp-glcnac in lncap-ln <dig> cells.
the output comprises the timecourse of the individual labeled species, which was deconvoluted into labeled metabolic units, namely glucose, ribose, acetyl and uracil.
nmr and mass spectrometry are the techniques of choice for global profiling of stable isotope labeling patterns in cellular metabolites.
13c positional isotopomers and isotopologues of udp-glcnac were determined by high resolution nmr and fourier transform-ion cyclotron resonance-mass spectrometry.
this computational approach revealed the relative fluxes through the different biosynthetic pathways of udp-glcnac, which comprises simultaneous sequential and parallel reactions, providing new insight into the regulation of udp-glcnac levels and o-linked protein glycosylation.
however, meaningful biochemical interpretation of the labeling data requires both quantitative analysis and complex modeling.
the reproducibility and robustness of the deconvolution were verified by replicate experiments, extensive statistical analyses, and cross-validation against nmr data.
