two-dimensional landmarks were used to capture the shapes of the superior aspect of the body and posterior elements of the last thoracic and first lumbar vertebrae of chimpanzees, orangutans, and humans with and without schmorl’s nodes.
recent studies suggest there is a relationship between intervertebral disc herniation and vertebral shape.
with this in mind, we carried out a study of human, chimpanzee, and orangutan vertebrae to examine the links between vertebral shape, locomotion, and schmorl’s nodes, which are bony indicators of vertical intervertebral disc herniation.
back paindisc herniationvertebral shapebipedalismgeometric morphometricsschmorl’s nodesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
together, these results suggest that human vertebrae with schmorl’s nodes are closer in shape to chimpanzee vertebrae than are healthy human vertebrae.
the results support the hypothesis that intervertebral disc herniation preferentially affects individuals with vertebrae that are towards the ancestral end of the range of shape variation within h. sapiens and therefore are less well adapted for bipedalism.
canonical variates analysis indicated that the last thoracic and first lumbar vertebrae of healthy humans, chimpanzees, and orangutans can be distinguished from each other , but vertebrae of pathological humans and chimpanzees cannot .
the procrustes distance between pathological humans and chimpanzees was found to be smaller than the one between pathological and healthy humans.
this finding not only has clinical implications but also illustrates the benefits of bringing the tools of evolutionary biology to bear on problems in medicine and public health.
we tested the hypothesis that vertical disc herniation preferentially affects individuals with vertebrae that are towards the ancestral end of the range of shape variation within homo sapiens and therefore are less well adapted for bipedalism.
pair-wise manovas of principal component scores for both the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae found significant differences between all pairs of taxa , except pathological humans vs chimpanzees .
