candidates for avirulence effectors with cognate resistance genes involved in race-cultivar specificity were identified, as were putative proteins involved in host-species determination.
genomes of venturia pirina  and venturia inaequalis  were sequenced and the predicted secretomes of each isolate identified.
venturia inaequalisventuria pirinaapplemalus x domesticaeuropean pearpyrus communissecretomeeffectorthe new zealand foundation for research, science and technologyc06x <dig> c06x0207victorian life sciences computation initiative’s  life sciences computation centrevictorian life sciences computation initiative’s  life sciences computation centrehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001215la trobe universityvictorian life sciences computation initiativeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
in terms of economic impact, the most important of these are v. inaequalis, which infects apple, and v. pirina, which is a pathogen of european pear.
candidate effectors were found, on average, to be in regions of relatively low gene-density and in closer proximity to repeats , compared with core eukaryotic genes.
given that venturia fungi colonise the sub-cuticular space without penetrating plant cells, it is assumed that effectors that contribute to virulence and determination of host range will be secreted into this plant-pathogen interface.
effectors that are putative determinants of host range were identified; both those that may be involved in race-cultivar and host-species specificity.
comparative secretomics has revealed candidate effectors from venturia fungal plant pathogens that attack pome fruit.
numerous genes with similarity to leptosphaeria maculans avrlm <dig> and the verticillium spp.
since many of the effector candidates are in close proximity to repetitive sequences this may point to a possible mechanism for the effector gene family expansion observed and a route to diversification via transposition and repeat-induced point mutation.
rna-seq was conducted on the apple-specific v. inaequalis isolate vi <dig>  to highlight virulence and pathogenicity components of the secretome.
thus the predicted secretomes of a range of isolates of venturia with distinct host-ranges were interrogated to reveal putative proteins involved in virulence and pathogenicity.
fungal plant pathogens belonging to the genus venturia cause damaging scab diseases of members of the rosaceae.
