the federated semantic web services that operate upon this ontology are deployed within the semantic annotation, discovery, and integration  framework.
unfortunately, efforts to annotate, classify, and analyze these chemical entities have largely remained in the hands of human curators using manual or semi-automated protocols, leaving many novel entities unclassified.
since chemical function is often closely linked to structure, accurate structure-based classification and annotation of chemical entities is imperative to understanding their functionality.
the formal lipid ontology we use here extends a part of the lipro ontology and draws on the lipid hierarchy in the lipid maps database, as well as literature-derived knowledge.
our prototype framework is capable of accurate automated classification of lipids and facile integration of lipid class information with additional data obtained with sadi web services.
as part of an exploratory study, we have investigated the utility of semantic web technologies in automated chemical classification and annotation of lipids.
our prototype framework consists of two components: an ontology and a set of federated web services that operate upon it.
we extend the utility of these core services by combining them with additional sadi services that retrieve associations between lipids and proteins and identify publications related to specified lipid types.
firstly, a structural annotation service detects and enumerates relevant functional groups for a specified chemical structure.
a second service reasons over lipid ontology class descriptions using the attributes obtained from the annotation service and identifies the appropriate lipid classification.
the potential of programming-free integration of external web services through the sadi framework offers an opportunity for development of powerful novel applications in lipidomics.
we conclude that semantic web technologies can provide an accurate and versatile means of classification and annotation of lipids.
structure-based lipid classification is enacted by two core services.
