in temperate grasslands, earthworms serve as important ecosystem engineers making up the majority of soil faunal biomass.
to test this we conducted a mesocosm experiment where we added earthworms  to planted grassland communities with different plant species composition .
later, arion vulgaris slugs  were added and allowed to freely choose among the available plant species.
we hypothesized that  the food choice of slugs would be altered by earthworms’ specific effects on the growth and nutrient content of plant species,  slug herbivory will be less affected by earthworms in plant communities containing more plant species than in those with fewer plant species because of a more readily utilization of plant resources making the impacts of earthworms less pronounced.
slug herbivory was significantly affected by both earthworms and plant species composition.
percent leaf area consumed by slugs was 40% lower in communities containing  <dig> plant species; in communities containing only three species earthworms increased slug leaf area consumption.
leaf length and number of tillers was increased in mesocosms containing more plant species but little influenced by earthworms.
overall shoot biomass was decreased, root biomass increased in plant communities with more plant species.
earthworms decreased total shoot biomass in mesocosms with more plant species but did not affect biomass production of individual functional groups.
slugs damaged 60% less leaves when earthworms were present, regardless of the species composition of the plant communities.
this slug species is listed among the  <dig> worst alien species in europe.
herbivore behaviour has been shown to be affected by earthworms, however it is unclear whether these effects differ with the composition of plant communities.
plant communities had equal plant densities and ratios of the functional groups grasses, non-leguminous forbs and legumes.
plant nitrogen concentrations across three focus species were 18% higher when earthworms were present; composition of plant communities did not affect plant quality.
given the important role that both herbivores and earthworms play in structuring plant communities the implications of belowground-aboveground linkages should more broadly be considered when investigating global change effects on ecosystems.
