genomic scans between fiber flax and linseed identified candidate genes involved in cell-wall biogenesis/modification, xylem identity and fatty acid biosynthesis congruent with genes previously identified in flax and other plant species.
however, the genetic diversity, population structure and linkage disequilibrium  patterns necessary for association mapping  have not yet been assessed in flax because genomic resources have only recently been developed.
abundant genetic diversity was observed in the total panel , and some sub-groups showed a high proportion of private alleles.
based on the abundant genetic diversity, weak population structure and relatedness and relatively fast ld decay, we concluded that this core collection is suitable for am studies targeting multiple agronomic and quality traits aiming at the improvement of flax as a true dual purpose crop.
genetic diversitypopulation structurelinkage disequilibriumassociation mappinglinum usitatissimumfiber flaxlinseeddivergent selection
the data was analyzed to assess the suitability of this core collection for am.
our genomic scans provide the first insights into candidate regions affected by divergent selection in flax.
combined genetic structure analysis assigned all accessions to two major groups with six sub-groups.
population differentiation was weak between the major groups  and for most of the pairwise comparisons among sub-groups.
simultaneous targeting of genomic regions controlling stem fiber and seed quality traits could enable the development of dual purpose cultivars.
recently, the fiber industry has invested in the development of products made from linseed stems, making it a dual purpose crop.
the molecular coancestry analysis indicated weak relatedness  for most individual pairs.
the average genome-wide ld  was  <dig> , with a relatively fast decay of  <dig>  cm.
genomic scans to identify candidate genes selected during the divergent breeding process of fiber flax and linseed were conducted using the whole genome shotgun sequence of flax.
we characterized  <dig> globally distributed flax accessions using  <dig> microsatellite markers.
