mptp administration lowered the number of tyrosine hydroxylase immunopositive cells in the substantia nigra pars compacta, decreased motor coordination, and increased the total wake time during the dark period.
the sleep-wakefulness cycle was studied by continuous eeg and motor activity monitoring  <dig> and 2 weeks after mptp injection.
here we demonstrate a neurotrophic effect of mgdnf on pc <dig> cells in vitro as well as its neuroprotective effect on dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta in vivo as indicated by improved motor coordination and sleep-wakefulness cycle in the mptp mouse model of parkinson’s disease.
after the experiment, the motor coordination of experimental animals was evaluated in the rotarod test, and dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta were counted in cross-sections of the midbrain.
transplantation of transgenic cells with the gdnf gene lacking the pre- and pro-sequences can protect dopaminergic neurons in the mouse midbrain from the subsequent administration of the pro-neurotoxin mptp, which is confirmed by polysomnographic, behavioral and histochemical data.
transgenic hek293/mgdnf/gfp cells were transplanted into the striatum  of experimental mice.
hence it is released from transfected cells and preserves the differentiation activity and neuroprotective properties.
the medium conditioned by transgenic cells with mgdnf induced axonal growth in rat embryonic spinal ganglion in vitro.
this factor in the medium conditioned by the transfected cells was shown to induce axonal growth in pc <dig> cells.
previously, we have shown that transgenic cells bearing the gdnf gene with deleted pre- and pro-regions  can release transgenic gdnf.
hek <dig> cells were transfected with a vector encoding an isoform of the human gdnf gene with deleted pre- and pro-regions .
the transplantation of hek293/mgdnf cells into the caudate-putamen 3 days prior to mptp injection smoothed these effects, while the control transplantation of hek <dig> cells showed no notable impact.
neurotrophic factorgdnfparkinson’s diseasesleep-wakefulness cyclesubstantia nigrarussian science foundation 14-15-00942pavlova g. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
