in contrast, rxrα deficiency might induce the synthesis of saturated fatty acids, triglyceride, cholesterol, bile acids, and retinoids.
to correlate the dna binding data with gene expression data, the expression patterns of  <dig> genes that regulate lipid homeostasis were studied in wild type and liver rxrα-null mice treated with and without ra.
furthermore, hepatocytes express the highest amount of retinoid x receptor alpha  among all the cell types.
moreover, ra reduced serum cholesterol, triglyceride, and bile acid levels in mice.
in addition, hepatocytes produce the largest amount of retinol binding protein and cellular retinoic acid binding protein to mobilize retinol from the hepatic storage pool and deliver retinol to its receptors, respectively.
based on the binding, functional annotation illustrated the role of those receptors in regulating hepatic lipid homeostasis.
the data showed that ra treatment and rxrα-deficiency had opposite effects in regulating lipid homeostasis.
the expression data suggested that ra treatment could produce unsaturated fatty acids and induce triglyceride breakdown, bile acid secretion, lipolysis, and retinoids elimination.
the eyes and skin are obvious retinoid target organs.
vitamin a deficiency causes night blindness and retinoids are widely used to treat acne and psoriasis.
surprisingly, the function of endogenous retinoids in the liver has received very little attention.
based on the data generated from chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing, the global dna binding of transcription factors including retinoid x receptor α  along with its partners i.e.
nuclear receptorretinoids x receptorretinoic acid receptorfarnesnoid x receptorperoxisomal proliferator-activated receptor αliver x receptorpregnane x receptorchromatin immunoprecipitationsequencingmicroarray
hepatic ra mediated through rxrα and its partners regulates lipid homeostasis.
a subset of genes , which could clearly differentiate the effect of ligand treatment and receptor deficiency, were selected for further functional analysis.
however, more than 90% of total body retinol is stored in liver stellate cells.
