loss of endogenous nad from isolated yeast mitochondria is greatly stimulated by matrix space expansion.
however, the loss of nad from the matrix space was not mediated by the ymuc, because ymuc inhibitors did not prevent decreased nad-linked respiration during swelling and ymuc opening without swelling did not cause decreased nad-linked respiration.
adding nad back to the medium, even in the presence of a membrane-impermeant nadh dehydrogenase inhibitor, restored the respiratory rate of swollen mitochondria oxidizing ethanol, suggesting that nad is transported into the matrix space.
nad addition did not restore the decreased respiratory rate of swollen mitochondria oxidizing the combination of malate, glutamate, and pyruvate.
nad loss greatly limits nad-linked respiration in swollen mitochondria without decreasing the nad-linked respiratory rate in normal, condensed organelles.
nad addition can totally restore the decreased respiration in swollen mitochondria.
in live yeast cells mitochondrial swelling has been observed prior to mitochondrial degradation and cell death.
either hypotonic swelling or colloid-osmotic swelling due to opening of the yeast mitochondrial unspecific channel  in a mannitol medium resulted in decreased nad-linked respiration.
mitochondria contain shuttles for the transport of cytoplasmic nadh reducing equivalents into the mitochondrial matrix.
the mitochondrial electron transport chain oxidizes matrix space nadh as part of the process of oxidative phosphorylation.
nad was lost more extensively from the matrix space of swollen than normal, condensed isolated yeast mitochondria from saccharomyces cerevisiae.
the loss of nad in swollen organelles caused a greatly decreased respiratory rate when ethanol or other matrix space nad-linked substrates were oxidized.
therefore the loss of matrix space metabolites is not entirely specific for nad.
however evidence has been obtained for the transport of nad into and out of plant and mammalian mitochondria.
therefore mitochondrial swelling may stimulate nad transport to regulate metabolism during these conditions.
however, during nad loss the mitochondrial levels of most other nucleotides were maintained.
