the genes of the triterpenoid saponin pathway were identified in both g- and p-type plants.
we randomly chose  <dig> ssrs to detect the genetic diversity of  <dig> barbarea germplasms.
barbarea vulgaristranscriptomediamondback mothexpression patternmolecular markergenetic diversitysaponin biosynthesisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
the distance tree showed that these accessions were clearly divided into groups, with the g-type grouping with available western and central european b. vulgaris accessions in contrast to the p-type accession, b. stricta and b. verna.
herein, the transcriptomes of p-type b. vulgaris before and after dbm infestation were subjected to illumina  pyrosequencing and comparative analysis.
the homologous genes from p- and g-type plants were detected by blast unigenes with a cutoff level e-value < e− <dig>   <dig>  gene families containing  <dig>  p-type and  <dig>  g-type unigenes were shared by the two types of b. vulgaris.
we also detected  <dig>  simple sequence repeats  in the b. vulgaris transcriptome, comprising mono-nucleotide-repeats  and triple-nucleotide-repeats .
barbarea vulgaris contains two genotypes: the glabrous type , which confers resistance to the diamondback moth  and other insect pests, and the pubescent type , which is susceptible to the dbm.
compared with our previous g-type transcriptome, the expression patterns of many insect responsive genes, including those related to secondary metabolism, phytohormones and transcription factors, which were significantly induced by dbm in g-type plants, were less sensitive to dbm infestation in p-type plants.
however, gene expression for two downstream enzymes, the glucosyl transferase  and an oxidosqualene cyclase , were significantly upregulated in the p-type compared with the g-type plant.
<dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms  were found in  <dig>  orthologous genes between the p- and g-type plants.
<dig>  gigabase pairs of clean nucleotides were generated.
the upstream genes of the pathway showed similar expression patterns between the two genotypes.
