we also searched the sea cucumber transcriptome for homologs of factors known to be involved in acquisition and/or control of pluripotency.
the identified candidate transcription factors included not only known regeneration-related genes, but also factors not previously implicated as regulators of post-traumatic tissue regrowth.
our analysis yielded eleven putative transcription factors, which constitute good candidates for further functional studies.
our de novo assembly yielded  <dig>  contigs, of which  <dig>  showed significant similarity to known protein-coding sequences.
functional analysis of sets of differentially expressed genes suggested that among the most extensively over-represented pathways were those involved in the extracellular matrix  remodeling and ecm-cell interactions, indicating a key role of the ecm in regeneration.
more importantly, however, it also illuminates new aspects of echinoderm regeneration, which have been scarcely studied or overlooked altogether.
in this study, we employ high-throughput sequencing to analyze the transcriptome of the normal and regenerating radial nerve cord , in the sea cucumber holothuria glaberrima.
functional annotation also suggested that one of the possible adaptations contributing to fast and efficient neural regeneration in echinoderms may be related to suppression of excitotoxicity.
echinoderms are emerging as important models in regenerative biology.
significant amount of data are available on cellular mechanisms of post-traumatic repair in these animals, whereas studies of gene expression are rare.
expression profiling revealed large-scale changes in gene expression  associated with regeneration.
we also sought to get insight into which transcription factors may operate at the top of the regulatory hierarchy to control gene expression in regeneration.
the most significant outcome of the present work is that it lays out a roadmap for future studies of regulatory mechanisms by providing a list of key candidate genes for functional analysis.
our transcriptomic analysis corroborates existing data on cellular mechanisms implicated in regeneration in sea cucumbers.
