to explore the origins of embryonic and adult macrophages, we injected hamburger-hamilton stage  <dig> to  <dig> chick embryos with either yolk sac-derived blood cells, or bone marrow cells from egfp+ donors.
conversely, bone marrow egfp+ cells gave rise to tissue macrophages in all organs of adult birds, and regenerated csf1-responsive marrow macrophage progenitors.
the data indicate that the yolk sac is not the major source of macrophages in adult birds, and that there is a macrophage-restricted, self-renewing progenitor cell in bone marrow.
there were no apparent adverse effects of chicken csf1-fc on embryonic or post-hatch development, but there was an unexpected increase in bone density in the treated hatchlings.
macrophage proliferation and differentiation is controlled by macrophage colony-stimulating factor  and interleukin  <dig> , both agonists of the csf <dig> receptor .
recent studies in mammals suggest that cells arising in the yolk sac give rise to self-renewing macrophage populations that persist in adult tissues.
in the current manuscript we describe the origin, function and regulation of macrophages, and the role of csf1r signaling during embryonic development, using the chick as a model.
to explore the role of csf <dig> further, we injected embryonic or hatchling csf1r-reporter transgenic birds with a novel chicken csf1-fc conjugate.
csf1r is demonstrated to be limiting for macrophage development during development in ovo and post-hatch.
the chicken provides a novel and tractable model to study the development of the mononuclear phagocyte system and csf1r signaling.
based upon rna-sequencing comparison to bone marrow-derived macrophages grown in csf <dig>  we show that embryonic macrophages contribute around 2% of the total embryo rna in day  <dig> chick embryos, and have similar gene expression profiles to bone marrow-derived macrophages.
in the case of the yolk sac, these cells were not retained in hatched birds.
in both cases, the transferred cells gave rise to large numbers of egfp+ tissue macrophages in the embryo.
