larix gmelinii is a dominant tree species in china’s boreal forests and plays an important role in the coniferous ecosystem.
we performed de novo sequencing and assembly of the l. gmelinii transcriptome using a short read sequencing technology .
chemical defenses of l. gmelinii seedlings were induced with jasmonic acid  or methyl jasmonate  for  <dig> hours.
the application of exogenous volatile semiochemicals may induce and enhance its resistance against insect or disease attacks; however, little is known regarding the genes and molecular mechanisms related to induced resistance.
this study provides sequence resources for l. gmelinii research and will help us to better understand the functions of disease/insect-resistance genes and the molecular mechanisms of secondary metabolisms in l. gmelinii.
the expression profiles of some abundant genes under different elicitor treatment were studied by using real-time qrt-pcr.
the results showed that the expression levels of disease/insect-resistance genes in the seedling samples induced by ja and meja were higher than those in the control group.
unfortunately, in northeast china, l. gmelinii often suffers from serious attacks by diseases and insects.
both ja and meja induced seedlings of l. gmelinii showed significantly increased expression of disease/insect-resistance genes.
the expression of disease/insect-resistance genes  was up-regulated.
the seedlings induced with meja elicited the strongest increases in disease/insect-resistance genes.
we sequenced  <dig> digital gene expression libraries and generated between  <dig>  and  <dig>  million raw tags, and obtained  <dig>  reliable reference genes after removing redundancy.
it is also one of the most economically important tree species in the chinese timber industry due to excellent water resistance and anti-corrosion of its wood products.
transcriptomes were compared between seedlings induced by ja, meja and untreated controls using a tag-based digital gene expression profiling system.
