we next focused on up-regulated genes unique to either balb/c or c57bl/ <dig> derived macrophages and identified, using kegg database, signal transduction pathways among the most relevant pathways unique to both susceptible and resistant derived macrophages.
microarray results were first analyzed for significant pathways using the kyoto encylopedia of genes and genomes  database.
taken together our results suggest that strains specific pathogenesis may be due to a difference in the magnitude of the same pathways and/or to differentially expressed pathways in the two mouse strains derived macrophages.
the outcome of infection depends largely on parasite pathogenicity and virulence but also on the activation status and genetic background of macrophages.
we identify signal transduction pathways among the most relevant pathways modulated by l. major infection, unique to balb/c and c57bl/ <dig> bmdm and postulate that the interplay between these potentially interconnected pathways could direct the macrophage response toward a given phenotype.
the analysis revealed that a large set of the shared genes is involved in the immune response and that difference in the expression level of some chemokines and chemokine receptors could partially explain differences in resistance.
protein-protein interaction analysis using string database highlights the existence of a cross-talk between p <dig> and mtor signaling pathways respectively specific to susceptible and resistant bmdms.
we next investigated whether, in a given mice strain derived macrophages, the different up-regulated unique genes could be coordinately regulated.
indeed, genes unique to c57bl/ <dig> bmdms were associated with target of rapamycin  signaling pathway while a range of genes unique to balb/c bmdms, belong to p <dig> signaling pathway.
animal models are essential for a better understanding of pathogenesis of different microbes including leishmania.
leishmania are obligated intracellular pathogens that replicate almost exclusively in macrophages.
