our results suggest that rapid accumulation of ros and no at early stage is important for dormancy release in grapevine in the summer, and the identification of the commonly expressed specific genes among the treatments allowed the construction of the signal transduction pathway related to ros/rns metabolism during dormancy release.
the rapid accumulation of a sublethal level of ros/rns subsequently induces cell wall loosening and expansion for bud sprouting.
microarray analysis revealed specific alterations in gene expression in dormancy breaking buds induced by p, hc and phc after 24 h of treatment.
the amounts of ros and no accumulated were highly correlated with the rates of budbreak among these treatments, highlighting the importance of a rapid, transient accumulation of sublethal levels of ros and rns in dormancy breaking.
the budbreak rates induced by pruning , hydrogen cyanamide , pruning plus hydrogen cyanamide  and water  after 8 days were  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 0 %, respectively.
in situ staining of longitudinal bud sections after 12 h of treatments detected high levels of ros and nitric oxide  accumulated in the buds treated with phc, compared with hc or p alone.
hydrogen cyanamide  and pruning  have frequently been used to break dormancy in grapevine floral buds.
hydrogen cyanamiderosdormancy breaking budsgrapevinesgene ontologycouncil of agriculture 105as- <dig> .3-fd-z1yen yung-fu ministry of science and technology 104-2221-e- <dig> -022yen yung-fu issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
clearly, hc was more effective in stimulating grapevine budbreak and p further enhanced its potency.
phc also exerted a greater intensity in transcriptional activation of these genes.
qrt-pcr analysis revealed the transient expression dynamics of  <dig> specific genes related to ros generation and scavenge during the 48 h treatment with phc.
this study aimed to address the early mode of action of these treatments on accumulation of reactive oxygen species  and reactive nitrogen species  and expression of related genes in the dormancy breaking buds of grapevine in the summer.
