in cotton, however, the high number and smaller size of the chromosomes has resulted in difficulties in discriminating chromosomes from wild species in cultivated cotton background, the development of cotton maals has lagged far behind many other crops.
to date, no set of g. hirsutum-g. anomalum maals was reported.
here the amphiploid  derived from g. hirsutum × g. anomalum was used to generate a set of g. hirsutum-g. anomalum maals through a combination of consecutive backcrossing, genomic in situ hybridization , morphological survey and microsatellite marker identification.
we improved the gish technique used in our previous research by using a mixture of two probes from g. anomalum and g. herbaceum .
the results indicate that a ratio of 4: <dig>  is the most suitable for discrimination of chromosomes from g. anomalum and the at-subgenome of g. hirsutum.
next,  <dig> g. hirsutum- and g. anomalum-specific codominant markers were obtained and employed for characterization of these maal individuals.
the characterized lines can be employed as bridges for the transfer of desired genes from g. anomalum into g. hirsutum, as well as for gene assignment, isolation of chromosome-specific probes, development of chromosome-specific “paints” for fluorochrome-labeled dna fragments, physical mapping, and selective isolation and mapping of cdnas/genes for a particular g. anomalum chromosome.
gossypium anomalum  possesses the desirable characteristics of drought tolerance, resistance to diseases and insect pests, and the potential for high quality fibers.
using this improved gish technique,  <dig> maal individuals were isolated.
monosomic alien addition lines  can be used as a bridge to transfer desired genes from wild species into g. hirsutum.
gossypium hirsutumgossypium anomalumchromosomemonosomic alien addition linegenomic in situ hybridizationmicrosatellite markerthe national key research and development program of china2016yfd0100203zhou baoliang national key technology support program of china during the twelfth five-year plan period2013bad01b03-04zhou baoliang jiangsu collaborative innovation center for modern crop productionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
