genes that interact directly or indirectly may have the same or similar functions in the biological processes in which they are involved and together contribute to the related disease phenotypes.
a function enrichment analysis for go and kegg indicated that the optimized genes were mainly involved in the biological processes of regulating cell apoptosis and programmed cell death.
we prioritized  <dig> potential cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation in casn by neighborhood-weighting decision rule.
as an important epigenetic modification, dna methylation plays a crucial role in the development of mammals and in the occurrence of complex diseases.
the complicated relations between genes can be clearly represented using network theory.
here we have shown that network theory combined with epigenetic characteristics provides a favorable platform from which to identify cancer-related genes.
a protein-protein interaction  network offers a platform from which to systematically identify disease-related genes from the relations between genes with similar functions.
a cancer-associated subnetwork  was obtained from whpn by selecting genes associated with seed genes which were known to be methylated in the four cancers.
we found that casn had a more densely connected network community than whpn, indicating that the genes in casn were much closer to seed genes.
of  <dig> optimized genes,  <dig> were as diagnostic markers and  <dig> as prognostic markers previously identified in literature for cancers and other complex diseases by searching pubmed manually.
we constructed a weighted human ppi network  using dna methylation correlations based on human protein-protein interactions.
whpn represents the relationships of dna methylation levels in gene pairs for four cancer types.
by examining the pubmed co-citations, we found  <dig> optimized genes were related with cancers and aberrant methylation, and  <dig> genes were validated to be methylated aberrantly in cancers.
we prioritized  <dig> potential cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation that might contribute to the further understanding of cancers.
