we used our multi-scale model to understand what conditions might determine the balance between use of resistance mechanisms at the two different levels.
commonly, viruses enter host cells by binding cell surface receptors.
our modeling results suggest that if the virus adopts a strategy based on binding to low complexity sites on the host receptor, the host will select a defense strategy at the protein  level, rather than at the level of the regulatory network - a virus-host strategy that appears to have been selected most often in nature.
we explored a range of different conditions  that affect host evolutionary dynamics and, in particular, the balance between the use of different resistance mechanisms.
these conditions include the complexity of the receptor binding protein-protein interaction, selection pressure on the host population , and the number of expressed cell-surface receptors.
host resistance and viral pathogenicity are determined by molecular interactions that are part of the evolutionary arms race between viruses and their hosts.
host resistance and viral pathogenicity depend on quite different evolutionary conditions.
we adopt a computational modeling approach to study the evolution of the first infection step, where we consider two possible levels of resistance mechanism: at the level of the binding interaction between the host receptor and a virus binding protein, and at the level of receptor protein expression where we use a standard gene regulatory network model.
virus entryhost cell surface receptorgene regulatory networkhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of health1r01gm111741maccarthy thomas issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
at the population level we adopted the susceptible-infected-susceptible  model.
at the same time, on the host side, the potential for resistance shifts from the changes at the level of receptor binding  interaction towards changes at the level of gene regulation, suggesting a mechanism for increased biological complexity.
viruses are obligate intracellular parasites and entry to the host cell is the first step of any virus infection.
viruses may evolve cell entry strategies that use small receptor binding regions, represented by low complexity binding in our model.
in particular, we found that as the receptor binding complexity  increases, viruses tend to become specialists and target one specific receptor.
