using this as a starting point,  <dig> significantly regulated reductases and dehydrogenases were selected in the present work for further study.
the vanillin specific reduction rate increased by  <dig> times in adh <dig> overexpressed strain but not in ynl134c and yjr096w overexpressed strain.
beside the reported adh6p, the enzymes encoded by ynl134c and yjr096w were proved to have vanillin reduction activity in present study.
vanillin, a type of phenolic released during the pre-treatment of lignocellulosic materials, is toxic to microorganisms and therefore its presence inhibits the fermentation.
the vanillin can be reduced to vanillyl alcohol, which is much less toxic, by the ethanol producer saccharomyces cerevisiae.
while ald <dig> and zwf <dig> did not directly reduce vanillin to vanillyl alcohol, their contribution to vanillin resistance primarily depended on the enhancement of the reducing equivalent supply.
the in vitro detected vanillin reductase activities of strain overexpressing adh <dig>  ynl134c and yjr096w were notably higher than control.
overexpressing ald <dig> and zwf <dig> mainly increased the / and / ratios but not the vanillin reductase activities.
the reducing capacity of s. cerevisiae and its vanillin resistance are strongly correlated.
their contribution to strain growth and vanillin reduction were balancing the redox state of strain when vanillin was presented.
this suggested that the enzymes encoded by ynl134c and yjr096w might prefer other substrate and/or could not show their effects on vanillin on the high background of adh6p in vivo.
the roles of these reductases and dehydrogenases in the vanillin tolerance and detoxification abilities of s. cerevisiae are described.
budding yeastvanillin toleranceadh6ynl134cyjr096wthe national key technology research and development program of the ministry of science and technology of china2014bad02b07hou jin the grants of the national high technology research and development program of china2014aa0219032012aa022106bao xiaoming shen yu the project of national energy administration of chinany20130402bao xiaoming the state key laboratory of motor vehicle biofuel technologykfkt20130022013004bao xiaoming shen yu shandong key laboratory of straw biorefinement technologiesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
however, the specific enzymes and their contribution to the vanillin reduction are not extensively studied.
in our previous work, an evolved vanillin-resistant strain showed an increased vanillin reduction capacity compared with its parent strain.
