we then investigate the applicability of the random subspace  ensemble method for phenotype classification based on microscopy images.
the characteristics of curvelet transform of being multiscale and multidirectional suit the description of microscopy images very well.
for the three images sets hela, cho and rnai, the random subspace ensembles offers the classification rates  <dig> %,  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively, which compares sharply with the published result 84%, 93% and 82% from a multi-purpose image classifier wnd-charm which applied wavelet transforms and other feature extraction methods.
the random subspace ensemble of mlps is much better than a number of commonly applied multi-class classifiers in the investigated application of phenotype recognition.
experimental results on the phenotype recognition from three benchmarking image sets including hela, cho and rnai show the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
the ensemble model produces better classification performance compared to the component neural networks trained.
the combined feature is better than any individual one in the classification accuracy.
in this paper we investigated an efficient method for the extraction of quantitative features from images by combining second order statistics, or haralick features, with curvelet transform.
the curvelet transform has a more sparse representation of the image than wavelet, thus offering a description with higher time frequency resolution and high degree of directionality and anisotropy, which is particularly appropriate for many images rich with edges and curves.
a combined feature description from haralick feature and curvelet transform can further increase the accuracy of classification by taking their complementary information.
a random subspace based classifier ensemble with multiple layer perceptron  as the base classifier was then exploited for classification.
a base classifier is trained with a rs sampled subset of the original feature set and the ensemble assigns a class label by majority voting.
