additionally, challenge by non-fluoroquinolone agents, particularly cetrimide, promoted cross resistance to fluoroquinolones, revealing the potential role of biocides as selective pressure for the emergence of resistance to these antibiotics.
remarkably, detection of the is <dig> element in the promoter regions of mgra and nora, in some cases associated with increased gene expression, suggests that these genes may be hot spots for is <dig> insertion events.
two closely related methicillin- and ciprofloxacin-resistant staphylococcus aureus clinical strains, with different efflux capacity and the pan-susceptible strain atcc <dig> were exposed to constant concentrations of the efflux pump  substrates ciprofloxacin, ethidium bromide and cetrimide.
parental and exposed strains were tested regarding their susceptibility towards antibiotics, biocides and ethidium bromide, efflux capacity and levels of ep gene expression.
the results obtained with exposure of atcc <dig> to ciprofloxacin were particularly striking, revealing a step-wise development of fluoroquinolone resistance, with a first efflux-mediated response, followed by the occurrence of a mutation in grla that resulted in phenotypic resistance.
this study aimed to examine the impact of efflux on development of resistance to fluoroquinolones and other antimicrobials in s. aureus strains representing relevant phenotypes in terms of antibiotic susceptibility and efflux activity.
the overall cell response was more pronounced for strains with an initial basal efflux activity.
this efflux-mediated response can result in the emergence of multidrug resistance in healthcare environments and should be taken into account in the management of this major pathogen.
the temporal pattern of ep gene expression disclosed an early-response with high expression of several genes, followed by a late-response, characterized by overexpression of specific genes.
multidrug resistance phenotypes emerged upon exposure, independently of the substrate or its concentration, which were correlated with increased efflux capacity of the exposed strains.
