our results demonstrate that different tissues show different expression kinetics following gene transfer of the same reporter plasmid to different mouse tissues in vivo.
in the present study, we evaluated the efficacy of biolistic gene transfer techniques in vivo using non-invasive bioluminescent imaging  methods.
biolistic gene transfer to mouse skin produced peak reporter gene expression one day after transfer.
the use of bioluminescence imaging techniques enabled efficient evaluation of reporter gene expression in vivo.
we evaluated superficial  and abdominal organ  targets, and found that reporter gene expression peaked within the first two days post-transfer in each case, but declined most rapidly in the skin  compared to liver .
maximum depth of tissue penetration following biolistic transfer to abdominal skin was 200- <dig> μm.
gene therapy continues to hold great potential for treating many different types of disease and dysfunction.
similarly, biolistic gene transfer to mouse liver in vivo also produced peak early expression followed by a decline over time.
in contrast to skin, however, liver expression of the reporter gene was relatively stable 4- <dig> days post-biolistic gene transfer, and remained detectable for nearly two weeks.
this information is essential for designing effective gene therapy strategies in different target tissues.
the optimal dlr was found to be in the range of 4- <dig>  bioluminescence was measured using an in vivo imaging system  at various time-points following transfer.
plasmid dna carrying the firefly luciferase  reporter gene under the control of the human cytomegalovirus  promoter/enhancer was transfected into mouse skin and liver using biolistic methods.
currently, the most commonly used methods employ replication-defective viral vectors for gene transfer, while physical gene transfer methods such as biolistic-mediated  delivery to target tissues have not been as extensively explored.
the plasmids were coupled to gold microspheres  using different dna loading ratios , and "shot" into target tissues using a helium-driven gene gun.
