we describe the recent emergence of feline sporotrichosis in the metropolitan region of são paulo, brazil, with an overwhelming occurrence of s. brasiliensis as the etiological agent.
during the last 3-year period,  <dig> cases of feline sporotrichosis were reported in são paulo with proven s. brasiliensis culture.
haplotype analysis confirmed that isolates from são paulo shared the haplotype originated in the long-lasting outbreak of cat-transmitted sporotrichosis in rio de janeiro, which differed from the haplotype circulating in the rio grande do sul epidemic.
sporotrichosis outbreaks with zoonotic transmission, such as those that are ongoing in southern and southeastern brazil, have highlighted the threat of cross-species pathogen transmission.
a phylogenetic and a haplotype approach were used to investigate the origin of this epidemic and the impact of feline transmission on genetic diversity.
the haplotype diversity of feline s. brasiliensis isolates revealed the expansion of a clonal population with low genetic diversity.
the feline sporotrichosis epidemic shows no signs of slowing, and this epidemiological pattern may require specific public health strategies to control future outbreaks.
it affects the skin, lymphatic system, and other organs in the warm-blooded host.
sporothrix brasiliensis has emerged as a human threat owing to the intimate contact pattern between diseased cats and humans in endemic areas.
sporotrichosisfelinesporothrix brasiliensiszoonosisemerging infectious diseasesepidemiologycatsporothrix schenckiimycosisoutbreakissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
etiological agents are embedded in the plant-associated order ophiostomatales.
the fast spread of sporotrichosis in a short period of time highlights the potential for outbreaks and suggests that the mycosis may affect an urban population with a high concentration of susceptible felines.
sporotrichosis is a mycotic infectious disease that is generally acquired by traumatic inoculation of contaminated materials especially from plant debris or through bites and scratches from diseased animals, such as domestic cats.
