in this work we aimed at sequencing and assembling the goat milk transcriptome corresponding at colostrum and  <dig> days of lactation.
moreover because a higher expression of genes involved in immune defense response, carbohydrate metabolism and related to oligosaccharide metabolism was identified in colostrum we here corroborate the potential of goat milk as a natural source of lactose-derived oligosaccharides and for the development of functional foods.
goat milktranscriptomic profilerna-seqlactationcolostrumoligosaccharidesmilk somatic cellsitalian ministry of agricultureimprovement of italian livestock through the use of innovative biotechnologies: functional genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics moioli bianca issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
functional annotation and pathway enrichment analysis showed that in goat colostrum somatic cells predominate biological processes involved in glycolysis, carbohydrate metabolism, defense response, cytokine activity, regulation of cell proliferation and cell death, vasculature development, while in mature milk, biological process associated with positive regulation of lymphocyte activation and anatomical structure morphogenesis are enriched.
additionally, we aimed at identifying the differentially expressed genes  between the two lactation stages and at analyzing the expression of genes involved in oligosaccharides metabolism.
<dig> loci were differentially expressed between lactation stages, among which  <dig> and  <dig> were significantly up- and down-regulated in colostrum, respectively.
to our knowledge, this is the first study comparing goat transcriptome of two lactation stages: colostrum and  <dig> days.
the analysis of  <dig> different oligosaccharide metabolism-related genes showed that most of these  were more expressed in colostrum than in mature milk, with eight expressed at very high levels .
to reconstruct transcripts we used both the genome as reference, and a de novo assembly approach.
a significant sequence similarity match was found for  <dig>  transcripts  against the ncbi nt and for  <dig>   against the nr databases.
a total of  <dig>  different transcripts, organized in  <dig>  tentative genes, were obtained using the goat genome as reference.
68% and 69% of the de novo assembled transcripts, in colostrum and  <dig> days of lactation samples respectively, have a significant match with the merged transcriptome obtained using cufflinks/cuffmerge.
