overall, these findings indicate that intracellular gene transfer may occur even more frequently in angiosperms than already recognized and that pseudogenes in plant mitochondrial genomes can be surprisingly resistant to forces that lead to gene loss and inactivation.
although this transfer occurred at least  <dig> million years ago, i.e., in a common ancestor of these three grasses, it is striking that expressed, nearly intact pseudogenes of rps <dig> are retained in the mitochondrial genomes of both rice and wheat.
filter hybridization experiments showed that rps <dig> sequences are present in the mitochondrial genomes of all examined poales except for members of the grass subfamily panicoideae .
remarkably, nearly intact and expressed pseudogenes of rps <dig> have persisted in the mitochondrial genomes of most lineages of poaceae and cyperaceae despite the antiquity of the transfers and of the frameshift and rna editing mutations that mark the mitochondrial genes as pseudogenes.
multiple lines of evidence indicate that the nuclear genes are probably the products of three independent transfers.
putatively nuclear copies of rps <dig> were isolated from one to several members of each of these three poales families.
such survival probably reflects a combination of factors, including the short length of rps <dig>  its location immediately downstream of rpl <dig> in most plants, and low rates of nucleotide substitutions and indels in plant mitochondrial dnas.
such long-term, nearly pervasive survival of expressed, apparent pseudogenes is to our knowledge unparalleled in any genome.
many mitochondrial genes, especially ribosomal protein genes, have been frequently transferred as functional entities to the nucleus during plant evolution, often by an rna-mediated process.
cdna analysis showed that all mitochondrial pseudogenes examined  are transcribed, that most are rna edited, and that surprisingly many of the edits are reverse  edits.
the transfers in cyperaceae and poaceae are relatively ancient, occurring in the common ancestor of each family, roughly  <dig> million years ago, whereas the putative joinvilleaceae transfer may be the most recent case of functional organelle-to-nucleus transfer yet described in any organism.
