the transcriptomic study was extended to assess the scglk role in this model by comparing the transcriptomic profile of s. coelicolor m <dig> with that of a ∆glk mutant derived from the wild-type strain, complemented with a heterologous glk gene from zymomonas mobilis , insensitive to ccr but able to grow in glucose .
this mechanism regulates the expression of genes involved in the uptake and utilization of alternative carbon sources.
even when the outcome effect of ccr in different bacteria is the same, their essential mechanisms can be quite different.
our results confirm and update the agar model of the ccr in streptomyces and its dependence on the scglk per se.
while its entry and flow through glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathway were stimulated, the gluconeogenesis was inhibited.
surprisingly, the expected regulatory function of scglk was not found to be as global as thought before , although may be accompanied or coordinated by other transcriptional regulators.
this work identified the expression of s. coelicolor genes involved in primary metabolism that were influenced by glucose and/or scglk.
the transcriptome of a classical model of ccr was studied in s. coelicolor to differentiate between the effects due to glucose or scglk in this regulatory mechanism.
these findings offer new opportunities to study and understand the ccr in s. coelicolor by increasing the number of known glucose and scglk -regulated pathways and a new set of putative regulatory proteins possibly involved or controlling the ccr.
in several streptomycetes glucose kinase  represents the main glucose phosphorylating enzyme and has been regarded as a regulatory protein in ccr.
interestingly, even when the scglk protein does not have dna binding domains and the glycolytic flux was restored by a heterologous glucokinase, the scglk replacement modified the expression of  <dig> genes.
aside from describing the metabolic pathways influenced by glucose and/or scglk, several unexplored transcriptional regulators involved in the ccr mechanism were disclosed.
glucose also triggered the ccr by repressing transporter systems and the transcription of enzymes required for secondary carbon sources utilization.
in the genus streptomyces, one of the most remarkable control mechanisms of physiological processes is carbon catabolite repression .
ccr also affects the synthesis of secondary metabolites and morphological differentiation.
to evaluate the paradigmatic model proposed for ccr in streptomyces, a high-density microarray approach was applied to streptomyces coelicolor m <dig>  under repressed and non-repressed conditions.
glucose elicited important metabolic and transcriptional changes in this microorganism.
