additionally, the genes involved in abscisic acid  and ethylene signal responses were expressed at high levels earlier in gt grapes than in cl grapes.
considering the expression patterns of both transcription factors and mature-related genes, we infer that less rainfall and stronger sunshine in the gt region could initiate the earlier expression of ripening-related genes and accelerate the berry maturation, eventually limiting the production of terpene volatiles.
differential production of free and glycosidically-bound terpenes in grape berries across gt and cl regions should be related at least to the expression of both vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig> .
the transcription expression profiling of the genes was obtained by rna sequencing and part of the results were verified by quantitative real time pcr .
transcription factors that could regulate terpene synthesis were predicted through gene co-expression network analysis.
gc-ms analysis demonstrated that both free and glycosidically bound terpenes accumulated primarily after veraison and that mature grape berries from cl contained significantly higher concentrations of free and glycosidically bound terpenes than berries from gt.
other genes were also found to be related to the differential accumulation of terpenes and monoterpene glycosides in the grapes between regions.
‘muscat blanc a petits grains’ berries were collected from two wine-producing regions with strikingly different climates, gaotai  in gansu province and changli  in hebei province in china, at four developmental stages for two consecutive years.
recently a series of genes required for terpene biosynthesis were biochemically characterized in grape berries.
however, the genes that dominate the differential terpene accumulation of grape berries between regions have yet to be identified.
particularly in the mep pathway, the expression of vvihdr  paralleled with the accumulation of terpenes, which can promote the flow of isopentenyl diphosphate  into the terpene synthetic pathway.
transcriptome analysis revealed that some key genes involved in terpene biosynthesis were markedly up-regulated in the cl region.
free and glycosidically-bound terpenes were identified and quantified using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry  technique.
