here, we investigate cross talk between fgf/spry and wnt signaling during otic placode induction and assess whether these two signaling pathways functionally cooperate during early inner ear development in the mouse.
this study provides genetic evidence that fgf and wnt signaling cooperate during early inner ear development in the mouse.
inner earotic placodesprouty1sprouty2wnt8afgfβ-catenincross talkissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
in multiple vertebrate organisms, including chick, xenopus, and zebrafish, fibroblast growth factor  and wnt signaling cooperate during formation of the otic placode.
however, in the mouse, although fgf signaling induces wnt8a expression during induction of the otic placode, it is unclear whether these two signaling pathways functionally cooperate.
we previously demonstrated that the sprouty <dig>  and sprouty <dig>  genes antagonize fgf signaling during induction of the otic placode.
comparison of spry <dig>  spry <dig>  and wnt reporter expression in pre-otic and otic placode cells indicates that fgf signaling precedes and is active in more cells than wnt signaling.
interestingly, we find that although the entire otic placode increases in size in spry <dig> and spry <dig> compound mutant embryos, the size of the wnt-reporter-positive domain does not increase to the same extent as the wnt-reporter-negative domain.
furthermore, our data suggest that although specification of the otic placode may be globally regulated by fgf signaling, otic specification of cells in which both fgf and wnt signaling are active may be more tightly regulated.
we provide in vivo evidence that fgf signaling activates the wnt signaling pathway upstream of tcf/lef transcriptional activation.
fgf regulation of wnt signaling is functional, since early inner ear defects in spry <dig> and spry <dig> compound mutant embryos can be genetically rescued by reducing the activity of the wnt signaling pathway.
otic phenotypes were assessed by in situ hybridization, semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase pcr, immunohistochemistry, and morphometric analysis of sectioned tissue.
sprouty  genes encode intracellular antagonists of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling, including fgf signaling.
