therefore, we used three independent methods robust to the presence of recombination to define the population structure of this species: a phylogenetic tree based on a set of conserved protein sequences, in silico chromosome painting, and network analysis.
our results provide an essential baseline for future molecular epidemiological, ecological and evolutionary studies of e. rhusiopathiae and facilitate comparisons to other recombinogenic, multi-host bacteria.
erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae is an opportunistic pathogen that is currently reemerging in both the swine and poultry industries globally.
erysipelothrix rhusiopathiaegenomicsgram positive bacteriahomologous recombinationhost specificitymulti-host pathogenpopulation structurewhole genome sequencinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canadadiscovery grantnorthern supplementcanada graduate scholarshipforde taya kutz susan http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008459university of calgaryeyes highkutz susan http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004073killam trustsizaak walton killam pre-doctoral scholarshipforde taya canada north outfittersnunavut general monitoring programnunavut harvesters associationbc oil and gas research and innovation societyhttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100002438weyerhaeuser companyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
although we found some evidence of host and geographical clustering, each clade included isolates from diverse host species and from multiple continents.
knowledge about how bacterial populations are structured is an important prerequisite for studying their ecology and evolutionary history and facilitates inquiry into host specificity, pathogenicity, geographic dispersal and molecular epidemiology.
however, despite its economic relevance and broad geographic and host distribution, including zoonotic potential, the global diversity, recombination rates, and population structure of this bacterium remain poorly characterized.
eighty-three e. rhusiopathiae isolates from a range of host species and geographic origins, isolated between  <dig> and  <dig>  were sequenced and assembled using both reference-based mapping and de novo assembly.
despite frequent recombination, we can reliably identify three distinct clades that do not clearly segregate by host species or geographic origin.
this bacterium sporadically causes mortalities in captive marine mammals, and has recently been implicated in large-scale wildlife die-offs.
in this study, we conducted a broad-scale genomic comparison of e. rhusiopathiae based on a diverse collection of isolates in order to address these knowledge gaps.
all three methods were broadly concordant and supported the existence of three distinct clades within the species e. rhusiopathiae.
using whole genome sequence data, we confirm recent suggestions that e. rhusiopathiae is a weakly clonal species that has been shaped extensively by homologous recombination.
we found that a high proportion of the core genome  had undergone recombination.
