several studies have pointed out their involvement in a range of biological processes, revealing that a large number of wrky genes are transcriptionally regulated under conditions of biotic and/or abiotic stress.
we propose that, making use of data from co-regulatory networks, it is possible to highlight novel clusters of plant genes contributing to the same biological processes or signal transduction pathways.
the presented results suggested that  <dig> members of the rice wrky gene family  were differentially-regulated in response to at least one of the stress conditions tested.
this analysis was extended to arabidopsis thaliana taking advantage of an extensive repository of gene expression data.
to investigate the existence of wrky co-regulatory networks in plants, a whole gene family wrkys expression study was carried out in rice .
we defined the existence of nine oswrky gene clusters comprising both phylogenetically related and unrelated genes that were significantly co-expressed, suggesting that specific sets of wrky genes might act in co-regulatory networks.
atwrkys were found to belong to two main co-regulatory networks  and two smaller ones , all including genes belonging to distinct phylogenetic groups.
we also showed that specific co-regulatory networks were conserved between the two model species by identifying arabidopsis orthologs of the co-expressed oswrky genes.
the cor-a network contained several atwrky genes known to be involved mostly in response to pathogens, whose physical and/or genetic interaction was experimentally proven.
in this work we identified sets of co-expressed wrky genes in both rice and arabidopsis that are functionally likely to cooperate in the same signal transduction pathways.
this hypothesis was tested by pearson correlation coefficient analysis of the arabidopsis wrky gene family in a large set of affymetrix microarray experiments.
this information will open new routes contributing to the dissection of wrky signal transduction pathways in plants.
the wrky transcription factor gene family has a very ancient origin and has undergone extensive duplications in the plant kingdom.
