therefore, to examine hesc surfaces for other potential pluripotent markers, we used a panel of  <dig> lectins, which were chosen based on their specificity for a variety of carbohydrates and carbohydrate linkages, along with stage specific embryonic antigen- <dig> , to determine binding quantitation by flow cytometry and binding localization in adherent colonies by immunocytochemistry.
this work represents a fundamental base to systematically classify pluripotent hescs, and in future studies these lectins may be used to distinguish differentiated hesc types based on glycan presentation that accompanies differentiation.
some developmentally regulated cell surface antigens identified by monoclonal antibodies in a variety of species and stem cell types have proven to be side chains of membrane glycolipids and glycoproteins.
we propose that tl, rca and con a may be used as markers that are associated with the pluripotent state of hescs because binding percentages and binding localization of these lectins are similar to those of ssea- <dig>  non-binding lectins, dba and ltl, may identify differentiated cell types; however, we did not find these lectins to bind to pluripotent ssea- <dig> positive hescs.
lycopersicon esculetum lectin , ricinus communis agglutinin , and concanavalin a  bound to ssea- <dig> positive regions of hescs and with similar binding percentages as ssea- <dig>  in contrast, we found dolichos biflorus agglutinin  and lotus tetragonolobus lectin  did not bind to hescs while phaseolus vulgaris leuco-agglutinin , vicia villosa agglutinin , ulex europaeus agglutinin , phaseolus vulgaris erythro-agglutinin , and maackia amurensis agglutinin  bound partially to hescs.
enriching cells for ssea- <dig> expression increased the percentage of ssea- <dig> positive cells to 98–99%.
these binding percentages correlated well with immunocytochemistry results.
our results provide information about types of carbohydrates and carbohydrate linkages found on pluripotent hesc surfaces.
these cells must be appropriately characterized prior to differentiation studies or when defining characteristics of the pluripotent state.
pluripotent human embryonic stem cells  have the potential to form every cell type in the body.
