in the wild, each lupinus species hosted a broader genetic range of bradyrhizobium than did either acmispon species, suggesting that acmispon species are more specialized.
lupinus bicolor benefited from a broader range of genotypes but averaged less benefit from each.
second, as predicted by coevolutionary theory, each test species performed better with partner genotypes isolated from conspecifics.
to address this question, we quantified realized partner richness and phylogenetic breadth of four wild-grown native legumes  and performed inoculation trials to test the ability of two hosts  to nodulate , benefit from , and provide benefit to   <dig> bradyrhizobium genotypes.
nevertheless, a. strigosus exhibited more specificity, i.e., greater variation in its response to, and effect on, bradyrhizobium genotypes.
plant-soil feedbacks help to structure plant and microbial communities, but how frequently are soil-based symbiotic mutualistic interactions sufficiently specialized to influence species distributions and community composition?
first, as predicted by the jack-of-all-trades is a master of none hypothesis, specialist a. strigosus obtained greater benefit from its beneficial symbionts than did generalist l. bicolor.
in the greenhouse, however, l. bicolor and a. strigosus did not differ in fundamental association specificity: all inoculated genotypes nodulated both hosts.
the “jack-of-all-trades is a master of none” hypothesis asserts that specialists persist because the fitness of a generalist utilizing a particular habitat is lower than that of a specialist adapted to that habitat.
this study affirmed two important tenets of evolutionary theory.
both hosts obtained more fitness benefit from symbionts isolated from conspecific hosts; those symbionts in turn gained greater fitness benefit from hosts of the same species from which they were isolated.
finally, positive fitness feedback between the tested hosts and symbionts suggests that positive plant-soil feedback could contribute to their patchy distributions in this system.
