considering that sunflower production is expanding to arid regions, tolerance to abiotic stresses as drought, low temperatures and salinity arises as one of the main constrains nowadays.
abiotic-related expressed genes were the target of this characterization through a gene expression analysis using an organ-specific cdna fluorescence microarray approach in response to high salinity and low temperatures.
a statistical analysis based on mean comparison by anova and ordination by principal component analysis allowed the detection of  <dig> candidate genes for either salinity and/or chilling stresses.
differential organ-specific sunflower ests  were previously generated by a subtractive hybridization method that included a considerable number of putative abiotic stress associated sequences.
the objective of this work is to analyze concerted gene expression profiles of organ-specific ests by fluorescence microarray assay, in response to high sodium chloride concentration and chilling treatments with the aim to identify and follow up candidate genes for early responses to abiotic stress in sunflower.
this study not only allowed the identification of common transcriptional changes to both stress conditions but also lead to the detection of stress-specific genes not previously reported in sunflower.
we analyzed  <dig> unigenes previously isolated from differential organ-specific cdna libraries from leaf, stem and flower at r <dig> and r <dig> developmental stage.
eighty genes isolated from organ-specific cdna libraries were identified as candidate genes for sunflower early response to low temperatures and salinity.
out of them,  <dig> genes were up or down regulated under both stresses, supporting common regulatory mechanisms and general responses to chilling and salinity.
this is the first organ-specific cdna fluorescence microarray study addressing a simultaneous evaluation of concerted transcriptional changes in response to chilling and salinity stress in cultivated sunflower.
