it has been shown that olfactory ensheathing glia  and schwann cell  transplantation are beneficial as cellular treatments for spinal cord injury , especially acute and sub-acute time points.
significant tissue sparing was observed at both time points following glial scs transplantation.
these results show that transplantation of oeg and scs in a sub-acute phase can improve anatomical outcomes after a contusion injury to the spinal cord, by increasing the number of spared/regenerated supraspinal fibers, reducing cavitation and enhancing tissue integrity.
this provides important information on the time window of glial transplantation for the repair of the spinal cord.
immunohistochemistry of spinal cord sections short term  and long term  showed differences in host glial activity, migration and proteoglycan deposits between the two cell types.
in this study, we transplanted dsred transduced adult oeg and scs sub-acutely  following a t <dig> moderate spinal cord contusion injury in the rat.
behaviour was measured by open field  and horizontal ladder walking tests to ascertain improvements in locomotor function.
histochemical staining revealed that the volume of tissue remaining at the lesion site had increased in all oeg and scs treated groups.
in addition, oeg transplants showed significantly decreased chondroitin proteoglycan synthesis in the lesion site, suggesting a more cns tolerant graft.
however, the ladder walk test did not show statistically significant differences between treatment and control groups.
the purpose of this study was to investigate if oeg and scs cells injected sub acutely  could:  improve behavioral outcomes,  induce sparing/regeneration of propriospinal and supraspinal projections, and  reduce tissue loss.
fluorogold staining was injected into the distal spinal cord to determine the extent of supraspinal and propriospinal axonal sparing/regeneration at 4 months post injection time point.
fluorogold retrograde tracing showed a statistically significant increase in the number of supraspinal nuclei projecting into the distal spinal cord in both oeg and scs transplanted rats.
