a dense and accurate consensus map specific for t. durum will greatly facilitate genetic mapping, functional genomics and marker-assisted improvement.
the t. durum a and b genomes were covered in their near totality based on the reference ssr hexaploid wheat map.
the consensus map presented here was used as a reference for genetic diversity and mapping analyses in t. durum, providing nearly complete genome coverage and even marker density.
a genome-wide association scan for heading date from  <dig> field trials in the mediterranean basin and in mexico yielded  <dig> chromosome regions with evidences of association in multiple environments.
the consensus locus order compared to those of the single component maps showed good correspondence, .
high quality genotypic data from six core recombinant inbred line populations were used to obtain a consensus framework map of  <dig> simple sequence repeats  and diversity array technology®  anchor markers .
durum wheat  is a tetraploid cereal grown in the medium to low-precipitation areas of the mediterranean basin, north america and south-west asia.
interpolation of unique markers from  <dig> maps allowed us to position a total of  <dig>  markers in a consensus map of  <dig>  cm.
genomics applications in durum wheat have the potential to boost exploitation of genetic resources and to advance understanding of the genetics of important complex traits .
the consensus map provides the basis for high-density single nucleotide polymorphic  marker implementation in durum wheat.
linkage disequilibrium was found to decay below the r <dig> threshold =  <dig>  within  <dig>  cm, on average.
triticum durum desfconsensus maplinkage disequilibriumgenome-wide association mappingheading dateqtlissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
the consensus map was used to carry out a whole-genome search for genetic differentiation signatures and association to heading date in a panel of  <dig> accessions adapted to the mediterranean areas.
differences in marker order and local recombination rate were observed between the durum and hexaploid wheat consensus maps.
