in this study, we set out to document which mirnas and corresponding target genes change significantly as ameloblasts transition from secretory- to maturation-stage amelogenesis.
based on bioinformatics analyses,  <dig> %  of these differentially expressed genes  were highlighted as being the potential targets of  <dig> mirnas that were differentially expressed in the opposite direction, in the same tissue samples.
further, we used luciferase reporter assays to provide evidence that two of these differentially expressed mirnas, mir- <dig> and mir- <dig>  are potential regulators for their predicated target mrnas, lamp <dig>  and tfrc .
although they represent only one of numerous mechanisms influencing gene activities, mirnas specific to the maturation stage could be involved in regulating several key processes of enamel maturation by influencing mrna stability and translation.
mirnaamelogenesisenamel maturationmatrix mineralizationbioinformaticsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
in the rodent incisor during amelogenesis, as ameloblast cells transition from secretory stage to maturation stage, their morphology and transcriptome profiles change dramatically.
we identified  <dig> mirnas that were differentially expressed at the maturation stage relative to the secretory stage of enamel development  <  <dig> , fold change  ≥  <dig> ).
in parallel, transcriptome profiling experiments identified  <dig>  mrna transcripts that were differentially expressed in the maturation stage compared to the secretory stage .
although the number of predicted target degs was not higher than baseline expectations generated by examination of stably expressed mirnas, gene ontology  analysis showed that these  <dig> degs were enriched for ion transport, ph regulation, calcium handling, endocytotic, and apoptotic activities.
total rna samples from both secretory- and maturation-stage rat enamel organs were subjected to genome-wide mirna and mrna transcript profiling.
prior whole genome transcriptome analysis has given a broad picture of the molecular activities dominating both stages of amelogenesis, but this type of analysis has not included mirna transcript profiling.
in conclusion, these data indicate that mirnas exhibit a dynamic expression pattern during the transition from secretory-stage to maturation-stage tooth enamel formation.
seven differentially expressed mirnas  in secretory- and/or maturation-stage enamel organs were confirmed by in situ hybridization.
