furthermore, a high-throughput assay based on automated microscopy coupled to image analysis to quantify p65-nuclear translocation was established.
oscillations were detected at the single-cell level using real-time microscopy as well as at the population level using high-throughput image analysis.
transcription of nf-κb-induced genes is regulated by differential dynamics of single nf-κb subunits, but only a few methods are currently being applied to study dynamics.
therefore, insight into the regulation of nf-κb activation has crucial medical relevance, holding promise for novel drug target discovery.
in particular, while oscillations of nf-κb activation have been observed in response to the cytokine tumor necrosis factor α , little is known about the occurrence of oscillations in response to bacterial infections.
in addition, mathematical modeling of nf-κb dynamics during bacterial infections predicted masking of oscillations on the population level in asynchronous activations, which was experimentally confirmed.
using this assay, we demonstrate a stimulus- and cell line-specific temporal control of p <dig> translocation, revealing, for the first time, oscillations of p <dig> translocation in response to bacterial infection.
taken together, this simple and cost effective assay constitutes an integrated approach to infer the dynamics of nf-κb kinetics in single cells and cell populations.
in addition, deregulation of the nf-κb system has been associated with a number of disease states, including cancer.
the nuclear factor-κb  family of transcription factors plays a role in a wide range of cellular processes including the immune response and cellular growth.
using a single system, novel factors modulating nf-κb can be identified and analyzed, providing new possibilities for a wide range of applications from therapeutic discovery and understanding of disease to host-pathogen interactions.
to quantitatively assess nf-κb dynamics we generated human and murine monoclonal cell lines that stably express the nf-κb subunit p <dig> fused to gfp.
