we profiled the analysis of the global gene expression in rh and tn <dig> under bph infestation, together with changes in the sa and ja levels.
many isolated rice genes that modulate bph resistance are involved in the metabolism or signaling pathways of sa, ja and ethylene.
our results will aid in understanding the molecular basis of rh’s bph resistance and facilitate the identification of new resistance-related genes for breeding bph-resistant rice varieties.
a venn diagram analysis revealed  <dig> rh-specific and bph-inducible probe sets.
finally,  <dig> bph resistance-related gene candidates were selected based on the expression pattern clustering and venn diagram analysis.
they were jasmonate zim-domain transcription factors, which are important negative regulators of the ja pathway.
in rh, the sa content significantly increased and the ja content significantly decreased after bph infestation, with the former occurring prior to the latter.
a cdna microarray analysis illuminated the resistance response at the genome level of rh under bph infestation.
sa plays a leading role in the resistance response of rice to bph.
in rh, the differential genes in the sa pathway were synthesis-related and were up-regulated after bph infestation.
the differential genes in the ja pathway were also up-regulated.
the expression pattern clustering indicated that  <dig> differential probe sets may be associated with constitutive resistance and  <dig> with the bph infestation-responsive resistance of rh.
the levels of sa and ja in rh and tn <dig> seedlings after bph infestation were also determined.
comparatively, genes involved in the et pathway were less affected by a bph infestation in rh.
dna sequence analysis revealed that most bph infestation-inducible genes may be regulated by the genetic background in a trans-acting manner, instead of by their promoters.
the plant hormones salicylic acid  and jasmonic acid  play important roles in plant–pest interactions.
‘rathu heenati’  is a rice cultivar with a high-level, broad-spectrum resistance to all bph biotypes.
