rather than exhibiting only spheroid or ellipsoidal shapes, the cells adapt their shape to fit the local space and are capable of growing past each other, taking on growth and morphological characteristics with greater complexity than observed even in whole plants.
microfluidic devices can isolate the dynamics of single plant cells but have restricted use for providing a tissue-like and fibrous extracellular environment for cells to interact.
this work defines a new suite of techniques for exploring cell-environment interactions.
the cells, once seeded in the scaffolds, can adopt a variety of morphologies, demonstrating that they do not need to be part of a tightly packed tissue to form complex shapes.
cell culture methods allow the detailed observations of individual plant cells and their internal processes.
a gap exists, therefore, in the understanding of spatiotemporal interactions of single plant cells interacting with their three-dimensional  environment.
the 3d culture within the fibre scaffolds permits cells to grow freely within a matrix containing both large and small spaces, a technique that is expected to add to current lithographic technologies, where growth is carefully controlled and constricted.
plant cell culture3d culturemorphogenesisscaffoldarabidopsis thalianacytoskeleton3d imaging4d imagingmicrofibresnanofibresissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
this points to a role of the immediate nano- and micro-topography in plant cell morphogenesis.
the scaffolds provide both developmental cues and structural stability to isolated callus-derived cells grown in liquid culture.
whereas cultured cells are more amenable to microscopy, they have had limited use when studying the complex interactions between cell populations and responses to external signals associated with tissue and whole plant development.
the protocol is rapid, compared to the growth and preparation of whole plants for microscopy, and provides detailed subcellular information on cells interacting with their local environment.
