the saprophyte aspergillus niger , the plant pathogen fusarium verticillioides , and the mycoparasite clonostachys rosea  were grown in single and dual cultures in minimal medium with asparagine as nitrogen source.
fungal biomass was rarely monitored in interaction studies; it is not known whether dominance in pairwise interactions follows congruent patterns.
a. niger showed the greatest ability to suppress the accumulation of metabolites produced by the other fungi.
a. niger was also the species with the largest capacity of transforming metabolites produced by other fungi.
c. rosea suppresses the synthesis of fumonisins by f. verticillioides but does not degrade fumonisins.
fumonisin production by f. verticillioides was suppressed in co-cultures with c. rosea but fumonisin b <dig> was not degraded by c. rosea nor did it affect the growth of c. rosea up to a concentration of 160 μg/ml.
interactions among fungi colonizing dead organic matter involve exploitation competition and interference competition.
pairwise interactions of three fungal species with different life styles were studied.
competitive fitness shifted with time: in dual c.r./f.v.
at certain time points fungal competitive fitness exhibited a rock–paper–scissors pattern: f.v.
competitive fitness in pairwise interactions among fungi is incongruent, indicating that species-specific factors and/or effects are involved.
many metabolites secreted by fungi are catabolized by their producers at later growth stages.
the effect of competition on secondary metabolite production by fungi is however poorly understood.
most metabolites secreted to the medium at early stages in single and dual cultures were not found at later times.
many metabolites occurring in supernatants of single cultures were suppressed in dual cultures and many new metabolites not occurring in single cultures were found in dual cultures.
major mechanism of interference competition is antibiosis caused by secreted secondary metabolites.
interference competitionmetabolic diversityfumonisinmetabolic profilinghttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100005156alexander von humboldt-stiftung http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004543china scholarship councilissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
