this study, for the first time, demonstrates that the parasitic genomes can expand, instead of shrink, through several common molecular mechanisms such as gene duplication, horizontal gene transfer, and transposable element expansion.
gene duplicationhorizontal gene transferhost-derived transposable elementhost adaptationmicrosporidiansilkworms
to gain some insights into the underlying genetic mechanism of pathological ability and host range expansion in this parasite, a comparative genomic approach is conducted.
our comparative genomics analysis show that the n. bombycis genome has greatly expanded due to the following three molecular mechanisms: 1) the proliferation of host-derived transposable elements, 2) the acquisition of many horizontally transferred genes from bacteria, and 3) the production of abundnant gene duplications.
compared to other known nosema parasites, n. bombycis can unusually parasitize a broad range of hosts.
the genome of two nosema parasites, n. bombycis and n. antheraeae , were sequenced and compared with their distantly related species, n. ceranae .
based on our research, we propose that duplicated genes of n. bombycis should be treated as primary targets for treatment designs against pébrine.
furthermore, several duplicated genes involving in the cytotoxic metabolic pathway were found to undergo positive selection, suggestive of the role of duplicated genes on the adaptive evolution of pathogenic ability.
we also showed that the duplicated genes can serve as raw materials for evolutionary innovations possibly contributing to the increase of pathologenic ability.
microsporidian nosema bombycis has received much attention because the pébrine disease of domesticated silkworms results in great economic losses in the silkworm industry.
genome expansion is rarely considered as the evolutionary outcome acting on those highly reduced and compact parasitic microsporidian genomes.
our relative dating analysis further indicated that these duplication events have arisen recently over very short evolutionary time.
