this is the first demonstration that a tonb-system is involved in bacterial trans-envelope signaling in the context of a pathogenic interaction with a plant.
campestris deficient in exbd <dig>  which encodes a component of its unusual elaborate tonb system, had impaired pectate lyase activity and caused no visible symptoms for defense on the non-host plant pepper .
tonb systemdamage-associate molecular patterndampoligogalacturonidetrans-envelope signalingmolecular plant-microbe interactionpathogenxanthomonas campestris
while small ogas were unable to induce an oxidative burst, the elicitor activity in cell suspension cultures of the non-host plants tobacco and pepper increased with the degree of polymerization .
while there are comparably well-characterized examples for damps, often oligogalacturonides , generated by the activity of fungal pathogens, endogenous elicitors evoked by bacterial pathogens have been rarely described.
after hydrolysis with trifluoroacetic acid and subsequent hpae chromatography, the elicitor preparation contained galacturonic acid, the monosaccharide constituent of pectate.
a co-incubation of x. campestris pv.
maximal elicitor activity was observed for dps exceeding  <dig>  in contrast to the x. campestris pv.
the generation of the oga elicitor is embedded in a complex exchange of signals within the framework of the plant-microbe interaction of c. annuum and x. campestris pv.
campestris with isolated cell wall material from c. annuum led to the release of compounds which induced an oxidative burst in cell suspension cultures of the non-host plant.
plant defense is evoked by molecules termed elicitors.
campestris wild type b <dig>  the exbd <dig> mutant was unable to generate elicitor activity from plant cell wall material or from pectin.
lipopolysaccharides and proteins were ruled out as elicitors by polymyxin b and heat treatment, respectively.
the bacterial tonb-system is essential for the substrate-induced generation of extracellular pectate lyase activity.
