we designed an integrated human organ-specific molecular electronic repository , defining human organ-specific genes/proteins, based on five criteria: 1) comprehensive organ coverage; 2) gene/protein to disease association; 3) disease-organ association; 4) quantification of organ-specificity; and 5) cross-linking of multiple available data sources.
most currently available resources for organ-specific genes/proteins either allow users to access tissue-specific expression over a limited range of organs, or do not contain disease information such as disease-organ relationship and disease-gene relationship.
homer is a new resource for analyzing, identifying, and characterizing organ-specific molecules in association with disease-organ and disease-gene relationships.
moreover, the quality of the database was validated with comparison to other known databases and two case studies: 1) an association analysis of organ-specific genes with disease and 2) a gene set enrichment analysis of organ-specific gene expression data.
homer is a comprehensive database covering about  <dig>  proteins,  <dig> organs, and  <dig>  diseases integrated and filtered from organ-specific proteins/genes and disease databases like dbest, tisged, hpa, ctd, and disease ontology.
“organ-specificity” refers to differential expressions of the same gene across different organs.
the database has a web-based user interface that allows users to find organ-specific genes/proteins by gene, protein, organ or disease, to explore the histogram of an organ-specific gene/protein, and to identify disease-related organ-specific genes by browsing the disease data online.
the current homer database can successfully answer a variety of questions related to organ specificity in human diseases and can help researchers in discovering and characterizing organ-specific genes/proteins with disease relevance.
an organ-specific gene/protein is defined as a gene/protein whose expression is significantly elevated in a specific human organ.
an “organ-specific marker” is defined as an organ-specific gene/protein that is also implicated in human diseases related to the organ.
the statistical method we developed for organ-specific gene identification can be applied to other organism.
each organ has a specific function in the body.
