average velocities were increased approximately  <dig>  um/min by ten-fold increases in laminin coating concentration in some cases.
exponential growth, as monitored by total cell area, did not linearly correlate with absolute cell number, but proved valuable for selection of reliable tracking data and for disclosing between-experiment variations in cell growth.
previously reported image processing methods for motility analysis required custom viewing devices and manual interactions that may introduce bias, that slow throughput, and that constrain the scope of experiments in terms of the number of treatment variables, time period of observation, replication and statistical options.
these results demonstrate the applicability of a system that uses fully automated image acquisition and analysis to study cell motility and growth.
we show dose-response and kinetic data for induction of increased motility by laminin and collagen type i without significant effects on growth rate.
data quality measures have been developed that can serve as a basis for the design and quality control of experiments that are facilitated by automation and the  <dig> well plate format.
abundant ancillary data provide opportunities for uniform filtering according to criteria that select for biological relevance and for providing insight into features of system performance.
visible responses of whole cells can yield insight into functional changes that underlie physiological processes in health and disease.
we have applied this technology to study the effects of different extracellular matrix compounds on human osteoblast-like cell lines to explore functional changes that may underlie processes involved in bone formation and maintenance.
quality statistics are reported that associate with stage noise, interference by non-cell objects, and uncertainty in the outlining and positioning of cells by automated image analysis.
for example, features of cell motility accompany molecular changes that are central to the immune response, to carcinogenesis and metastasis, to wound healing and tissue regeneration, and to the myriad developmental processes that generate an organism.
comparison with manual tracking demonstrated the accuracy of the automated method and highlighted the comparative imprecision of human tracking for analysis of cell motility data.
cellular motility response is determined in an unbiased and comparatively high throughput manner.
differential motility response was evident within  <dig> hours of plating cells; long-term responses differed depending upon cell type and surface coating.
