hydrothermal organisms show a particularly great diversity of dirs1-like elements with  <dig> families characterized among alvinocarididae shrimps and  <dig> in the galatheid crab munidopsis recta.
they also suggest some peculiar features of these retrotransposons in hydrothermal organisms where a great diversity of elements is already observed.
phylogenic analyses show that these elements are divergent toward the dirs1-like families previously described in other crustaceans and arthropods and form a new clade called aldirs <dig>  at larger scale, the distribution of dirs1-like retrotransposons appears more or less patchy depending on the taxa considered.
using pcr approaches, we have identified  <dig> new dirs1-like families in  <dig> diverse decapod species .
considering their mutational abilities, tes can contribute to the genetic diversity and evolution of organisms.
our results lead to nearly double both the number of dirs1-like elements described to date, and the number of species known to harbor these ones.
transposable elements are major constituents of eukaryote genomes and have a great impact on genome structure and stability.
dirs1-like retrotransposons are a particular group of retrotransposons according to their mode of transposition that implies a tyrosine recombinase.
in this study, we provide the first degenerate primers designed to look specifically for dirs1-like retrotransposons.
finally, this paper constitutes the first essential step which allows for considering further studies based on the dynamics of the dirs1-like retrotransposons among several genomes.
in this paper, we determine the distribution of dirs1-like elements among  <dig> decapod species,  <dig> of them living in hydrothermal vents that correspond to particularly unstable environments.
they allowed for revealing for the first time a widespread distribution of these elements among a large phylum, here the order decapoda.
indeed, a scattered distribution can be observed in the infraorder brachyura whereas all the species tested in infraorders caridea and astacidea harbor some dirs1-like elements.
to date, they have been described in a restricted number of species in comparison with the ltr retrotransposons.
