by adding time-delayed positive feedback to the inherent time-delayed negative feedback for tgf-β signalling.
we focus on the effects of time-delayed feedback loops and their coupling to ligand stimulation in this system.
computer simulations revealed the vital role of the coupling of the positive and negative feedback loops on the regulation of the tgf-β signalling system.
although tgf-β signalling can be complex, many of the signalling components are well defined, so it is possible to develop mathematical models of tgf-β signalling using reduction and scaling methods.
the incorporation of time-delays for the negative feedback loop improved the accuracy, stability and robustness of the model.
the results from the rf- model compare well with experimental data and predict the dynamics of tgf-β signalling in cancer cells with different mutations.
the parameterization of our tgf-β signalling model is consistent with experimental data.
we have tested the model against experimental data from mef  wt, sv40-immortalized mefs and gp <dig> f/f mefs.
the predictions from the rf- model are consistent with the experimental data.
we developed our mathematical model for the tgf-β signalling pathway, i.e.
tgf-β signallingmathematical modellingfeedback couplingtime-delayreductionrapid equilibrium assumptioncancersignal switchinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001782university of melbourneissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
signalling feedback loops are required to model tgf-β signal transduction and its effects on normal and cancer cells.
the rf- model of tgf-β signalling, using the “rapid equilibrium assumption” to reduce the network of tgf-β signalling reactions based on the time scales of the individual reactions.
this model reproduces both the short-term and long-term switching responses for the intracellular signalling pathways at different tgf-β concentrations.
the model was simplified and reduced to its key components using standard methods and the rapid equilibrium assumption.
