gifts can be a valuable tool for computational procedures which analyze lists of large set of genes resulting from wet-lab or computational research.
the bimodal shape of the gifts distribution suggests a division of the human gene repertoire into two main groups: the high-gifts peak consists almost entirely of protein-coding genes; the low-gifts peak consists of genes from all of the categories.
gifts also provide measures which enable the evaluation of the databases that serve as genecards sources.
gene annotation is a pivotal component in computational genomics, encompassing prediction of gene function, expression analysis, and sequence scrutiny.
gifts may also assist the scientific community with identification of groups of uncharacterized genes for diverse applications, such as delineation of novel functions and charting unexplored areas of the human genome.
genecards® is a gene-centric compendium of rich annotative information for over  <dig>  human gene entries, building upon  <dig> data sources, including gene ontology , pathways, interactions, phenotypes, publications and many more.
the gifts tool, linked from the genecards home page, facilitates browsing the human genome by searching for the annotation level of a specified gene, retrieving a list of genes within a specified range of gifts value, obtaining random genes with a specific gifts value, and experimenting with the gifts weighting algorithm for a variety of annotation categories.
an inverse correlation is found  between the number of genes annotated by each source, and the average gifts value of genes associated with that source.
we present the genecards inferred functionality score  which allows a quantitative assessment of a gene's annotation status, by exploiting the unique wealth and diversity of genecards information.
three typical source prototypes are revealed by their gifts distribution: genome-wide sources, sources comprising mainly highly annotated genes, and sources comprising mainly poorly annotated genes.
