a phylogenetic tree of deduced rt sequences from  <dig> elements revealed that sinbad was most closely related to an unnamed element from the zebrafish danio rerio and to saci- <dig>  also from s. mansoni.
the full length, consensus sinbad retrotransposon was  <dig>  bp long and was flanked at its 5'- and 3'-ends by identical ltrs of  <dig> bp.
it is becoming apparent that numerous ltr retrotransposons and other mobile genetic elements have colonized the genome of the human blood fluke, schistosoma mansoni.
sinbad displayed a triple cys-his rna binding motif characteristic of gag of pao/bel-like elements, followed by the enzymatic domains of protease, reverse transcriptase , rnaseh, and integrase, in that order.
of the major families of long terminal repeat  retrotransposons, the pao/bel family is probably the least well studied.
among the deuterostomes examined, only aquatic species harbored these types of elements.
blast searches of whole genomes and est databases indicated that members of this clade occurred in species of the insecta, nematoda, echinodermata and chordata, as well as platyhelminthes, but were absent from all plants, fungi and lower eukaryotes examined.
the distribution of these elements in the ecdysozoa, deuterostomia, and lophotrochozoa is discontinuous, suggesting horizontal transmission and/or efficient elimination of pao-like mobile genetic elements from some genomes.
southern hybridization and bioinformatics analyses indicated that there were about  <dig> copies of sinbad in the s. mansoni genome.
all four species of nematode examined were positive for sinbad sequences, although among insect and vertebrate genomes, some were positive and some negative.
it was also closely related to pao from bombyx mori and to ninja of drosophila simulans.
a proviral form of sinbad, a new ltr retrotransposon, was identified in the genome of s. mansoni.
the presence of ests representing transcripts of sinbad in numerous developmental stages of s. mansoni along with the identical 5'- and 3'-ltr sequences suggests that sinbad is an active retrotransposon.
sinbad is a pao/bel type retrotransposon from the genome of s. mansoni.
