carassius auratus complex is an extraordinary species complex including the diploid and polyploid forms exhibiting asexual and sexual reproduction modes.
our study indicates that a similar amount of energy is invested by both gynogenetic and sexual females of c. auratus complex in reproductive behaviour.
the energy allocation in reproduction measured by the relative size of gonads revealed no difference between gynogenetic and sexual females; in addition, both females in spawning expressed the same estradiol levels in blood plasma.
in addition, the differences in specific immunity between gynogens and sexuals may also reduce the evolutionary disadvantage of sexual reproduction.
in our study, we hypothesized and tested the differences in physiological , growth-related, condition-related, and fitness-related traits between gynogenetic females and sexuals.
our results revealed similar growth performance in gynogenetic females and sexuals measured by body size and weight, or expressed by condition factor.
our study evidenced significantly lower aerobic performance but higher oxygen-carrying capacity per erythrocyte in gynogenetic females when compared to sexuals.
a trade-off between the number of erythrocytes and the oxygen-carrying capacity per erythrocyte in sexual males and gynogenetic females may contribute to the coexistence of gynogenetic and sexual forms.
higher aerobic performance expressed by the heart index and higher oxygen-carrying capacity were found in sexual males, with increasing values before and during spawning.
the stable coexistence of asexual and sexual forms assumes some disadvantages for asexuals that balance the costs of sex.
igm production differed between gynogens and sexuals of c. auratus complex.
in conclusion, we propose that several mechanisms contribute to the coexistence of the gynogenetic-sexual c. auratus complex.
we suggest that lower aerobic performance in gynogens may represent their physiological disadvantage balancing the cost of sexual reproduction.
