the synaptonemal complex  is a highly conserved meiotic structure that functions to pair homologs and facilitate meiotic recombination in most eukaryotes.
the sc is required for meiotic recombination in drosophila and absence of these proteins leads to reduced crossing over and chromosomal nondisjunction.
despite the conserved nature of the sc and the key role that these five proteins have in meiosis in d. melanogaster, they display little apparent sequence conservation outside the genus.
to identify factors that explain this lack of apparent conservation, we performed a molecular evolutionary analysis of these genes across the drosophila genus.
sc components within drosophila show little apparent sequence homology to those identified in other model organisms due to their rapid evolution.
sc gene sequences have a higher dn/ds  rate ratio than the genome wide average and this can in part be explained by the action of positive selection in almost every sc component.
finally, using population genetic approaches, we demonstrate that positive selection on sc components is ongoing.
we also propose that positive selection in the sc is driven by its sex-specificity combined with its role in facilitating both recombination and centromere clustering in the face of recurrent bouts of drive in female meiosis.
drosophilasynaptonemal complexpositive selectionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationmcb-1022165nsf mcb-1413532blumenstiel justin p. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
first, we propose that a high rate of evolution can be partly explained by low purifying selection on protein components whose function is to simply hold chromosomes together.
it further appears that ω estimates for the five sc components are in accordance with their physical position within the sc.
for the five sc components, gene sequence similarity declines rapidly with increasing phylogenetic distance and only ord and cm are identifiable outside of the drosophila genus.
five drosophila sc proteins have been identified and localized within the complex: cg, cm, cona, ord, and the newly identified corolla.
we propose that the drosophila sc is evolving rapidly due to two combined effects.
