the recent completion of genome sequencing of several photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic eukaryotes that belong to divergent lineages offers a unique opportunity to conduct a comprehensive comparative analysis of kinesins in plant and non-plant systems and infer their evolutionary relationships.
the kinesin- <dig> family, which typically contains a c-terminal motor, has many plant kinesins that have the motor domain at the n terminus, in the middle, or the c terminus.
results from our gene-tree analyses indicate that there was tremendous lineage-specific duplication and diversification of kinesins in eukaryotes.
we used the kinesin motor domain to identify kinesins in the completed genome sequences of  <dig> species, including  <dig> newly sequenced genomes.
all kinesins contain a highly conserved ~ <dig> amino acid motor domain.
since the functions of only a few plant kinesins are reported in the literature, this comprehensive comparative analysis will be useful in designing functional studies with photosynthetic eukaryotes.
addition of novel domains to kinesins in lineage-specific groups contributed to the functional diversification of kinesins.
kinesins, a superfamily of molecular motors, use microtubules as tracks and transport diverse cellular cargoes.
chlamydomonas, a green alga that is part of the lineage that includes land plants, has at least nine of the  <dig> known kinesin families.
seven of ten families present in flowering plants are represented in chlamydomonas, indicating that these families were retained in both the flowering-plant and green algae lineages.
among the newly analyzed genomes, six represent photosynthetic eukaryotes.
a total of  <dig> kinesins was used to perform comprehensive analysis of kinesins and to construct gene trees using the bayesian and parsimony approaches.
the previously recognized  <dig> families of kinesins are resolved as distinct lineages in our inferred gene tree.
several domains in kinesins are present exclusively either in plant or animal lineages.
the increase in the number of kinesins in flowering plants is due to vast expansion of the kinesin- <dig> and kinesin- <dig> families.
at least three of the  <dig> kinesin families are not represented in flowering plants.
