to identify genes controlling differential expression of curli fimbriae and biofilm formation, the rna-seq profile of a cr+ isolate was compared to the cr− parental isolate.
some of the upregulated genes were linked to biofilm formation through biosynthesis of curli fimbriae and flagella.
the genes encoding transcriptional regulators, such as csgd, qseb, ykgk, ydeh, bdm, cspd, bssr and flhdc, which modulate biofilm formation, were significantly altered in their expression.
many genes mediating acid resistance and colanic acid biosynthesis, which influence biofilm formation directly or indirectly, were also down-regulated.
the results of this study indicate that rcsb is a global regulator affecting bacterial survival in growth-restrictive environments through upregulation of genes promoting biofilm formation while downregulating certain metabolic functions.
the alignment of the amino acid sequences of rcsb of the two isolates showed truncation of rcsb in the cr+ isolate at the insertion site of the duplicated sequence.
complementation of cr+ isolate with rcsb of the cr− parent restored parental phenotypes to the cr+ isolate.
escherichia coli o157:h <dig>  strain 86– <dig>  linked to a  <dig> disease outbreak, displays curli- and biofilm-negative phenotypes that are correlated with the lack of congo red  binding and formation of white colonies  on a cr-containing medium.
comparative genomics of cr+ and cr− isolates revealed the presence of a short duplicated sequence in the rcsb gene of the cr+ isolate.
several genes of the envelope stress , heat shock , oxidative stress , nutrient limitation stress  response pathways, and amino acid metabolism were downregulated in the cr+ isolate.
of the  <dig> genes expressed differentially in the cr+ isolate,  <dig> genes encoded proteins of known functions while the remaining  <dig> encoded hypothetical proteins.
however, on a cr medium this strain produces red isolates  capable of producing curli fimbriae and biofilms.
understanding whether rcsb inactivation enhances persistence and survival of o <dig> in carrier animals and the environment would be important in developing strategies for controlling this bacterial pathogen in these niches.
