the majority of enteric neurons and glia originate from vagal nc-derived progenitors which invade the foregut mesenchyme and migrate rostro-caudally to colonise the entire length of the gut.
although the migratory behaviour of nc cells has been studied extensively, it remains unclear how their properties and response to microenvironment change as they navigate through complex cellular terrains to reach their target embryonic sites.
gem deletion in early ens progenitors  resulted in cell-autonomous activation of dna damage response and p53-dependent apoptosis, leading to severe intestinal aganglionosis.
the stage-dependent resistance of ens progenitors to mutation-induced genotoxic stress was further supported by the enhanced survival of post gut invasion ens lineages to γ-irradiation relative to their predecessors.
following gut invasion, ens progenitors are distinctly resistant to gem ablation and irradiation in comparison to their pre-enteric counterparts.
our experiments demonstrate that, in mammals, nc-derived ens lineages are sensitive to genotoxic stress in a stage-specific manner.
these studies suggest that the microenvironment of the embryonic gut protects ens progenitors and their progeny from genotoxic stress.
in contrast to other developmental systems, we obtained no evidence for a role of gem in commitment or differentiation of ens lineages.
using conditional gene inactivation in mice we demonstrate here that the cell cycle-dependent protein geminin  is critical for the survival of ens progenitors in a stage-dependent manner.
in contrast, ablation of gem shortly after ens progenitors had invaded the embryonic gut did not result in discernible survival or migratory deficits.
apoptosisdevelopmentdna damageenteric nervous systemgemininneural cresthttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000265medical research councilhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000268biotechnology and biological sciences research councilbb/l022974pachnis vassilis the francis crick instituteissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
