nor does the longevity benefit appear to function through mechanisms by which dietary restriction extends longevity.
dietary restriction further extended the lifespan of knockout females.
in an analysis of expression profiles of knockout females in fertile and sterile backgrounds, about  <dig> genes changed in response to loss of juvenile hormone independent of reproductive state.
we identify transcripts that change in response to juvenile hormone independent of reproductive state and suggest these represent somatically expressed genes that could modulate how juvenile hormone controls persistence and longevity.
knockout females remained relatively long-lived even when crossed into a genotype that blocked all egg production.
our data do not support a mechanism for juvenile hormone control of longevity simply based on reducing the physiological costs of egg production.
in contrast, little is known about how juvenile hormone affects adult drosophila melanogaster.
here we adapt a genetic approach to knock out the corpora allata in adult drosophila melanogaster and characterize adult life history phenotypes produced by reduction of juvenile hormone.
reduced juvenile hormone alone is sufficient to extend the lifespan of drosophila melanogaster.
previous work suggests that insulin signaling may modulate drosophila aging in part through its impact on juvenile hormone titer, but no data yet address whether reduction of juvenile hormone is sufficient to control drosophila life span.
juvenile hormone  has been demonstrated to control adult lifespan in a number of non-model insects where surgical removal of the corpora allata eliminates the hormone’s source.
with this system we test potential explanations for how juvenile hormone modulates aging.
treating these adults with the juvenile hormone analog methoprene restored all traits toward wildtype.
reduced juvenile hormone limits reproduction by inhibiting the production of yolked eggs, and this may arise because juvenile hormone is required for the post-eclosion development of the vitellogenin-producing adult fat body.
corpora allata knockout adults had greatly reduced fecundity, inhibited oogenesis, impaired adult fat body development and extended lifespan.
