here we present a de novo assembly of the guppy  transcriptome using  <dig> sequence reads, and we evaluate potential uses of this transcriptome, including detection of sex-specific transcripts and deployment as a reference for gene expression analysis in guppies and a related species.
we identified transcripts that, in juveniles, are regulated differently in the presence and absence of an important predator, rivulus hartii, including two genes implicated in stress response.
in addition, we evaluated the use of the guppy reference transcriptome for gene expression analyses in a congeneric species, the sailfin molly .
for each sample in the rna-seq study, >50% of high-quality reads mapped to unique sequences in the reference database with high confidence.
guppies have been model organisms in ecology, evolutionary biology, and animal behaviour for over  <dig> years.
we generated approximately  <dig> mbp of mrna sequence data from male brain, male body, female brain, and female body.
we annotated nearly 40% of this reference transcriptome by searching protein and gene ontology databases.
we show that next-generation sequencing provided a reliable and broad reference transcriptome.
using this annotated transcriptome database, we identified candidate genes of interest to the guppy research community, putative single nucleotide polymorphisms , and male-specific expressed genes.
this resource allowed us to identify candidate gene variants, snps in coding regions, and sex-specific gene expression, and permitted quantitative analysis of differential gene expression.
the resulting  <dig> , <dig> reads assembled into  <dig>  contigs, creating a reference transcriptome for the guppy with an average read depth of 28×.
we also showed that our reference transcriptome can be used for rna-sequencing-based analysis of differential gene expression.
an annotated transcriptome and other genomic tools will facilitate understanding the genetic and molecular bases of adaptation and variation in a vertebrate species with a uniquely well known natural history.
over 40% of reads from the sailfin molly sample aligned to the guppy transcriptome.
