calcineurin, a serine/threonine-specific protein phosphatase, plays an important role in the control of cell morphology and virulence in fungi.
afcrza overexpression in a. fumigatus increases the expression of several of these genes.
this provided an excellent opportunity to identify genes and pathways that are under the influence of afcrza.
the deleted strain of one of these genes, afrcna, belonging to a class of endogenous calcineurin regulators, calcipressins, had more calcineurin activity after exposure to calcium and was less sensitive to menadione  <dig> μm, hydrogen peroxide  <dig>  mm, egta  <dig> mm, and mncl <dig>  <dig> mm.
afrcna, one of these selected genes, encodes a modulator of calcineurin activity.
a. nidulans anrcna mutation is suppressing cnaa mutation and it is responsible for modulating the calcineurin activity and mrna accumulation of genes encoding calcium transporters.
decreased mrna abundance in the Δcrza was seen for genes encoding calcium transporters, transcription factors and genes that could be directly or indirectly involved in calcium metabolism.
here, we investigate which pathways are influenced by a. fumigatus afcrza during a short pulse of calcium by comparatively determining the transcriptional profile of a. fumigatus wild type and Δafcrza mutant strains.
we were able to observe  <dig>  genes modulated in at least one timepoint in the mutant when compared to the wild type strain .
gfp::rcna was mostly detected along the germling, did not accumulate in the nuclei and its location is not affected by the cellular response to calcium chloride.
increased mrna accumulation was observed for some genes encoding proteins involved in stress response.
concomitantly with a. fumigatus afrcna molecular analysis, we decided to exploit the conserved features of a. nidulans calcineurin system and investigated the a. nidulans anrcna homologue.
we have performed a transcriptional profiling analysis of the a. fumigatus Δafcrza mutant strain exposed to calcium stress.
we constructed deletion, overexpression, and gfp fusion protein for the closely related a. nidulans anrcna.
