comparing our model to available in vivo vascular patterning data suggests that vascular phenotypes are most consistently predicted at short range by the soluble fraction of the vegf distributions, or at longer range by matrix-bound vegf detected in a filopodia-dependent manner.
previous experimental studies in the mouse hindbrain and retina have suggested that vegf alternative splicing, which controls the ability of vegf to bind to heparan sulfate proteoglycans  in the extracellular matrix , plays a key role in controlling vegf diffusion and gradients in tissues.
the spatial distribution of vascular endothelial growth factor a  is an important mediator of vascular patterning.
we show that differences in localization between vegf isoforms, as observed experimentally in the mouse hindbrain, as well as the ability of proteases to redistribute vegf in pathological situations, are consistent with a model where vegf is endogenously cleared or degraded in an isoform-specific manner.
conversely, proteolysis notably by matrix metalloproteinases , plays a critical role in pathological situations by releasing matrix-sequestered vegf and modulating angiogenesis.
a novel prediction is that neuropilin- <dig>  despite functioning as a coreceptor to vegf165-vegfr <dig> binding, reduces the ability of a cell to gauge the relative steepness of the vegf distribution.
isoform-specific vegf degradation provides a possible explanation for numerous examples of isoform specificity in vegf patterning and examples of proteases relocation of vegf upon release.
we use our predictions of the vegf distribution to quantify a tip cell's receptor binding and gradient sensing capacity.
however, computational models have predicted that hspg binding alone does not affect vegf localization or gradients at steady state.
using a 3d molecular-detailed reaction-diffusion model of vegf ligand-receptor kinetics and transport, we test alternate models of vegf transport in the extracellular environment surrounding an endothelial sprout.
