quantitative gene expression analyses such as quantitative real-time pcr  are powerful tools in the investigation of underlying mechanisms of cell behavior and are used routinely for differentiation and phenotype assays.
the pairwise variations for the two most stable hkg in each group were all below the cut-off value of  <dig> , suggesting that the two most stable hkg from genorm analysis would be sufficient for qrt-pcr.
in monolayer rpl13a were the most stable gene using normfinder, while genorm assessed rpl13a and human rna polymerase ii  as most stable.
all data combined we recommend rpl13a, b2m and rpii as the best choice for qrt-pcr analyses when comparing normoxic and hypoxic cultured human chondrocytes although other genes might also be suitable.
however, the matching of hkg to target genes by means of a thorough investigation of the stability in each study would always be preferable.
culturing of chondrocytes under low oxygen tension has shown several advantages, among them increased synthesis of extracellular matrix and increased redifferentiation of dedifferentiated chondrocytes.
the objective of this study was to determine hypoxia-stable housekeeping genes  for quantitative real-time pcr  in human chondrocytes cultured in 21%, 5% and 1% oxygen by genorm and normfinder analyses.
often used hkg such as beta actin  and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase  were the most unstable genes investigated in all comparisons.
the chondrocytic response to the hypoxic challange was validated by a significant increase in expression of the hypoxia-inducible gene ankyrin repeat  <dig> as well as sox <dig> in hypoxia.
when cultured on the 3-dimentional  scaffold tata-binding protein  exhibited the highest expression stability with normfinder while ribosomal protein l13a  and beta2-microglobulin  were the most stable using genorm analysis.
when examining the combination of  culturing and monolayer rpl13a and b2m showed the highest expression stability from genorm analysis while rpl13a also showed the highest expression stability using normfinder.
hypoxic culturing of chondrocytes is gaining increasing interest in cartilage research.
