phylogenies from both methods provide strong support for the monophyly of several major angiosperm clades, including monocots, eudicots, rosids, asterids, eurosids ii, euasterids i, and euasterids ii.
plastid genetic engineering offers the potential to overcome this limitation, as demonstrated by the accumulation of badh in chromoplasts of carrot taproots to confer exceedingly high levels of salt resistance.
additionally, the sequence data add to the rapidly growing database of plastid genomes for assessing phylogenetic relationships among angiosperms.
these results provide the best taxon sampling of complete chloroplast genomes and the strongest support yet for the sister relationship of caryophyllales to the asterids.
both mp and ml trees provide very strong support  for the sister relationship of daucus with panax in the euasterid ii clade.
the availability of the complete plastid genome sequence should facilitate improved transformation efficiency and foreign gene expression in carrot through utilization of endogenous flanking sequences and regulatory elements.
its capacity for storage and its lifecycle as a biennial make it an attractive species for the introduction of foreign genes, especially for oral delivery of vaccines and other therapeutic proteins.
this is the first sequenced plastid genome of the family apiaceae and only the second published genome sequence of the species-rich euasterid ii clade.
phylogenetic analysis of nucleotide sequences for  <dig> protein-coding genes using both maximum parsimony  and maximum likelihood  were performed for  <dig> angiosperms.
the complete plastid genome of carrot provides essential information required for genetic engineering.
the complete carrot plastid genome is  <dig>  bp in length, with  <dig> unique genes and  <dig> duplicated genes within the ir.
the carrot plastid genome contains a number of dispersed direct and inverted repeats scattered throughout coding and non-coding regions.
until recently efforts to express recombinant proteins in carrot have had limited success in terms of protein accumulation in the edible tap roots.
