micrornas  play an important role in regulating plant responses to biotic stress.
the present study was the first to use two sugarcane genotypes, ya05- <dig>  and roc <dig> , to identify differentially expressed mirnas in sugarcane challenged with s. scitamineum by using high-throughput sequencing.
the predicted target gene number corresponding to known differentially expressed mirnas in ya05- <dig> was less than that in roc <dig>  however most of them were in common.
these were mainly associated with cellular processes and metabolic processes in the biological process category, as well as combination and catalytic activity in the molecular function category.
sugarcane smut caused by sporisorium scitamineum leads to a significant reduction in cane yield and sucrose content.
saccharum spp.sporisorium scitamineumhigh-throughput sequencingmirnafunction prediction of target genesqrt-pcrnatural science foundation of fujian province, china2015j06006que youxiong the earmarked fund for the modern agriculture technology of chinacars-20xu liping the national natural science foundation of china31501363su yachun the program for new century excellent talents in fujian province universityja14095que youxiong the research funds for distinguished young scientists in fujian agriculture and forestry universityxjq201630su yachun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
taken together, our findings serve as evidence for the association of mirna expression with the molecular mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of sugarcane smut, particularly on the significance of mirna levels in relation to the cultivation of smut-resistant sugarcane varieties.
seven out of eight predicted target genes showed identical expression after 12 h treatment and reached the highest degree of matching at 48 h, indicating that the regulatory role of mirnas on the target genes in sugarcane was maximized at 48 h after s. scitamineum challenge.
these findings also showed certain predicted target genes of mir <dig>  mir <dig>  mir <dig>  mir <dig>  and mir <dig> play roles in the mitogen-activated protein kinase  signaling pathway, plant hormone signal transduction, and plant-pathogen interaction.
expression of differential mirnas under s. scitamineum challenge was mostly downregulated, with similar trends in the two varieties.
kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathway enrichment analysis revealed that these predicted target genes involved in a series of physiological and biochemical pathways or disease resistance-related physiological metabolism and signal transduction pathways, suggesting that the molecular interaction mechanism between sugarcane and s. scitamineum was a complex network system.
quantitative real-time pcr  analysis showed that majority of the known mirnas and its predicted target genes followed a negatively regulated mode.
