p. aeruginosa cell growth can be measured by optical density  and gene expression can be measured using reporter fusions with a fluorescent protein, allowing high time resolution monitoring.
we illustrate the method using measured rhamnolipid secretion by p. aeruginosa as endpoint measurements and we integrate these measurements with high-resolution growth curves measured by od <dig> and expression of rhamnolipid synthesis genes monitored using a reporter fusion.
online spectrophotometric measurements allow monitoring dynamic biological processes with high-time resolution.
integrating both types of measurement would allow analyzing biological processes more comprehensively.
if serial diluting an inoculum gives reproducible time series shifted in time, then time series of endpoint measurements can be reconstructed using calculated time shifts between dilutions.
more generally, growth curve synchronization can be applied to many biological systems thus helping to overcome a key obstacle in dynamic regulation: the scarceness of quantitative time-resolved data.
we show how this simple method can be used in combination with mutants lacking specific genes in the rhamnolipid synthesis or quorum sensing regulation to acquire rich dynamic data on p. aeruginosa virulence regulation.
such data can be valuable to unveil the dynamic regulation of virulence in p. aeruginosa.
a typical example of this problem is acquiring quantitative data on rhamnolipid secretion by the opportunistic pathogen pseudomonas aeruginosa.
additionally, the linear relation between the ratio of inocula and the time-shift between curves produces high-precision measurements of maximum specific growth rates, which were determined with a precision of ~ <dig> %.
here, we propose a method to integrate growth curve data with endpoint measurements of secreted metabolites that is inspired by a model of exponential cell growth.
growth curve synchronization allows integration of rich time-resolved data with endpoint measurements to produce time-resolved quantitative measurements.
