the venom gland transcriptome was investigated using the illumina hiseq™ platform, while the venom proteome was profiled by 1d-sds-page-nano-esi-lcms/ms.
besides, the presence of cobra venom factor, nerve growth factors, phosphodiesterase, 5’-nucleotidase, and dpp-iv in the venom proteome suggests its probable hypotensive action in subduing prey.
ophiophagus hannahking cobravenom proteomevenom gland transcriptomenano-lcmsesi-lcms/msissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
transcriptomic results reveal high redundancy of toxin transcripts  despite small cluster numbers, implying gene duplication and diversification within restricted protein families.
the results correlate with the pathophysiological actions of moh venom, and dispute the use of naja cobra antivenoms to treat moh envenomation.
among the  <dig> toxin families identified, three-finger toxins  and snake-venom metalloproteases  have the most diverse isoforms.
these  <dig> toxin families are also the most abundantly transcribed, followed in descending order by phospholipases a <dig> , cysteine-rich secretory proteins , kunitz-type inhibitors , and l-amino acid oxidases .
the king cobra  is widely distributed throughout many parts of asia.
this study aims to investigate the complexity of malaysian ophiophagus hannah  venom for a better understanding of king cobra venom variation and its envenoming pathophysiology.
this study reports the diversity and abundance of toxins in the venom of the malaysian king cobra .
on the other hand, the moh proteome includes 3ftxs, the most abundantly expressed proteins in the venom .
neurotoxins comprise the major 3ftxs in the moh venom, consistent with rapid neuromuscular paralysis reported in systemic envenoming.
dissimilarities in the subtypes and sequences between the neurotoxins of moh and naja kaouthia  are in agreement with the poor cross-neutralization activity of n. kaouthia antivenom used against moh venom.
within this toxin family, there are  <dig> long-chain,  <dig> short-chain and  <dig> non-conventional 3ftx.
the presence of toxic enzymes such as laaos, svmps and pla <dig> would explain tissue inflammation and necrotising destruction in local envenoming.
seventeen toxin families exhibited low mrna expression, including hyaluronidase, dpp-iv and 5’-nucleotidase that were not previously reported in the venom-gland transcriptome of a balinese o. hannah.
