newly published studies have suggested that β-catenin is critical for normal pancreatic development although these reports reached somewhat different conclusions.
the goals of this study then were; 1] to further investigate the role of β-catenin in pancreatic development using a conditional knockout approach and 2] to identify possible mechanisms by which loss of β-catenin disrupts pancreatic development.
pdx1-cre floxed β-catenin animals were viable but demonstrated small body size and shortened median survival.
a pdx1-cre mouse line was used to delete a floxed β-catenin allele specifically in the developing pancreas, and embryonic pancreata were studied by immunohistochemistry and microarray analysis.
transcriptional profiling of pdx1-cre floxed β-catenin embryonic pancreata at e <dig> , before there was a morphological phenotype, revealed significant decreases in the β-catenin target gene n-myc, and the basic hlh transcription factor ptf <dig>  and an increase of several pancreatic zymogens compared to control animals.
in addition, the molecular mechanisms by which loss of β-catenin affects pancreas development are not well understood.
β-catenin is an essential mediator of canonical wnt signaling and a central component of the cadherin-catenin epithelial adhesion complex.
dysregulation of β-catenin expression has been described in pancreatic neoplasia.
we conclude that β-catenin expression is required for development of the exocrine pancreas, but is not required for development of the endocrine compartment.
finally, β-catenin may be required to maintain positional identity of the pancreatic endoderm along the anterior-posterior axis.
the pancreata from knockout mice were hypoplastic and histologically demonstrated a striking paucity of exocrine pancreas, acinar to duct metaplasia, but generally intact pancreatic islets containing all lineages of endocrine cells.
by e <dig> , there was a dramatic loss of exocrine markers and an increase in hoxb <dig>  which is normally expressed anterior to the pancreas.
