a recursive least-squares algorithm is subsequently used to estimate the time-dependent coefficients of the model.
the estimated time-varying coefficients are used to define an index of randomness, in order to assess the statistical correlations in coding and non-coding dna sequences.
more recent analysis of genomic data has relied on time-varying power spectral methods to capture the statistical characteristics of genomic sequences.
the non-stationary parameters estimated are used as a basis for statistical inference and biophysical interpretation of genomic data.
large deviations in the correlation structure results from very minor perturbations in the genomic data and experimental procedure.
our simulation results on various gene sequences show that both the coding and non-coding regions are non-random.
these results corroborate the evolutionary periodogram analysis of genomic sequences and revoke the stationary analysis' conclusion that coding dna behaves like random sequences.
in this paper, we propose to model non-stationary genomic sequences by a time-dependent autoregressive moving average  process.
a fundamental new approach is needed in order to provide a stable platform for the non-stationary statistical analysis of genomic sequences.
techniques such as the evolutionary spectrum and evolutionary periodogram have been successful in extracting the time-varying correlation structure.
specifically, we define a quantitative measure of randomness to assess how far a process deviates from white noise.
standard statistical tests have been used to verify that the genomic sequences are indeed not stationary.
the main difficulty in using time-varying spectral methods is that they are extremely unstable.
in particular, we rely on the td-arma model of genomic sequences to investigate the statistical properties and differentiate between coding and non-coding regions in the nucleotide chain.
it turns out that the statistical differences between coding and non-coding sequences are more subtle than previously thought using stationary analysis tools: both coding and non-coding sequences exhibit statistical correlations, with the coding regions being "whiter" than the non-coding regions.
specifically, the correlation of the nucleotide chain has been studied by examining the properties of the power spectrum.
the main limitation of the power spectrum is that it is restricted to stationary time series.
we demonstrate that the proposed td-arma model can be used to provide a stable time series tool for the analysis of non-stationary genomic sequences.
over the past decade, many investigators have used sophisticated time series tools for the analysis of genomic sequences.
however, it has been observed over the past decade that genomic sequences exhibit non-stationary statistical behavior.
