opsin expression is also seen in the apical sensory organ.
the mnemiopsis genome has  <dig> full-length photoprotein genes situated within two genomic clusters with high sequence conservation that are maintained due to strong purifying selection and concerted evolution.
we present evidence that one opsin functions as a photopigment in vitro, absorbing light at wavelengths that overlap with peak photoprotein light emission, raising the hypothesis that light production and light reception may be functionally connected in ctenophore photocytes.
photoprotein-like genes were also identified in the genomes of the non-luminescent sponge amphimedon queenslandica and the non-luminescent cnidarian nematostella vectensis, and phylogenomic analysis demonstrated that photoprotein genes arose at the base of all animals.
this study elucidates the genomic organization, evolutionary history, and developmental expression of photoprotein and opsin genes in the ctenophore mnemiopsis leidyi, introduces a novel dual role for ctenophore photocytes in both bioluminescence and phototransduction, and raises the possibility that light production and light reception are linked in this early-branching non-bilaterian animal.
calcium-activated photoproteins are luciferase variants found in photocyte cells of bioluminescent jellyfish  and comb jellies .
we combined our genomic survey with gene trees, developmental expression patterns, and functional protein assays of photoproteins and opsins to provide a comprehensive view of light production and light reception in mnemiopsis.
the complete genomic sequence from the ctenophore mnemiopsis leidyi, a representative of the earliest branch of animals that emit light, provided an opportunity to examine the genome of an organism that uses this class of luciferase for bioluminescence and to look for genes involved in light reception.
to determine when photoprotein genes first arose, we examined the genomic sequence from other early-branching taxa.
we identified three putative opsin genes in the mnemiopsis genome and show that they do not group with well-known bilaterian opsin subfamilies.
we also present genomic evidence of a complete ciliary phototransduction cascade in mnemiopsis.
