germ cells arise from a small group of cells that express markers of pluripotency including oct <dig>  in humans formation of gonadal compartments  takes place during the 1st trimester .
in testicular extracts vasa mrna and protein were low/undetectable in 1st trimester and increased in the 2nd trimester whereas the total amount of dazl did not seem to change.
during the 1st trimester, germ cells were oct <dig> positive but did not express vasa.
in the 1st trimester oct <dig> was detected in most germ cells.
oct <dig> mrna and protein were detected in extracts from both 1st and 2nd trimester ovaries and testes.
in the 2nd trimester germ cells can enter meiotic prophase in females whereas in males this does not occur until puberty.
in the 2nd trimester germ cells with intense cytoplasmic staining for vasa were present in both sexes; these cells were oct <dig> negative.
in ovarian extracts a marked increase in expression of vasa and dazl mrna and protein occurred in the 2nd trimester.
these results are in contrast to the situation in mice where expression of vasa is initiated in oct <dig> positive primordial germ cells as they enter the gonadal ridge.
in males, oct4-positive and vasa-positive subpopulations of germ cells coexisted within the same seminiferous cords but in the ovary there was a distinct spatial distribution of cells with oct <dig> expressed by smaller, peripherally located, germ cells whereas dazl and vasa were immunolocalised to larger  centrally located cells.
oct <dig>  dazl and vasa are expressed by human fetal germ cells but their patterns of expression are temporally and spatially distinct.
these data reveal similarities between the expression of key regulatory proteins within germ cells as they mature in male and female fetal human gonads suggesting that in the female these maturational changes are not determined by entry into meiosis.
we have used qrtpcr, westerns and immunohistochemical profiling to determine which of the germ cell subtypes in the human fetal gonads express oct <dig>  dazl and vasa, as these have been shown to play an essential role in germ cell maturation in mice.
dazl expression overlapped with both oct <dig> and vasa and changed from the nuclear to the cytoplasmic compartment as cells became oct4-negative.
