in a phylogenetic tree, the sequences clade according to taxonomic group.
many proteins with tandem repeats in their sequence have been described and classified according to the length of the repeats: i) repeats of short oligopeptides , including structural cell wall proteins and arabinogalactan proteins.
ii) repeats that range in length from  <dig> to  <dig> residues, including proteins with a well-established three-dimensional structure often involved in mediating protein-protein interactions.
st mrnas accumulate mainly in the roots and under biotic interactions.
all deduced st proteins have a signal peptide, indicating that these proteins enter the secretory pathway, and the mature proteins have tandem repeat oligopeptides that share a hexapeptide feprp followed by  <dig> partially conserved amino acids, which could determine a putative n-glycosylation signal, and a fully conserved tyrosine.
they present  <dig> to  <dig> amino acid tandem repeat sequences with different characteristics  from the described group of  <dig> to  <dig> amino acid tandem repeat proteins and also from known cell wall proteins with repeat sequences.
longer repeats in the order of  <dig> amino acids that constitute structurally and functionally independent units.
several putative roles in plant physiology can be inferred from the characteristics found.
most st proteins have one or several domain of unknown function  <dig> .
biotic interactionduf <dig> domainst proteinstandem repeat proteins
we describe a new family of proteins called st whose presence is limited to the plant kingdom, specifically to a few families of dicotyledonous plants.
a possible involvement in symbiosis and abiotic stress as well as in plant cell elongation is suggested, although different sts could play different roles in plant development.
st protein sequences were only found in dicotyledonous plants, limited to several plant families, mainly the fabaceae and the asteraceae.
here we analyse shoot specific  proteins, a family of proteins with tandem repeats of unknown function that were first found in leguminosae, and their possible similarities to other proteins with tandem repeats.
