this de novo transcriptome analysis resulted in the identification of tfs with specific temporal expression patterns such as two wrkys and one bhlh, which might play the role of senescence progression regulators.
a large number of differentially expressed genes were identified at the initiation of visible symptoms of senescence compared to the open flower stage indicating a significant shift in the expression profiles which might be coordinated by up-regulated and/or down-regulated tfs.
a large number of simple sequence repeats were also identified comprising a large number of dinucleotides and trinucleotides.
the comparison of the consecutive developmental stages resulted in  <dig> common, differentially expressed unigenes.
even less is known on flower senescence of the ornamental pot plant gardenia jasminoides, a non climacteric flower with significant commercial value.
there are  <dig> differentially expressed tfs when the symptoms of flower senescence become visible with the most prevailing being the wrky family with  <dig> unigenes.
the petal senescence of ethylene insensitive species has not been investigated thoroughly while little is known about the temporal and tissue specific expression patterns of transcription factors  in this developmental process.
no other wrky tfs had been identified up to now in petal senescence of ethylene insensitive species.
we initiated a de novo transcriptome study to investigate the petal senescence in four developmental stages of cut gardenia flowers considering that the visible symptoms of senescence appear within 4 days of flower opening.
further research is required to investigate their role in gardenia flowers in order to develop tools to delay petal senescence.
de novo assembly of transcriptome sequencing resulted in  <dig>  contigs with mean length of  <dig> nucleotides that generated  <dig>  unigenes.
gardeniatranscriptomessr markerstranscription factorspetal senescenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
the expression of  <dig> genes that belong to the tf families of wrky, bhlh and the ethylene sensing pathway was validated using qrt – pcr.
