statistical significance of edge strengths was evaluated and the less reliable edges were pruned to increase the network robustness.
thirty-four predictors related to lifestyle, adiposity, body fat distribution, blood lipids and adipocyte sizes have been considered as potential correlates of visceral obesity in women.
the source code and the data sets used for the empirical tests are available at http://www <dig> univ-lyon <dig> fr/~aaussem/software.html.
regarding biological plausibility, we found that the inference results obtained with the proposed method were in excellent agreement with biological knowledge.
for example, these analyses indicated that visceral adipose tissue accumulation is strongly related to blood lipid alterations independent of overall obesity level.
to allow accessible interpretation and integrate biological knowledge into the final network, several undirected edges were afterwards directed with physiological expertise according to relevant literature.
to properly address the difficulties in managing such interactions given our limited sample of  <dig> women, bootstrapped bayesian networks were constructed based on novel constraint-based learning methods that appeared recently in the statistical learning community.
bayesian networks are a useful tool for investigating and summarizing evidence when complex relationships exist among predictors, in particular, as in the case of multifactorial conditions like visceral obesity, when there is a concurrent incidence for several variables, interacting in a complex manner.
extensive experiments on synthetic data sampled from a known bayesian network show that the algorithm, called recursive hybrid parents and children , outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms that appeared in the recent literature.
the aim of this study was to provide a framework for the analysis of visceral obesity and its determinants in women, where complex inter-relationships are observed among lifestyle, nutritional and metabolic predictors.
