however, little is known about the gene function and regulatory networks during these processes in rice.
therefore, we provide the gene information for investigating the gene function and regulatory networks during female gametophyte development and fertilization.
the go analysis showed that the transport-, localization-, membrane-, communication-, and pollination-related genes were significantly enriched in the stigma.
the go analysis indicated that a dry rice stigma might primarily perform its function through the cell membrane, which was different from the wet stigma of other species.
among these genes,  <dig> exhibited an ovary-specific expression pattern and are thought to be embryo sac-preferential/specific genes within the pistils.
the stigma is capable of receiving pollen grains and guiding pollen tube growth.
additionally, to identify the embryo sac-preferential/specific genes within the pistils, we compared a wild-type ovary with a mutant dst  ovary and found that  <dig> genes were down-regulated in dst.
moreover, many embryo sac-preferential/specific genes within the pistils were identified and may be expressed in female rice gametophytes, implying that these genes might participate in the process of female gametophyte specialization and fertilization.
in addition, these novel genes are valuable for the supplementation and perfection of the existing transcriptome in rice, which provides an effective method of detecting novel rice genes.
according to these rice ovary comparisons, numerous genes were preferentially or specifically expressed in the stigma, suggesting that they were involved in stigma development or pollination.
the ovary holds the embryo sac, which is fertilized with male gametes to produce seed.
moreover, the rice homologs of some arabidopsis embryo sac-specific genes, which played essential roles during sexual reproduction, were down-regulated in dst.
embryo sacfemale gametophytenovel genericerna-seqstigmathe national basic research program of china2013cb1269032012cb944801zhao jie issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
here, using the rna-seq technique, we identified  <dig> stigma-preferential genes and  <dig> stigma-specific genes within the rice pistils, and we verified  <dig> stigma-specific genes via qrt-pcr and in situ hybridization.
