the phylogenetic tree of osca genes showed that two subspecies of cultivated rice, oryza sativa l. ssp.
indica, are more closely related than wild rice oryza glaberrima, while oryza brachyantha was less closely related.
we found that four and six ososca genes showed a clear correlation between the expression profile and osmotic changes during caryopsis development and seed imbibition, respectively.
the expression profiles of ososca genes were analysed at different stages of vegetative growth, reproductive development, and under osmotic-associated abiotic stresses.
ososca expression is organ- and tissue-specific and regulated by different osmotic-related abiotic stresses in rice.
reception of and response to exogenous and endogenous osmotic changes is important to sustain plant growth and development, as well as reproductive formation.
these findings will facilitate further research in this gene family and provide potential target genes for generation of genetically modified osmotic-stress-resistant plants.
to explore the potential biological functions of oscas in rice, we performed a bioinformatics and expression analysis of the ososca gene family.
moreover, osmotic-related abiotic stress differentially induced the expression of  <dig> genes.
the entire osca family is characterised by the presence of a conserved duf <dig> domain, which functions as an osmotic-sensing calcium channel.
based on their sequence composition and phylogenetic relationship, the ososca family was classified into four clades.
oscaduf <dig> domainphylogenetic relationshipsexpression profileosmotic stressoryzaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
a total of  <dig> ososca genes were identified from the genome database of oryza sativa l. japonica.
indica, oryza glaberrima, and oryza brachyantha.
orchestrated transcription of three ososcas was strongly associated with the circadian clock.
gene and protein structure analysis indicated that the  <dig> ososcas shared similar structures with their homologs in oryza sativa l. ssp.
japonica and oryza sativa l. ssp.
hyperosmolality-gated calcium-permeable channels  were first characterised as an osmosensor in arabidopsis and are involved in the perception of extracellular changes to trigger hyperosmolality-induced i increases .
