previous transcriptomic studies have identified many genes with age-associated expression levels; however, small samples sizes and mixed cell types often make these results difficult to interpret.
using transcriptomic profiles in cd14+ monocytes from  <dig>  participants of the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis , we identified  <dig>  genes differentially expressed with chronological age .
comparing transcriptomic profiles of cd14+ monocytes to cd4+ t cells from a subset  of the population, we identified  <dig> age-associated  genes in common, while larger sets of differentially expressed genes were unique to either t cells  or monocytes .
an overall decline in expression of ribosomal protein synthesis genes with age was detected in cd14+ monocytes and cd4+ t cells, demonstrating that some patterns of aging are likely shared between different cell types.
at the pathway level, a decline in ribosomal protein synthesis machinery gene expression with age was detectable in both cell types.
expression of several chromatin remodeler and transcriptional modifier genes strongly correlated with expression of oxidative phosphorylation and ribosomal protein synthesis genes.
17% of genes with age-associated expression harbored cpg sites whose degree of methylation significantly mediated the relationship between age and gene expression .
our findings also support cell-specific effects of age on gene expression, illustrating the importance of using purified cell samples for future transcriptomic studies.
we further identified six networks of co-expressed genes that included prominent genes from three pathways: protein synthesis , oxidative phosphorylation, and autophagy, with expression patterns suggesting these pathways decline with age.
agingmonocytet celltranscriptomemitochondrial ribosometranslationprotein synthesisribonucleoprotein complexoxidative phosphorylationautophagymethylationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
lastly,  <dig> genes with age-associated expression were also associated  with pulse pressure independent of chronological age.
transcriptomic studies hold great potential towards understanding the human aging process.
