adventitious roots provide structural support and contribute to water and nutrient absorption, and are critical for commercial vegetative propagation of several crops.
this study suggests the involvement of two genes of the tryptophan-dependent auxin biosynthesis pathway, sur <dig> and tsa <dig>  in the regulation of a critical trait for the clonal propagation of woody species.
adventitious roots  develop from tissues other than the primary root, in a process physiologically regulated by phytohormones.
parental individuals and progeny showed extensive segregation for ar developmental traits.
quantitative trait loci  mapping and whole-transcriptome analysis of individuals with alternative qtl alleles for ar number were used to identify putative regulators of ar development.
a time series transcriptome analysis identified  <dig>  genes differentially expressed during ar development, particularly during the first 24 h after cuttings were harvested.
here we quantified the number of ar, root architectural traits and root biomass in cuttings from a pseudo-backcross population of populus deltoides and populus trichocarpa.
quantitative trait loci for number of ar mapped consistently in the same interval of linkage group  ii and lg xiv, explaining 7–10 % of the phenotypic variation.
a possible model for this regulation is that poplar individuals that have poor ar formation synthesize auxin indole-3-acetic acid  primarily through the tryptophan  pathway.
much of the trp pathway flux appears to be directed to the synthesis of indole glucosinolates , as suggested by the over-expression of sur <dig>  individuals that are efficient in ar formation may utilize alternative  pathways to synthesize iaa, based on the observation that they down-regulate the expression of tsa <dig>  one of the critical steps in the synthesis of tryptophan.
eighty-one of these genes were physically located within the qtl intervals for number of ar, including putative homologs of the arabidopsis genes superroot <dig>  and tryptophan synthase alpha chain , both of which are involved in the auxin indole-3-acetic acid  biosynthesis pathway.
of those,  <dig> genes were differentially regulated between individuals carrying alternative alleles for the two qtl for number of ar, in one or more time point.
