a quasispecies is a steady-state population of biopolymer sequence variants generated by mutations from a master sequence.
our results show that compositional assemblies, as simulated by the gard formalism, portray significant attributes of quasispecies dynamics.
further, changing the error rate by modifying basal assembly joining rate of gard kinetics was found to display an error catastrophe, similar to the standard quasispecies model.
a compotype's center-of-mass is found to be analogous to a master sequence for a sequential quasispecies.
rna molecules or viral genomes, while its prebiotic context is often associated with an rna world scenario.
here, we study the possibility that compositional entities which code for compositional information, intrinsically different from biopolymers coding for sequential information, could show quasispecies dynamics.
this allowed computing a steady state distribution of distances to the center of mass, as derived from the quasispecies equation.
this expands the applicability of the quasispecies model beyond sequence-based entities, and potentially enhances validity of gard as a model for prebiotic evolution.
additional augmentation of compositional mutations leads to the complete disappearance of the master-like composition.
in parallel, a steady state distribution was obtained via the gard equation kinetics.
in gard, a compotype represents a population of similar assemblies that constitute a quasi-stationary state in compositional space.
a similar correspondence was found when comparing the quasispecies time dependent dynamics towards steady state.
we employed a chemistry-based model, graded autocatalysis replication domain , which simulates the network dynamics within compositional molecular assemblies.
origin of lifecomposomeslipid worldgardquasispecieserror thresholdcompositional informationcompositionsequenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
a quasispecies error threshold is a minimal replication accuracy below which the population structure breaks down.
