the insect exoskeleton provides shape, waterproofing, and locomotion via attached somatic muscles.
gene ontology annotation based on orthologous relationships with drosophila melanogaster genes placed the honeybee differentially expressed genes  into distinct categories of biological process and molecular function, depending on developmental time, revealing the functional elements required for adult exoskeleton formation.
the upregulated gene set included  <dig> of the  <dig> cuticular protein  genes that were previously identified in the honeybee genome, and three novel putative cp genes that do not belong to a known cp family.
we used whole-genome oligonucleotide microarrays to screen for genes involved in exoskeletal formation in the honeybee thoracic dorsum.
of the  <dig>  unique degs,  <dig> were upregulated in the thoracic dorsum after apolysis, suggesting induction by the ecdysteroid pulse.
a search for cis-regulatory motifs in the 5′-untranslated region of the degs revealed potential binding sites for known transcription factors.
conserved sequence motifs identified the cp genes as members of the cpr, tweedle, apidermin, cpf, cplcp <dig> and analogous-to-peritrophins families.
construction of a regulatory network showed that various upregulated cp- and muscle-related genes  share common elements, suggesting co-regulation during thoracic exoskeleton formation.
our analysis included three sampling times during the pupal-to-adult molt, i.e., before, during and after the ecdysteroid-induced apolysis that triggers synthesis of the adult exoskeleton.
in situ hybridization showed that two of the novel genes were abundantly expressed in the epidermis during adult exoskeleton formation, strongly implicating them as genuine cp genes.
these findings help reveal molecular aspects of rigid thoracic exoskeleton formation during the ecdysteroid-coordinated pupal-to-adult molt in the honeybee.
furthermore,  <dig> of the  <dig> muscle-related degs were upregulated during the de novo formation of striated fibers attached to the exoskeleton.
