after aligning translated w. smithii contigs and singletons from this transcriptome with other insects, we determined that there was no significant difference in the average divergence of w. smithii from the six other taxa between the core feedback-loop genes and post-translational modifiers.
relative divergence does not differ between core feedback-loop genes and post-translational modifiers of those genes in a sabethine species  that has experienced a continual northward dispersal into temperate regions of progressively longer summer day lengths as compared with six other insect taxa.
heretofore, there is no reference transcriptome or genome sequence for any mosquito in the tribe sabethini, which includes over  <dig> mainly circumtropical species.
eukaryotic clocks consist of core transcription-translation feedback loops that generate a cycle and post-translational modifiers that maintain that cycle at about 24 h. we use the pitcher-plant mosquito, wyeomyia smithii , to test whether evolutionary divergence of the circadian clock genes in this species, relative to other insects, has involved primarily genes in the core feedback loops or the post-translational modifiers.
the characterized transcriptome is sufficiently complete and of sufficient quality to have uncovered all of the insect circadian clock genes we sought to identify .
an associated microarray platform derived from this work will enable the investigation of functional genomics of circadian rhythmicity, photoperiodic time measurement, and diapause along a photic and seasonal geographic gradient.
transcriptometranscription-translation feedbackpost-translational modifiersgene sequencinggene alignmentbiological clocksculicidaesabethinihttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationios-083998bradshaw william http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationios-1255628bradshaw william issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
the w. smithii transcriptome includes all nine circadian transcription-translation feedback-loop genes and all eight post-translational modifier genes we sought to identify .
