reduction of cultivation temperature from 25°c to 20°c led to a  <dig> -fold increase of specific product secretion rate in chemostat cultivations, although the transcriptional levels of the product genes  were significantly reduced at the lower temperature.
cultivation temperature has a significant influence on specific productivity that cannot be related just to thermodynamic effects, but strongly impacts the regulation of specific genes.
thus our results emphasize the importance to analyse the individual hosts under real production conditions instead of drawing conclusions from model organisms.
additionally, environmental conditions such as growth temperature may have a strong impact on cell physiology and specific productivity.
it has become evident that host cells react to recombinant protein production with a variety of metabolic and intrinsic stresses such as the unfolded protein response  pathway.
monitoring of genomic regulation of marker genes with the transcriptional profiling method trac in p. pastoris revealed similarities and discrepancies of the responses compared to s. cerevisiae.
most of the folding/secretion related genes showed similar regulation patterns in both yeasts, whereas genes associated with the general stress response were differentially regulated.
for the first time, we monitored transcriptional regulation of a subset of marker genes in the common production host pichia pastoris to gain insights into the general physiological status of the cells under protein production conditions, with the main focus on secretion stress related genes.
overexpression of s. cerevisiae protein disulfide isomerase  enhances fab secretion rates  <dig>  fold, but did not relief upr stress.
overexpression of the upr activating transcription factor hac1p was employed to identify upr target genes in p. pastoris and the responses were compared to those known for saccharomyces cerevisiae.
secretion of an antibody fab fragment led to induction of upr target genes in p. pastoris, however not to the same magnitude as hac1p overproduction.
