a comparative biochemical analysis of the medicago truncatula and cicer arietinum enzymes against two previously characterized sdc-like enzymes further emphasizes the unusual substrate specificity and activity of these novel aldehyde synthases.
specifically, medicago truncatula  and cicer arietinum  catalyze the decarboxylation and oxidative deamination of phenylalanine, methionine, leucine and tryptophan to generate their corresponding acetaldehydes.
the alternate substrate preference of these homologous sdc-like proteins indicated that functional divergence might have occurred with in sdc-like proteins.
in an effort to identify additional sdc-like functional divergence, two uncharacterized sdc-like enzymes were recombinantly expressed and characterized.
due to the strong substrate preference towards phenylalanine, it is likely that both enzymes function as phenylacetaldehyde synthesis in vivo.
this work further elaborates on the functional complexity of plant type ii plp decarboxylases and their roles in secondary metabolite biosynthesis.
type ii pyridoxal 5′-phosphate decarboxylases are an important group of phylogenetically diverse enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism.
within plants, this group of enzymes is represented by aromatic amino acid decarboxylases, glutamate decarboxylases and serine decarboxylases.
despite shared homology, no such evolutionary divergence has been characterized within glutamate decarboxylases or serine decarboxylases .
an extensive biochemical analysis of two serine decarboxylases-like recombinant proteins led to an interesting discovery; both proteins catalyze the formation of acetaldehyde derivatives from select hydrophobic amino acids substrates.
type ii plp decarboxylasesaromatic amino acid decarboxylasearomatic acetaldehyde synthasesphenylacetaldehyde synthasesserine decarboxylasesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
additional evolutionary divergence of plant aromatic amino acid decarboxylases has resulted in further subcategories with distinct substrate specificities and enzymatic activities.
the promiscuous aldehyde synthase activity of these proteins yields novel products of 4- butanal, 3-methylbutanal  and indole-3-acetaldehyde from methionine, leucine and tryptophan respectively.
