we took a direct testis cdna selection strategy and discovered two novel gene families, znf280by and znf280ay, on the bovine  y-chromosome , which originated from the transposition of a gene block on the bovine chromosome  <dig>  and subsequently amplified.
phylogenetic analysis indicated that both gene families fit with the "birth-and-death" model of evolution.
znf280by and znf280ay gene families are present in bovid, but absent in other mammalian lineages.
znf280by and znf280ay are lineage-specific, multi-copy y-gene families specific to bovidae, and are derived from the transposition of an autosomal gene block.
this study offers insights into the genomic organization of the bovine msy and gene regulation in spermatogenesis, and provides a model for studying evolution of multi-copy gene families in mammals.
deep sequencing of the selected cdnas revealed that different loci of znf280by were differentially expressed up to 60-fold.
recent progress in exploring the y-chromosome gene content in humans, mice and cats have suggested that "autosome-to-y" transposition of the male fertility genes is a recurrent theme during the mammalian y-chromosome evolution.
assembly of a  <dig>  mb btay sequence in the msy ampliconic region demonstrated that znf280by and znf280ay, together with hsfy and tspy families, constitute the major elements within the repeat units.
interestingly, different copies of the znf280ay pseudogenes were also found to differentially express up to 10-fold.
approximately  <dig> active znf280by loci  and ~ <dig> pseudogenized znf280ay copies are present over the majority of the male-specific region .
however, expression level of the znf280ay pseudogenes was almost 6-fold lower than that of the znf280by genes.
the znf280by gene family was found to express in different developmental stages of testis with sense rna detected in all cell types of the seminiferous tubules while the antisense rna detected only in the spermatids.
the active znf280by loci share high sequence similarity and comprise three major genomic structures, resulted from insertions/deletions .
