the present study establishes the efficient expression of the newly introduced insect resistant asal gene even after cre/lox mediated recombination resulting in elimination of selectable marker gene.
antibiotic/ herbicide resistant marker genes have been proven to be very useful in plant transformation for the initial selection of desired transgenic events.
the f <dig> hybrid hpt negative, asal positive plants were allowed to self- fertilize to obtain f <dig> progeny plants.
in some of these plants cre gene was found to be segregated out of the asal gene by genetic segregation yielding completely marker free plants.
retention of functionality of expressed asal was investigated by agglutination assay using rabbit erythrocytes.
marker gene elimination was confirmed in the resulting f <dig> hybrid progenies by pcr analysis, using hpt, cre and asal specific primers followed by southern hybridization.
reciprocal crosses were made between t1asal-lox-hpt-lox and cre-bar plants.
in planta insect bioassay on f <dig> hybrid progenies exhibited detrimental effect on the performance of devastating target pest, lipaphis erysimi.
a cre/lox mediated recombination using crossing strategy was adopted to remove the hpt gene from the subsequent generation of selected hybrid events.
in the present study exploiting cre/lox mediated recombination strategy, attempt has been made for selectable marker gene elimination from allium sativum leaf agglutinin  expressing brassica plants with hemipteran insect resistant phenotype.
cre recombinase gene cassette was also integrated in separate event.
among several different approaches, the effectiveness of cre/lox mediated recombination strategy for selectable marker gene  elimination has previously been demonstrated by different groups in several plants including brassica.
agglutinationallium sativum leaf agglutinin cre/lox recombinationlipaphis erysimiselectable marker gene
allium sativum leaf agglutinin  linked with lox flanked hygromycin resistant  gene was introduced in mustard.
