solexa sequencing of two srna libraries from nacl-free  and nacl-treated  radish roots were performed for systematical identification of salt-responsive mirnas and their expression profiling in radish.
salt stress is one of the most representative abiotic stresses that severely affect plant growth and development.
micrornas  are well known for their significant involvement in plant responses to abiotic stresses.
although mirnas implicated in salt stress response have been widely reported in numerous plant species, their regulatory roles in the adaptive response to salt stress in radish , an important root vegetable crop worldwide, remain largely unknown.
of these mirnas,  <dig> known and  <dig> novel mirnas were differentially expressed under salt stress.
further functional analysis suggested that these target genes were mainly implicated in signal perception and transduction, regulation of ion homeostasis, basic metabolic processes, secondary stress responses, as well as modulation of attenuated plant growth and development under salt stress.
the results provide novel insight into complex mirna-mediated regulatory network of salt stress response in radish, and facilitate further dissection of molecular mechanism underlying plant adaptive response to salt stress in root vegetable crops.
radish salt stressmicrornatarget genert-qpcrhigh-throughput sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
target prediction and annotation indicated that these mirnas exerted a role by regulating specific stress-responsive genes, such as squamosa promoter binding-like proteins , auxin response factors , nuclear transcription factor y  and superoxide dismutase  .
with the srna sequencing, salt-responsive mirnas and their target genes in radish were comprehensively identified.
additionally, the expression patterns of ten mirnas and five corresponding target genes were validated by reverse-transcription quantitative pcr .
totally,  <dig> known mirnas  and  <dig> potential novel mirnas  were identified.
