side effects are unwanted responses to drug treatment and are important resources for human phenotype information.
by exploring the relationship between drugs and phenotypes through a multi-level network, the mechanisms underlying the effect of specific drugs on the human body may be understood.
evaluation is conducted in  <dig> ways: first, by discerning the number of biological processes discovered by our method that co-occur with gene ontology  terms in relation to effects extracted from pubmed records using a text-mining technique and second, determining whether there is improvement in performance by limiting response processes by drugs sharing the same side effect to frequent ones alone.
subsequently, the side effect-related biological processes are found by merging the drug-biological process network and the drug-side effect network.
the multi-level network  was built by merging the drug-biological process network and the drug-side effect network.
it is, however, insufficient to simply find the association of drugs with biological processes; that relationship is crucial because drugs that influence biological processes can have an impact on phenotype.
to the best of our knowledge, the relationship between biological processes and side effects of drugs has not yet been systematically researched.
we propose  <dig> steps for systematically searching relationships between drugs and biological processes: enrichment scores  calculations, t-score calculation, and threshold-based filtering.
the preliminary results showed that the process-drug-side effect network was able to find meaningful relationships between biological processes and side effects in an efficient manner.
we propose a novel process-drug-side effect network for discovering the relationship between biological processes and side effects.
the recent development of a database on side effects, the side effect resource , is a first step in documenting the relationship between drugs and their side effects.
we generated a network of  <dig> drugs- <dig> side effects- <dig> biological process relation resources.
<dig>  <dig>  <dig>  fourth international workshop on data and text mining in biomedical informatics   <dig> toronto, canada
