after a 28-day dietary intervention with high-cla beef, a range of plasma markers indicated a marked improvement in the metabolic health of genetically obese mice.
results from modified gsea showed that the high-cla beef diet affected diverse biological processes across the three tissues, and that the majority of pathway changes reached significance only with the bi-directional test.
in this case, we have identified selenoamino acid metabolism and steroid biosynthesis as key pathways mediating the observed relationship between metabolic health and high-cla beef.
combining the liver tissue microarray results with plasma marker data revealed  <dig> cla-sensitive genes showing strong canonical correlation with one or more plasma markers of metabolic health, and  <dig> significantly overrepresented pathways among this set; each of these pathways was also significantly changed by the high-cla diet.
these results indicate that this type of analysis has the potential to generate novel transcriptome-based biomarkers of disease.
furthermore, we apply canonical correlation analysis and fisher's exact test, using plasma marker data with known clinical relevance to aid identification of the most important gene and pathway changes in our transcriptomic dataset.
in such cases where transcriptomic response to treatment is exceptionally large, canonical correlation analysis in conjunction with fisher's exact test highlights the subset of pathways showing strongest correlation with the clinical markers of interest.
closer inspection of two of these pathways - selenoamino acid metabolism and steroid biosynthesis - illustrated clear diet-sensitive changes in constituent genes, as well as strong correlations between gene expression and plasma markers of metabolic syndrome independent of the dietary effect.
here, we apply an approach to gene set enrichment analysis that allows for detection of bi-directional enrichment within a gene set.
bi-directional gene set enrichment analysis more accurately reflects dynamic regulatory behaviour in biochemical pathways, and as such highlighted biologically relevant changes that were not detected using a traditional approach.
