we have extended the vsm ability to retrieve information using a transitive closure approach.
the vsm extended with a transitive closure approach provides a good way to identify biological interactions from textual collections.
consequently, we have developed an efficient method for extracting and restricting the best potential results to consider as new advances in life sciences, even when indications of these results are not easily observed from a mass of documents.
most confirmation patent claims were found at the top  <dig> new interactions obtained from each subnetwork.
biological systems are commonly described as networks of entity interactions.
based on interactions established in the network our model applies the transitive closure in order to predict and rank new interactions.
we have tested and validated our model using a collection of patent claims issued from  <dig> to  <dig>  from  <dig>  possible interactions in our network, the model identified  <dig>  known interactions and predicted  <dig>  new interactions.
specifically for the context of literature-based discovery, the extended vsm contributes to identify and rank relevant new interactions even if these interactions occcur in only a few documents in the collection.
in this work we present a model to predict these unknown interactions from a textual collection using the vector space model , a well known and established information retrieval model.
for instance, the best new interaction inferred by our model relates the interaction between the adrenaline neurotransmitter and the androgen receptor gene.
we have found a paper that reports the partial dependence of the antiapoptotic effect of adrenaline on androgen receptor.
iterating the model according to patent issue dates, interactions found in a given past year were often confirmed by patent claims not in the collection and issued in more recent years.
15- <dig> november  <dig> 6th international conference of the brazilian association for bioinformatics and computational biology  ouro preto, brazil
others remain unknown for long periods of time and are frequently discovered by chance.
some interactions are already known and integrate the current knowledge in life sciences.
