in response, we employed existing tools for phylogenetic analysis to produce a computationally efficient, tree-based approach for annotating transcriptomes or new genomes that we term phylogenetically-informed annotation , which places uncharacterized genes into pre-calculated phylogenies of gene families.
next, to rapidly annotate transcriptomes from organisms that lack sequenced genomes, we repurposed a maximum likelihood-based evolutionary placement algorithm  to place sequences of potential lit genes on to our pre-calculated gene trees.
we generated maximum likelihood trees for  <dig> genes from a light interaction toolkit , a collection of genes that underlie the function or development of light-interacting structures in metazoans.
phylogenetic analyses are one useful method for assigning identities to these sequences, but such methods tend to be time-consuming because of the need to re-calculate trees for every gene of interest and each time a new data set is analyzed.
to do so, we searched protein sequences predicted from  <dig> fully-sequenced genomes and built trees using tools for phylogenetic analysis in the osiris package of galaxy .
our new trees for lit genes are available on the bitbucket public repository  and we demonstrate pia on a publicly-accessible web server .
finally, we implemented pia in galaxy and used it to search for lit genes in  <dig> newly-sequenced transcriptomes from the light-interacting tissues of a range of cephalopod mollusks, arthropods, and cubozoan cnidarians.
we also introduce pia, a high throughput method for using phylogenetic relationships to identify lit genes in transcriptomes from non-model organisms.
tools for high throughput sequencing and de novo assembly make the analysis of transcriptomes  feasible for almost any organism.
yet a challenge for biologists is that it can be difficult to assign identities to gene sequences, especially from non-model organisms.
our new trees for lit genes will be a valuable resource for researchers studying the evolution of eyes or other light-interacting structures.
