rnai technology has been used for development of anti-pathogenic crops.
quantitative real-time pcr results showed that expression level of target msechi <dig> and msechi <dig> genes in gut tissue of m. separata were down-regulated after oral delivery of engineered bacteria expressing the corresponding dsrna.
in  <dig>  development of transgenic plants resistant to insect herbivore using rnai technology was first reported, leading to a burst of efforts aimed at exploitation of rnai mechanism and control strategy against variety of insect species based on this technique.
our research provides both an experimental foundation for using rnai technology to control m. separata and also a useful research tool for loss-of-function study of important developmental and regulatory genes in this insect species.
rnai  is a technology for silencing of target genes via sequence-specific manner.
furthermore, knockdown of msechi <dig> and msechi <dig> resulted in increased mortality and reduced body weight of the feeding larvae.
the bacteria were mixed with artificial diet and were fed to m. separata.
chitinase genes were chosen as the target genes as they were expressed predominantly in the gut tissue and were reported to be ideal silencing targets in several insect species.
interfering sequences against the target genes were cloned into the l <dig> vector to produce sequence specific dsrnas .
mythimna separata belongs to noctuidae family of lepidoptera and is posing threat to crops of economic importance.
chitinasel4440mythimna separatamortalityrna interference,sirnahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31460036wuriyanghan hada program of higher-level talents of inner mongolia university30105-125127wuriyanghan hada issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
we showed that oral delivery of bacterially expressed dsrna would lead to rnai effects in the recipient insect.
sequence-specific sirna  was detected in recipient insects, supporting the existence of sirna-mediated silencing effects in m. separata.
recently, outbreaks of m. separata severely threatens corn production in northern china, calling for new control approaches.
we reported a simple and low cost experimental procedure to silence m. separata endogenous gene expression.
