to comply with the highest level multiple uniprot criteria for determining despr’s existence, we performed various experiments using multiple anti-despr monoclonal antibodies  targeting distinct despr epitopes with one spanning the contested tryptophan -codon# <dig>  assessing:  despr protein expression,  predicted full-length protein size,  sequence-predicted protein-specific properties beyond codon#14: receptor glycosylation and internalization,  protein-partner interactions, and  despr functionality via despr-inhibition effects.
western blot analysis using anti-despr mabs targeting distinct despr epitopes detect the identical glycosylated  <dig>  kda pull-down protein.
however, re-analysis is needed given prior single gene studies detected a tryptophan -codon# <dig> by manual sanger sequencing, demonstrated despr translatability and functionality, and since the demonstration of actual non-translatability through expression studies, the standard-of-excellence for pseudogene designation, has not been performed.
in contrast to rat and mouse databases, the ncbi gene database lists the human dual-endothelin1/vegfsp receptor  as a unitary transcribed pseudogene due to a stop -codon at codon# <dig> in automated dna and rna sequences.
to dissect the nucleotide sequence discrepancy, we performed maxam–gilbert sequencing and reviewed  <dig> rna-seq entries.
maxam–gilbert sequencing and some rna-seq entries demonstrate two guanines, hence a tryptophan -codon# <dig> within a compression site spanning an error-prone compression sequence motif.
along with detection of the tryptophan -codon# <dig> within an error-prone compression site, cumulative data demonstrating despr protein existence fulfill multiple uniprot criteria, thus refuting its pseudogene designation.
re-analysis must meet uniprot criteria for demonstration of a protein’s existence at the highest  level, which a priori, would override dna- or rna-based deductions.
decrease in despr-protein size after pngase-f digest demonstrates post-translational glycosylation, concordant with the consensus-glycosylation site beyond codon# <dig>  like other small single-transmembrane proteins, mass spectrometry analysis of anti-despr mab pull-down proteins do not detect despr, but detect despr-protein interactions with proteins implicated in intracellular trafficking and cancer.
despr-inhibition studies identify despr-roles in csc survival and growth.
facs analyses also detect despr-protein in different human cancer stem-like cells .
