clearly an extended comparison of the transcriptional responses in the interaction with heterobasidion between several independent genotypes exhibiting reduced susceptibility is needed to catalogue mechanisms of successful host defence strategies.
in this study we examined transcriptional response, using 454-sequencing, and chemical profiles in bark of norway spruce trees with different susceptibility to heterobasidion annosum s.l.
the aim was to find associations between the transcriptome and chemical profiles to the level of susceptibility to heterobasidion spp.
both terpene and phenol compositions were analysed and at  <dig> days post inoculation  high levels of 3-carene was produced in response to h. annosum.
the levels of the flavonoid catechin, which is polymerized into proanthocyanidins , showed a temporal variation; it accumulated between  <dig> and  <dig> dpi in response to h. annosum infection in the less susceptible genotypes.
the varying dynamics in transcriptional and chemical patterns displayed by the less susceptible genotypes suggest that there is a genotypic variation in successful spruce defence strategies against heterobasidion.
however, both high levels of piceasides and flavonoids in the less susceptible genotypes suggested the importance of the phenolic compounds in the defence.
norway spruce  is one of the most important conifer species in europe.
the first line of defence in a norway spruce tree is the bark.
quantitative pcr analyses verified the induction of genes in the phenylpropanoid and flavonoid pathway.
it is a very efficient barrier against infection based on its mechanical and chemical properties.
however, significant patterns relating to inoculation or to genotypes with higher or lower susceptibility could only be found in the phenol fraction.
the qpcr data also highlighted genotype-dependent differences in the transcriptional regulation of these pathways.
the transcriptome data suggested that the accumulation of free catechin was preceded by an induction of genes in the flavonoid and pa biosynthesis pathway such as leucoanthocyanidin reductase.
