expression profiling analyses of  <dig> slbzip genes using quantitative rt-pcr and publicly available microarray data indicate that the tomato slbzip genes have distinct and diverse expression patterns in different tissues and developmental stages and many of the tomato bzip genes might be involved in responses to various abiotic and biotic stresses as well as in response to light.
the phylogenetic trees, conserved motifs and gene structures were generated by mega <dig> , meme tool and gene structure display server, respectively.
this genome-wide systematic characterization identified a total of  <dig> members in the slbzip family and the analyses of the protein features and gene expression patterns provide useful clues for further functional characterization of the bzip transcription factors in tomato.
within the slbzip family, a total of  <dig> slbzip genes are located in the segmental duplicate regions in the tomato genome, suggesting that the segment chromosomal duplications contribute greatly to the expansion of the tomato slbzip family.
the slbzip genes were identified using local blast and hidden markov model profile searches.
in the present study, we carried out a genome-wide identification and systematic analyses of  <dig> slbzip genes that distributes unevenly on the tomato chromosomes.
six kinds of intron patterns  within the basic and hinge regions are defined.
this family can be divided into  <dig> groups according to the phylogenetic relationship among the slbzip proteins.
however, little is known about the bzip family in tomato .
transcription factors of the basic leucine zipper  family represent exclusively in eukaryotes and have been shown to regulate diverse biological processes in plant growth and development as well as in abiotic and biotic stress responses.
further, we predicted the dna-binding patterns and the dimerization property on the basis of the characteristic features in the basic and hinge regions and the leucine zipper, respectively, which supports our classification greatly and helps to classify  <dig> distinct subfamilies.
