our results demonstrate that integration of rna-seq-based transcriptome analysis and high-throughput genotyping is an effective approach for discovery of a large number of nucleotide variations and for identification of functional gene variants associated with adaptive traits in a non-model species.
snp loci of those candidate genes associated with resistant phenotypes can be used as positional and functional variation sites for further characterization of wwp major gene resistance against c. ribicola.
western white pine  is of high interest in forest breeding and conservation because of its high susceptibility to the invasive disease white pine blister rust .
bioinformatic snp detection identified > <dig>  high quality snps in three expressed candidate gene groups: pinus highly conserved genes , differential expressed genes  in plant defense response, and resistance gene analogs .
a collection of resistance germplasm was used for construction of cdna libraries and snp genotyping.
snp clustering analyses consistently revealed distinct populations, each composed of multiple full-sib seed families by parentage assignment in the wwp germplasm collection.
at least one snp locus provided an excellent marker for cr <dig> selection across p. monticola populations.
approximately 36– <dig> million  <dig> × 100-bp reads were obtained per library and de-novo assembly generated the first shoot-tip reference transcriptome containing a total of  <dig>  unique transcripts.
the wwp shoot tip transcriptome and those validated snp markers provide novel genomic resources for genetic, evolutionary and ecological studies.
however, wwp lacks genomic resource development and is evolutionarily far away from plants with available draft genome sequences.
linkage disequilibrium  analysis identified six genes in significant association with major gene  resistance, including three rgas , two hcgs, and one deg.
to estimate efficiency of in-silico snp discovery, genotyping assay was developed by using sequenom iplex and it unveiled snp success rates from  <dig> % to  <dig> %.
