in d. melanogaster, te-derived endogenous sirnas and pirnas are involved in genome surveillance and maintenance of genome integrity.
we characterized a large population of te-derived endogenous sirnas and pirnas, which constitutes 56-60% of the total sirna and pirna reads in the analysed libraries.
we also found that biotic stress as blood feeding and infection with plasmodium parasite, the etiological agent of malaria, modulated the expression levels of the endogenous sirnas and pirnas in an.
the te-specific small rnas produced by both the sirna and pirna pathways represent an important aspect of genome stability and genetic variation, which might have a strong impact on the evolution of the genome and vector competence in the malaria mosquitoes.
genetic variations induced by te activities are known to shape the genome landscape and to alter the fitness in an.
gambiae pirnas were produced by both “ping-pong” dependent  and independent mechanisms .
the vast majority of endogenous small rnas produced by the sirna and pirna pathways originate from repetitive or transposable elements .
endo-sirnasendo-pirnasanopheles gambiaetransposable elementsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
similarly to d. melanogaster, more than 90% of the detected pirnas were produced from te-associated clusters in an.
moreover, we identified a number of protein coding genes producing gene-specific sirnas and pirnas that were generally expressed at much lower levels than the te-associated small rnas.
the sirna and pirna pathways have been shown in insects to be essential for regulation of gene expression and defence against exogenous and endogenous genetic elements .
we identified a large and diverse set of the endogenously derived sirnas and pirnas that share common and distinct aspects of small rna expression across insect species, and inferred their impact on te and gene activity in an.
in the medically relevant malaria mosquito anopheles gambiae tes constitute 12-16% of the genome size.
detailed sequence analysis revealed that an.
