the main network reconstruction approaches are either based on bayesian scores, which enable the ranking of alternative bayesian networks, or rely on the identification of structural independencies, which correspond to missing edges in the underlying network.
bayesian inference methods typically require heuristic search strategies, such as hill-climbing algorithms, to sample the super-exponential space of possible networks.
in a nutshell, this local optimization scheme and corresponding 3off <dig> algorithm iteratively “take off” the most likely conditional 3-point information from the 2-point  information between each pair of nodes.
the resulting network skeleton is then partially directed by orienting and propagating edge directions, based on the sign and magnitude of the conditional 3-point information of unshielded triples.
it combines constraint-based and bayesian approaches to infer structural independencies based on the ranking of their most likely contributing nodes.
the approach is shown to outperform both constraint-based and bayesian inference methods on a range of benchmark networks.
the reconstruction of reliable graphical models from observational data is important in bioinformatics and other computational fields applying network reconstruction methods to large, yet finite datasets.
yet, in practice, conditional independencies need to be ascertained from the available observational data, based on adjustable statistical significance levels, and are not robust to sampling noise from finite datasets.
we propose a more robust approach to reconstruct graphical models from finite datasets.
the novel information-theoretic approach and corresponding 3off <dig> algorithm combine constraint-based and bayesian inference methods to reliably reconstruct graphical models, despite inherent sampling noise in finite datasets.
by contrast, constraint-based methods, such as the pc and ic algorithms, are expected to run in polynomial time on sparse underlying graphs, provided that a correct list of conditional independencies is available.
conditional independencies are thus derived by progressively collecting the most significant indirect contributions to all pairwise mutual information.
the 3off <dig> approach is then applied to the reconstruction of the hematopoiesis regulation network based on recent single cell expression data and is found to retrieve more experimentally ascertained regulations between transcription factors than with other available methods.
