grfp also estimates that there are significant intron losses in the evolution of non-vertebrate genomes, with extreme cases of around 57% intron loss in drosophila melanogaster, 28% in caenorhabditis elegans, and 24% in oryza sativa.
as the second conclusion from the model, we show that intron insertion loci follow a normal distribution with a mean of  <dig>   and a standard deviation of  <dig> .
the grfp model suggests that intron gain is dynamic with a higher chance for longer exons; introns are inserted into exons randomly with the highest probability at the center of the exon.
grfp estimates that there are  <dig> introns in every  <dig> kb coding sequences for vertebrate genomes, agreeing with empirical observations.
in this work, a novel approach is taken based on the assumptions that the evolution of exon-intron structure is a stochastic process, and that the characteristics of this process can be understood by examining its historical outcome, the present-day size distribution of internal translated exons .
through the combination of simulation and modeling the size distribution of exons in different species, we propose a general random fragmentation process  to characterize the evolution dynamics of exon-intron structure.
we use simulation to demonstrate that the negative correlation might result from significant intron loss during evolution, which could be explained by selection against multi-intron genes in these organisms.
most eukaryotic genes are interrupted by spliceosomal introns.
this model accurately predicts the probability that an exon will be split by a new intron and the distribution of novel insertions along the length of the exon.
the evolution of exon-intron structure remains mysterious despite rapid advance in genome sequencing technique.
evolution of exon-intron structuregeneral random fragmentation processsimulation
we also show that such size dependence is nearly constant across gene, with the exception of the exons adjacent to the 5′ utr.
