several horizontal gene transfer events were identified.
mycoplasma hyopneumoniae, mycoplasma flocculare and mycoplasma hyorhinis live in swine respiratory tracts.
the comparative analyses of three mycoplasma species that inhabit the swine respiratory tract facilitated the identification of some characteristics that may be related to their different behaviors.
however, it was not possible to identify specific virulence determinant factors that could explain the differences in the pathogenicity of the analyzed species.
m. flocculare, a commensal bacterium, is genetically closely related to m. hyopneumoniae, the causative agent of enzootic porcine pneumonia.
in this work, we present the genome sequences of m. flocculare and m. hyopneumoniae strain  <dig>  and we compare these genomes with the genomes of other m. hyoponeumoniae strain and to the a m. hyorhinis genome.
although m. flocculare and m. hyopneumoniae display a high degree of similarity with respect to the gene content, only some genomic regions display considerable synteny.
genes encoding proteins that may be involved in host-cell adhesion in m. hyopneumoniae and m. flocculare display differences in genomic structure and organization.
m. hyopneumoniae and m. flocculare display many differences that may help to explain why one species is pathogenic and the other is considered to be commensal.
the phylogenomic analysis places m. hyopneumoniae, m. flocculare and m. hyorhinis in the hyopneumoniae clade.
m. hyorhinis is also pathogenic, causing polyserositis and arthritis.
the m. hyorhinis genome contains differences in some components involved in metabolism and evasion of the host’s immune system that may contribute to its growth aggressiveness.
these analyses were performed to identify possible characteristics that may help to explain the different behaviors of these species in swine respiratory tracts.
the phylogenetic relationship of the three species was confirmed by a phylogenomic approach.
some genes encoding adhesins of the p <dig> family are absent in m. flocculare and some contain sequence differences or lack of domains that are considered to be important for adhesion to host cells.
