within the firmicutes phylum, the enterococcus spp.
in addition, the e. coli iscu ortholog sufu was found to be the scaffold protein of enterococcus spp., containing all features considered essential for its biological activity, including conserved amino acid residues involved in substrate and/or co-factor binding  and, phylogenetic analyses showed a close relationship with orthologues from other gram-positive bacteria.
primary sequences and structural analysis of the sufu protein demonstrated its structural-like pattern to the scaffold protein iscu nearby on the isc machinery.
molecular modeling using haemophilus influenzae iscu primary sequence over the pdb:1su <dig> crystal followed by a md trajectory was performed to analyse differences in the c-terminus region of gram-positive sufu and gram-negative orthologous proteins, in which several modifications in secondary structure were observed.
the aim of this study was to carry out a phylogenetic analysis in enterococcus faecalis v <dig> and a structural and conformational characterisation of it sufu protein.
this presented a stable model, showing secondary structure modifications near the active site and conserved cysteine residues.
iron-sulfur clusters are ubiquitous and evolutionarily ancient inorganic prosthetic groups, the biosynthesis of which depends on complex protein machineries.
the data describe the identification of the suf machinery for  cluster biosynthesis present in the firmicutes genome, showing conserved sufb, sufc, sufd and sufs genes and the presence of the sufu gene coding for scaffold protein, instead of sufa; neither sufe nor sufr are present.
e. faecalis sufu molecular modeling showed high flexibility over the active site regions, and demonstrated the existence of a specific region in firmicutes denoting the gram positive region , suggested as a possible candidate for interaction with other factors and/or regulators.
blast searches of the enterococcus genome revealed a series of genes with sequence similarity to the escherichia coli suf machinery of  cluster biosynthesis, namely sufb, sufc, sufd and sufs.
although well described in several organisms, these machineries are poorly understood in gram-positive bacteria.
