given that zebrafish is an important experimental model and teleost fishes constitute an evolutionarily diverse group that forms half the vertebrate species, it would be useful to compare the zebrafish chemokine system with those of mammals.
recombinant cxl-chr24a, one of the cx subfamily members on chromosome  <dig>  showed marked chemotactic activity for carp leukocytes.
the majority of the identified chemokine genes are unique to zebrafish or teleost fishes.
the chemokine family plays important roles in cell migration and activation.
prior to this study, however, only incomplete lists of the zebrafish chemokine genes were reported.
we systematically searched chemokine genes in the zebrafish genome and est databases, and identified more than  <dig> chemokine genes.
we also searched chemokine genes in pufferfish fugu and tetraodon, and found only  <dig> chemokine genes in each species.
phylogenetic analysis and genome organization of the chemokine genes showed that successive tandem duplication events generated the cx genes from the cc subfamily.
the phylogenic and genomic organization analyses suggest that a substantial number of chemokine genes in zebrafish were generated by zebrafish-specific tandem duplication events.
the mrna was expressed mainly during a certain period of the embryogenesis, suggesting its role in the zebrafish development.
based on the arrangement of the four conserved cysteine residues, chemokines are now classified into four subfamilies, cxc, cc, xc and cx3c.
the cx chemokines lack one of the two n-terminus conserved cysteine residues but retain the third and the fourth ones.
however, several groups of chemokines are moderately similar to human chemokines, and some chemokines are orthologous to human homeostatic chemokines cxcl <dig> and cxcl <dig>  zebrafish also possesses a novel species-specific subfamily consisting of five members, which we term the cx subfamily.
only two human chemokines cxcl <dig> and cxcl <dig> have the orthologous chemokines in zebrafish.
during such duplications, a novel chemokine subfamily termed cx was generated in zebrafish.
