the major limitation of this approach is due to the fact that recombinant plasmids are often lost from the bacterial culture upon removal of antibiotic selection.
three out of eighteen chloramphenicol resistant transformants selected exhibited 100% stability of the phenotype and only one of them, gp <dig>  carried the cat gene integrated as a single copy.
we have developed a genetic system based on suicide vectors on conjugative transposons allowing stable integration of recombinant dna into the chromosome of transformable and non-transformable gram-positive bacteria.
in the past ten years there has been a growing interest in engineering gram-positive bacteria for biotechnological applications, including vaccine delivery and production of recombinant proteins.
to study the possibility of using this promoter  for single copy heterologous gene expression, we created transcriptional fusions of pp with genes encoding surface recombinant proteins in a vector capable of integrating into the conjugative transposon tn <dig>  surface recombinant proteins whose expression was controlled by the pp promoter were detected in tn916-containing strains of s. gordonii and bacillus subtilis after single copy chromosomal integration of the recombinant insertion vectors into the resident tn <dig>  the surface recombinant protein synthesized under the control of pp was also detected in enterococcus faecalis after conjugal transfer of a recombinant tn <dig> containing the transcriptional fusion.
usually, bacteria are manipulated using plasmid expression vectors.
the aim of this work was to select a strong chromosomal promoter from streptococcus gordonii to improve this genetic system making it suitable for expression of single-copy recombinant genes.
we demonstrated that this promoter can be used to direct expression of heterologous genes in different gram-positive bacteria, when integrated in a single copy into the chromosome.
a dna fragment of  <dig> base pairs exhibiting promoter activity was isolated from gp <dig> and sequenced.
to achieve this task, a promoterless gene encoding a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase , was randomly integrated into the s. gordonii chromosome and transformants were selected for chloramphenicol resistance.
we isolated and characterized a s. gordonii chromosomal promoter.
