the availability of a saturated genetic map of clementine was identified as an essential prerequisite to assist the whole genome sequence assembly.
five parental genetic maps were established from three segregating populations, which were genotyped with single nucleotide polymorphism , simple sequence repeats  and insertion-deletion  markers.
a reference genetic map of citrus, used to facilitate the chromosome assembly of the first citrus reference genome sequence, was established.
as a foundational step towards deciphering the interspecific genome structures, a reference whole genome sequence was produced by the international citrus genome consortium from a haploid derived from clementine mandarin.
an initial medium density reference map  of the clementine was established by combining male and female clementine segregation data.
the results identified nine recombination break points for the sweet orange gamete that contributed to the clementine genome.
the primary goals of the present study were to establish a clementine reference map using codominant markers, and to perform comparative mapping of pummelo, sweet orange, and clementine.
the linear order of markers was highly conserved in the different species.
clementine is believed to be a ‘mediterranean’ mandarin × sweet orange hybrid, and sweet orange likely arose from interspecific hybridizations between mandarin and pummelo gene pools.
this clementine map was compared with two pummelo maps and a sweet orange map.
most modern citrus cultivars have an interspecific origin.
the high conservation of marker order observed at the interspecific level should allow reasonable inferences of most citrus genome sequences by mapping next-generation sequencing  data in the reference genome sequence.
the high frequency of skewed allelic segregations in the male clementine data underline the probable extent of deviation from mendelian segregation for characters controlled by heterozygous loci in male parents.
however, significant differences in map size were observed, which suggests a variation in the recombination rates.
skewed segregations were much higher in the male than female clementine mapping data.
the genome of the haploid clementine used to establish the citrus reference genome sequence appears to have been inherited primarily from the ‘mediterranean’ mandarin.
