assays for snps were designed using kaspar technology and tested on a f7-ril population derived from a chiifu x tetra cross.
criteria used for snp identification delivered markers, more than 93% of which could be successfully mapped to the f7–ril population of chiifu x tetra cross.
this will allow more involved molecular mapping, in-depth study of molecular mechanisms underlying important agronomic traits and introgression of traits from b. rapa to major oilseed crops - b. juncea  and b. napus .
a large number of snps and psvs are present in the transcriptome of b. rapa lines for genome-wide linkage mapping and specific-region fine mapping.
brassica rapa  contains very diverse forms which include oleiferous types and many vegetable types.
genome sequence of b. rapa line chiifu , a leafy vegetable type, was published in  <dig>  using this knowledge, it is important to develop genomic resources for the oleiferous types of b. rapa.
the study explores the availability of snps in rna-seq generated contigs of three oleiferous lines of b. rapa - candle , yspb- <dig> and tetra  and their use in genome-wide linkage mapping and specific-region fine mapping using a ril population between chiifu and tetra.
while the number of ssrs was limited, more than  <dig>  million snps were observed between chiifu and the three oleiferous lines.
sequence assembly was carried out using the velvet de-novo programme and the assembled contigs were organised against chiifu gene models, available in the brad-cds database.
out of  <dig> markers that were tested,  <dig> markers could be mapped unambiguously which included  <dig> markers for genome-wide mapping and  <dig> markers for fine mapping of the tet-o locus that is involved with the trait tetralocular ovary in the line tetra.
rna-seq confirmed the presence of more than  <dig>  single-copy gene models described in the brad database.
rna-seq was carried out on the rna isolated from young inflorescences containing unopened floral buds, floral axis and small leaves, using illumina paired-end sequencing technology.
the design of the snp assays were based on three considerations - the 50 bp flanking region of the snps should be strictly similar, the snp should have a read-depth of ≥ <dig> and no exon/intron junction should be present within the 101 bp target region.
