mutant lines for the genes merlin and karl showed the most extreme phenotypes exhibiting a developmental time reduction and increase, respectively, of over  <dig> days and  <dig> days relative to the control .
the present work is one of the first systematic studies of the genetic basis of developmental time, in which we also evaluate the impact of environmental variation on the expression of the trait.
taken together, our results stress the need to take into account the effect of environmental variation and the dynamics of gene interactions on the genetic architecture of this complex life-history trait.
interestingly, the gene-by-environment interaction accounted for 52% of total phenotypic variance.
we also demonstrate that many developmental time genes have pleiotropic effects on several adult traits and that the action of most of them is sensitive to temperature during development.
at the same time, we also show that many heterochronic phenotypes may arise from changes in genes involved in several developmental mechanisms that do not explicitly control the timing of specific events.
we identified components of several integrated time-dependent pathways affecting egg-to-adult developmental time in drosophila.
sixty percent of the lines showed a heterochronic phenotype, suggesting that a large number of genes affect this trait.
plastic reaction norms were found for a large number of developmental time candidate genes.
understanding the genetic architecture of ecologically relevant adaptive traits requires the contribution of developmental and evolutionary biology.
the time to reach the age of reproduction is a complex life history trait commonly known as developmental time.
in particular, in holometabolous insects that occupy ephemeral habitats, like fruit flies, the impact of developmental time on fitness is further exaggerated.
we analyzed  <dig> co-isogenic single p-element insertion lines of drosophila melanogaster to identify novel genes affecting developmental time in flies reared at 25°c.
