lactic acid bacteria  are among the predominant microbial species in african indigenous fermented food products and are used for different applications in the food and biotechnology industries.
the resistance to kanamycin and vancomycin is probably an intrinsic feature since similar observations were reported in the literature for lab.
plantarum strains had a mic value of 16 mg/l and 32 mg/l respectively.
using molecular biology based methods and selected phenotypic tests such as catalase reaction, co <dig> production from glucose, colonies and cells morphology, the isolates were identified as lactobacillus delbrueckii, lactobacillus fermentum, lactobacillus ghanensis, lactobacillus plantarum, lactobacillus salivarius, leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides, pediococcus acidilactici, pediococcus pentosaceus and weissella confusa.
indigenous fermented food products play an essential role in the diet of millions of africans.
the aim of this study was to characterize  <dig> lab previously isolated from three different african indigenous fermented food products using 5-based rep-pcr, sequencing of the 16s rrna gene and species-specific pcr techniques for differentiation of closely related species and further evaluate their antibiotic resistance profiles by the broth microdilution method and their haemolytic activity on sheep blood agar plates as indicators of safety traits among these bacteria.
no β-haemolytic activity was observed, however, α-haemolytic activity was observed in 27%  of the strains comprising lb.
acidilactici strains were resistant to 64 mg/l whereas some w. confusa and lb.
low prevalence of pathogenicity indicator traits were observed among the isolates especially with the presence of poor haemolytic activities and they could therefore be considered as interesting candidates for selection of starter cultures or probiotics for different applications.
numerous studies have described antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of lab from different parts of the world.
fermentum strains being susceptible to tetracycline whereas pediococcus strains and lb.
