modern did, however, outperform archival during growth on nutrient broth, and in resistance to rifamycin, which was selected for by researchers in the 1980s.
stored as a lyophilized sample, we hypothesized that this archival strain would better reflect the first-ever isolate of am <dig> and reveal ways in which our modern stock has changed through laboratory domestication or other means.
these results highlight the surprising degree to which am <dig> has diverged through a combination of unintended laboratory domestication and purposeful selection for rifamycin resistance.
laboratory domesticationmethylobacterium extorquens am1antibiotic resistancerifamycinwhole-genome sequencingstrain integrity
since its discovery in  <dig>  a stock of methylobacterium extorquens am <dig>  has remained in the lab, propagated across numerous growth and storage conditions, researchers, and facilities.
instances of strain divergence are important, not only to ensure consistency of experimental results, but also to explore how microbes in the lab diverge from one another and from their wild counterparts.
to explore the extent to which this lineage has diverged, we compared our own “modern” stock of am <dig> to a sample archived at a culture stock center shortly after the strain’s discovery.
given the large number of genomic changes arising from domestication , it is somewhat surprising that the single other mutation attributed to purposeful laboratory selection accounts for much of the phenotypic divergence between strains.
contrary to our expectations, modern was both slower and less fit than archival across a variety of growth substrates, and showed no improvement during long-term growth and storage.
using whole-genome re-sequencing, we identified some  <dig> mutations – including single nucleotide polymorphisms, small indels, the insertion of mobile elements, and the loss of roughly  <dig> kb of dna - that arose in the laboratory-maintained modern lineage.
recapitulating selection for rifamycin resistance in replicate archival populations showed that mutations to rna polymerase b  substantially decrease growth in the absence of antibiotic, offering an explanation for slower growth in modern stocks.
