repeat families showed transition mutations and a cpa → tpa dinucleotide bias, indicating the presence of a repeat-induced point mutation -like mechanism in m. graminicola.
one gene family and two repeat families specific to subtelomeres also were identified in the m. graminicola genome.
class i transposable elements, that amplify via an rna intermediate, account for about 70% of the total repetitive content in the m. graminicola genome.
using a combination of four repeat-finding methods, at least 17% of the m. graminicola genome was estimated to be repetitive.
a total of  <dig> putative clusters of nested elements was found in the m. graminicola genome.
this analysis of the transposable element content in the finished m. graminicola genome resulted in a thorough and highly curated database of repetitive sequences.
distribution of repeats across the chromosomes also varied, with at least six chromosomes showing a non-random distribution of repetitive elements.
this comprehensive analysis will serve as a scaffold to address additional biological questions regarding the origin and fate of transposable elements in fungi.
future analyses of the distribution of repetitive sequences in m. graminicola also will be able to provide insights into the association of repeats with genes and their potential role in gene and genome evolution.
the dispensable chromosomes had a higher percentage of repetitive elements as compared to the core chromosomes.
identification of repeats is important not only because it improves gene prediction, but also because of the role that repetitive sequences play in determining the structure and evolution of genes and genomes.
several genes with putative roles in pathogenicity were found associated with these nested repeat clusters.
in addition to gene identification and annotation, repetitive sequence analysis has become an integral part of genome sequencing projects.
four independent approaches were used to identify and characterize the repetitive fraction of the mycosphaerella graminicola  genome.
