we propose a model to explain the evolutionary history of fur within this well-known bacterial phylum: the postulated scenario includes one duplication event from a primitive regulator, which probably had a broad range of co-factors and dna-binding sites.
the presence of syntenic regions surrounding the different fur orthologues supports the proposed model, as do the evolutionary distances and topology of phylogenetic trees built using both neighbor-joining and maximum-likelihood methods.
the survey of regulators among related genomes provides a relevant tool for understanding the evolution of one of the first lines of cellular adaptability, control of dna transcription.
the proposed fur evolutionary model, which includes one general duplication and two in-genus duplications followed by divergence and specialization, explains the presence and diversity of fur genes within the actinobacteria.
an understanding of the evolution of global transcription regulators is essential for comprehending the complex networks of cellular metabolism that have developed among related organisms.
blast analyses revealed the presence of more than one fur homologue in most members of the actinobacteria whose genomes have been fully sequenced.
the fur gene encodes one of those regulators – the ferric uptake regulator fur – widely distributed among bacteria and known to regulate different genes committed to varied metabolic pathways.
the parallel study of fur phylogeny across diverse organisms offers a solid base to guide functional studies and allows the comparison between response mechanisms in relation with the surrounding environment.
although a few rare horizontal gene transfer events have been reported, the model is consistent with the view of gene duplication as a main force of microbial genomes evolution.
this duplication predated the appearance of the last common ancestor of the actinobacteria, while six other duplications occurred later within specific groups of organisms, particularly in two genera: frankia and streptomyces.
