we performed network analyses of  <dig> biomarkers, including major mutational events, microsatellite instability , epigenetic features, protein expression status, and immune reactions using data from  <dig> colorectal cancer cases:  <dig> cases with proximal colon cancer and  <dig> cases with distal colorectal cancer matched by age and sex.
among patients with non-msi-high cancer, braf mutation status emerged as a distinct marker with higher connectivity in the network of proximal colon cancer, but not in distal colorectal cancer.
in proximal colon cancer, tumor biomarkers tended to be correlated with each other, and msi and braf mutation functioned as key molecular characteristics during the carcinogenesis.
colorectal carcinoma evolves through a multitude of molecular events including somatic mutations, epigenetic alterations, and aberrant protein expression, influenced by host immune reactions.
such a network analysis integrates multidimensional tumor biomarker data to identify key molecular events and pathways that are central to an underlying biological process.
due to embryological, physiological, and microbial differences, proximal and distal colorectal cancers have distinct sets of molecular pathological signatures.
we found that the proximal colon cancer network formed a denser network  than the distal colorectal cancer network  .
the value of the average clustering coefficient was  <dig>  in the proximal colon cancer network and  <dig>  in the distal colorectal cancer network, indicating the greater clustering tendency of the proximal colon cancer network.
in particular, msi was a key hub, highly connected with other biomarkers in proximal colon cancer, but not in distal colorectal cancer.
edges were defined by statistically significant correlations between biomarkers using spearman correlation analyses.
given these differences, we hypothesized that a biomarker correlation network might vary by tumor location.
one way to interrogate the complex carcinogenic process and interactions between aberrant events is to model a biomarker correlation network.
our findings highlight the importance of considering multiple correlated pathways for therapeutic targets especially in proximal colon cancer.
