m. terricolor burrows are about  <dig> cm deep everywhere.
the three chromosomal species m. terricolor i, ii and iii have identical burrows, including location of the nest which is situated at the highest position.
the nest chamber of m. booduga is located at greater depth than the nest chamber of m. terricolor.
also, in the burrows of m. booduga the exchange of air takes place only from one side  in contrast to the burrows of m. terricolor where air exchange is through three sides.
hence, m. booduga lives in relatively more hypoxic and hypercapnic conditions than m. terricolor.
we observed the fixation of alternative alleles in m. booduga and m. terricolor at superoxide dismutase- <dig> , transferrin  and hemoglobin beta chain  loci.
the burrow structure and depth of nest of the chromosomal species m. terricolor i, ii and iii are same everywhere probably due to the recency of their evolutionary divergence.
however, the co-existing sibling species m. booduga and m. terricolor exhibit mutual "exclusion" of the 'microhabitats' for burrow construction.
thus, location, structure and depth of the burrows might have been the contributory factors for selection of alternative alleles at three loci sod- <dig>  trf and hbb, which reflect difference in probable adaptive strategy in m. booduga and m. terricolor.
all the three are directly or indirectly dependent on oxygen concentration for function.
in northern india which experiences great variation in climatic condition between summer and winter, m. booduga burrows have an average depth of  <dig> cm, as against  <dig> cm in southern india with less climatic fluctuation.
in contrast, in m. booduga burrows, the nest is at the lowest position.
in addition to these, there are differences in burrow patterns and site-preference for burrows suggesting difference in probable adaptive strategy in these co-existing sibling species.
the former build them in flat portion of the fields while the latter make burrows in earthen mounds raised for holding water in cultivated fields.
