a second set of experiments aims at assessing how well two commonly available classification algorithms, upgma  and nj , can use the methodology to perform their task, their performance being evaluated against gold standards and with the use of well known statistical indexes, i.e., the f-measure and the partition distance.
we experimentally test the usm methodology by using  <dig> compressors, all three of its known approximations and six data sets of relevance to molecular biology.
based on the experiments, several conclusions can be drawn and, from them, novel valuable guidelines for the use of usm on biological data.
ucd and ncd are indistinguishable, i.e., they yield nearly the same values of the statistical indexes we have used, accross experiments and data sets, while cd is almost always worse than both.
upgma seems to yield better classification results with respect to nj, i.e., better values of the statistical indexes , on a substantial fraction of experiments, compressors and usm approximation choices.
the compression program ppmd, based on ppm , for generic data and gencompress for dna, are the best performers among the compression algorithms we have used, although the difference in performance, as measured by statistical indexes, between them and the other algorithms depends critically on the data set and may not be as large as expected.
their applicability and robustness is tested on various data sets yielding a first massive quantitative estimate that the usm methodology and its approximations are of value.
moreover, we compare the usm methodology both with methods based on alignments and not.
this offers the first systematic and quantitative experimental assessment of this methodology, that naturally complements the many theoretical and the preliminary experimental results available.
it is based on the deep theory of kolmogorov complexity and universality is its most novel striking feature.
however, the alignment methods seem inadequate for post-genomic studies since they do not scale well with data set size and they seem to be confined only to genomic and proteomic sequences.
ppmd used with ucd or ncd and upgma, on sequence data is very close, although worse, in performance with the alignment methods .
in particular, the methodology applies to all biological data in textual format.
despite the rich theory developed around usm, its experimental assessment has limitations: only a few data compressors have been tested in conjunction with usm and mostly at a qualitative level, no comparison among ucd, ncd and cd is available and no comparison of usm with existing methods, both based on alignments and not, seems to be available.
the main ones are reported next.
