the results have been compared with those described in published expression analyses using axenic promastigotes.
the comparison of these particular results with published gene expression profile analyses performed using the same experimental procedure to study cultured promastigotes in stationary phase versus amastigotes revealed considerable differences .
for decades, research on these parasites has involved the axenic culture model of the promastigote stage including gene expression profiling studies performed in the post-genome era.
regarding transcript abundance, the set of differentially regulated genes is notably different when using promastigotes from the sand fly foregut instead of axenic cultures.
the primary vector of l. infantum in spain is phlebotomus perniciosus.
for this purpose, p. perniciosus sand flies were infected with l. infantum and differentiated promastigotes were extracted by dissection of the foreguts.
leishmania infantum is the etiological agent of zoonotical visceral leishmaniasis in the mediterranean basin.
we found that the up-regulation rate is lower in amastigotes than in sand fly-derived promastigotes, which is in agreement with the over-expression of genes involved in gene expression regulation and signaling in those promastigote populations.
the up-regulation rate is lower in intracellular amastigotes than in promastigotes obtained from the sand fly gut.
the primary objective of this differentiation study is to compare the gene expression profiles of promastigotes isolated from the foregut of the sand fly and amastigotes.
leishmania infantumphlebotomus perniciosuspromastigotesamastigotespromastigote axenic culturegene expression profilingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
parasites are transmitted to the mammalian host by the bite of sand flies.
unlike the controversial axenic culturing of amastigotes, promastigote cultures are generally accepted and used, although with the precaution of avoiding excessive culture passage.
this was also reported by us using the promastigote culture model and is an evidence for the hypothesis of promastigote preadaptation towards life in the intracellular environment.
