between  <dig> and  <dig> million sequence reads were generated per tissue across three replicate samples for each of the eighteen tissues from the single cow .
this large proportion of genes displaying ase was confirmed in the two tissues in a validation dataset.
to analyse ase, we had access to unambiguously phased genotypes for all heterozygous variants in the cow’s whole genome sequence, where these variants were homozygous in the whole genome sequence of her sire, and as a result we were able to map reads to parental genomes, to determine snp and genes showing ase in each tissue.
a bovine gene expression atlas was created , and differentially expressed genes in each tissue were identified.
investigating the extent of ase across  <dig> bovine tissues in one cow and two tissues in  <dig> cows demonstrated 1) ase is pervasive in cattle, 2) the ase is often mae but ranges from mae to slight overexpression of the major allele, 3) the ase is most often tissue specific and that more than half the time displays divergent allele specific expression patterns across tissues, 4) across all genes there is a slight bias towards expression of the paternal allele and 5) genes expressing the same parental allele are clustered together more than expected by chance, and there are several runs of large numbers of genes expressing the same parental allele.
ase was pervasive, 89 % of genes tested had significant ase in at least one tissue.
for individual tissues the proportion of genes showing significant ase varied from as low as 8–16 % of those tested in thymus to as high as 71–82 % of those tested in lung.
allele specific gene expression , with the paternal allele more expressed than the maternal allele or vice versa, appears to be a common phenomenon in humans and mice.
for example the gene spty2d <dig> showed almost complete paternal allele expression in kidney and thymus, and almost complete maternal allele expression in the brain caudal lobe and brain cerebellum.
across all tissues,  <dig>  % of all genes with ase favoured the paternal allele.
these include; to what extent is ase tissue specific?
mono allelic expression  was common, with  <dig> of  <dig> genes  tested with more than one heterozygous snp showing mae.
here we use gene expression data  from  <dig> tissues from a single cow to investigate each of these questions in turn, and then validate some of these findings in two tissues from  <dig> cows.
is there a genome wide bias towards expression of the paternal or maternal allele; and finally do genes that are nearby on a chromosome share the same direction of ase?
in total  <dig>  heterozygous snp within  <dig> genes were tested for ase in at least one tissue.
we identified several long runs of neighbouring genes that showed either paternal or maternal ase, one example was five adjacent genes  that showed almost exclusive paternal expression in brain caudal lobe.
