exploiting population genetics, landscape genomics and genome wide association studies, we evaluate b. distachyon role as a natural probe for identifying genomic loci involved in environmental adaptation.
when coupled with population genetics and measures of genomic structuration, methods coming from genome wide association studies may lead to the exploitation of model species as natural probes to identify loci related to environmental adaptation.
landscape genomicsbrachypodium distachyonadaptationgenotyping by sequencingpopulation geneticsgwasassociation mappingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
we investigated the structuration and diversity of this collection, and exploited climatic data to identify loci with adaptive significance through i) two different approaches for genome wide association analyses considering climatic variation, ii) an outlier loci approach, and iii) a canonical correlation analysis on differentially sequenced bins.
a linkage disequilibrium-corrected bonferroni method was applied to filter associations.
the canonical correlation analysis showed that the distribution of some differentially sequenced regions was associated to environmental variation.
its application to a model species with a fully sequenced genome is a modular strategy that enables the stratification of biological material and thus improves our knowledge of the functional loci determining adaptation in near-crop species.
variations in sequencing depth showed consistent patterns at  <dig>  genomic bins, which were significantly enriched in transposable elements.
the two association methods jointly identified a set of  <dig> genes significantly related to environmental adaptation.
the local environment plays a major role in the spatial distribution of plant populations.
here we report the use of genotyping-by-sequencing on local groups of the sequenced monocot model species brachypodium distachyon.
we show that the multi-faceted approach used here targeted different components of b. distachyon adaptive variation, and may lead to the discovery of genes related to environmental adaptation in natural populations.
