gene expression profiling showed gene-differential, stage- and sex-specific expression patterns of spis, suggesting that spis may be involved in multiple physiological processes in p. xylostella.
the characterized features and expression patterns of p. xylostella spis indicate that the spi family genes may be involved in innate immunity of this species.
serine protease inhibitors  have been found in all living organisms and play significant roles in digestion, development and innate immunity.
sequence alignments showed that amino acid residues in the hinge region of known inhibitory serpins from other insect species were conserved in most p. xylostella serpins, suggesting that these p. xylostella serpins may be functionally active.
a total of  <dig> potential spi genes were identified in the p. xylostella genome, and these spis were classified into serpins, canonical inhibitors, and alpha-2-macroglobulins based on their modes of action.
phylogenetic analysis confirmed that p. xylostella inhibitory serpins were clustered with known inhibitory serpins from six other insect species.
this is the most comprehensive investigation so far on spi genes in p. xylostella.
our findings provide valuable information for uncovering further biological roles of spi genes in p. xylostella.
of the  <dig> p.xylostella spi genes,  <dig> were canonical spis containing seven types of inhibitor domains, including kunitz, kazal, til, amfpi, antistasin, wap and pacifastin.
moreover, some spis contained additional non-inhibitor domains, including spondin_n, reeler, and other modules, which may be involved in protein-protein interactions.
serpincanonical inhibitorexpression patternphylogenetic analysislepidopterahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3132010392231230061you minsheng national key project of fundamental scientific research 2011cb100404you minsheng the fellowship of outstanding phd students at fujian agriculture and forestry university324-1122yb023lin hailan issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
in this study, we present a genome-wide identification and expression profiling of spi genes in the diamondback moth, plutella xylostella , a major pest of cruciferous crops with global distribution and broad resistance to different types of insecticides.
