in this study, we performed a comparative transcript analysis of two low phytate soybean mutants , which have the same mutation, a 2 bp deletion in gmmips <dig>  but show a significant difference in seed field emergence, tw-1-m was higher than that of tw- <dig> .
numerous genes analyzed by rna-seq showed markedly different expression levels between tw-1-m and tw- <dig> mutants.
fifty-seven genes with  <dig> biological functions had the greatest expression abundance  in germination-related pathways.
compared with tw- <dig>  tw-1-m had a very different gene expression profile, which included genes related to plant hormones, antioxidation, anti-stress and energy metabolism processes.
twenty-two genes with  <dig> biological functions were the most highly up/down- regulated  in the high field emergence mutant tw-1-m and were related to metabolic or signaling pathways.
plant hormone- and antioxidation-related genes might strongly contribute to the high germination rate in the tw-1-m mutant.
there were ~3900– <dig> differentially expressed genes  in each contrast library, the number of up-regulated genes was similar with down-regulated genes in the mutant tw-1and tw-1-m. gene ontology functional categories of degs indicated that the ethylene-mediated signaling pathway, the abscisic acid-mediated signaling pathway, response to hormone, ethylene biosynthetic process, ethylene metabolic process, regulation of hormone levels, and oxidation-reduction process, regulation of flavonoid biosynthetic process and regulation of abscisic acid-activated signaling pathway had high correlations with seed germination.
seed germination is important to soybean  growth and development, ultimately affecting soybean yield.
although this reduction could be overcome by additional breeding and selection, the mechanisms of seed germination in different low phytate mutants remain unknown.
seed germination in the soybean low phytate mutants is a very complex process, which involves a series of physiological, morphological and transcriptional changes.
our research provides a molecular basis for understanding germination mechanisms, and is also an important resource for the genetic analysis of germination in low phytate crops.
in total,  <dig> degs involved in the above functional categories were identified.
