evidence for the existence of three different genetic groups was found consistently across data sets , with the maintainer/restorer status being the most prevalent characteristic associated with group delimitation.
the ability of different kinds of markers to assess genetic diversity and population structure was also evaluated.
the average genetic diversity, as quantified by the expected heterozygosity, was  <dig>  for ssr loci and  <dig>  for snps.
we show that the ssr and snp panels examined here, either used separately or in conjunction, allowed consistent estimations of genetic diversity and population structure in sunflower breeding materials.
argentina has a long tradition of sunflower breeding, and its germplasm is a valuable genetic resource worldwide.
the analysis of polymorphism in the set of sunflower accessions studied here showed that both the microsatellites and snp markers were informative for germplasm characterization, although to different extents.
however, knowledge of the genetic constitution and variability levels of the argentinean germplasm is still scarce, rendering the global map of cultivated sunflower diversity incomplete.
the present study constitutes the first report comparing the performance of ssr and snp markers for population genetics analysis in cultivated sunflower.
bayesian and multivariate methods were used to infer population structure.
the generated knowledge about the levels of diversity and population structure of sunflower germplasm is an important contribution to this crop breeding and conservation.
a significant correlation was found between ssr and snp- based genetic distances among accessions.
in this study,  <dig> microsatellite loci and  <dig> single nucleotide polymorphisms  were used to characterize the first association mapping population used for quantitative trait loci mapping in sunflower, along with a selection of allied open-pollinated and composite populations from the germplasm bank of the national institute of agricultural technology of argentina.
within ssr markers, those derived from non-coding regions were able to capture higher levels of diversity than est-ssr.
