it requires efficient data sharing of disparate data types across a variety of scientific disciplines, such as molecular biology, pathology, radiology and clinical practice.
personalised medicine provides patients with treatments that are specific to their genetic profiles.
in particular, this is valid in oncology, where knowledge about genetic mutations has already led to new therapies.
the vast amounts of data, however, coupled with the use of different terms - or semantic heterogeneity - in each discipline makes the retrieval and integration of information difficult.
this paper provides an ontology-based solution for querying distributed databases over service-oriented, model-driven infrastructures.
existing software infrastructures for data-sharing in the cancer domain, such as cagrid, support access to distributed information.
an extensive evaluation of the query reformulation technique is included.
current molecular biology techniques  enable better characterisation of cancer tumours.
the domain metadata consists of ontology-based annotations associated with the structural information of each data source.
the semantic heterogeneity of the data makes this a challenging task.
ontologies provide a formal framework to support querying and integration.
personalised medicine aims to offer the safest and most effective therapeutic strategy based on the gene variations of each subject.
to support personalised medicine in oncology, it is crucial to retrieve and integrate molecular, pathology, radiology and clinical data in an efficient manner.
concept-based queries are reformulated to the target query language, where join conditions between multiple data sources are found by exploiting the semantic annotations.
the system has been implemented, as a proof of concept, over the cagrid infrastructure.
a graphical user interface has been developed, supporting ontology-based queries over cagrid data sources.
this paper presents the design of and theoretical foundations for distributed ontology-based queries over cancer research data.
each data source in cagrid is associated with metadata at increasing levels of abstraction, including syntactic, structural, reference and domain metadata.
cagrid follows a service-oriented model-driven architecture.
the approach is applicable to other model-driven architectures.
