gsno treatment of ir animals decreased ir-activated nnos activity and neuronal peroxynitrite levels by reducing nnos phosphorylation at ser <dig>  the ser <dig> phosphorylation is associated with increased nnos activity.
taken together, these results indicate an injurious nnos/peroxynitrite/ampk cycle following stroke, and gsno treatment of ir inhibits this vicious cycle, resulting in neuroprotection and improved neurological function.
to determine whether ampk activation is deleterious in the acute phase of ir, we treated animals after ir with aicar  and compound c .
stroke immediately sets into motion sustained excitotoxicity and calcium dysregulation, causing aberrant activity in neuronal nitric oxide synthase  and an imbalance in the levels of nitric oxide .
amp-activated protein kinaseneuronal nitric oxide synthaseneuroprotectionperoxynitrites-nitrosoglutathionestrokecerebral ischemia reperfusionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
gsno is a natural component of the human body, and its exogenous administration to humans is not associated with any known side effects.
we therefore investigated whether gsno-mediated neuroprotection and improved neurological functions depend on blocking nnos/peroxynitrite-associated injurious mechanisms using a rat model of cerebral ischemia reperfusion .
because gsno provides neuroprotection by ameliorating stroke’s initial and causative injuries, it is a candidate of translational value for stroke therapy.
gsno also decreased the activation of amp kinase  and its upstream kinase lkb <dig>  both of which were activated in ir brain.
while aicar potentiated, compound c reduced the ir injury.
ir increased the activity of nnos, the levels of neuronal peroxynitrite and phosphorylation at ser <dig> of nnos.
supporting the notion that nnos activity and peroxynitrite are deleterious following ir, inhibition of nnos by its inhibitor 7-nitroindazole or reducing peroxynitrite by its scavenger fetpps decreased ir injury.
ampk has been implicated in nnos activation via ser <dig> phosphorylation.
