because the systems of social organisation in the various species of pemphigus aphids span the continuum from asociality through to advanced sociality , the genus is an ideal model clade in which to study the influence of ecology on the origins of eusociality.
the phylogeny allowed us to infer one likely point of origin of basic social defence and two independent origins of enhanced defence.
p. populi, a species with no soldiers, has the shortest galling phase, synchronised development of a small number of individuals in a sparsely-populated gall, and an extremely brief emergence period.
conversely, predation does not occur during the galling phase of p. populi, which has no soldiers but makes an entirely-sealed gall.
the life-history strategy of p. populi, on the other hand, is to avoid predation in the closed gall fortress and flee for the secondary host at the earliest opportunity.
p. spyrothecae, a highly social species with aggressive morphologically-specialised soldiers, has the longest galling phase, unsynchronised development of a large number of individuals in a densely-populated gall, and an extended period over which alates emerge.
the galls of p. spyrothecae and p. bursarius form small openings during the course of the season and predation-related mortality is relatively high in these two species.
the life-history strategy of p. spyrothecae appears to be geared towards defending the colony against the constant threat of predation that faces the inhabitants of a long-lived, open gall.
to elucidate evolutionary relationships and to attempt to estimate the number of origins of sociality, we also created a phylogeny based on sequences spanning the mitochondrial genes cytochrome oxidase i and ii for nine species of pemphigus.
the ecology of p. bursarius, which has behavioural soldiers that are not morphologically specialised, is intermediate between these two extremes.
the life-history strategy of p. bursarius appears to represent a compromise between these strategies.
