since the function of a protein is largely dictated by its three dimensional configuration, determining a protein's structure is of fundamental importance to biology.
using psi-blast divergent evolutionary profiles as input data, dynamic nonlinear systems are built through a black-box approach to model the process of protein folding.
unlike other secondary structure prediction methods, here a web service is developed to provide both human- and machine-readable interfaces to pci-based protein secondary structure prediction.
this improvement in bad score, combined with the machine-readable soap web service interface makes pci-ss particularly useful for inclusion in a tertiary structure prediction pipeline.
xml is used to represent the input protein sequence data and also to encode the resulting structure prediction in a machine-readable format.
to our knowledge, this represents the only publicly available soap-interface for a protein secondary structure prediction service with published wsdl interface definition.
a detailed comparison between pci and  <dig> contemporary methods is provided over a set of  <dig> new protein chains guaranteed to be dissimilar to all training data.
relative to the  <dig> contemporary methods included in the comparison cascaded pci classifiers perform well, however pci finds greatest application as a consensus classifier.
here we report on a novel approach to determining the one dimensional secondary structure of proteins  from primary sequence data which makes use of parallel cascade identification , a powerful technique from the field of nonlinear system identification.
in addition to a dynamic php-generated web interface for humans, a simple object access protocol  interface is added to permit invocation of the pci-ss service remotely.
genetic algorithms  are applied in order to optimize the architectural parameters of the pci models.
this machine-readable interface facilitates incorporation of pci-ss into multi-faceted systems biology analysis pipelines requiring protein secondary structure information, and greatly simplifies high-throughput analyses.
the three-state prediction problem is broken down into a combination of three binary sub-problems and protein structure classifiers are built using  <dig> layers of pci classifiers.
careful construction of the optimization, training, and test datasets ensures that no homology exists between any training and testing data.
