a high degree of similarity was seen between p. ultimum sequences and other sequenced plant pathogenic oomycetes with 91% of the hybrid assembly derived sequences >  <dig> bp having similarity to sequences from plant pathogenic phytophthora species.
pythium species are an agriculturally important genus of plant pathogens, yet are not understood well at the molecular, genetic, or genomic level.
to gain a better understanding of its gene complement, we generated expressed sequence tags  from the transcriptome of pythium ultimum daom br <dig>  using two high throughput sequencing methods, sanger-based chain termination sequencing and pyrosequencing-based sequencing-by-synthesis.
they are closely related to other oomycete plant pathogens such as phytophthora species and are ubiquitous in their geographic distribution and host rage.
an analysis of gene ontology assignments revealed a similar representation of molecular function ontologies in the hybrid assembly in comparison to the predicted proteomes of three phytophthora species, suggesting a broad representation of the p. ultimum transcriptome was present in the normalized cdna population.
sequences with similarity to thiamine biosynthesis enzymes that are lacking in the genome sequences of three phytophthora species and one downy mildew were identified and could serve as useful phylogenetic markers.
furthermore, we identified  <dig> candidate simple sequence repeats that can be used for genotyping strains of p. ultimum.
an ample number of candidate polymorphic markers were identified in the dataset providing resources for phylogenetic and diagnostic marker development for this species.
p. ultimum sequences with similarity to oomycete rxlr and crinkler effectors, kazal-like and cystatin-like protease inhibitors, and elicitins were identified.
through these two technologies, we were able to generate a robust set  of transcribed sequences for p. ultimum.
a single half-plate pyrosequencing  run on adapter-ligated cdna from a normalized cdna population generated  <dig>  reads with an average read length of  <dig> nucleotides following cleaning and removal of sequences shorter than  <dig> base pairs.
in parallel,  <dig>  reads were generated from a library constructed from the same normalized cdna population using dideoxy chain termination sanger sequencing, which upon clustering and assembly generated  <dig>  unique sequences.
after clustering and assembly, a total of  <dig>  unique sequences were generated.
a hybrid assembly of both sanger- and pyrosequencing-derived ests resulted in  <dig>  unique sequences with  <dig>  sequences  that were solely derived from sanger sequencing alone.
