rumen epithelial tissue plays an important role in nutrient absorption and rumen health.
in total,  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> differentially expressed  genes were identified via pair-wise comparisons including ah vs. cs, ah vs. rs, and rs vs. cs, respectively.
our results suggest that particle size may be more important in regulating rumen epithelial morphology when animals are fed with low-quality forage diets and the identified de genes may affect the re nutrient absorption or morphology of re.
our findings provide insights into the effects of the dietary particle size in the future management of dairy cow feeding, that when cows were fed with low-quality forage , smaller particle size may be beneficial for nutrients absorption and milk production.
the current study was conducted to elucidate the effects of forage quality and forage particle size on rumen epithelial morphology and to identify potential underlying molecular mechanisms by analyzing the transcriptome of the rumen epithelium .
the width of the rumen papillae was greater in rs-fed cows than in cows fed ah or cs.
ruminal volatile fatty acids  and epithelial thickness were determined, and rna-sequencing was conducted to identify the transcriptomic changes of rumen epithelial under different forage-based diets.
functional classification analysis of de genes revealed dynamic changes in ion binding  between ah and cs, proliferation and apoptotic processes  and complement activation  between ah or rs and cs.
the rs diet exhibited greater particle size but low quality, the ah diet was high nutritional value but small particle size, and cs diet was low quality and small particle size.
however, whether forage quality and particle size impact the rumen epithelial morphology is unclear.
to achieve these objectives,  <dig> mid-lactation dairy cows were allocated to three groups , and were fed with one of three different forage-based diets, alfalfa hay , corn stover , and rice straw  for  <dig> weeks, respectively.
our results suggest that both nutrients  and particle sizes can alter expression of genes involved in cell proliferation/apoptosis process and complement complex.
