in the present study, we analyzed samples on a finer geographical scale.
we suggest that gene flow from marine sticklebacks overwhelms adaptation to freshwater conditions, but the short genetic patch size means that the effect of gene flow on the most upstream region must be indirect and occurs over generations.
adaptive divergencegene flowspatial autocorrelationsex-biased dispersalsingle nucleotide polymorphismsbody shapeedahybrid zonehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008398villum fondenvkr022523and eu interreg margenissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
in order to assess what characterizes these highly different outcomes, we focused on the latter kind of system in the odder river, denmark.
we assessed variation at  <dig> snps and the eda gene that affects lateral plate number, conducted molecular sex identification, and analyzed morphological traits.
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
genetic differentiation estimated by fst was non-significant throughout the system.
the occurrence of both weak unimodal and strong bimodal hybrid zones within the same species is striking.
the system was dominated by full-plated morphs characteristic of marine sticklebacks, but in the upstream part of the river body shape and frequency of low-plated morphs changed in the direction expected for freshwater sticklebacks.
nevertheless, spatial autocorrelation analysis suggested fine scale genetic structure with a genetic patch size of 770 m. there was no evidence for sex-biased dispersal, but full-plated individuals showed higher dispersal than low- and partial-plated individuals.
here, a previous study based on rad  sequencing found non-significant genome-wide differentiation between marine and freshwater sticklebacks.
we assessed if the system should be regarded as panmictic, or if fine-scale genetic structure and local selection was present but dominated by strong migration.
nevertheless, cases also exist where marine-freshwater divergence is diffuse despite seemingly similar environmental settings.
