hpd http://bio.informatics.iupui.edu/hpd is a new resource for searching, managing, and studying human biological pathways.
users of hpd can search against large collections of human biological pathways, compare related pathways and their molecular entity compositions, and build high-quality, expanded-scope disease pathway models.
the current hpd software can help users address a wide range of pathway-related questions in human disease biology studies.
there are approximately  <dig> biological pathway resources as of april  <dig> according to the pathguide database; however, these pathway databases generally have poor coverage or poor quality, and are difficult to integrate, due to syntactic-level and semantic-level data incompatibilities.
we developed the human pathway database  by integrating heterogeneous human pathway data that are either curated at the nci pathway interaction database , reactome, biocarta, kegg or indexed from the protein lounge web sites.
integration of pathway data at syntactic, semantic, and schematic levels was based on a unified pathway data model and data warehousing-based integration techniques.
pathway-oriented experimental and computational studies have led to a significant accumulation of biological knowledge concerning three major types of biological pathway events: molecular signaling events, gene regulation events, and metabolic reaction events.
this pathway tool enables users to 1) search for human pathways from different resources by simply entering genes/proteins involved in pathways or words appearing in pathway names, 2) analyze pathway-protein association, 3) study pathway-pathway similarity, and 4) build integrated pathway networks.
we demonstrated the usage and characteristics of the new hpd through three breast cancer case studies.
at the time of this writing hpd includes  <dig> human pathways and more than  <dig>  human molecular entities.
a pathway consists of a series of molecular pathway events that link molecular entities such as proteins, genes, and metabolites.
hpd provides a comprehensive online view that connects human proteins, genes, rna transcripts, enzymes, signaling events, metabolic reaction events, and gene regulatory events.
