the divergence of p. tetraurelia actins and actin-related proteins between different p. tetraurelia subfamilies as well as with sequences of other organisms is well represented in a phylogenetic tree, where p. tetraurelia sequences only partially cluster.
the ciliated protozoan, p. tetraurelia, contains an actin multigene family with at least  <dig> members encoding actin, actin-related and actin-like proteins.
in comparison to actins in other organisms, p. tetraurelia actins are highly divergent, with identities topping 80% and falling to 30%.
analysis of different features on nucleotide and amino acid level revealed striking differences in isoforms of actin and actin-related proteins in p. tetraurelia, both within the organism and in comparison to other organisms.
on amino acid level, we scanned the sequences for the presence of actin consensus regions, for amino acids of the intermonomer interface in filaments, for residues contributing to atp binding, and for known binding sites for myosin and actin-specific drugs.
previously we had localized actin in paramecium; however, none of the efforts so far could proof the occurrence of actin in the cleavage furrow of a dividing cell, despite the fact that actin is unequivocally involved in cell division.
the different subfamilies are very distinct from each other.
we analyzed their structure on nucleotide level regarding the number and position of introns.
they group into twelve subfamilies; a large subfamily with  <dig> genes, seven pairs and one trio with > 82% amino acid identity, as well as three single genes.
a paramecium tetraurelia pilot genome project, the subsequent sequencing of a megabase chromosome as well as the paramecium genome project aimed at gaining insight into the genome of paramecium.
this gave a first hint that paramecium may possess actin isoforms with unusual characteristics.
the genome project gave us the chance to search the whole paramecium genome, and, thus, to identify and characterize probably all actin isoforms in paramecium.
