furthermore senescence is delayed by treatments with the ethylene signalling inhibitor silver thiosulphate, and accelerated with ethylene released by 2-chloroethylphosphonic acid.
furthermore, although auxin levels rose with senescence, treatments that delayed early senescence did not affect transcript abundance of wps <dig>  an auxin-induced gene.
silver thiosulphate suppressed the increase in transcript abundance both of wfsag <dig> and wls <dig>  activity of reactive oxygen species scavenging enzymes changed during senescence.
in many species floral senescence is coordinated by ethylene.
furthermore, floral senescence is often associated with increased reactive oxygen species, and is delayed by exogenously applied cytokinin.
a model for the interaction between cytokinins, ethylene, reactive oxygen species and auxin in the regulation of floral senescence in wallflowers is proposed.
auxincytokininethylenefloral senescencereactive oxygen speciestranscript abundancewallflowersmalaysian governmentuniversity of pisahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000268biotechnology and biological sciences research council00/b1/g/06478price anna m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the combined increase in ethylene and reduction in cytokinin triggers the initiation of senescence and these two plant growth regulators directly or indirectly result in increased reactive oxygen species levels.
a fall in conjugated auxin and/or the total auxin pool eventually triggers abscission.
this has facilitated microarray analysis of gene expression during petal senescence and provided gene markers for following the effects of treatments on different regulatory pathways.
despite the similar effects on senescence, transcript abundance of gene markers is affected differentially by the treatments.
both treatments with exogenous cytokinin, or 6-methyl purine , delay petal senescence.
in detached erysimum linifolium  flowers ethylene production peaks in open flowers.
a significant rise in transcript abundance of wls <dig>  was abolished by cytokinin or 6-methyl purine treatments.
treatments that increased cytokinin levels, or inhibited ethylene action, reduced accumulation of hydrogen peroxide.
