leishmania infantum is the protozoan parasite responsible for zoonotic visceral leishmaniasis in the mediterranean basin.
indeed, gipl, lpg and ppg biosynthetic genes together with a gp <dig> gene are up-regulated in pro-pper and interestingly, the correlation coefficient between both transcriptomes in terms of transcript abundance is r2 =  <dig> .
leishmania infantummetacyclic promastigotesphlebotomus perniciosuspeanut lectin agglutinationinfectivitydifferential gene expressionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004837ministerio de ciencia e innovación agl2010-21806-c02-01larraga vicente http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008054fundación ramón areces 050204100014/ott, code 20100338larraga vicente issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
however, infectivity decreases with culture passages and infection of laboratory animals is frequently required.
the major vector of l. infantum in spain is phlebotomus perniciosus.
enrichment of the stationary phase population in highly infective metacyclic promastigotes is achieved by negative selection with peanut agglutinin , which is possible only in certain leishmania species such as l. major and l. infantum.
in this study, in vitro infectivity and differential gene expression of cultured pna-negative promastigotes  and metacyclic promastigotes isolated from the sand fly anterior thoracic midgut  have been compared.
therefore, negative selection with pna is an appropriate method for isolating metacyclic promastigotes in stationary phase of axenic culture but it does not allow reaching the in vitro infectivity levels of pro-pper.
therefore, the implications of axenic culture should be evaluated case-by-case in each experimental design even when the stationary phase population in culture is enriched in metacyclic promastigotes by negative selection with pna.
the axenic culture model of promastigotes is generally used because it is able to mimic the conditions of the natural environment .
this means that the correlation is sufficiently high to consider that both samples are physiologically comparable  and sufficiently low to conclude that important differences in transcript abundance have been found.
in vitro infectivity is about  <dig> % higher in terms of rate of infected cells and number of amastigotes per infected cell in pro-pper than in pro-pna−.
the life cycle of the parasite is digenetic.
