based on gene ontology, global and changed-tissues de genes were different, having no common go terms.
the two contrasting types of de genes provide possible explanations for the previous controversial conclusions about the relationships between molecular evolution and expression evolution of genes in different species, and the relationship between expression breadth and expression conservation in evolution.
however, different types of gene expression alteration should have different effects on an organism, the evolutionary forces that act on them might be different, and different types of genes might show different types of differential expression between species.
to confirm this, we studied differentially expressed  genes among closely related groups that have extensive gene expression atlases, and clarified characteristics of different types of de genes including the identification of regulating loci for differential expression using expression quantitative loci  analysis data.
since the development of transcriptome analysis systems, many expression evolution studies characterized evolutionary forces acting on gene expression, without explicit discrimination between global expression differences and tissue specific expression differences.
global type de genes were not expressed in any tissues in the atlas of one subspecies, however changed-tissues type de genes were expressed in both subspecies with different tissue specificity.
expression evolution of changed-tissues de genes was rapid in tissue specifically expressed genes and those rapidly evolved changed-tissues de genes were regulated not by cis-eqtls, but by complicated trans-eqtls.
expression differences of most global de genes were regulated by cis-eqtls.
we detected differentially expressed  genes between rice subspecies in five homologous tissues that were verified using japonica and indica transcriptome atlases in public databases.
molecular evolution of global de genes was rapid, unlike that of changed-tissues de genes.
