genetically similar arthrobacter ureafaciens bacteria which occurred as minor inhabitants of cogon grass roots in the industrial soil were ubiquitous and predominant atrazine degraders in the maize rhizosphere.
the atrazine degradation genes trzn and atzabc were detected by multiplex pcr.
all isolates from the adjacent sites inhabited by cogon grass or common reed were various arthrobacter spp.
an enrichment bias from the routine isolation procedure prevents studying the diversity of atrazine degraders.
the diversity of atrazine degraders was characterized by enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus-pcr  genotyping followed by 16s rrna gene phylogenetic analysis.
the community structures of culturable atrazine degraders were habitat-specific.
in the present work, we analyzed the occurrence, diversity and community structure of soil atrazine-degrading bacteria based on their direct isolation.
a total of  <dig> atrazine-degrading isolates were recovered from bulk and rhizosphere soils sampled near an atrazine factory and from geographically distant maize fields.
fifteen genotypes were distinguished among  <dig> industrial isolates, with  <dig> of them representing eight phylogenetic groups of the genus arthrobacter.
bacteria belonging to the genus arthrobacter were the predominant degraders of atrazine in the plant rhizosphere.
the occurrence of atrazine-degrading bacteria was also assessed by conventional pcr targeting trzn and atzabc in soil dna.
atrazine-degrading bacteriadiversitysoil bacterial communitiesarthrobactergulosibacternocardioidespseudomonastrznatz genesone thousand talents plan of chinawq20123700079taishan scholar plan of shandong provincetshw20120743youth foundation of shandong academy of sciences2014qn021li chengyun science foundation for distinguished young scholars of shandong provincebs2014sw030li chengyun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the remaining two were closely related to pseudomonas alcaliphila and gulosibacter molinativorax and constituted major components of the atrazine-degrading community in the most heavily contaminated industrial plantless soil.
the results obtained provided evidence that contaminated soils harbored communities of genetically distinct bacteria capable of individually degrading and utilizing atrazine.
with a strong prevalence of a. aurescens group.
direct plating on sm agar enabled rapid isolation of atrazine-degrading bacteria and analysis of their natural diversity in soil.
atrazine-degrading bacteria were isolated by direct plating on a specially developed sm agar.
