dissection of the genetic architecture underlying oil-related biological processes will greatly facilitates the genetic improvement of rapeseed.
gene annotation analysis was integrated with qtl mapping and brassica napus pod transcriptome profiling to detect potential candidate genes in oilseed.
then,  <dig> degs between sollux and gaoyou were identified as the candidate genes affecting seed oil content by combining those degs with the quantitative trait locus  mapping results, of which, one was found to be homologous to arabidopsis thaliana lipid-related genes.
bioinformatics analysis was performed to investigate differentially expressed genes .
this study provided a comprehensive overview on the pod transcriptomes of two varieties with different oil-contents at the three developmental stages.
the differential gene expression during pod development offers a snapshot on the genes responsible for oil accumulation in.
integrated analysis of transcriptome profiling, qtl mapping and comparative genomics with other relative species leads to efficient identification of most plausible functional genes underlying oil-content related characters, offering valuable resources for bettering breeding program of brassica napus.
transcriptomerna-seqqtl regionscomparative genomicslipid-related candidate genesbrassica napusissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
intervarietal degs of lipid pathways in qtl regions represent important candidate genes for oil-related traits.
the rna samples were collected for rna-seq at 5- <dig>  15- <dig> and 25- <dig> days after flowering .
to identify candidate genes in the linkage peaks reported previously, we used rna sequencing  technology to analyze the pod transcriptomes of german cultivar sollux and chinese inbred line gaoyou.
brassica napus is an important oilseed crop.
four hundred sixty five and two thousand, one hundred fourteen candidate degs were identified, respectively, between two varieties at the same stages and across different periods of each variety.
