a benchmark data set was used to evaluate the accuracy of three motif discovery programs: bioprospector, weeder and meme.
promzea was validated in silico using a benchmark data set: the promzea pipeline showed a 22% increase in nucleotide sensitivity compared to the best standalone program tool, weeder, with equivalent nucleotide specificity.
therefore, using the benchmark, statistical filters were optimized to reduce the false discovery ratio, and then remaining motifs from all programs were combined to improve motif prediction.
analysis showed that each motif discovery tool had limited accuracy and appeared to retrieve a distinct set of motifs.
these principles were integrated into a user-friendly pipeline for motif discovery in maize called promzea, available at http://www.promzea.org and on the discovery environment of the iplant collaborative website.
promzea was also validated by its ability to retrieve the experimentally defined binding sites of transcription factors that regulate the maize anthocyanin and phlobaphene biosynthetic pathways.
promzea was also tested against tissue-specific microarray data from maize.
promzea was validated in silico by its ability to retrieve benchmark motifs and experimentally defined motifs and was tested using tissue-specific microarray data.
promzea searches the chosen plant genome for genes containing each candidate motif, providing the user with the gene list and corresponding gene annotations.
promzea predicted additional promoter motifs, and genome-wide motif searches by promzea identified  <dig> non-anthocyanin/phlobaphene genes that each contained all five predicted promoter motifs in their promoters, perhaps uncovering a broader co-regulated gene network.
promzea predicted broader networks of gene regulation associated with the historic anthocyanin and phlobaphene biosynthetic pathways.
an online tool customized for promoter motif discovery in plants has been generated called promzea.
the recent release of the maize genome  has facilitated in silico searches for regulatory motifs.
within promzea, a user enters cdna sequences or gene ids; corresponding upstream sequences are retrieved from the maize genome.
