further exacerbation of these molecular differences in vivo could affect the pathogenesis of spirochete strains.
lyme disease in the united states is caused primarily by b. burgdorferi sensu stricto while other species are also prevalent in europe.
this study further emphasizes a need to investigate multiple invasive strains of b. burgdorferi to fully appreciate the pathogenic mechanisms that contribute to lyme disease manifestations.
genetic techniques have identified several chromosomal and plasmid-borne regulatory and virulence factors involved in lyme pathogenesis.
based upon the studies here, it can be predicted that n40d10/e <dig> disseminated infection at lower doses may be enhanced by its lower binding to epithelial cells at the site of inoculation due to the absence of bbk <dig>  we suggest that complete molecular analyses of virulence factors followed by their evaluation using the mouse infection model should form the basis of determining infectivity and pathogenicity of different strains rather than simple phylogenetic group analyses.
differences in the protein profiles of these b. burgdorferi strains in vitro suggest that the novel, differentially expressed molecules may affect infectivity of b. burgdorferi.
b <dig> and n <dig> are two widely studied strains of b. burgdorferi, which belong to two different  <dig> s- <dig> s rrna spacer types  and outer surface protein c  allelic groups.
this is the first comprehensive study that compared these two strains both in vitro and using the mouse model of infection.
based-upon a careful analyses of known adhesins of these strains, it is predicted that the absence of a known fibronectin-glycosaminoglycan binding adhesin, bbk <dig>  in the n <dig> strain could at least partially be responsible for reduction in its binding to vero cells in vitro.
however, the presence of several known virulence factors in n <dig> has not been investigated.
the genes encoding known regulatory and virulence factors critical for pathogenesis were detected in both strains.
