it automatically searches assembled est sequences against databases of orthologous groups , assigns ests to these predefined ogs, translates the sequences into proteins, eliminates redundant sequences assigned to the same og, creates multiple sequence alignments of identified orthologous sequences and offers the possibility to further process this alignment in a last step by excluding potentially homoplastic sites and selecting sufficiently conserved parts.
from these data sets, appropriate target genes are selected, and redundant sequences are eliminated to obtain suitable sequence sets as input data for tree-reconstruction software.
this makes the pipeline useful for non-bioinformaticians as well as to bioinformatic experts.
furthermore, the results orthoselect produces are in absolut agreement with the results of other programs, but our tool offers a significant speedup and additional functionality, e.g.
to our knowledge, there is currently no fully automated and freely available tool for this purpose.
our tests show that orthoselect detects orthologs in est libraries with high accuracy.
the software pipeline is especially designed for ests, but it can also handle protein sequences.
in the absence of a gold standard for orthology prediction, we compared predictions by orthoselect to a manually created and published phylogenomic data set.
thus, orthoselect is a valuable tool for researchers in the field of phylogenomics who deal with large quantities of est sequences.
such studies are usually based on large sets of newly generated, unannotated, and error-prone est sequences from different species.
a first crucial step in est-based phylogeny reconstruction is to identify groups of orthologous sequences.
our tool was not only able to rebuild the data set with a specificity of 98%, but it detected four percent more orthologous sequences.
phylogenetic studies using expressed sequence tags  are becoming a standard approach to answer evolutionary questions.
we developed a flexible and user-friendly software pipeline, running on desktop machines or computer clusters, that constructs data sets for phylogenomic analyses.
our software pipeline can be used as it is, but it can also be adapted by integrating additional external programs.
