first, we tested what types of genetic variation can be detected by this method using direct re-sequencing and comparison to the littorina genome draft.
we found evidence for high levels of segmental duplication in the littorina genome ; duplicated genes and regions were mostly the same in all analyzed species.
secondly, we performed a genome-wide comparison of four closely related littorina species: l. fabalis, l. compressa, l. arcana and l. saxatilis and of populations of l. saxatilis found in spain, britain and sweden.
the trichotomy of l. arcana, l. compressa and l. saxatilis could not be resolved and we argue that these divergence events have occurred recently and very close in time.
array comparative genomic hybridization  is commonly used to screen different types of genetic variation in humans and model species.
finally, this method discriminated geographically distant populations of l. saxatilis, but we did not detect any significant genome divergence associated with ecotypes of l. saxatilis.
finally, we tested whether we could identify genetic variation underlying “crab” and “wave” ecotypes of l. saxatilis.
applying this method to littorina species yields insights into genome evolution following the recent species radiation and supports earlier single-gene based phylogenies.
comparative genomic hybridizationoligonucleotide arrayslittorinaecotypesgenome evolutiongene divergenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
the present study provides new information on the sensitivity and the potential use of oligonucleotide arrays for genotyping of non-model organisms.
the overall hybridization pattern and number of significantly diverged genes were in close agreement with earlier phylogenetic reconstructions based on single genes.
we could reliably detect copy number variations, deletions and high sequence divergence , but not single nucleotide polymorphisms.
genetic differentiation of l. saxatilis ecotypes was not detected in this study, despite pronounced innate phenotypic differences.
the reason may be that these differences are due to single-nucleotide polymorphisms.
