the syrian golden hamster  has been used as a model to study infections caused by a number of human pathogens.
transcriptional profiling was accomplished in the syrian golden hamster, for which a fully annotated genome is not available.
we used this microarray to interrogate the hamster spleen response to leishmania donovani, an intracellular protozoan that causes visceral leishmaniasis.
the hamster model of visceral leishmaniasis is of particular interest because it recapitulates clinical and immunopathological features of human disease, including cachexia, massive splenomegaly, pancytopenia, immunosuppression, and ultimately death.
in the hamster model of visceral leishmaniasis, a robust and functional ifn-γ response did not restrain parasite load and progression of disease.
further dissection of mechanisms that lead to polarization of macrophages toward a permissive state is needed to fully understand the pathogenesis of visceral leishmaniasis.
hamsterleishmania donovanivisceral leishmaniasistranscriptional profilingmicroarrayinterferon-gammainterleukin-4issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
studies of immunopathogenesis in hamster infection models are challenging because of the limited availability of reagents needed to define cellular and molecular determinants.
the concomitant expression of il-4/il- <dig> and their downstream target genes, some of which were characteristic of alternative macrophage activation, are likely to contribute to this.
we sequenced a hamster cdna library and developed a first-generation custom cdna microarray that included  <dig> unique cdnas enriched for immune response genes.
following a relatively silent early phase of infection , there was dramatic upregulation of inflammatory and immune-related genes in the spleen .
the differentially expressed transcripts included genes involved in inflammation, immunity, and immune cell trafficking.
the latter included genes characteristic of alternatively activated macrophages.
of particular interest there was concomitant upregulation of the ifn-γ and interleukin - <dig> signaling pathways, with increased expression of a battery of ifn-γ- and il-4-responsive genes.
in the microarray a differentially expressed transcript was identified as having at least a 2-fold change in expression between uninfected and infected groups and a false discovery rate of <5%.
