the miniature pig serves as a large model animal to elucidate the relationship between morphogenesis and transcript level during the cascade initiation of additional molars.
we also have identified the coding and long non-coding transcripts using coding-non-coding index  and annotated transcripts through mapping to the porcine, wuzhishan miniature pig, mice, cow and human genomes.
the diphyodont miniature pig has proved to be a valuable model for studying human molar morphogenesis.
the additional molars show a sequential initiation pattern related to the specific tooth development stage of additional molars in miniature pigs during the morphogenesis of additional molars.
here, we performed rna-seq and microarray on miniature pigs at three key molar developmental stages to examine their differential gene expression profiles and potential regulatory networks during additional molar morphogenesis.
we have profiled the differential transcript expression and functional networks during morphogenesis of additional molars in miniature pigs.
cascade initiationadditional molargene expression profilinglincrnadiphyodontminiature pigbeijing scholar programpxm2016_014226_000034wang songlin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
however, the molecular mechanisms of the regulatory network of mrnas and long non-coding rnas during sequential formation of additional molars remain poorly characterized in diphyodont mammals.
in diphyodont mammals, the additional molars  bud off from the posterior-free end of the primary dental lamina compared with successional teeth  budding off from the secondary dental lamina.
our data provide fundamental knowledge and a basis for understanding the molecular mechanisms governing cascade initiation of additional molars, but also provide an important resource for developmental biology research.
this is the first study to comprehensively analyze the spatiotemporal dynamics of coding and long non-coding transcripts during morphogenesis of additional molars in diphyodont mammals.
detailed regulatory network analyses reveal that wnt and tgf-β pathways are critical in regulating sequential morphogenesis of additional molars.
many new unannotated genes plus  <dig> putative long intergenic non-coding rnas  were identified.
