our results confirm that the mitochondrial genome, unlike analyses based on morphological data or nuclear genes, consistently supports the non monophyly of hexapoda.
the finding of the reciprocal paraphyly of hexapoda and crustacea suggests an evolutionary scenario in which the acquisition of the hexapod condition may have occurred several times independently in lineages descending from different crustacean-like ancestors, possibly as a consequence of the process of terrestrialization.
in this study, we have assembled the largest data set available so far for pancrustacea, consisting of  <dig> complete  sequences of mitochondrial genomes.
the analysis was performed with bayesian inference, and for the amino acid sequences a new, pancrustacea-specific, matrix of amino acid replacement was developed and used in this study.
in particular, the best tree obtained based on the new matrix of amino acid replacement  was preferred over those obtained using previously available matrices  because of its higher likelihood score.
after removal of unalignable sequence regions and highly rearranged genomes, we used nucleotide and inferred amino acid sequences of the  <dig> protein coding genes to reconstruct the phylogenetic relationships among major lineages of pancrustacea.
at the same time, the disagreement between reconstructions based on morphological, nuclear and mitochondrial data sets seems to remain, despite the use of larger data sets and more powerful analytical methods.
the most remarkable result is the reciprocal paraphyly of hexapoda and crustacea, with some lineages of crustaceans  being more closely related to the insecta s.s.  than two orders of basal hexapods, collembola and diplura.
several genes, as well as different molecular markers, have been used to tackle this problem in molecular phylogenetic studies, with the mitochondrial dna being one of the molecules of choice.
in particular, while the taxon joining hexapods and crustaceans  is now widely accepted among zoologists, the relationships among its basal lineages, and particularly the supposed reciprocal paraphyly of crustacea and hexapoda, continues to represent a challenge.
