over  <dig> tvbspa proteins with inferred transmembrane domains were characterised by a considerable structural diversity between their tplrr and other types of repetitive sequences and two subfamilies possessed distinct classic sorting signal motifs for endocytosis.
the biased mucosal habitat for microbial species encoding bspa-like proteins, the characterisation of a vast structural diversity for the tvbspa proteins, differential expression of a subset of tvbspa genes and the cellular localisation and immunological data for one tvbspa; all point to the importance of the tvbspa proteins to various aspects of t. vaginalis pathobiology at the host-pathogen interface.
initial annotations of t. vaginalis genome identified a plethora of candidate extracellular proteins.
data mining of the t. vaginalis genome identified  <dig> bspa-like entries  sharing tplrr-like leucine-rich repeats, which represent the largest gene family encoding potential extracellular proteins for the pathogen.
one tvbspa subfamily also shared a glycine-rich protein domain with proteins from clostridium difficile pathogenic strains and c. difficile phages.
a broad range of microorganisms encoding bspa-like proteins was identified and these are mainly known to live on mucosal surfaces, among these t. vaginalis is endowed with the largest gene family.
consistent with the hypothesis that tvbspa protein structural diversity implies diverse roles, we demonstrated for several tvbspa genes differential expression at the transcript level in different growth conditions.
identified variants of repetitive segments between several tvbspa paralogues and orthologues from two clinical isolates were also consistent with tplrr and other repetitive sequences to be functionally important.
trichomonas vaginalis is the most common non-viral human sexually transmitted pathogen and importantly, contributes to facilitating the spread of hiv.
for one tvbspa protein cell surface expression and antibody responses by both female and male t. vaginalis infected patients were also demonstrated.
