as the selected oligosaccharide fractions were derived from natural products, the fractions contained defined amounts of mono- and disaccharides and minor amounts of endotoxin, which was taken into account in the design of the study and the analysis of data.
in addition, incubation with gos/fos/aos significantly increased the apparent pbmc viability, indicating a protective or mitogenic effect.
this study aims to elucidate the effects of selected oligosaccharide fractions on the lipopolysaccharide  induced inflammatory response in equine peripheral blood mononuclear cells .
furthermore, mono- and disaccharide control fractions significantly stimulated the inflammatory response in lps challenged pbmcs as well, though to a lesser extent than gos and gos/fos fractions.
we found distinct immunomodulating effects of the investigated standardised oligosaccharide fractions, which either stimulated or suppressed the lps induced inflammatory response in pbmcs.
we investigated three different products containing either galacto-oligosaccharides  alone, a combination of gos with fructo-oligosaccharides , and a triple combination of gos and fos with acidic oligosaccharides , at different concentrations.
dietary supplementation with oligosaccharides has been proven to be beneficial for health in several mammalian species.
exposing cultured pbmcs to either gos or gos/fos fractions resulted in a substantial dose-dependent increase of tumour necrosis factor-α  production in lps challenged pbmcs.
in contrast, incubation with gos/fos/aos resulted in a dose-dependent reduction of both tnf-α and interleukin- <dig> production following lps challenge.
supplementation with defined oligosaccharide fractions has been shown to attenuate allergic responses and enhance defensive immune responses.
both scenarios require additional investigation, to elucidate underlying modulatory mechanisms, and to translate this knowledge into the clinical application of oligosaccharide supplements in foals and other neonates.
