a revision of the global distribution of fossil and recent turtle reveals that the three primary lineages of derived, aquatic turtles, including the crown, paracryptodira, pan-pleurodira, and pan-cryptodira can be traced back to the middle jurassic of euramerica, gondwana, and asia, respectively, which resulted from the primary break up of pangaea at that time.
the two primary lineages of pleurodira, pan-pelomedusoides and pan-chelidae, can similarly be traced back to the cretaceous of northern and southern gondwana, respectively, which were separated from one another by a large desert zone during that time.
the temporally persistent lineages of basal turtles, helochelydridae, meiolaniformes, sichuanchelyidae, can similarly be traced back to the late mesozoic of euramerica, southern gondwana, and asia.
phylogenetic analysis places the late jurassic sichuanchelys palatodentata in a clade with the late cretaceous mongolochelys efremovi outside crown group testudines thereby establishing the prolonged presence of a previously unrecognized clade of turtles in asia, herein named sichuanchelyidae.
given the ambiguous phylogenetic relationships of these three lineages, it is unclear if their diversification was driven by vicariance as well, or if they display a vicariance-like pattern.
nov., that is highly unusual by plesiomorphically exhibiting palatal teeth.
the clean, primary signal apparent among early turtles is secondarily obliterated throughout the late cretaceous to recent by extensive dispersal of continental turtles and by multiple invasions of marine habitats.
the primary divergence of crown turtles was therefore driven by vicariance to the primary freshwater aquatic habitat of these lineages.
we herein describe a new species of fossil turtle from the late jurassic of xinjiang, china, sichuanchelys palatodentata sp.
in contrast to previous hypotheses, m. efremovi and kallokibotion bajazidi are not found within meiolaniformes, a clade that is here reinterpreted as being restricted to gondwana.
