based on partial genome sequence and pcr analysis, some members of the msdin family were previously identified in amanita bisporigera, and several other members are known from other species of amanita.
differences between previous and current results for the complement of msdin genes and cyclic peptides in the two fungi probably represents natural variation among geographically dispersed isolates of a. phalloides and among the members of the poorly defined a. bisporigera species complex.
in a. bisporigera, rna expression was observed for  <dig> of the msdin family members.
the msdin gene family has expanded and diverged rapidly in amanita section phalloideae.
however, the complete complement in any one species, and hence the genetic capacity for these fungi to make cyclic peptides, remains unknown.
each species has ~ <dig> msdin genes, most of which are predicted to encode unknown cyclic peptides.
based on their predicted sequences, novel cyclic peptides were searched for by lc/ms/ms in extracts of a. phalloides.
the presence of two cyclic peptides, named cycloamanides e and f with structures cyclo and cyclo, was thereby demonstrated.
draft genome sequences of two cyclic peptide-producing mushrooms, the “death cap” a. phalloides and the “destroying angel” a. bisporigera, were obtained.
of the msdin genes reported earlier from another specimen of a. bisporigera,  <dig> of  <dig> were not found in the current genome assembly.
both a. phalloides and a. bisporigera contain two prolyl oligopeptidase genes, one of which  is probably dedicated to cyclic peptide biosynthesis as it is in galerina marginata.
together, a. bisporigera and a. phalloides are predicted to have the capacity to make more than  <dig> cyclic hexa-, hepta-, octa-, nona- and decapeptides.
a gene encoding cycloamanide b, a previously described nontoxic cyclic heptapeptide, was also present in a. phalloides, but genes for antamanide and cycloamanides a, c, and d were not.
the cyclic peptide toxins of amanita mushrooms, such as α-amanitin and phalloidin, are encoded by the “msdin” gene family and ribosomally biosynthesized.
some msdin genes were duplicated in one or the other species, but only three were common to both species.
