contamination of agricultural commodities with multiple trichothecene mycotoxins, produced by toxigenic fusarium species, is a food safety issue, which greatly affects grain production and marketing worldwide.
to address the problem this study aimed to achieve a novel biological trait capable of detoxifying various food and feed contaminating trichothecenes under aerobic and anaerobic conditions and wide range of temperatures.
dx <dig> demonstrated de-epoxidation activity under aerobic and anaerobic conditions, a greater range of temperatures and around neutral ph.
dx <dig>  which has de-epoxidation ability under wide range of conditions, represents a unique enzymatic source which has great industrial potential for reducing contamination of foods/feeds with multiple trichothecenes, and minimizing their synergistic/additive cytotoxic effects on consumer health.
dx <dig> showed rapid and stable activity by de-epoxidizing 100% of 50 μg/ml deoxynivalenol at 48 h of incubation and retaining de-epoxidation ability after  <dig> subcultures in mineral salts broth .
probably novel bacteria including strains of stenotrophomonas and alkaliphilus-blautia species complex could be involved in aerobic and anaerobic de-epoxidation of trichothecenes, respectively.
this study reports the enrichment procedure for obtaining an effective and stable microbial consortium dx <dig> capable of de-epoxidizing several food contaminating trichothecene mycotoxins.
furthermore, the nature of microbial de-epoxidation reaction and inhibition of the reaction by sodium azide and the finding that bacterial cell culture lysate retained activity suggests that certain cytoplasmic reductases may be responsible for the de-epoxidation activity.
a highly enriched microbial consortium  capable of transforming eleven trichothecenes to significantly less toxic de-epoxy forms was achieved after prolonged incubation of soil microbial culture with 200 μg/ml deoxynivalenol .
the consortium contains 70% known and 30% unknown bacterial species, dominated by stenotrophomonas species.
