subsequently, size exclusion chromatography  and dynamic light scattering  analyses demonstrated that refolded mnp was a good monomer in solution, while soluble mnp predominantly existed in the oligomeric status.
our results showed that two forms of recombinant mnp could be expressed in e. coli by varying the culture conditions during protein expression.
additionally, we attempted to express recombinant mnp in soluble form in e. coli, and compared its activity with that of refolded mnp.
in this study, a recombinant mnp from i. lacteus f <dig> was expressed in escherichia coli rosetta  in the form of inclusion bodies, which were refolded to achieve an active enzyme.
compared with refolded mnp, soluble mnp showed low catalytic efficiencies for mn2+ and h2o <dig> substrates, but the two enzymes had an identical, broad range substrate specificity, and the ability to decolorize azo dyes.
furthermore, their enzymatic spectral characteristics were analysed by circular dichroism , electronic absorption spectrum , fluorescence and raman spectra, indicating the differences in protein conformation between soluble and refolded mnp.
escherichia coliinclusion bodieskinetic propertiesmanganese peroxidaseprotein expressionprotein refoldingspectral characteristicsthe national natural science foundation of china3157010231070109jia rong college students’ innovation and entrepreneurship training project of anhui universityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
further, we optimized the in vitro refolding conditions to increase the recovery yield of the recombinant protein production.
hemin and ca2+ supplementation was crucial for the activity of the recombinant protein.
manganese peroxidase  from irpex lacteus f <dig> has been shown to have a strong ability to degrade recalcitrant aromatic pollutants.
refolded mnp was obtained by optimizing the in vitro refolding conditions, and soluble mnp was produced in the presence of four additives, tritonx- <dig>  tween- <dig>  ethanol, and glycerol, through incubation at 16 °c.
