the method was tested against biomass obtained from a laboratory-scale biofilm-based trickling reactor, and the findings were validated against those obtained by 16s rrna gene-based amplicon sequencing.
overall, the hope method was developed and validated against 16s rrna gene-based amplicon sequencing for the purpose of performing simultaneous monitoring of relative abundance of nitrifying populations.
single nucleotide primer extensionquantitative monitoring16s rrna gene-based amplicon sequencingaob/nob ratioshock loading eventhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004052king abdullah university of science and technologyfcc/1/1971-06-01issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
quantitative measurements of these nitrifying populations obtained via hope would be indicative of reactor performance and nitrification functionality.
hierarchical oligonucleotide primer extension , previously developed to rapidly quantify relative abundances of specific microbial groups of interest, was applied in this study to track the abundances of the important nitrifying bacterial populations.
establishing an optimal proportion of nitrifying microbial populations, including ammonia-oxidizing bacteria , nitrite-oxidizing bacteria , complete nitrite oxidizers  and ammonia-oxidizing archaea , is important for ensuring the efficiency of nitrification in water treatment systems.
based on the relative abundance of aob and nob  obtained from hope, it was determined that the optimal ratio of aob against nob ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  during stable reactor performance.
in contrast, nitrosospira remained stable in its relative abundance against the total community throughout the operational phases.
our findings indicated a good correlation between the relative abundance of nitrifying bacterial populations obtained using both hope and amplicon sequencing.
hope showed a significant increase in the relative abundance of aob, specifically nitrosomonas, with increasing ammonium content and shock loading .
there was a corresponding significant decrease in the relative abundance of nob, specifically nitrospira and those affiliated to comammox, during the shock loading.
