eis were performed on the anode chamber, biofilm  and anolyte .
the biofilm makes a significant contribution to the charge transfer processes at the electrode  and, consequently, on the performance of the anode chamber.
the results showed certain members of the bacterial electrode community increased in relative abundance from the initial inoculum.
this study proved that under the experimental conditions used there is an important contribution from the interaction of the biofilm and the anolyte on cell performance.
the results showed that the system tended to increase power density from 15 ±  <dig>  to 100 ±  <dig> mw/m <dig>  and current density 211 ±  <dig>  to 347 ±  <dig> ma/m <dig> .
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy  was used to study the behavior of the mfc during initial biofilm  and maximum power density .
microbial fuel cellcommunity growth and electrochemical impedance spectroscopyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
the biofilm can act as a barrier which reduces diffusion of the anolyte towards the electrode, all the while behaving like a porous material.
for example, proteobacterial species are important for electricity generation in the anode biofilms and firmicutes phylum was predominant on anolyte to transfer electron.
the samples were identified by pyrosequencing of the 16s rrna gene and showed that initial inoculum  was constituted by proteobacteria , bacteroidetes  and firmicutes .
at week  <dig>  proteobacterial species were predominant  for electricity generation in the anode biofilm, being 51% rhodopseudomonas palustris.
a laboratory-scale two-chamber microbial fuel cell employing an aerated cathode with no catalyst was inoculated with mixed inoculum and acetate as the carbon source.
meanwhile on anolyte, firmicutes phylum was predominant with bacillus sp.
table  <dig> presents a summary of the specific influence of each element of the system under study.
the anolyte and its interaction with the biofilm exert a considerable influence on diffusion processes, given that it presents the highest values for rd which increased at week  <dig>
