here, we explored the use of publicly available ests  for ssrs development in non-model plants, focusing on genera listed by the international union for the conservation of nature .
our results from the empirical test revealed considerable amplification success and transferability between congenerics.
overall, we downloaded  <dig>  <dig>  <dig> sequences for  <dig> plant genera which were mined for ssrsand their primers with the help of qdd <dig>  genome distribution analyses in oryza and arabidopsis were done by blasting the sequences with ssr against the oryza sativa and arabidopsis thaliana reference genomes implemented in the basal local alignment tool  of the ncbi website.
we identify a very large number  of ready-to-test est-ssrs in most plant genera  at no cost.
here we provide a very large number of ready-to-test est-ssr  for  <dig> genera.
we also search two model genera with fully annotated genomes for est-ssrs, arabidopsis and oryza, and used them as controls for genome distribution analyses.
control genomes revealed that trinucleotide repeats were mostly located in coding regions while dinucleotide repeats were largely associated with untranslated regions.
overall, dinucleotide and trinucleotide repeats were the prevalent types but the abundance of the various types of repeat differed between taxonomic groups.
since trinucleotide repeats are abundant and mainly linked to exons they might be useful in evolutionary and conservation studies.
simple sequence repeats  are widely used in population genetic studies but their classical development is costly and time-consuming.
we explored a total of  <dig>  <dig>  <dig> est sequences from the dbest database  in  <dig> plant genera from the iucn red list.
expressed sequence tags  have been widely used as ssr source for plants of economic relevance but their application to non-model species is still modest.
the ever-increasing available dna datasets generated by high-throughput techniques offer an inexpensive alternative for ssrs discovery.
the present work represents the first large-scale study developing ssrs by utilizing publicly accessible est databases in threatened plants.
altogether, our study highly supports the use of est databases as an extremely affordable and fast alternative for ssr developing in threatened plants.
finally, we performed an empirical test to determine the performance of our est-ssrs in a few individuals from four species of two eudicot genera, trifolium and centaurea.
