with the exception of manzamine c, all other manzamines tested are characterized by a complex pentacyclic diamine linked to c- <dig> of the β-carboline moiety.
the purpose of this investigation was to conduct a structure-activity relationship study with manzamines  a, b, c, d, e and f on agonist-stimulated release of txb <dig> and o2- from e. coli lps-activated rat neonatal microglia in vitro.
to our knowledge, this is the first experimental study that demonstrates that mza, at in vitro concentrations that are non toxic to e. coli lps-activated rat neonatal microglia, potently modulates pma-stimulated txb <dig> and o2- generation.
from the structure-activity relationship perspective, contributing factors to the observed differential bioactivity on txb <dig> and o2- generation are the solubility or ionic forms of mza and d as well as changes such as saturation or oxidation of the β carboline or 8-membered amine ring.
thromboxane b <dig>  and superoxide anion  are neuroinflammatory mediators that appear to be involved in the pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative diseases.
marine natural products provide a novel and rich source of chemical diversity that can contribute to the design and development of new and potentially useful anti-inflammatory agents to treat neurodegenerative diseases.
mza may thus be a lead candidate for the development of novel therapeutic agents for the modulation of txb <dig> and o2- release in neuroinflammatory diseases.
marine natural products have become a source of novel agents that modulate eicosanoids and o2- generation from activated murine and human leukocytes.
similarly, pma-stimulated o2- generation was affected differentially as follows: mzd  >mza  >mzb  >mzc  >mze and mzf .
in contrast, opz-stimulated o2- generation was minimally affected: mzb  >mzc  >mza, mzd, mze and mzf .
because activated-microglia are the main source of txb <dig> and o2- in these disorders, modulation of their synthesis has been hypothesized as a potential therapeutic approach for neuroinflammatory disorders.
