transcripts in the biological process were found to be related with metabolic process , cellular process , response to stimulus , localization process , multicellular organismal process , developmental process  and reproduction .
detailed analysis of the results presents candidate cdnas that can be used to dissect further the genetic basis of fruit production and / or alternate bearing which causes significant economical loss for olive growers.
olive cdna libraries to isolate candidate genes that can help enlightening the molecular mechanism of periodicity and / or fruit production were constructed and analyzed.
quantitative real-time rt-pcr  analyses of the cdna libraries confirmed cdna molecules that are associated with different developmental stages  and fruits.
comparison of the detected cdnas to the current est database of genbank along with other non - redundant databases of ncbi revealed homologs of previously described genes along with several unknown cdnas.
one of the two unknown cdnas was specific to leaves in july while the other was detected in all of the libraries except fruits.
for this purpose, cdna libraries from the leaves of trees in “on year” and in “off year” in july  and in november  were constructed.
kegg pathway analyses for the obtained sequences correlated with essential metabolisms such as galactose metabolism, amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolisms and photosynthesis.
these independent transcripts were analyzed using blast searches  against the kegg and genbank nucleotide databases and  <dig> putative transcripts corresponding to known gene functions were annotated with gene names and gene ontology  terms.
homologs of udp – glucose epimerase, acyl - coa binding protein, triose phosphate isomerase and a putative nuclear core anchor protein were significant in fruits only, while a homolog of an embryo binding protein / small gtpase regulator was detected in “on year” leaves only.
two putative dehydrins expressed significantly more in “on year” leaves than that of “off year” leaves in november.
hence, a number of candidate cdnas associated with “on year” and “off year” were isolated.
