ascaridida, oxyurida, and spirurida  do not form a monophyletic group based on complete mitochondrial dna sequences.
the phylogenetic hypotheses from comparative analysis of the complete mitochondrial genome data  indicates that nematodes representing ascaridida, oxyurida and spirurida do not share an exclusive most recent common ancestor, in contrast to published results based on nuclear ribosomal dna.
the orders ascaridida, oxyurida, and spirurida represent major components of zooparasitic nematode diversity, including many species of veterinary and medical importance.
in this study we report that mtdna sequences do not support the monophyly of ascaridida, oxyurida and spirurida  in contrast to results for nuclear rdna.
results from mtdna genomes show promise as an additional independently evolving genome for developing phylogenetic hypotheses for nematodes, although substantially increased taxon sampling is needed for enhanced comparative value with nuclear rdna.
these new sequences were used along with  <dig> published nematode mitochondrial genomes to investigate phylogenetic relationships among chromadorean orders.
for this comparative phylogenetic study, we determined the complete mitochondrial genome sequences of three nematode species, cucullanus robustus  representing ascaridida, wellcomia siamensis  representing oxyurida, and heliconema longissimum  representing spirurida.
overall, mtdna genome data provides reliable support for nematode relationships that often corroborates findings based on nuclear rdna.
phylogenetic analyses of both nucleotide and amino acid sequence datasets support the hypothesis that ascaridida is nested within rhabditida.
it is anticipated that additional taxonomic sampling will provide a wealth of information on mitochondrial genome evolution and sequence data for developing phylogenetic hypotheses for the phylum nematoda.
the position of oxyurida within chromadorea varies among analyses; in most analyses this order is sister to the ascaridida plus rhabditida clade, with representative spirurida forming a distinct clade, however, in one case oxyurida is sister to spirurida.
tree topology tests revealed that constraining clade iii taxa to be monophyletic, given the mtdna datasets analyzed, was a significantly worse result.
phylum-wide nematode phylogenetic hypotheses have mainly been based on nuclear rdna sequences, but more recently complete mitochondrial  gene sequences have provided another source of molecular information to evaluate relationships.
although there is much agreement between nuclear rdna and mtdna phylogenies, relationships among certain major clades are different.
ultimately, topological incongruence  between nuclear rdna and mtdna phylogenetic hypotheses will need to be tested relative to additional independent loci that provide appropriate levels of resolution.
