the different actions of abscisic acid  in the aboveground and belowground parts of plants suggest the existence of a distinct perception mechanism between these organs.
although the mrna levels of zmpyl1- <dig> increased significantly in roots subjected to polyethylene glycol -induced osmotic stress, zmpyl4- <dig> transcripts were either maintained at a stable level or increased only slightly.
our results also showed that all of the evaluated transcripts of pp2cs and snrk <dig> were quickly up-regulated in roots by aba or osmotic stress; conversely they were either up-regulated or maintained at a constant level in leaves, depending on the isoforms within each family.
our results demonstrated up-regulation of the transcript levels of zmpyls homologous to dimeric-type arabidopsis aba receptors by aba in maize primary roots, whereas those of zmpyls homologous to monomeric-type arabidopsis aba receptors were down-regulated.
these results deepen our understanding of the diverse biological effects of aba between plant leaves and roots in response to abiotic stress at the stimulus-perception level.
by performing real-time quantitative pcr assays, we comprehensively compared transcriptional differences of core aba signaling components in response to aba or osmotic/dehydration stress between maize  roots and leaves.
it appears that core aba signaling components perform their osmotic/dehydration stress response functions in a stress intensity-, duration-, species-, organ-, and isoform-specific manner, leading to plasticity in response to adverse conditions and, thus, acclimation to life on land.
a difference in the preference for core signaling components in the presence of exogenous aba versus stress-induced endogenous aba was observed in both leaves and roots.
given that zmpyl <dig> and zmpyl <dig> exhibit similar transcript abundance under normal conditions, our findings may represent a novel mechanism for species-specific regulation of pyr/pyl/rcar aba receptor gene expression.
although characterization of the soluble aba receptors pyr1/pyl/rcar as well as core signaling components has greatly advanced our understanding of aba perception, signal transduction, and responses, the environment-dependent organ-specific sensitivity of plants to aba is less well understood.
there is a distinct profile of pyr/pyl/rcar aba receptor gene expression between maize roots and leaves, suggesting that monomeric-type aba receptors are mainly involved in the transmission of aba signals in roots but that dimeric-type aba receptors primarily carry out this function in leaves.
aba signal transduction pathwaydrought stressgene expressionzmpylszmpp2czmsnrk2basic scientific research of northwest a&f universityno.
