in contrast, tashat family genes, implicated in control of host cell gene expression, are strongly conserved at the protein level and geographically sub-structured allelic sequences were identified among tunisian and turkish isolates.
strong evidence is provided that the sub-telomerically encoded svsp family and the host-nucleus targeted tashat family have evolved under contrasting pressures within natural t. annulata populations.
we extend this analysis to the intra-species level, focusing on allelic diversity of two major secretome families.
we provide new evidence of extensive allelic diversity in representative members of the enigmatic svsp gene family, which supports a putative role for the encoded products in subversion of the host immune response.
genome sequencing has revealed that several theileria-specific gene families encoding secreted proteins are positively selected at the inter-species level, indicating diversification between the species.
to gain further insight into their evolution and function, this study investigates whether representative genes of these two families are diversifying or constrained within the t. annulata population.
svsp genes were found to possess atypical codon usage and be evolving neutrally, with high levels of nucleotide substitutions and multiple indels.
parasite-encoded proteins secreted from the intracellular macroschizont stage within the leukocyte represent a critical interface between host and pathogen systems.
little is known about how apicomplexan parasites have evolved to infect different host species and cell types.
the data supports current hypotheses regarding the biological role of tashat family proteins in the management of host cell phenotype that may have evolved to allow adaptation of t. annulata to a specific host cell lineage.
these families represent a well-characterised group of genes implicated in control of the host cell phenotype and a gene family of unknown function.
no evidence of geographical sub-structuring of allelic sequences was found.
