our results suggest that the tdrp is likely responsible for the large discrepancy observed in foamy virus short-term and long-term rate estimates, and the simple power-law rate decay model is the best model for inferring evolutionary timescales.
furthermore, we demonstrated that, within the bayesian phylogenetic framework, currently available molecular clocks can severely bias evolutionary date estimates, indicating that they are inadequate for correcting for the tdrp.
as evolutionary rate estimates are dependent on their measurement timescales, their values must be used and interpreted under the context of the timescale of rate estimation.
however, when their rate of evolution is estimated over short timescales, it is more reminiscent of the rapid rates seen in other rna viruses.
extrapolating rate estimates across large timescales for evolutionary inferences can severely bias the outcomes.
several empirical models have been proposed and used to correct for the time-dependent rate phenomenon , such as a vertically-translated exponential rate decay model and a power-law rate decay model.
four empirical models were investigated:  a vertically-translated exponential rate decay model,  a simple exponential rate decay model,  a vertically-translated power-law rate decay model, and  a simple power-law rate decay model.
nevertheless, at present, it is still unclear which model best describes the rate dynamics.
foamy virustime dependent rate phenomenonevolutionary rate dynamicspower lawissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
here, we use foamy viruses as a case study to empirically describe the phenomenon and to determine how to correct rate estimates for its effects.
this discrepancy between their short-term and long-term rates could be explained by the time-dependency of substitution rate estimates.
it appears that substitution rate estimates co-vary very strongly with their timescale of measurement; the shorter the timescale, the higher the estimated value.
foamy viruses have a long history of co-speciation with their hosts, and one of the lowest estimated rates of evolution among viruses.
