together with previous generated probes from the stone curlew, burhinus oedicnemus , a charadriiformes species with atypical karyotype organization, we conducted multidirectional chromosome painting, including reciprocal chromosome painting between b. oedicnemus and g. fulvus and cross-species chromosome painting between b. oedicnemus and two accipitrid species .
from there, a cladistic analysis using chromosomal characters and mapping of chromosomal changes on a consensus molecular phylogeny were conducted in order to search for cytogenetic signatures for different lineages within accipitriformes.
using both a chromosome-based cladistic analysis as well as by mapping of chromosomal differences onto a molecular-based phylogenetic tree, we revealed a number of potential cytogenetic signatures that support the clade of pandionidae  + accipitridae.
the chromosomal rearrangements involved include both fusions and fissions.
our chromosome painting data indicated that the palearctic common buzzard  shared several common chromosomal rearrangements with some old world vultures, and was found to be more closely related to other accipitridae than to neotropical buteonine raptors from the karyotypic perspective.
accipitriformesfluorescent in situ hybridizationmultidirectional paintingchromosomal rearrangementschromosome-based phylogeneticsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
to delineate the synteny-conserved segments in accipitridae, a set of painting probes for the griffon vulture, gyps fulvus  was generated from flow-sorted chromosomes.
moreover, no genome-wide homology map between accipitridae species and other avian species with atypical karyotype organization has been reported till now, and the karyotype evolution within accipitriformes remains unclear.
in addition, our cladistic analysis using chromosomal characters appears to support the placement of osprey  in accipitridae.
our study confirmed that the genomes of the diurnal birds of prey, especially the genomes of species in accipitriformes excluding cathartidae, have been extensively reshuffled when compared to other bird lineages.
in doing so, genome-wide homology maps between b. oedicnemus and three accipitridae species were established.
