immunostaining and chromatin immunoprecipitation  tests with anti-brcenh <dig> antibody demonstrated that both the centromere-specific retrotransposon  and satellite repeat  are directly associated with rscenh <dig> in radish.
immunofluorescence- and chip-based assays demonstrated the functional significance of satellite and centromere-specific retrotransposon at centromeres.
radish  is a major root vegetable crop especially in eastern asia.
radish root contains various nutritions which play an important role in strengthening immunity.
repetitive elements are primary components of the genomic sequence and the most important factors in genome size variations in higher eukaryotes.
to date, studies about repetitive elements of radish are still limited.
to better understand genome structure of radish, we undertook a study to evaluate the proportion of repetitive elements and their distribution in radish.
we conducted genome-wide characterization of repetitive elements in radish with low coverage genome sequencing followed by similarity-based cluster analysis.
proportions of repetitive elements in radish were estimated and satellite repeats were the most dominating elements.
results showed that about 31% of the genome was composed of repetitive sequences.
our study provides a valuable basis for future genomic studies in radish.
fish signals of two satellite repeats, cl <dig> and cl <dig>  together with 5s rdna and 45s rdna, provide useful cytogenetic markers to identify each individual somatic metaphase chromosome.
the distribution pattern of three satellite repeat sequences  on radish chromosomes was characterized using fluorescence in situ hybridization .
cl <dig> was predominantly located at the centromeric region of all chromosomes, cl <dig> located at the subtelomeric region, and cl <dig> was a telomeric satellite.
its deduced amino acid sequence shares high similarities to those of the cenh3s in brassica species.
satellite repeats were the most dominating elements of the genome.
fine karyotyping analysis was established which allow us to easily identify each individual somatic metaphase chromosome.
