the saprolegnialean gh <dig> sequences appeared as a strongly supported, monophyletic group nested within an arthropod-specific clade, suggesting that this gene was acquired via a lateral gene transfer event from an insect or crustacean genome.
these results identified gh <dig> enzymes, and not crns, as potential pathogenicity factors shared by all animal pathogenic oomycetes.
in order to further characterize the l. giganteum pathogenome, an on-going genomic survey was mined to reveal novel putative virulence factors, including canonical oomycete effectors crinkler  <dig>  orthologs.
these novel sequences provided a basis to initiate gene expression analyses and determine if the proposed l. giganteum virulence factors are differentially expressed in the presence of mosquito larvae .
sequence analyses revealed that l. giganteum express crn <dig> transcripts.
the predicted proteins, like other l. giganteum crns, contained a conserved lyla motif at the n terminal, but did not display signal peptides.
genome mining demonstrated that gh <dig> genes are absent from phytopathogenic oomycete genomes, and that the l. giganteum gh <dig> sequence is the only reported peronosporalean gh <dig> gene.
in contrast, the l. giganteum gh <dig> protein sequence appeared as a sister taxon to a plant-specific clade that included exochitinases with demonstrated insecticidal activities.
finally, gene expression analyses demonstrated that the l. giganteum gh <dig> gene expression level is significantly modulated in the presence of mosquito larvae.
in contrast, other potential virulence factors, such as glycoside hydrolases family  <dig>  and  <dig>  proteins , contained identifiable signal peptides.
although interest in animal pathogenic oomycetes is increasing, the molecular basis mediating oomycete-animal relationships remains virtually unknown.
furthermore, phylogenetic analyses demonstrated that saprolegnialean and peronosporalean gh <dig> protein sequences clustered in unrelated clades.
in agreement with the protein secretion predictions, crn transcripts did not show any differential expression.
crinkler  genes, which have been traditionally associated with the cytotoxic activity displayed by plant pathogenic oomycetes, were recently detected in transcriptome sequences from the entomopathogenic oomycete lagenidium giganteum, suggesting that these genes may represent virulence factors conserved in both animal and plant pathogenic oomycetes.
