recently copy number variation  has gained considerable interest as a type of genomic/genetic variation that plays an important role in disease susceptibility.
also, cnv detection development suffers from the lack of a gold standard for performance evaluation.
comparative analysis of the results of the tools showed that there is a low consensus among the tools in calling cnvs.
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
the limited performance of the current cnv detection tools for wes data in cancer indicates the need for developing more efficient and precise cnv detection methods.
although many cnv detection tools have been developed since introducing ngs data, there are few tools for somatic cnv detection for wes data in cancer.
copy number variationwhole-exome sequencingsomatic aberrationscancerhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthr00lm011595nabavi sheida issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
using real data, tools show moderate sensitivity , fair specificity  and poor fdrs .
also, using simulated data we observed that increasing the coverage more than 10× in exonic regions does not improve the detection power of the tools significantly.
finally, developing tools with user-friendly user interfaces and visualization features can enhance cnv studies for a broader range of users.
due to the complexity of tumors and high level of noise and biases in wes data, employing advanced novel segmentation, normalization and de-noising techniques that are designed specifically for cancer data is necessary.
however, compared to whole genome sequencing, wes introduces more biases and noise that make cnv detection very challenging.
in this study, we evaluated the performance of the most recent and commonly used cnv detection tools for wes data in cancer to address their limitations and provide guidelines for developing new ones.
we compared the performance of the tools in terms of sensitivity and false discovery rate  using real data and simulated data.
