however, the morphological and proliferative defects in scrib mutants are independent of crb function, and instead can be rescued by a dominant negative  apkc transgene.
understanding how alterations in cell polarity can impact upon tumour development is, therefore, a central issue in cancer biology.
metastatic neoplasias are characterized by excessive cell proliferation and disruptions to apico-basal cell polarity and tissue architecture.
these results demonstrate distinct apkc and jnk-dependent pathways through which loss of scrib promotes tumourigenesis in drosophila.
jnk normally promotes apoptosis of scrib mutant cells.
in this report, we investigate how loss of scrib promotes epithelial tumourigenesis in drosophila, both alone and in cooperation with oncogenic mutations.
secondly, we demonstrate that loss of scrib promotes oncogene-mediated transformation through both apkc and jnk-dependent pathways.
the drosophila gene scribble  encodes a pdz-domain scaffolding protein that regulates cell polarity and acts as a tumour suppressor in flies.
first, we show that over-expression of the apical cell polarity determinants crumbs  or apkc induces similar cell morphology defects and over-proliferation phenotypes as scrib loss-of-function.
this is likely to have a direct relevance to the way in which human scrib can similarly restrain an oncogene-mediated transformation and, more generally, on how the outcome of oncogenic signalling can be profoundly perturbed by defects in apico-basal epithelial cell polarity.
we find that genetically distinct atypical protein kinase c -dependent and jun n-terminal kinase -dependent alterations in scrib mutants drive epithelial tumourigenesis.
apkc-dependent signalling in scrib mutants cooperates with jnk to significantly enhance oncogene-mediated tumour overgrowth.
increasing evidence also implicates the loss of human scrib in cancer.
however, in cooperation with oncogenic activated ras or notch signalling, jnk becomes an essential driver of tumour overgrowth and invasion.
