consequently, the production of high-quality bovine full-cds cdna sequences will enhance the bovine genome assembly and functional studies of bovine genes and gene products.
genome assemblies rely on the existence of transcript sequence to stitch together contigs, verify assembly of whole genome shotgun reads, and annotate genes.
the results demonstrate the utility of the comparative approach in obtaining predicted protein sequences in other species.
functional genomics studies also rely on transcript sequence to create expression microarrays or interpret digital tag data produced by methods such as serial analysis of gene expression .
transcript sequence can be predicted based on reconstruction from overlapping expressed sequence tags  that are obtained by single-pass sequencing of random cdna clones, but these reconstructions are prone to errors caused by alternative splice forms, transcripts from gene families with related sequences, and expressed pseudogenes.
the most useful transcript sequences are derived by complete insert sequencing of clones containing the entire length, or at least the full protein coding sequence  portion, of the source mrna.
while the bovine genome sequencing initiative is nearing completion, there is currently a paucity of bovine full-cds mrna and protein sequence data to support bovine genome assembly and functional genomics studies.
the goal of this investigation was to identify and characterize the full-cds sequences of bovine transcripts from clones identified in non-full-length enriched cdna libraries.
in most cases, the bflics span the entire cds of the genes, providing the basis for creating predicted bovine protein sequences to support proteomics and comparative evolutionary research as well as functional genomics and genome annotation.
the predicted bovine protein lengths, 5' utr lengths, and kozak consensus sequences from  <dig> bovine flic sequences  are all consistent with previously sequenced mammalian full-length transcripts.
