genes related to amino acid, sugar and general transporters were enriched in the induced genes in the mutant and the repressed genes of the wild type.
blu <dig> appears to regulate light sensitivity in terms of induction of conidiation, and to play a major role in supporting growth under continuous exposure to light.
rna-seq analyses under constant white light using glucose as sole carbon source revealed that localization and transport process present the opposite regulation pattern in the ∆blu <dig> and wild type strains.
for the first time we show a genome wide survey of light regulated gene expression in t. atroviride, including rna-seq analyses of the wild type and the Δblu <dig> strains after brief exposure to blue-light.
light activates stress responses and several metabolic processes in the wild type strain that are no longer activated in the mutant.
consequently, they have developed mechanisms to sense light quality and quantity.
peptone supplemented in the media restored growth of the ∆blu <dig> mutant in constant light, suggesting a role of blu <dig> in the regulation of nitrogen metabolism in the presence of light.
blrrna-seqphotoconidiationnitrogen metabolismglucosegrowthlightconacytfordecyt-2012-02-193512herrera-estrella alfredo issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
in agreement with the misregulation of metabolic processes, continuous exposure to white light strongly inhibited growth of the ∆blu <dig> mutant, in a carbon source dependent fashion.
the diminished conidiation observed in ∆blu <dig> mutants is likely due to misregulation of the camp signaling pathway and ros production, whereas their low tolerance to continuous exposure to light indicates that blu <dig> is required for adaptation.
in the fungus trichoderma atroviride blue-light is perceived through the blue light regulator complex, which in turn up-regulates a set of genes  and down-regulates another set , triggering asexual reproduction.
Δblu <dig> mutants show reduced conidiation at low light fluences, which is still clear even when exposed to saturating light.
