genome-wide searches for functional elements revealed several conserved motifs in intergenic regions of theileria genomes.
three over-represented sequence motifs were independently identified in intergenic regions of both theileria species, and the evidence suggests that at least two of them play a role in transcriptional control in t. parva.
intron position is negatively correlated with intron length, and positively correlated with gc content.
these results suggest that these two motifs are likely to represent transcription factor binding sites in theileria.
using stringent criteria, we identified a set of high-quality orthologous non-coding sequences between t. parva and t. annulata, and determined the distribution of selective constraints across regions, which are shown to be higher close to translation start sites.
the availability of the genome sequences and annotation for t. parva and t. annulata has facilitated the study of parasite biology and their relationship with host cell transformation and tropism.
two such motifs are preferentially located within the first  <dig> base pairs upstream of transcription start sites in t. parva, are preferentially associated with specific protein functional categories, and have significant similarity to know regulatory motifs in other species.
parasites in the genus theileria cause lymphoproliferative diseases in cattle, resulting in enormous socio-economic losses.
sequences similar to two of these theileria motifs are conserved in plasmodium hinting at the possibility of common regulatory machinery across the phylum apicomplexa.
these are prime candidates for experimental validation of transcription factor binding sites in this single-celled eukaryotic parasite.
in this study, we analyze the evolution of non-coding sequences in the theileria genome and identify conserved sequence elements that may be involved in gene regulation of these parasitic species.
however, the mechanism of transcriptional regulation in this genus, which may be key to understanding fundamental aspects of its parasitology, remains poorly understood.
