a common theme arising from these studies is that the genetic variations discovered by gwas can only explain a small fraction of the genetic risks associated with the complex diseases.
the method consists of the following two main steps: 1) for a given pathway, using an adaptive truncated product statistic to identify all representative  snps of each gene, calculating the average number of representative snps for the genes, then re-selecting the representative snps of genes in the pathway based on this number; and 2) ranking all selected snps by the significance of their statistical association with a trait of interest, and testing if the set of snps from a particular pathway is significantly enriched with high ranks using a weighted kolmogorov-smirnov test.
a critical challenge in the pathway analysis is how to combine evidences of association over multiple snps within a gene and multiple genes within a pathway.
we applied our method to two large genetically distinct gwas data sets of schizophrenia, one from european-american  and the other from african-american .
the snp-based pathway enrichment method described here offers a new alternative approach for analysing gwas data.
one such approach is the pathway analysis, which considers the genetic variations underlying a biological pathway, rather than separately as in the traditional gwas studies.
most current methods choose the most significant snp from each gene as a representative, ignoring the joint action of multiple snps within a gene.
recently we have witnessed a surge of interest in using genome-wide association studies  to discover the genetic basis of complex diseases.
in the ea data set, we found  <dig> pathways with nominal p-value less than or equal to  <dig>  and corresponding false discovery rate  less than 5%.
in the aa data set, we found  <dig> pathways by controlling the same nominal p-value and fdr threshold.
by applying it to schizophrenia gwas studies, we show that our method is able to identify statistically significant pathways, and importantly, pathways that can be replicated in large genetically distinct samples.
we describe a snp-based pathway enrichment method for gwas studies.
we have implemented our method in a java software package, called snp set enrichment analysis , which contains a user-friendly interface and is freely available at http://cbcl.ics.uci.edu/ssea.
