meanwhile most of the type i pullulanase investigated exhibit thermophilic or mesophilic properties.
the purified recombinant enzyme with an apparent molecular mass of about 96 kda was able to attack specifically the α- <dig>  linkages in pullulan to generate maltotriose as the major product.
the enzyme characterizations including the enzyme activity/stability, optimum temperature, optimum ph and substrate specificity were also described through protein purification.
although many pullulanase genes have been cloned and sequenced, there is no report of p. polymyxa type i pullulanase gene or the recombinant strain.
in this study, a type i pullulanase gene  was obtained from the strain p. polymyxa nws-pp <dig> by degenerate primers.
the pullulanase gene , encoding a novel cold-adapted type i pullulanase , was obtained from isolated strain paenibacillus polymyxa nws-pp <dig>  the gene had an open reading frame of 2532-bp and was functionally expressed in escherichia coli through optimization of induced conditions.
substrate specificity and products analysis proved that the purified pullulanase from paenibacillus polymyxa nws-pp <dig> belong to a type i pullulanase.
this report of the novel type i pullulanase in paenibacillus polymyxa would contribute to pullulanase research from paenibacillus spp.
pullulanase type ipaenibacillus polymyxacold-adapted pullulanasefunctional expressionenzymatic propertiesstarch hydrolysis productsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
as containing novel bacterium resource and significant pullulanase activity, strain nws-pp <dig> was selected for in-depth study.
there are just few reports of cold-adapted pullulanases, which have optimum activity at moderate temperature and exhibit rather high catalytic activity at cold.
selecting new bacterial strains or improving bacterial strains is a prerequisite and effective solution in industrial applications.
pullulanase is an important debranching enzyme and has been widely utilized to hydrolyse the α- <dig>  glucosidic linkages in starch/sugar industry.
the pullulanase activity was significantly enhanced by co2+ and mn2+, meanwhile cu2+ and sds inhibited pullulanase activity completely.
previously, six strains showing distinct pullulan degradation ability were isolated using enrichment procedures.
through optimization of induced conditions, the recombinant puln achieved functional soluble expression by low temperature induction.
also, the cold-adapted pullulanase produced in recombinant strain shows the potential application.
