cells move to aggregation centers and form fruiting bodies in which cells differentiate into dormant spores.
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by dna sequencing  and bioinformatic analysis of cells that had formed nascent fruiting bodies revealed  <dig> putative mrpc binding sites.
we found that the putative mrpc binding sites revealed by chip-seq are enriched for dna sequences that strongly resemble a consensus sequence for mrpc binding proposed previously.
mrpc <dig>  an n-terminally truncated form of mrpc, bound to dna sequences matching the consensus in all  <dig> cases tested.
our results also implicate mrpc as a direct activator or repressor of genes coding for several transcription factors known to be important for development, for a major spore protein and several proteins important for spore formation, for proteins involved in extracellular a- and c-signaling, and intracellular ppgpp-signaling during development, and for proteins that control the fate of other proteins or play a role in motility.
mrpc appears to directly activate transcription of frua, which also codes for a transcription factor.
some of these are known to be directly involved in fruiting body formation and several negatively regulate mrpc accumulation.
we conclude that mrpc and mrpc <dig> bind to promoter regions of hundreds of developmentally-regulated genes in m. xanthus, in many cases cooperatively with frua.
the up-regulated genes include  <dig> coding for protein kinases.
this binding very likely up-regulates protein kinases, and up- or down-regulates other proteins that profoundly influence the developmental process.
mrpcmyxococcus xanthuschip-seqfruafruiting bodysporulationgene regulationtranscription factorcooperative dna bindingprotein kinaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
the two proteins bind cooperatively in promoter regions of some developmental genes.
these sites included several known to bind mrpc and they were preferentially distributed in likely promoter regions, especially those of genes up-regulated during development.
myxococcus xanthus is a bacterium that undergoes multicellular development when starved.
using longer dna segments containing  <dig> of the putative mrpc binding sites from our chip-seq analysis as probes in electrophoretic mobility shift assays, evidence for one or more mrpc <dig> binding site was observed in all cases and evidence for cooperative binding of mrpc <dig> and frua was seen in  <dig> cases.
