the tool was originally intended to facilitate large-scale genotyping analysis of sugarcane cultivars.
with a novel automated image processing workflow, the tool can accurately segment lanes from a gel matrix, intelligently extract distorted and even doublet bands that are difficult to identify by existing image processing tools.
gelectdna gel electrophoresisgenotypingsugarcaneimage processingautomation9- <dig> september  <dig> joint 26th genome informatics workshop and asia pacific bioinformatics network  14th international conference on bioinformatics  tokyo, japan
the image processing workflow comprises three main steps: 1) lane segmentation, 2) extraction of dna bands and 3) band genotyping classification.
these gel images demonstrated many challenges in automated lane/band segmentation in image processing including lane distortion, band deformity, high degree of noise in the background, and bands that are very close together .
the automated genotype calling results were verified by independent manual typing by molecular biologists.
we tested the proposed tool on  <dig> gel images  obtained from polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  of pcr amplicons for detecting intron length polymorphisms  on one locus of the sugarcanes.
applications of dna gel electrophoresis include dna fingerprinting , size estimation of dna, and dna separation for southern blotting.
using the proposed bio-imaging workflow, lanes and dna bands contained within are properly segmented, even for adjacent bands with aberrant migration that cannot be separated by conventional techniques.
dna gel electrophoresis is a molecular biology technique for separating different sizes of dna fragments.
we developed an image-processing tool that automatically calls genotypes from dna gel electrophoresis images.
this work presents an automated genotyping tool from dna gel electrophoresis images, called gelect, which was written in java and made available through the imagej framework.
consequently, genotyping from dna gel electrophoresis can be performed automatically allowing users to efficiently conduct large scale dna fingerprinting via dna gel electrophoresis.
