average fertility was significantly lower in progeny obtained by microspore culture than progeny obtained by self-pollination or open-pollination, after excluding md progeny which had not undergone chromosome doubling.
the md progeny were also compared to progeny derived by self-pollination and open-pollination for fertility  and dna ploidy .
copy number analysis revealed eight instances of additional chromosomes and  <dig> instances of chromosomes present in one copy in somatically doubled md progeny.
many md progeny were unable to produce self-pollinated seed  or viable pollen , although one md plant produced  <dig> self-pollinated seeds.
microspore culture of a near-allohexaploid hybrid derived from the cross  × b. juncea was undertaken in order to assess the frequency and distribution of homologous and homoeologous crossovers in this trigenomic hybrid.
in the trigenomic hybrid, homologous chromosome pairs aj-an, bj-bc and cn-cc had similar meiotic crossover frequencies and segregation to that previously observed in established brassica species, as demonstrated by marker haplotype analysis of the md population.
based on snp data analysis of the microspore-derived progeny, crossover frequency per chromosome in the allohexaploid hybrid was found to be similar to that in established brassica species, suggesting that the higher chromosome number did not significantly disrupt cellular regulation of meiosis.
presence of chromosome a <dig> was positively correlated with self-pollinated seed set and pollen viability in the md population.
snp allele copy number analysis revealed the occurrence not only of homoeologous duplication/deletion events but also other cryptic duplications and deletions that may have been the result of mitotic instability.
microspore culture simplified the assessment of chromosome behaviour in the allohexaploid hybrid but yielded progeny with lower fertility and a greater range of ploidy levels compared to progeny obtained by self- or open-pollination.
allohexaploidbrassicasnp chipchromosome behaviourallele copy number analysisinterspecific hybridsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
