most notably, uridine phosphorylase, adenosine deaminase, lysine decarboxylase  and s-adenosylmethionine synthetase were differentially expressed at the transcript and/or protein level.
the polyamine biosynthetic pathway, responsible for the metabolism of highly abundant amines crucial for parasite growth, proliferation and differentiation, is currently under investigation as an antimalarial target.
the prevalence of resistant strains has necessitated the discovery and development of new chemical entities with novel modes-of-action.
in order to further evaluate polyamine depletion as possible antimalarial intervention, the consequences of inhibiting p. falciparum spermidine synthase  were examined on a morphological, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolic level.
morphological analysis of p. falciparum 3d <dig> following application of the pfspdsyn inhibitor cyclohexylamine confirmed that parasite development was completely arrested at the early trophozoite stage.
moreover, they confirm the role of transcriptional regulation in p. falciparum, particularly in this pathway.
a requirement of these targets  is that they prove essential for parasite survival.
the results corroborate and significantly expand previous functional genomics studies relating to polyamine depletion in this parasite.
plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of severe human malaria, has evolved to become resistant to previously successful antimalarial chemotherapies, most notably chloroquine and the antifolates.
several of the differentially expressed genes mapped to the polyamine biosynthetic and associated metabolic pathways.
several genes in associated metabolic pathways  were also affected.
this study details the malaria parasite's response to pfspdsyn inhibition on the transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolic levels.
global gene expression analyses confirmed a transcriptional arrest in the parasite.
differential expression of corresponding parasite proteins involved in polyamine biosynthesis was also observed.
