fifty-five percent of the snps were found in coding regions and ~22% resulted in an amino acid change.
to analyse the accuracy of rna-seq technology for snp detection,  <dig> snps were selected for validation by genotyping.
the rna-seq data and the collection of newly discovered coding snps improve the genomic resources available for cattle, especially for beef breeds.
advances in molecular genetics have led to the identification of several genetic markers associated with genes affecting economic traits.
a transcriptomic-based sequencing approach offers a cheaper alternative to identify a large number of polymorphisms and possibly to discover causative variants.
the large amount of variation present in genes expressed in limousin longissimus thoracis, especially the large number of non synonymous coding snps, may prove useful to study the mechanisms underlying the genetic variability of meat quality traits.
principal component analysis indicates a clear separation between the nine populations.
genetic information based on molecular markers has increasingly being used in cattle breeding improvement programmes, as a mean to improve conventionally phenotypic selection.
messenger rnas from longissimus thoraci from three limousin bull calves were subjected to high-throughput sequencing.
until recently, the identification of the causative genetic variants involved in the phenotypes of interest has remained a difficult task.
applying a very stringent snp quality threshold, we detected  <dig>  different high-confidence snps, 18% of which are non synonymous coding snps.
single nucleotide polymorphismcattlemusclerna-seqbeefnon synonymous coding variants
in the present study, we performed a gene-based single nucleotide polymorphism  discovery analysis in bovine longissimus thoraci, using rna-seq.
a total of  <dig>  transcripts were identified and  <dig>  different snps were detected.
to our knowledge, this represents the first study done in bovine muscle.
the advent of novel sequencing technologies now offers a new opportunity for the identification of such variants.
