an alignment-free rna comparison algorithm was proposed, in which novel numerical representations rna-tvcurve  of rna sequence and corresponding secondary structure features are provided.
in support of rna mutation and phylogenetic analysis, a web server  was designed based on this alignment-free rna comparison algorithm.
the comparison results with two popular rna comparison tools, rnapdist and rnadistance, showcased that rna-tvcurve can efficiently capture subtle relationships among rnas for mutation detection and non-coding rna classification.
all the relevant results were shown in an intuitive graphical manner, and can be freely downloaded from this server.
the alignment-free algorithms of rna comparison usually have lower time complexity than alignment-based algorithms.
it provides three functional modules: 1) visualization of numerical representation of rna secondary structure; 2) detection of single-point mutation based on secondary structure; and 3) comparison of pairwise and multiple rna secondary structures.
the inputs of the web server require rna primary sequences, while corresponding secondary structures are optional.
for the primary sequences alone, the web server can compute the secondary structures using free energy minimization algorithm in terms of rnafold tool from vienna rna package.
rna-tvcurve is the first integrated web server, based on an alignment-free method, to deliver a suite of rna analysis functions, including visualization, mutation analysis and multiple rnas structure comparison.
then a multi-scale similarity score of two given rnas was designed based on wavelet decomposition of their numerical representation.
rna-tvcurverna structure comparisonmulti-scale similarityphylogenetic treenumerical representationshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china <dig>  61472158liang yanchun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
hence, integrating rna structure features is very critical for rna analysis.
the majority of functional rnas show conserved secondary structures, rather than sequence conservation.
