in this work, we used a transcriptomic approach to examine the venom gland genes of bothrops alternatus, a clinically important species found in southeastern and southern brazil, uruguay, northern argentina and eastern paraguay.
bothrops alternatus venom gland contains the major toxin classes described for other bothrops venoms based on trancriptomic and proteomic studies.
together, these results contribute to our understanding of the physiopathology of envenoming by this species.
the genus bothrops is widespread throughout central and south america and is the principal cause of snakebite in these regions.
a cdna library of  <dig>  expressed sequence tags  was produced and assembled into  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons.
in addition to the above features, single-nucleotide polymorphisms, microsatellites, transposable elements and inverted repeats that could contribute to toxin diversity were observed.
the major groups of toxin transcripts identified were metalloproteinases , bradykinin-potentiating peptides/c-type natriuretic peptides , phospholipases a <dig> , serine proteinases  and c-type lectins .
minor toxin transcripts were related to l-amino acid oxidase, cysteine-rich secretory proteins, dipeptidylpeptidase iv, hyaluronidase, three-finger toxins and ohanin.
the lack of basic pla <dig> agrees with the lower myotoxicity of this venom compared to other bothrops species with these toxins.
gene ontology analysis identified non-toxin genes related to general metabolism, transcription and translation, processing and sorting,  degradation, structural functions and cell regulation.
transcriptomic and proteomic studies have examined the venom composition of several species in this genus, but many others remain to be studied.
the predominance of type piii metalloproteinases agrees with the well-known hemorrhagic activity of this venom, whereas the lower content of serine proteases and c-type lectins could contribute to less marked coagulopathy following envenoming by this species.
