given a database of drug-protein interactions, d-pia performs its tasks in several steps.
experimental results show that there are indeed patterns that one can discover in the interdependency relationship between drug substructures and protein domains of interacting drugs and proteins.
d-pia has the advantage that it is able to perform its tasks effectively based on the fingerprints of drug and protein molecules without requiring any 3d information about their structures and d-pia is therefore very fast to compute.
third, based on known interactions between drugs and proteins, an interdependency measure between the fingerprint of each drug substructure and protein domain is then computed.
fourth, based on the interdependency measure, drug substructures and protein domains that are significantly interdependent are identified.
fifth, the existence of interaction relationship between a previously unknown drug-protein pairs is then predicted based on their constituent substructures that are significantly interdependent.
second, for each protein in the database, the fingerprints of its protein domains are obtained.
the results show that the prediction accuracy can be very high.
d-pia has been tested with real drug-protein interaction data and experimental results show that it can be very useful for predicting previously unknown drug-protein as well as protein-ligand interactions.
first, for each drug in the database, the fingerprints of its molecular substructures are first obtained.
specifically, we propose to use a data mining technique called drug-protein interaction analysis  to determine if there are any commonalities in the fingerprints of the substructures of interacting drug and protein molecules and if so, whether or not any patterns can be generalized from them.
it can also be used to tackle problems such as ligand specificity which is related directly and indirectly to drug design and discovery.
the discovering of interesting patterns in drug-protein interaction data at molecular level can reveal hidden relationship among drugs and proteins and can therefore be of paramount importance for such application as drug design.
