midas cichlids have been intensively analyzed from an ecological and morphological perspective.
key morphological differences between the embryos of midas cichlids and other teleosts are highlighted and discussed, including the presence of adhesive glands and different early chromatophore patterns, as well as variation in developmental timing.
genomic resources such as transcriptomic and genomic data sets, and a high-quality draft genome are available now.
furthermore, we define homologous stages to well-described teleost models such as medaka and zebrafish, as well as other cichlid species such as the nile tilapia and the south american cichlid cichlasoma dimerus.
in the past, the species flocks of the african great lakes have received the most attention from researchers, but some lineages of the 300– <dig> species of central american lakes are fascinating model systems for adaptive radiation and rapid phenotypic evolution.
we describe the embryonic and larval development of the crater lake cichlid, amphilophus xiloaensis, until seven days after fertilization.
similar to previous studies on teleost development, we describe six periods of embryogenesis - the zygote, cleavage, blastula, gastrula, segmentation, and post-hatching period.
central american crater lake cichlid fish of the midas species complex  are a model system for sympatric speciation and fast ecological diversification and specialization.
detailed descriptions of the early development of the midas cichlid in particular, will help to investigate the ontogeny of species differences and adaptations.
the developmental staging of the midas cichlid will aid researchers in the comparative investigation of teleost ontogenies.
the availability of genetic resources, their status as a model system for evolutionary research, and the possibility to perform functional experiments including transgenesis makes the midas cichlid complex a very attractive model for evolutionary-developmental research.
teleosteiontogenyparallel evolutionphenotypic diversificationcichlidaepigmentationmelanophorexanthophoreamphilophus citrinellusamphilophus xiloaensisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
