we herein performed an rna-seq analysis to provide a comprehensive sequence resource and some insights into the regulation of genes including wax ester metabolism by comparative transcriptome analysis of e.gracilis under aerobic and anaerobic conditions.
a total of  <dig> transcripts were identified as differentially expressed genes  in response to anaerobic treatment for 24 h. a comprehensive pathway enrichment analysis using the kegg pathway revealed that the majority of degs were involved in photosynthesis, nucleotide metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, fatty acid metabolism.
a comparative expression analysis of aerobic- and anaerobic-treated e.gracilis cells indicated that gene expression changes in these components were not extensive or dynamic during the anaerobic treatment.
the rna-seq analysis provided comprehensive transcriptome information on e.gracilis for the first time, and this information will advance our understanding of this unique organism.
in spite of the importance and usefulness of euglena, the genome and transcriptome data are currently unavailable, though another research group has recently published e.gracilis transcriptome study during our submission.
the production of wax esters proceeds under anaerobic conditions, designated as wax ester fermentation.
the comprehensive analysis indicated that paramylon and wax ester metabolic pathways are regulated at post-transcriptional rather than the transcriptional level in response to anaerobic conditions.
nearly 40 % of  <dig>  sequences were annotated by similarity to swiss-prot database using the blastx program.
the phytoflagellated protozoan, euglena gracilis, has been proposed as an attractive feedstock for the accumulation of valuable compounds such as β- <dig> -glucan, also known as paramylon, and wax esters.
we successfully identified a candidate gene set of paramylon and wax esters, including novel β- <dig> -glucan and wax ester synthases.
euglena graciliswax ester fermentationtranscriptome analysishttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003382core research for evolutional science and technology, japan science and technology agency the yamagata prefectural government and tsuruoka city, japanissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
a total of  <dig>  components were assembled and identified as a reference sequence of e.gracilis, of which  <dig>  sequences were considered to be potentially expressed .
