to what extent this diversity is reflected on the amino acid level of functional genes such as enzymatic antioxidants that play an important role in thermal stress tolerance of the coral-symbiodinium symbiosis is, however, unknown.
the genus symbiodinium has a diverse enzymatic antioxidant repertoire that has similarities to prokaryotes, potentially as a result of horizontal gene transfer or events of secondary endosymbiosis.
different degrees of sequence evolution between sods and peroxidases might be the result of potential selective pressure on the conserved molecular function of sods as the first line of defence.
in contrast, genetic redundancy of hydrogen peroxide scavenging enzymes might permit the observed variations in peroxidase sequences.
while expression of antioxidant genes was successfully measured in symbiodinium b <dig>  it was not possible to assess the link between gene expression and protein activity due to high variability in expression between replicates, and little response in their enzymatic activity over the three-day experimental period.
in contrast to the bacterial form, katg in symbiodinium is characterized by extended functionally important loops and a shortened c-terminal domain.
we also report gene expression and enzymatic activity under short-term thermal stress in symbiodinium of the b <dig> genotype.
here we present a predicted structural analysis and phylogenetic characterization of the enzymatic antioxidant repertoire of the genus symbiodinium.
based on eight different its <dig> types, covering six clades, multiple protein isoforms for three of the four investigated antioxidants  are present in the genus symbiodinium.
our data and successful measurement of antioxidant gene expression in symbiodinium will serve as basis for further studies of coral health.
oxidative stressroscoral reefscatalase peroxidasesuperoxide dismutaseascorbate peroxidaseantioxidant gene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
amino acid sequences of both sod metalloforms , as well as katg, exhibited a number of prokaryotic characteristics that were also supported by the protein phylogeny.
