bistable systems typically show hysteretic dose response curves, in which the so called bifurcation points can be located experimentally.
one of the main challenges in modeling intracellular processes, from signaling pathways to gene regulatory networks, is to deal with high structural and parametric uncertainty, due to the complexity of the systems and the difficulty to obtain experimental measurements.
formal methods that exploit structural properties of networks for parameter estimation can help to overcome these problems.
observing how systems respond to different perturbations, insight can be gained into the underlying molecular mechanisms by developing mathematical models.
we exploit the fact that, at the bifurcation points, a condition for multistationarity derived in the context of the chemical reaction network theory must be fulfilled.
chemical reaction network theory has attracted attention from the  biology community since it connects the structure of biochemical reaction networks to qualitative properties of the corresponding model of ordinary differential equations.
our inverse bifurcation method exploits inherent structural properties of bistable switches in order to estimate kinetic parameters of bistable biochemical networks, opening a promising route for developments in chemical reaction network theory towards kinetic model identification.
biochemical reaction networkbistabilitysaddle node bifurcationdose response curvechemical reaction network theoryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
the inverse bifurcation method developed here allows determining the parameters that produce the expected behavior of the dose response curves and, in particular, the observed location of the bifurcation points given by experimental data.
in many cell decision processes the underlying networks behave as bistable switches, converting graded stimuli or inputs into all or none cell responses.
we here propose a novel method to infer the kinetic parameters of bistable biochemical network models.
