bisphosphonate inhibitors of human fpps are valuable therapeutics for the treatment of bone-resorption disorders and have also demonstrated efficacy in multiple tumor types.
the crystal structure of human fpps in complex with a novel bisphosphonate ys <dig> and in the absence of a second substrate showed partial ordering of the tail in the closed conformation.
we have determined crystal structures of human fpps in ternary complex with ys <dig> and the secondary ligands inorganic phosphate , inorganic pyrophosphate , and ipp.
inhibition of human fpps by bisphosphonates in vivo is thought to involve closing of the enzyme’s c-terminal tail induced by the binding of the second substrate isopentenyl pyrophosphate .
in human fpps, y <dig> functions as a safety switch that prevents any futile c-terminal closure and is locked in the “off” position in the absence of bound ipp.
binding of ppi or ipp to the enzyme-inhibitor complex, but not that of pi, resulted in full ordering of the c-terminal tail, which is most notably characterized by the anchoring of the r <dig> side chain to the main frame of the enzyme.
this conformational change, which occurs through a yet unclear mechanism, seals off the enzyme’s active site from the solvent environment and is essential for catalysis.
structure analysis identified a cascade of conformational changes required for the c-terminal tail rigidification involving y <dig>  f <dig>  and q <dig>  the residues k <dig> and n <dig> upon ppi/ipp binding undergo subtler conformational changes, which may initiate this cascade.
human farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase  controls intracellular levels of farnesyl pyrophosphate, which is essential for various biological processes.
mevalonate pathwayfarnesyl pyrophosphate synthaseisopentenyl pyrophosphatebisphosphonatesc-terminal tail closurecancer chemotherapeutics
isothermal titration calorimetry experiments demonstrated that ppi binds more tightly to the enzyme-inhibitor complex than ipp, and differential scanning fluorometry experiments confirmed that pi binding does not induce the tail ordering.
the findings of this study can be exploited for structure-guided optimization of existing inhibitors as well as development of new pharmacophores.
