furthermore, mismatch negativity  and late discriminative negativity  were computed as difference waves between deviant and standard tones, whereas early and late processing negativity  were calculated as difference waves between tones processed under attend and unattend conditions.
to study how event-related brain potentials  and underlying cortical mechanisms of selective attention change from childhood to old age, we investigated lifespan age differences in erps during an auditory oddball task in four age groups including  <dig> younger children ,  <dig> older children ,  <dig> younger adults , and  <dig> older adults .
these four secondary erp-derived measures were taken as indicators for change detection  and selective attention , respectively.
in the unattend condition, participants were asked to simply listen to the tones.
to examine lifespan age differences, the derived difference-wave components for attended  and deviant  stimuli were specifically compared across the four age groups.
the amplitudes of n <dig>  ldn, and lpn were higher in older children compared with both of the adult groups.
both primary and secondary erp components showed age-related differences in peak amplitude, peak latency, and topological distribution.
the present findings suggest that patterns of event-related brain potentials are highly malleable within individuals and undergo profound reorganization from childhood to adulthood and old age.
p <dig> peak amplitude was higher in older children and younger adults than in older adults.
interestingly, in the young adult sample p <dig> peak amplitude correlated positively and p <dig> peak latency correlated negatively with performance in the identical picture test, a marker measure of fluid intelligence.
five primary erp components  were extracted for deviant stimuli under attend conditions for lifespan comparison.
in the attend condition, participants were asked to count the deviant stimuli.
the p <dig> amplitude was higher in adults compared to children, whereas n <dig> showed the opposite effect.
