widespread sampling of vertebrates, which comprise the majority of published animal mitochondrial genomes, has led to the view that mitochondrial gene rearrangements are relatively rare, and that gene orders are typically stable across major taxonomic groups.
we determined the complete mitochondrial genomes of four species  and the partial mitochondrial genomes of two others .
studies of mitochondrial genomes at such low taxonomic levels should help to illuminate the dynamics of gene order change, since the telltale vestiges of gene duplication, translocation, and remolding have not yet been erased entirely.
in addition to the typical mitochondrial genome complement of  <dig> genes, additional trna genes were evident in d. gregarium  and thylacodes squamigerus .
here we provide evidence that the lability of the molluscan mitochondrial genome extends to the family level by describing extensive gene order changes that have occurred within the vermetidae, a family of sessile marine gastropods that radiated from a basal caenogastropod stock during the cenozoic era.
likewise, high sequence similarities between isoaccepting leucine trnas in thylacodes, eualetes, and thylaeodus suggest that trna remolding has been rife within this family.
three pseudogenes and additional trnas found within the genome of thylacodes squamigerus provide evidence of a past duplication event in this taxon.
major mitochondrial gene rearrangements have occurred within this family at a scale unexpected for such an evolutionarily young group and unprecedented for any caenogastropod examined to date.
likewise, gene order characters may improve phylogenetic hypotheses at finer taxonomic levels than once anticipated and aid in investigating the conditions under which sequence-based phylogenies lack resolution or prove misleading.
each of the six vermetid gastropods assayed possessed a unique gene order.
in contrast, more limited sampling within the phylum mollusca has revealed an unusually high number of gene order arrangements.
we have uncovered major changes in gene order within a family of caenogastropod molluscs that are indicative of a highly dynamic mitochondrial genome.
