from sccmec typing results, the majority  were shown to be sccmec type v. one isolate was sccmec iii.
of the  <dig> isolates of mrsa identified from nasal samples of the pigs,  <dig> isolates were sccmec type v and  <dig> isolate was sccmec type ii.
β-lactam resistancemethicillin resistant staphylococcus aureusmethicillin-resistant staphylococcus hyicusexudative epidermitispigsmeca genemecc sccmec type v
a high proportion of staphylococci isolated from pigs affected with exudative epidermitis were found to be resistant to β-lactam antimicrobials.
staphyloccoci isolates that were meca negative but resistant to β-lactam antimicrobials were further examined by screening for mecc, however all were negative.
the antimicrobial resistance patterns of  <dig> staphylococci isolates were determined by disk diffusion, of which  <dig>  of the isolates were resistant to  <dig> β-lactams .
furthermore, the majority of meca negative β-lactam resistant staphylococci isolates were susceptible to oxacillin and amoxicillin-clavulanic acid in a double disk diffusion test.
while this has been reported for acquisition of methicillin-resistance from coagulase negative staphylococci to s. aureus, these data suggest that transmission to or from the porcine pathogen s. hyicus may also occur.
the identification of methicillin resistance in a variety of staphylococcal species in pigs does raise concerns about the spread of serious multi-drug resistance in food producing animals and warrants further study.
methicillin resistance can be identified in a variety of staphylococcal species isolated from pigs.
the presence of meca gene was identified in  <dig> staphylococci isolates from skin samples by pcr.
the meca gene was identified in  <dig> s. aureus,  <dig> s. hyicus,  <dig> staphylococcus chromogenes,  <dig> staphylococcus pseudintermedius isolates, and in  <dig> isolate each of staphylococcus arlettae, and staphylococcus cohnii subspecies urealyticus.
the primary objective of this research was to investigate and characterize β-lactam resistance in staphylococcus hyicus, staphylococcus aureus and other staphylococci isolated from these pigs.
in this study there was a great deal of similarity in the sccmec types between staphylococcal species, suggesting that resistance may be passed from one species of staphylococci to another species of staphylococci.
