in this study orthologous codominant cross-species markers have been deployed to produce the first exclusively gene-based genetic linkage map of faba bean , using an f <dig> population developed from a cross between the lines vf <dig>  and vf <dig> .
a simple and direct macrosyntenic relationship between faba bean and medicago truncatula was evident, while faba bean and lentil shared a common rearrangement relative to m. truncatula.
non-coding repetitive dna or transposable element content provides a possible explanation for the difference in genome sizes.
despite the large size of the faba bean genome, comparative mapping did not reveal evidence for polyploidisation, segmental duplication, or significant rearrangements compared to m. truncatula, although a bias in the use of single locus markers may have limited the detection of duplications.
gene-based orthologous markers allow chromosomal regions and levels of synteny to be characterised between species, reveal phylogenetic relationships and chromosomal evolution, and enable targeted identification of markers for crop breeding.
however chromosomal rearrangements were observed that could explain the difference in chromosome numbers between these three legume species.
the composite map, anchored with orthologous markers mapped in m. truncatula, provides a central reference map for future use of genomic and genetic information in faba bean genetic analysis and breeding.
these rearrangements suggested high conservation of m. truncatula chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and 8; moderate conservation of chromosomes  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> and no conservation with m. truncatula chromosome  <dig>  multiple pcr amplicons and comparative mapping were suggestive of small-scale duplication events in faba bean.
faba bean possesses one of the largest and least studied genomes among cultivated crop plants and no gene-based genetic maps exist.
one hundred and four of the  <dig> mapped markers in the  <dig> lgs, which were previously assigned to m. truncatula genetic and physical maps, were found in regions syntenic between the faba bean and m. truncatula genomes.
however, substantial macrosynteny was apparent between faba bean and m. truncatula, with the exception of chromosome  <dig> where no orthologous markers were found, confirming previous investigations suggesting chromosome  <dig> is atypical.
this study also provides a preliminary indication for finer scale macrosynteny between m. truncatula, lentil and faba bean.
markers originally designed from genes on the same m. truncatula bacs were found to be grouped together in corresponding syntenic areas in lentil and faba bean.
similar patterns of rearrangements in faba bean and lentil compared to m. truncatula support phylogenetic studies dividing these species into the tribes viceae and trifoliae.
