through an exhaustive analysis, we could show that the pmhc placement can be further improved by a straightforward, yet very time intensive extension of the current approach.
former studies showed that the association angles of the tcr variable domains  can differ significantly and change upon binding to the pmhc complex.
t-cell recognitiontcr structural modelingepitope predictionglutamine side chain predictionprotein domain association anglesimmunoinformaticsadoptive t-cell therapyvaccine designdeutsche forschungsgemeinschaft sfb <dig> project a10hoffmann thomas deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft cipsm cluster of excellenceantes iris deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft sfb749marion antoine issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
in addition, we implemented a new approach to predict the correct orientation of the carboxamide endgroups in glutamine and asparagine residues, which can also be used as an external, independent tool.
we developed a computational method, dynadom, for the prediction of tcr vα/vβ inter-domain and tcr/pmhc orientations in tcrpmhc complexes, which allows predicting the orientation of multiple protein-domains.
these changes can be described as a rotation of the domains around a general center of rotation, characterized by the interaction of two highly conserved glutamine residues.
t cell receptor  molecules are involved in the adaptive immune response as they distinguish between self- and foreign-peptides, presented in major histocompatibility complex molecules .
we show that the dynadom method predicts the correct orientation of the tcr vα/vβ angles in  <dig> and 89% of the cases, for the poses with the best rmsd and best interaction energy, respectively.
the results obtained in the present remodeling study prove the suitability of our approach for interdomain-angle optimization.
the approach was evaluated for the remodeling of  <dig> and  <dig> experimental structures of tcr and tcrpmhc  complexes, respectively.
therefore it should be well suited as part of any accurate atomistic modeling pipeline for tcrpmhc complexes and potentially other large molecular assemblies.
