in addition, a dynamic re-patterning of expression of hfq-dependent srnas was observed at  <dig> and 12 hours after induction in hrp-inducing minimal medium.
although many virulence factors have been characterized, the coordination of expression of these virulence factors in e. amylovora is still not clear.
the identification of multiple virulence-regulating srnas also suggests that post-transcriptional regulation by srnas may play a role in the deployment of virulence factors needed during varying stages of pathogenesis during host invasion by e. amylovora.
furthermore, srnas that control virulence traits were characterized, among which arcz positively controls the type iii secretion system , amylovoran exopolysaccahride production, biofilm formation, and motility, and negatively modulates attachment while rmaa  and omrab both negatively regulate amylovoran production and positively regulate motility.
however, information is still lacking about hfq-dependent srnas on a genome scale, including the virulence regulatory functions of these srnas in e. amylovora.
using both an rna-seq analysis and a rho-independent terminator search,  <dig> candidate hfq-dependent srnas were identified in e. amylovora.
this study has significantly enhanced our understanding of the hfq-dependent srnas in e. amylovora at the genome level.
in e. amylovora, hfq was identified as a major regulator of virulence and various virulence traits.
rna-seqsrnatype iii secretion systembiofilmamylovoranmotilityarczissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
regulatory small rnas  are important post-transcriptional regulatory components in bacteria.
sequence conservation analysis identified srnas conserved only in the erwinia genus as well as e. amylovora species-specific srnas.
the expression and sizes of  <dig> srnas and the sequence boundaries of seven srnas were confirmed by northern blot and 5’ race assay respectively.
a large number of srnas require the rna chaperone hfq for both stability and functional activation.
erwinia amylovora is a phytopathogenic bacterium and causal agent of fire blight disease in apples and pears.
