two strategies allowed demonstrating disease freedom in several years, for the majority of simulated flocks: a strategy in which all the flock animals are genotyped, and a strategy in which only founders animals are genotyped, the flock pedigree being known.
the less costly strategy varied according to the genetic context  and to the relative costs of a genotyping exam and of a diagnostic test.
six qualification strategies were defined that combine genotyping data, diagnostic tests results and flock pedigree.
qualification schemes could thus be a useful tool for voluntary or mandatory scrapie control programmes.
the public health threat represented by a potential circulation of bovine spongiform encephalopathy agent in sheep population has led european animal health authorities to launch large screening and genetic selection programmes.
this work demonstrates that combining data sources allows substantiating a flock is free from scrapie within a reasonable time frame.
adapting these approaches leads to a paradoxical situation in which a greater amount of testing is needed to substantiate disease freedom in genetically resistant flocks than in susceptible flocks, whereas probability of disease freedom is a priori higher in the former than in the latter.
in both cases, diagnostic tests are performed on culled animals.
a probabilistic framework was defined that accounts for scrapie specificities and allows solving the preceding paradox.
classical approaches, based on surveys designed to detect disease presence, do not account for scrapie specificities: the genetic variations of susceptibility and the absence of live diagnostic test routinely available.
these were compared in two types of simulated flocks: resistant and susceptible flocks.
however, there is no general strategy that would always minimize the costs and choice of the strategy should be adapted to local genetic conditions.
the goal of this study was to propose, evaluate and compare several qualification strategies for demonstrating a flock is free from scrapie.
