to achieve this, interactomebrowser relies on a "cell compartments-based layout" that makes use of a subset of the gene ontology to map gene products onto relevant cell compartments.
deciphering gene regulatory networks by in silico approaches is a crucial step in the study of the molecular perturbations that occur in diseases.
the first objective of interactomebrowser is to provide a user-friendly tool to get new insight into any gene list by providing a context-specific display of putative regulatory and physical interactions.
the database includes:  predicted regulatory interactions ,  potential regulatory interactions inferred from systematic analysis of chip-seq experiments,  regulatory interactions curated from the literature,  predicted post-transcriptional regulation by micro-rna,  protein kinase-substrate interactions and  physical protein-protein interactions.
this layout is particularly powerful for visual integration of heterogeneous biological information and is a productive avenue in generating new hypotheses.
furthermore, given the intrinsic complexity of the data, the development of new tools offering integrated and meaningful visualizations of molecular interactions is necessary to help users drawing new hypotheses without being overwhelmed by the density of the subsequent graph.
we provide examples underlying the benefits of this visualization tool for large gene set analysis related to thymocyte differentiation.
in order to easily retrieve and efficiently analyze these interactions, we developed in-teractomebrowser, a graph-based knowledge browser that comes as a plug-in for transcriptome-browser.
thus, the research community would greatly benefit from having a unified database storing known and predicted molecular interactions.
we extend the previously developed transcriptomebrowser database with a set of tables containing  <dig> , <dig> human and mouse molecular interactions.
the interactomebrowser plugin is a powerful tool to get quick access to a knowledge database that includes both predicted and validated molecular interactions.
the development of regulatory maps is a tedious process requiring the comprehensive integration of various evidences scattered over biological databases.
our database is updated on a regular basis.
