many of the  <dig> selected clusters are highly relevant to the addictive process, including regions relevant to cognitive control, default mode network related self-referential thought, behavioral inhibition, and contextual memories.
single photon emission computerized tomography  images obtained during rest or a saline infusion in three cohorts of 2– <dig> week abstinent cocaine-dependent participants  and healthy controls  were used to develop a classification model.
however, these advances have not explored extensively for diagnostic accuracy in human subjects.
participants were successfully classified with  <dig>  and  <dig>  f-measure accuracies in 10-fold cross validation  and leave-one-out  approaches, respectively.
in this study, a framework suitable for educing potential brain regions that differed between the two groups was developed and implemented.
statistically insignificant voxels of spatially connected brain regions were removed iteratively and classification accuracy was reported through the iterations.
relative hyperactivity and hypoactivity of regional cerebral blood flow in brain regions in cocaine-dependent participants are presented with corresponding level of significance.
the regions found in this study align with brain regions reported in the literature.
the aim of this study was to develop a statistical approach, using a machine learning framework, to correctly classify brain images of cocaine-dependent participants and healthy controls.
the svm-based approach successfully classified cocaine-dependent and healthy control participants using voxels selected with information theoretic-based and statistical methods from participants’ spect data.
neuroimaging studies have yielded significant advances in the understanding of neural processes relevant to the development and persistence of addiction.
a statistical classifier, support vectors machine , was then used for participant classification.
these findings support the future use of brain imaging and svm-based classifier in the diagnosis of substance use disorders and furthering an understanding of their underlying pathology.
substance use disorderscocaine dependencemachine learningsupport vector machinesclassification13th annual mcbios conference memphis, tn, usa 3- <dig> may  <dig> https://mcbios.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
