the genome sequencing of maize was completed, and many gene families were identified.
these results provide significant insights into the molecular bases of zmnas in balancing iron uptake, translocation and homeostasis in response to fluctuating environmental fe status.
in this study, nine nas genes in maize were identified and their expression patterns in different organs including developing seeds were determined.
moreover, the expression patterns of zmnas genes in response to fluctuating metal status were analysed.
the class i zmnas genes were induced under fe deficiency and were suppressed under fe excessive conditions, while the expression pattern of class ii genes were opposite to class i. the complementary expression patterns of class i and class ii zmnas genes confirmed the classification of this family.
although three nas genes have been characterized in maize, there is still no systematic identification of maize nas family by genomic mining.
according to the evolutionary relationship and tissue specific expression profiles of zmnas genes, they can be subgrouped into two classes.
these results suggest that the two classes of zmnas genes may be regulated on transcriptional level when responds to various demands for iron uptake, translocation and homeostasis.
on the contrary, zmnas <dig>  one of the class ii genes, was accumulated in axillary meristems, leaf primordia and mesophyll cells.
it was revealed that zmnas1;1/1; <dig>  representing the class i genes, mainly expressed in cortex and stele of roots with sufficient fe, and its expression can expanded in epidermis, as well as shoot apices under fe deficient conditions.
furthermore, the histochemical localization of zmnas1;1/1; <dig> and zmnas <dig> were determined using in situ hybridization.
considerable progress has been achieved in cloning and characterizing the functions of nicotianamine synthase  in plants including barley, arabidopsis and rice.
maizenicotianamine synthasegene familyiron uptake and homeostasissubcellular localizationexpression profilingin situ hybridization
