an analysis of the broader range of candidate dichaete targets indicates that dichaete plays diverse roles in cns development, with the  <dig> or so dichaete-bound putative targets including a number of transcription factors, signalling pathway components and terminal differentiation genes.
our analysis also reveals that dominant negatives cause off-target effects, highlighting the need to use other experimental data for validating findings from dominant negative studies.
as well as identifying commisureless as a target, our data indicate that dichaete helps establish its expression during early midline development but has less effect on its established later expression, highlighting dichaete action on tissue specific enhancers.
in drosophila melanogaster, the sox gene dichaete is dynamically expressed in the embryonic cns, where it is known to have functional roles in neuroblasts and the ventral midline.
we expressed these tissue-specifically in the midline and in neuroblasts using the uas/gal <dig> system, validating their use at the phenotypic level and with known target genes.
using chip and immunohistochemistry, we identified two new likely direct dichaete target genes, commisureless in the midline and asense in the neuroectoderm.
these include a number of genes with known roles in cns development, including several components of the notch, wnt and egfr signalling pathways.
they are, however, difficult to study as mutations often have pleiotropic effects and other sox family members can mask phenotypes due to functional compensation.
group b sox domain transcription factors play important roles in metazoan central nervous system development.
in this study, we use inducible dominant negative proteins in combination with chip, immunohistochemistry and genome-wide expression profiling to further dissect the role of dichaete in these two tissues.
in the early neurectoderm we implicate dichaete in the lateral inhibition pathway and show that dichaete acts to repress the proneural gene asense.
