we detected many rare alleles, suggesting that this germplasm contains potentially useful undiscovered alleles, but their discovery and characterization will require extensive effort.
we performed a cluster analysis with the sorghum association panel based on  <dig>  snps and determined that nine of the ethiopian populations expanded the genetic diversity in the panel.
in total,  <dig> accessions  were assigned to one of these populations with an ancestry membership coefficient of larger than  <dig> ; these covered 90% of the total genomic variation.
the characterization of this exotic germplasm at a genome-wide scale will improve conservation efforts and its utilization in research and breeding programs.
genetic associations with agronomic traits can be used to improve the screening of exotic germplasm for selection of specific populations.
sorghum bicolorexotic germplasmgenotyping-by-sequencinggenome-wide association studypopulation structureissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
the usda agriculture research service national plant germplasm system  preserves the largest sorghum germplasm collection in the world, which includes  <dig>  accessions from the center of diversity in ethiopia.
the genetic profile of each accession was unique , and the average genetic distance among accessions was  <dig> .
the npgs ethiopian sorghum germplasm is a genetically and phenotypically diverse collection comprising  <dig> populations with high levels of admixture.
based on population structure and cluster analyses, we separated the collection into  <dig> populations with pairwise f
genome-wide association analysis demonstrated that these low-coverage data and the observed population structure could be employed for the genomic dissection of important phenotypes in this core set of ethiopian sorghum germplasm.
the genotypic data available for these accessions provide a valuable resource for sorghum breeders and geneticists to effectively improve crops.
therefore, we phenotyped a representative core set of  <dig> ethiopian accessions at two locations for agronomic traits and characterized the genomes.
we characterized these populations based on agronomic and seed compositional traits.
