nvhstrpa expressed in hek <dig> cells is activated by temperature increase, demonstrating that hstrpas function as novel thermal sensors in hymenoptera.
they are also activated by various compounds and secondary messengers to mediate cell-cell interactions as well as to detect changes in the local environment.
although p. humanus and d. melanogaster contain  <dig> trpa subfamily members, the other insects have  <dig> trpa subfamily members.
their physiological roles have been primarily characterized only in mice and fruit flies, and evolutionary studies are limited.
the common pattern also suggests that the mechanisms for detecting mechanical and visual stimuli and maintaining lysosomal functions may be evolutionarily well conserved in insects.
the above results demonstrate that there are both evolutionary conservation and changes in insect trp channels.
however, a trpp channel, the most ancient trp channel, is missing in b. mori, a. mellifera, and n. vitripennis.
t. castaneum, a. mellifera, and n. vitripennis contain trpa <dig> channels, which have been specifically retained or gained in coleoptera and hymenoptera.
furthermore, trpa <dig>  which functions for thermotaxis in drosophila, is missing in a. mellifera and n. vitripennis; however, they have other hymenoptera-specific trpa channels .
to understand the evolution of insect trp channels and the mechanisms of integrating sensory inputs in insects, we have identified and compared trp channel genes in drosophila melanogaster, bombyx mori, tribolium castaneum, apis mellifera, nasonia vitripennis, and pediculus humanus genomes as part of genome sequencing efforts.
the total number of insect trp family members is 13- <dig>  approximately half that of mammalian trp family members.
trp  channels respond to diverse stimuli and thus function as the primary integrators of varied sensory information.
as shown for mammalian trp channels, this may suggest that single trp channels are responsible for integrating diverse sensory inputs to maintain the insect sensory systems.
in particular, the evolutionary processes have been accelerated in the trpa subfamily, indicating divergence in the mechanisms that insects use to detect environmental temperatures.
