molecular identification detected  <dig> unique mycobacterial species: mycobacterium bovis, m. gordonae, m. fortuitum, m. intracellulare, m. flavescens, m. duvalii, m. haemophilum, m. immunogenum, m. lentiflavum, m. mucogenicum, m. novocastrense, m. parafortuitum, m. smegmatis, m. terrae and m. vaccae.
no statistically significant difference was observed between the presence of mycobacterium spp.
the microbiological cultures associated with pcr-based identification tests are possible tools for the investigation of the presence of mycobacterium spp.
the presence of these opportunistic, pathogenic bacteria in bovine milk has emerged as a public-health concern, especially among individuals who consume raw milk and related dairy products.
using these methods, we found that the brazilian population may be regularly exposed to mycobacteria by consuming raw bovine milk and related dairy products.
these evidences reinforces the need to optimize quality programs of dairy products, to intensify the sanitary inspection of these products and the necessity of further studies on the presence of mycobacterium spp.
polymerase chain reaction -based tests and restriction-enzyme pattern analysis were then performed on the colonies exhibiting phenotypes suggestive of mycobacterium spp., which were characterized as acid-fast bacilli.
in the present study,  <dig> samples of milk from bovine herds, obtained from both individual and collective bulk tanks and informal points of sale, were cultured on löwenstein-jensen and stonebrink media.
of the  <dig> bovine milk samples that were processed,  <dig> were positively identified as mycobacterium spp.
the isolation of bacteria from the various locations occurred in the following proportions:  <dig> percent of the individual bulk-tank samples,  <dig> percent of the collective bulk-tank samples and  <dig> percent of the informal-trade samples.
in the three types of samples collected, the milk production profiles, the presence of veterinary assistance and the reported concerns about bovine tuberculosis prevention in the herds.
