in hd, death occurs in striatal projection neurons as well as cortical neurons.
control mice had a greater number of ki-67+ cells than mutant mice.
there was no overlap between ki- <dig> and gfp staining in control or mutant mice, suggesting that cells did not undergo cell division once they acquired a drd1a phenotype.
in contrast, in the second study we found that brdu+ cells were identified throughout the cortex, striatum and periventricular region of control and mutant mice.
mutant mice from the gfp-global line showed increased brdu+ cells in the cortex, striatum and periventricular region relative to control.
striatal line mutant mice had an increased number of brdu+ cells in the striatum and periventricular region, but not the cortex.
the number of microglia, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and neurons generated from dividing progenitors was increased relative to control mice in most brain regions in mutant mice from the gfp-global line.
in contrast, striatal line mutant mice displayed an increase only in the number of dividing microglia in striatal and periventricular regions.
drd1a-expressing cells were targeted for cell death and three independent lines generated; a striatal-restricted line, a cortical-restricted line and a global line in which drd1a cells were deleted from both the striatum and cortex.
in the first, the proliferative marker ki- <dig> was used to identify proliferating cells in eighty-week-old mice belonging to a generic global line, a global in which drd1a cells express green fluorescent protein  and in eighty-week-old mice of a cortical line.
age related deficits in proliferation are seen in mutant lines.
mice generated by a cre/loxp transgenic paradigm were used to model neurodegenerative basal ganglia disease of which huntington disease  is the prototypical example.
in the second experiment, the proliferative response of four-week-old mice belonging to gfp-global and striatal lines was assessed using the thymidine analogue brdu.
in the first study, we found that ki-67-expressing cells were restricted to the striatal side of the lateral ventricles.
genetically programmed post-natal ablation of drd1a-expressing neurons is associated with an extensive proliferative response involving multiple cell lineages.
