sclerites of shallow water colonies became larger when transplanted to deeper environments and vice versa, but neither of the two transplanted groups overlapped with the residents' morphology.
morphological differences may be a response to environmental factors but also they can be attributed to accumulated genetic differences due to disruption of gene flow among populations.
in this study, we examined the extensive morphological variation  in natural populations observed in the gorgonian eunicea flexuosa, a widely distributed caribbean octocoral.
results from principal component analysis indicated the presence of two groups based on depth distribution, suggesting the presence of two discrete morphotypes .
reaction norms of morphological characters of colonies reciprocally transplanted showed gradual significant changes through the  <dig> months of transplantation.
genetic analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear genes suggested that such discrete morphology and non-overlapping phenotypic plasticity is correlated with the presence of two independent evolutionary lineages.
the extensive distribution and ample morphological variation of eunicea flexuosa corresponds to two distinct genetic lineages with narrower distributions and more rigid phenotypic plasticity than the original description.
clonal marine organisms exhibit high levels of morphological variation.
significant differences  in  <dig> morphological traits were found among colonies inhabiting  <dig> locations distributed in seven reefs in southwest puerto rico.
a discriminant function analysis based on a priori univariate and multivariate analyses  correctly classified 93% of the colonies for each environment.
the accepted description sensu bayer  of e. flexuosa is a complex of at least two distinct genetic lineages, adapted to different habitats and do not exchange genetic material despite living in sympatry.
light, water motion and sediment transport might influence the distribution of the two morphotypes.
eco-phenotypic and genetic effects were evaluated by reciprocal transplants of colonies inhabiting opposite ends of the depth gradient and analysis of population genetics of mitochondrial and nuclear genes, respectively.
the present study highlights the importance of correctly defining species, because the unknowingly use of species complexes can overestimate geographical distribution, population abundance, and physiological tolerance.
