strong differences in transcriptomic response to heat stress were observed across strains confirming that fish from desert environments have evolved diverse mechanisms to cope with stressful environments.
as expected, a large number of total transcripts  were differentially expressed in the study  with  <dig> transcripts in common for all three strains, but the desert strain had a larger number of unique differentially expressed transcripts  than the montane  or the f <dig>  strain.
in this study, we tested for differential transcriptional response of ecologically divergent populations of redband trout  that have evolved in desert and montane climates.
key stress response genes such as molecular chaperones  had adaptive patterns of gene expression among strains, but also a much higher number of metabolic and cellular process genes were differentially expressed in the desert strain demonstrating these biological pathways are critical for thermal adaptation to warm aquatic climates.
climate changeoncorhynchus mykiss gairdneriredband troutrna-seqthermal adaptationtranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
the results of this study further elucidate the molecular basis for thermal adaptation in aquatic ecosystems and extend the potential for identifying genes that may be critical for adaptation to changing climates.
gill tissues were collected from the three strains of fish  at the peak of heat stress and tested for mrna expression differences across the transcriptome with rna-seq.
as ectothermic organisms have evolved to differing aquatic climates, the molecular basis of thermal adaptation is a key area of research.
each pure strain and their f <dig> cross were reared in a common garden environment and exposed over four weeks to diel water temperatures that were similar to those experienced in desert climates within the species’ range.
strongly differentiated genes  were particularly abundant in the desert strain  relative to the other two strains .
this study demonstrated patterns of acclimation  within strains and evolutionary adaptation among strains in numerous genes throughout the transcriptome.
