our comparative next-generation sequencing  analysis reveals taxon-specific trends governing the formulation of the venom arsenal.
knowledge of the venom proteome provides hints on the translation efficiency of toxin-coding transcripts, contributing thereby to a more accurate interpretation of the transcriptome.
individually or combined, proteomic and transcriptomic studies have demonstrated their feasibility to explore in depth the molecular diversity of venoms.
the minimum number of genes from each toxin family transcribed into the venom gland transcriptome of each species was calculated from multiple alignments of reads matched to a full-length reference sequence of each toxin family.
<dig> , <dig> nucleotides  were masked by repeatmasker, the vast majority of which corresponding to class i  and class ii  mobile elements.
strong discrepancies between the transcriptome-computed and the proteome-gathered toxin compositions were obvious at first sight.
a transcriptome-based cladogram supports the large divergence between a. mexicanus and a. picadoi, and a closer kinship between a. mexicanus and c. godmani.
reads encoding orf regions of kazal-type inhibitor-like proteins were uniquely found in bothriechis schlegelii and b. lateralis transcriptomes, suggesting a genus-specific recruitment event during the early-middle miocene.
in the absence of genome sequence, transcriptomes represent also valuable searchable databases for proteomic projects.
a long term research goal of venomics, of applied importance for improving current antivenom therapy, but also for drug discovery, is to understand the pharmacological potential of venoms.
the venom gland transcriptomes of  <dig> costa rican taxa from  <dig> genera  of pitvipers were investigated using high-throughput  <dig> pyrosequencing.
<dig>  out of  <dig>  masked reads produced significant hits in the available databases.
blast hits included  <dig>  matches to entries of the taxonomic suborder serpentes, of which  <dig>  displayed similarity to documented venom proteins.
although the reasons underlaying this discrepancy are elusive, since no clear trend within or between species is apparent, the data indicate that individual mrna species may be translationally controlled in a species-dependent manner.
the application of ngs to the analysis of snake venom transcriptomes, may represent the tool for opening the door to systems venomics.
