prior knowledge networks  provide a framework for the development of computational biological models, including boolean models of regulatory networks which are the focus of this work.
boolean regulatory networksqualitative modelingnetwork inferenceoptimizationgenetic algorithmprior knowledge networkissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the resulting model network is therefore contextualized to the experimental conditions and constitutes a dynamical boolean model closer to the observed biological process used to train the model than the original pkn.
this limits their usefulness as a basis for the development of context-specific, predictive dynamical boolean models.
certain of these regulatory interactions may not occur in all biological contexts of interest, and their presence may dramatically change the dynamical behaviour of the resulting computational model, hindering the elucidation of the underlying mechanisms and reducing the usefulness of model predictions.
such a model can then be interrogated to simulate response under perturbation, to detect stable states and their properties, to get insights into the underlying mechanisms and to generate new testable hypotheses.
these contextualized models have improved utility for hypothesis generation and experimental design.
the optimization method presented in this article produces specific, contextualized models from generic pkns.
using a genetic algorithm, a model network is built as a sub-network of the pkn and trained against experimental data to reproduce the experimentally observed behaviour in terms of attractors and the transitions that occur between them under specific perturbations.
pkns are created by a painstaking process of literature curation, and generally describe all relevant regulatory interactions identified using a variety of experimental conditions and systems, such as specific cell types or tissues.
generic pkns attempt to synthesize knowledge of all interactions occurring in a biological process of interest, irrespective of the specific biological context.
the general applicability of this methodological approach makes it suitable for a variety of biological systems and of general interest for biological and medical research.
