moreover, we divide the context to hierarchial sub-context and get the contextual dissimilarity vector for each protein pair.
using the class label information of the proteins, we select the relevant  and irrelevant  protein pairs, and train an svm model to distinguish between their contextual dissimilarity vectors.
using the contextual proteins with their class labels in the database, we can improve the accuracy of the pairwise dissimilarity/similarity measures dramatically for the protein retrieval tasks.
the svm model is further used to learn a supervised regularizing factor.
prodis-contshc regularizes an existing dissimilarity measure dij by considering the contextual information of the proteins.
finally, with the new supervised learned dissimilarity measure, we update the protein hierarchial context coherently in an iterative algorithm--prodis-contshc.
experimental results demonstrate that plugging our supervised contextual dissimilarity measures into the retrieval systems significantly outperforms the context-free dissimilarity/similarity measures and other unsupervised contextual dissimilarity measures that do not use the class label information.
in this work, for the first time, we propose the idea of supervised contextual dissimilarity learning, resulting in the prodis-contshc algorithm.
among different contextual dissimilarity learning approaches that can be used to compare a pair of proteins, prodis-contshc provides the highest accuracy.
recent work in the machine learning community has shown that exploiting the global structure of the database and learning the contextual dissimilarity/similarity measures can improve the retrieval performance significantly.
the basic idea is, for a pair of proteins , if their context n and n is similar to each other, the two proteins should also have a high similarity.
however, most existing contextual dissimilarity/similarity learning algorithms work in an unsupervised manner, which does not utilize the information of the known class labels of proteins in the database.
the need to retrieve or classify protein molecules using structure or sequence-based similarity measures underlies a wide range of biomedical applications.
we implement this idea by regularizing dij by a factor learned from the context n and n.
