in the current study, it is shown that f. avenaceum can be efficiently transformed by agrobacterium tumefaciens mediated transformation.
single step cloningatmtagrobacterium tumefaciens mediated transformationfusarium avenaceumuser-brickgenome modificationtransformationfusaristatinfapks6mycotoxinlc-msms-mspolyketidenonribosomal peptide
the system was found to have an assembly efficiency of 97% with up to six dna fragments, based on the construction of  <dig> vectors targeting different polyketide synthase  and pks associated transcription factor encoding genes in f. avenaceum.
acetosyringone concentration, co-culturing time, co-culturing temperature and fungal inoculum were found to significantly impact the transformation frequency.
the new user-brick system is highly versatile by allowing for the reuse of a common set of building blocks to accommodate seven different types of genome modifications.
despite its significant impact on the profitability of agriculture production and a desire to characterize the infection process at the molecular biological level, no genetic transformation protocol has yet been established for f. avenaceum.
following optimization, an average of  <dig> transformants per  <dig> macroconidia was obtained in experiments aimed at introducing targeted genome modifications.
the optimized protocol for atmt of f. avenaceum represents the first reported targeted genome modification by double homologous recombination of this plant pathogen and will allow for future characterization of this fungus.
subsequently, the Δfapks <dig> vector was used for optimizing a. tumefaciens mediated transformation  of f. avenaceum with respect to six variables.
targeted deletion of fapks <dig>  in f. avenaceum showed that this gene is essential for biosynthesis of the polyketide/nonribosomal compound fusaristatin a.
the plant pathogenic and saprophytic fungus fusarium avenaceum causes considerable in-field and post-field losses worldwide due to its infections of a wide range of different crops.
