mycoplasma gallisepticum  is a major poultry pathogen and causes severe economic loss to the poultry industry.
the promoter region from the gene for elongation factor tu   and the signal and acylation sequences from the vlha  <dig>  gene, both from mycoplasma gallisepticum , together with the coding region of phoa , were assembled in the transposon-containing plasmid pism <dig>   to enable expression of alkaline phosphatase  as a recombinant lipoprotein.
mycoplasma gallisepticum lipoproteinmembrane proteinreporter genephoa alkaline phosphatase
trypsin proteolysis confirmed its surface exposure.
the ptap plasmid will facilitate investigations of lipoproteins and protein translocation across the cell membrane in mycoplasmas, and the ease of detection of these transformants makes this vector system suitable for the simultaneous screening and detection of cloned genes expressed as membrane proteins in mycoplasmas.
alkaline phosphatase was shown to be located in the hydrophobic fraction of transformed mycoplasmas following triton x- <dig> partitioning and in the membrane fraction after differential fractionation.
the level of transcription of phoa  in organisms transformed with ptp was lower than in those transformed with ptap, and alkaline phosphatase was not detected by immunoblotting or enzymatic assays in ptp transformants, eventhough alkaline phosphatase expression could be readily detected by both assays in ptap transformants.
in mycoplasmas lipoproteins are abundant on the membrane surface and play a critical role in interactions with the host, but tools for exploring their molecular biology are limited.
using a colorimetric substrate for detection of alkaline phosphatase activity, it was possible to detect transformed m. gallisepticum .
in this study we examined whether the alkaline phosphatase gene  from escherichia coli  could be used as a reporter in mycoplasmas.
the transposon was used to transform m. gallisepticum  strain s <dig>  as a control, a plasmid containing a similar construct, but lacking the signal and acylation sequences, was also produced  and also introduced into m. gallisepticum .
