flowering event of pistillate flower bud in hickory is triggered by several pathways synchronously including the photoperiod, autonomous, vernalization, gibberellin, and sucrose pathway.
this work provides an available framework for pistillate flower development in hickory, which is significant for insight into regulation of flowering and floral development of woody plants.
co-expression networkcarya cathayensis sargfloral developmentseasonal floweringhickoryhigh-throughput data analysis
to explore pistillate flowering mechanism in hickory, a comprehensive flowering gene regulatory network based on arabidopsis thaliana was constructed by additional literature mining.
the locations, functions and dynamic transcript abundances were analyzed in the gene regulatory networks.
moreover, the analysis provides a potential flc-like gene based vernalization pathway and an 'ac’ model for pistillate flower development in hickory.
different from herbaceous plants, the woody plants undergo a long-period vegetative stage to achieve floral transition.
differential transcript abundance analysis uncovered the dynamic transcript abundance patterns of flowering correlated genes and their major functions based on gene ontology  analysis.
the genome-wide dynamic transcriptome was characterized via the joint-approach of rna sequencing and microarray analysis.
a genome-wide co-expression network for the putative flowering or floral genes shows three flowering regulatory modules corresponding to response to light abiotic stimulus, cold stress, and reproductive development process, respectively.
a total of  <dig> putative flowering or floral genes including  <dig> with differential transcript abundance were identified in hickory.
totally  <dig> potential flowering or floral genes were recruited which are meaningful to understand the hickory specific seasonal flowering mechanism better.
totally  <dig> potential flowering or floral genes were recruited from the genome-wide co-expression network function module analysis.
