a haplotype is regarded as a hereditary unit and therefore input pedigrees are preferred that are free of mutational events and have a minimum number of genetic recombinational events.
the experimental results show a great linearity in terms of execution time in relation to input size when both n and m are larger than  <dig>  for those experiments where n or m are less than  <dig>  the proposed algorithm runs very fast, in thousandth to hundredth of a second, on a personal desktop computer.
our experimental results demonstrated the linearity of its execution time in relation to the input size.
most existing computational algorithms for haplotype inference have been designed to use genotype data collected from individuals in the form of a pedigree.
given a pedigree with n individuals, m marker loci, and k mating loops, we proposed an algorithm that can provide a general solution to the zero-recombinant haplotype configuration problem in o time.
the proposed algorithm can be modified to detect inconsistency within the genotype data without loss of efficiency and is expected to be able to handle recombinant and missing data with further extension.
determining haplotypes from genotype data is called haplotype inference.
in addition, this algorithm can be modified to detect inconsistencies within the genotype data without loss of efficiency.
so far no linear-time algorithm for zrhc has been proposed for general pedigrees, even though the number of mating loops in a human pedigree is usually very small and can be regarded as constant.
we have developed the first deterministic linear-time algorithm for the zero-recombinant haplotype configuration problem.
when studying genetic diseases in which genetic variations are passed on to offspring, the ability to distinguish between paternal and maternal alleles is essential.
these ideas motivated the zero-recombinant haplotype configuration  problem, which strictly follows the mendelian law of inheritance, namely that one haplotype of each child is inherited from the father and the other haplotype is inherited from the mother, both without any mutation.
haplotype inferencezero-recombinant haplotype configuration pedigreemating loop.3- <dig> october  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  eleventh international conference on bioinformatics  bangkok, thailand
