the hybrid method achieves overall accuracy of  <dig> % and  <dig> % using ten-fold cross-validation on the benchmark data sets.
the svm model comprises a number of binary classifiers, in which biological features derived from gram-negative bacteria translocation pathways are incorporated.
our results demonstrate that biological features derived from gram-negative bacteria translocation pathways yield a significant improvement.
a three-way data split procedure is also incorporated to prevent overestimation of the predictive performance.
in the structural homology approach, we employ secondary structure alignment for structural similarity comparison and assign the known localization of the top-ranked protein as the predicted localization of a query protein.
moreover, the overall accuracy of combining the structural homology approach is further improved, which suggests that structural conservation could be a useful indicator for inferring localization in addition to sequence homology.
we propose a hybrid prediction method for gram-negative bacteria that combines a one-versus-one support vector machines  model and a structural homology approach.
however, their performance might be significantly degraded if homologous sequences are not detected.
the proposed method can be used in large-scale analyses of proteomes.
determination of subcellular localization using experimental approaches is time-consuming; thus, computational approaches become highly desirable.
in addition, we show that the prediction accuracy should be approximately 85% for non-redundant data sets of sequence identity less than 30%.
in the assessment of the evaluation data sets, our method also attains accurate prediction accuracy of  <dig> %, especially when testing on sequences with a low level of homology to the training data.
moreover, methods that integrate various features could suffer from the problem of low coverage in high-throughput proteomic analyses due to the lack of information to characterize unknown proteins.
extensive studies of localization prediction have led to the development of several methods including composition-based and homology-based methods.
the biological features are interpretable and can be applied in advanced analyses and experimental designs.
