in neurons, it is the target of the synaptic activity-induced nuclear calcium-calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase  iv signaling pathway that controls the expression of genes important for acquired neuroprotection as well as other long-lasting adaptive processes in the nervous system.
increasing the levels of wild type creb can, even without inducing synaptic activity, increase pro-survival gene expression and strengthen the neurons’ neuroprotective shield.
increasing the levels of creb was sufficient to boost neuroprotective activity even under basal conditions .
here we used recombinant adeno-associated virus  to increase the levels of wild type creb or to overexpress a mutant version of creb  containing a serine to alanine mutation at position amino acid  <dig> in mouse hippocampal neurons.
the ratio of phosphocreb to creb immunoreactivity in unstimulated hippocampal neurons was similar for endogenous creb and overexpressed wild type creb and, as expected, dramatically reduced for overexpressed mcreb.
a gene expression analysis revealed that increased expression of creb but not that of mcreb in hippocampal neurons led to elevated expression levels of bdnf as well as that of several members of a previously characterized set of activity-regulated inhibitor of death  genes, which include atf <dig>  btg <dig>  gadd45β, and gadd45γ.
our findings indicate that the expression levels of wild type creb are a critical determinant of the ability of hippocampal neurons to survive harmful conditions.
the observed degradation of creb protein following nmda treatment of hippocampal neurons suggests that the known creb shut-off associated with extrasynaptic nmda receptor-induced excitotoxicity is followed by creb proteolysis.
crebneuroprotectionhippocampal neuronsnuclear calciumcamkivgene expressionviral gene deliveryrecombinant adeno-associated virus
activation of cbp function by nuclear calcium-camkiv signaling is a second regulatory step required for creb/cbp-mediated transcription.
in contrast, overexpression of mcreb increased cell death.
