the mepe protein tends to accumulate amino acids promoting disorder and potential phosphorylation targets.
matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein  belongs to a family of small integrin-binding ligand n-linked glycoproteins  that play a key role in skeleton development, particularly in mineralization, phosphate regulation and osteogenesis.
mepe shows a high number of selection signatures, revealing the crucial role of positive selection in the evolution of this sibling member.
the comparative genomic analyses revealed a high degree of evolutionary conservation of some coding and non-coding regions of the mepe gene across mammals indicating a possible regulatory or functional role likely related with mineralization and/or phosphate regulation.
here we studied the adaptive evolution of the mepe gene in  <dig> eutherian mammals and three birds.
conversely, we find three sites under selection in the signal peptide and one in the asarm motif that were supported by at least one selection model.
the selection signatures were found mainly outside the functional motifs, reinforcing the idea that other regions outside the dentonin and the asarm might be crucial for the function of the protein and future studies should be undertaken to understand its importance.
rodentia and scandentia had distinct substitution rates with an increased accumulation of both synonymous and non-synonymous mutations compared with other mammalian lineages.
the study of this developmental gene from an evolutionary perspective could provide valuable insights on the adaptive diversification of morphological phenotypes in vertebrates.
however, the majority of the coding region had a fast evolutionary rate, particularly within the largest exon .
we identified  <dig> sites with significant positive selection signatures  outside the main regulatory motifs  suggestive of an adaptive role.
mepe associated disorders cause various physiological effects, such as loss of bone mass, tumors and disruption of renal function .
