tlrs are a phylogenetically conserved diverse family of sensors that drive innate immune responses following interactions with pamps.
moreover, transcriptional start sites  and isoforms, as well as differential promoter usage, revealed a complex pattern of transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene regulation upon infection with tlr <dig> and tlr <dig>  furthermore, tf motif analysis  revealed that the dna sequences for nf-κb, irf <dig>  and stat <dig> were significantly enriched in tlr3- and tlr4-stimulated microglia.
gene expression patterns were determined for the bv- <dig> microglial cell line when stimulated with viral dsrna poly  or bacterial endotoxin lps to identify novel transcribed genes, as well as investigate how differences in downstream signaling could influence gene expression in innate immunity.
in addition, we confirmed the expressions of key inflammatory genes as well as pro-inflammatory mediators in the supernatants were significantly induced in tlr3-and tlr4-stimulated primary microglial cells.
sequencing assessment and quality evaluation revealed that common and unique patterns of proinflammatory genes were significantly up-regulated in response to tlr <dig> and tlr <dig> stimulation.
most importantly, we observed that previously unidentified transcription factors   and the epigenetic regulators kdm4a and dnmt3l were significantly up-regulated in both tlr3- and tlr4-stimulated microglia.
tlr <dig> and tlr <dig> recognize viral dsrna poly  and bacterial endotoxin lps, respectively.
these unprecedented findings not only permit a comparison of tlr3-and tlr4-stimulated genes but also identify new genes that have not been previously implicated in innate immunity.
gene regulationinnate immunitytoll-like receptormicrogliarna sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
however, a genome-wide search for the effects of these tlrs has not been performed in microglia using rna-seq.
resident macrophages in the cns microglia become activated and produce proinflammatory molecules upon encountering bacteria or viruses.
