an a priori knowledge of that structure may guide the choice of the analysis method.
we compared between-group analysis and discriminant analysis .
for this, we recommend discriminant analysis.
discriminant analysis outperformed between-group analysis because it allows for the dataset structure.
when the clusters superpose, both methods fail to give interesting predictions.
to examine the structure of a dataset before analysis and preselect an a priori appropriate method for its analysis, we proposed a two-graph preliminary visualization tool: plotting patients on the between-group analysis discriminant axis  and on the first and the second within-group principal components analysis component , respectively.
besides, an innovative way of simulation generated the three main structures by modelling different partitions of the whole variance into within-group and between-group variances.
simulated datasets with known properties are valuable to assess and compare the performance of analysis methods, then implementation on real datasets checks and validates the results.
with the advance of microarray technology, several methods for gene classification and prognosis have been already designed.
these simulated datasets were used in complement to some well-known public datasets to investigate the methods behaviour in a large diversity of structure situations.
a geometric approach showed that these two methods are strongly related, but differ in the way they handle data structure.
yet, data structure helps understanding the predictive efficiency of these methods.
however, under various denominations, some of these methods have similar approaches.
three main structure situations may be identified.
in intermediate situations, the configuration of the clusters of points has to be handled by the projection to improve prediction.
this study evaluates the influence of gene expression variance structure on the performance of methods that describe the relationship between gene expression levels and a given phenotype through projection of data onto discriminant axes.
