discriminant analysis classified segmental origin of the intracellularly labeled and three-dimensionally reconstructed motoneurons 100% correctly based on twelve morphological variables.
the location specific motor pattern generation properties of the spinal cord along its rostro-caudal axis have been demonstrated.
however, it is still unclear that these differences are due to the different spinal interneuronal networks underlying locomotions or there are also segmental differences in motoneurons innervating different limbs.
location specificity of locomotor networks is therefore partly due to segmental differences in motoneurons driving fore-, and hindlimbs.
therefore we hypothesized that limb innervating motoneurons, located in the cervical and lumbar spinal cord, are different in their morphology and dendritic signal transfer properties.
whether log attenuations were higher or lower in cervical than in lumbar motoneurons depended on the proximity of dendritic input to the soma.
somata of lumbar motoneurons were rounder; the dendrites had bigger total length, more branches with higher branching orders and different spatial distributions of branch points.
to investigate dendritic voltage and current transfer properties imposed by dendritic architecture rather than by neuronal size we used standardized distributions of transfer variables.
a segregation tendency of cervical and lumbar motoneurons was detected by the rates of steady-state and transient voltage-amplitude transfers from dendrites to soma at all levels of synaptic background activities, modeled by varying the specific dendritic membrane resistance.
on the other hand no segregation was observed by the steady-state current transfer except under high background activity.
computational models of the motoneurons showed that dendritic signal transfer properties were also different in the two groups of motoneurons.
we introduced a novel combination of cluster analysis and homogeneity indexes to quantify segmental segregation tendencies of motoneurons based on their dendritic transfer properties.
the ventro-medial extent of cervical dendrites was bigger than in lumbar motoneurons.
