for intra-h2h gene pairs, transcription factors regulate their transcriptions through bidirectional promoters, whereas for inter-h2h gene pairs, transcription factors are likely to regulate their activities depending on the spatial interaction of h2h gene pairs.
factors such as hey <dig>  gabp, sin3ak- <dig>  pol <dig>  e2f <dig>  and c-myc are essential for the bidirectional transcription of intra-h2h pairs; while factors like ctcf, bdp <dig>  gata <dig>  rad <dig>  and pol <dig> play important roles in coherently regulating inter-h2h pairs; iii) h2h gene blocks are enriched with hypersensitive dnase and modified histones, which participate in active transcriptions; and iv) h2h genes tend to be highly connected compared with non-h2h genes in the human co-expression network.
in this study, we first used the hi-c data of chromatin linkages to identify spatially interacting h2h pairs, and then integrated chip-seq data to compare h2h gene pairs with and without evidence of spatial interactions in terms of their binding transcription factors .
our findings shed new light on the mechanism of the transcriptional regulation of h2h genes through their linear and spatial interactions.
however, the mechanism by which h2h genes are regulated at the transcriptional level still needs further clarification, especially with regard to the co-regulation of h2h pairs.
using chip-seq and dnase-seq data, histones and dnase associated with h2h pairs were identified.
we found that i) similar to the behaviour of two genes within an h2h pair , a gene pair involving two distinct h2h pairs  which interact with each other spatially, share common transcription factors ; ii) tfs of intra- and inter-h2h pairs are distributed differently.
in this way, two distinctive groups of transcription factors mediate intra- and inter-h2h gene transcriptions respectively, resulting in a highly compact gene regulatory network.
furthermore, we looked into the connections between h2h genes in a human co-expression network.
there have been many studies on bidirectional promoters.
