hla sequences were module dependent to some extent.
patients carrying certain hla alleles may develop adverse drug reactions  after taking specific drugs.
the neighbor-edges based and unbiased leverage algorithm  was developed for predicting hla-peptide binding.
an hla-peptide binding network was constructed from this dataset and modules were identified by the fast greedy modularity optimization algorithm.
peptide length and functional side chains of amino acids at certain positions of the peptides were different among the modules.
the modules identified from the network analysis clustered peptides and hlas with similar sequences and properties of amino acids.
hlapeptidenetworknebulabindingmodulepredictionmhc13- <dig> march  <dig> 12th annual mcbios conference little rock, ar, usa
nebula archived an overall prediction accuracy of  <dig>  in the loo validations and average accuracy of  <dig>  in the two-fold cross-validations and outperformed the method reported in the literature.
as the major histocompatibility complex , human leukocyte antigens  are one of the most polymorphic genes in humans.
network analysis is a useful approach for analyzing large and sparse datasets such as the hla-peptide binding dataset.
leave-one-out  validations and two-fold cross-validations were conducted to evaluate the performance of nebula using the constructed hla-peptide binding network.
therefore, we developed a network analysis based method to understand and predict hla-peptide binding.
we demonstrated that network analysis coupled with nebula is an efficient approach to understand and predict hla-peptide binding interactions and thus, could further our understanding of adrs.
to examine the significance of signals in the yielded models, the modularity was compared with the modularity values generated from  <dig>  random networks.
qualitative class i hla-peptide binding data were harvested and prepared from four major databases.
many experimental data have been generated for understanding hla-peptide binding.
nine modules were identified from analyzing the hla-peptide binding network with a highest modularity compared to all the random networks.
