the clostridial n-butanol pathway was co-engineered with inducible ompc-tmt in e. coli  for simultaneous ros removal, and its effect on n-butanol productivity was examined.
transcriptomic analysis revealed three major kegg pathways that were significantly differentially expressed in the but3-de strain compared with their expression in the but1-de strain, including genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation, fructose and mannose metabolism and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis.
the transcriptomic analysis suggested that n-butanol causes quinone malfunction, resulting in oxidative-phosphorylation-related nuo operon downregulation, which would diminish the ability to convert nadh to nad+ and generate proton motive force.
colioxidative stresstranscriptomic analysishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001868national science councilmost 104-2621-m-005-003-my3huang chieh-chen issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
these results indicate that ompc-tmt can increase n-butanol production by scavenging ros.
these results indicated that more nadh and atp were required in the n-butanol synthetic pathway.
the host strain  containing the clostridial n-butanol pathway displayed a decreased growth rate and limited n-butanol productivity, likely due to ros accumulation.
the modified strain improved n-butanol productivity to 320 mg/l, whereas the control strain produced only  <dig>  mg/l.
although bio-industrial microbes such as escherichia coli have been engineered to produce n-butanol, reactive oxygen species -mediated toxicity may limit productivity.
previously, we show that outer-membrane-targeted tilapia metallothionein  is more effective as an ros scavenger than human and mouse metallothioneins to reduce oxidative stress in the host cell.
however, fructose and mannose metabolism-related genes  were upregulated, and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis-related genes  were downregulated, which further assisted in regulating nadh/nad+ redox and preventing additional atp depletion.
our study demonstrates a potential approach to increase the robustness of microorganisms and the production of toxic chemicals through the ability to reduce oxidative stress.
bio-based n-butanol production using microbes is an emerging technology that requires further development.
