consistent expression of mir- <dig> suggests that it is likely important across all mosquito life stages from embryos to aged adults.
understanding the functions of mosquito mirnas will undoubtedly contribute to a better understanding of mosquito biology including longevity, reproduction, and mosquito-pathogen interactions, which are important to disease transmission.
stephensi mir- <dig> displayed a relatively strong signal from late embryonic to adult stages.
mature mirnas were detected in an.
expression profile analysis of eight of these mirnas revealed distinct expression patterns from early embryo to adult stages in an.
expression profile analysis of eight mirnas, including the four new mirnas, revealed distinct patterns from early embryo to adult stages in an.
stephensi is the most important malaria vector in asia and it is becoming a model anopheline species for physiological and genetics studies.
there are a few reports describing mirnas in the african malaria mosquito, anopheles gambiae, on the basis of similarity to known mirnas from other species.
comparisons between mirna gene clusters in anopheles and aedes mosquitoes, and in d. melanogaster suggest the loss or significant change of two mirna genes in ae.
micrornas  are non-coding rnas that are now recognized as a major class of gene-regulating molecules widely distributed in metozoans and plants.
this study provides experimental evidence for  <dig> conserved and four new micrornas in an.
a mosquito homolog of mir- <dig>  a regulator of longevity and apoptosis in d. melanogaster, represented 25% of all sequenced mirna clones from 17-day old an.
thus mir- <dig> is likely important across all mosquito life stages.
stephensi for all of the nine selected mirnas, including the four novel mirnas , either by northern blot or by ribonuclease protection assay.
gambiae mirnas, offering the first experimental verification of mirnas from mosquito species.
mirnas have been found to play important roles in apoptosis, cancer, development, differentiation, inflammation, longevity, and viral infection.
thus mir-x <dig> is likely involved in female reproduction and its function may be conserved among divergent mosquitoes.
further analysis showed that mir-x <dig> is likely involved in female reproduction and its function may be conserved among divergent mosquitoes.
aegypti, the expression of mir-x <dig> was restricted to adult females and predominantly in the ovaries.
two clusters of mirnas were found within introns of orthologous genes in an.
