we used affymetrix microarray as well as roche's gs-flx transcriptome sequencing for a comparative analysis of cotton transcriptome in leaf tissues under drought conditions.
the analysis of physiological measurements and gene expression profiling showed that vagad has the inherent ability to sense drought at a much earlier stage and to respond to it in a much more efficient manner than does rahs- <dig>  gene ontology  studies showed that the phenyl propanoid pathway, pigment biosynthesis, polyketide biosynthesis, and other secondary metabolite pathways were enriched in vagad under control and drought conditions as compared with rahs- <dig>  similarly, go analysis of transcriptome sequencing showed that the go terms responses to various abiotic stresses were significantly higher in vagad.
this was further supported by transcriptome analysis which revealed that rahs- <dig> responds to drought by inducing many transcripts related to senescence and cell death.
our results indicate that drought tolerance observed in vagad is not because of a single molecular reason but is rather due to several unique mechanisms which vagad has developed as an adaptation strategy.
however, the results of such an analysis are often plagued due to a limited number of genes  on microarrays.
fourteen accessions of gossypium herbaceum were subjected to mannitol stress for preliminary screening; two accessions, namely vagad and rahs- <dig>  were selected as being the most tolerant and most sensitive to osmotic stress, respectively.
among the classes of transcription factors  uniquely expressed in both accessions, rahs- <dig> showed the expression of erf and wrky families.
genome-wide gene expression profiling and detailed physiological investigation were used for understanding the molecular mechanism and physiological response of gossypium herbaceum, which governs the adaptability of plants in drought conditions.
recently, microarray-based gene expression analysis is commonly used to decipher genes and genetic networks controlling the traits of interest.
affymetrix cotton arrays containing  <dig>  probe sets and roche's gs-flx transcriptome sequencing of leaf tissue were used to analyze the gene expression profiling of vagad and rahs- <dig> under drought conditions.
the comparative genome-wide gene expression profiling study of two accessions of g.herbaceum under drought stress deciphers the differential patterns of gene expression, including tfs and physiologically relevant processes.
the unique expression of erfs in response to drought conditions reveals that rahs- <dig> responds to drought by inducing senescence.
