here we use rna-seq to identify differences in gene expression in the ovine mammary gland between late pregnancy and lactation.
between late pregnancy  and lactation  13 % of genes in the sheep genome were differentially expressed in the ovine mammary gland.
hormone and growth factor signalling and activation of signal transduction pathways, including the jak-stat and ppar pathways, were also differently regulated, indicating key roles for these pathways in functional development of the ovine mammary gland.
the mammary gland is a dynamic organ that undergoes dramatic physiological adaptations during the transition from late pregnancy to lactation.
our findings indicate the remarkable plasticity of the mammary gland, and the coordinated regulation of multiple genes and pathways to begin milk production.
genes and pathways identified by the present study may be important for managing milk production and mammary development, and may inform studies of diseases affecting the mammary gland.
in late pregnancy, cell proliferation, beta-oxidation of fatty acids and translation were identified as key biological processes.
changes in the expression of epigenetic regulators, particularly chromatin remodellers, indicate a possible role in coordinating the large-scale transcriptional changes that appear to be required to switch mammary processes from growth and development during late pregnancy to synthesis and secretion of milk during lactation.
coordinated transcriptional regulation of large numbers of genes is required to switch between mammary tissue establishment during late pregnancy, and activation and maintenance of milk production during lactation.
protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum was enriched during lactation, likely in support of active milk protein synthesis.
during lactation, high levels of milk fat synthesis were mirrored by enrichment of genes associated with fatty acid biosynthesis, transport and lipogenesis.
investigation of the molecular basis of mammary development and function will provide fundamental insights into tissue remodelling as well as a better understanding of milk production and mammary disease.
