a new encoding scheme was employed to improve the prediction of mucin-type o-glycosylation sites in mammalian proteins.
a new protein bioinformatics tool, cksaap_oglysite, was developed to predict mucin-type o-glycosylation serine/threonine  sites in mammalian proteins.
because of cksaap encoding's ability of reflecting characteristics of the sequences surrounding mucin-type o-glycosylation sites, cksaap_ oglysite has been proved more powerful than the conventional binary encoding based method.
this suggests that it can be used as a competitive mucin-type o-glycosylation site predictor to the biological community.
when the ratio of o-glycosylation to non-glycosylation sites in training datasets was set as 1: <dig>  10-fold cross-validation tests showed that the proposed method yielded a high accuracy of  <dig> % and  <dig> % in predicting o-glycosylated s and t sites, respectively.
computational identification of glycosylation sites in protein sequences becomes increasingly important in the post-genomic era.
when trained and tested in 1: <dig> datasets, the cksaap encoding showed a more significant improvement than the binary encoding.
either in 1: <dig> or 1: <dig> datasets, the performance of this s+t predictor was always slightly better than those predictors where s and t sites were independently predicted, suggesting that the molecular recognition of o-glycosylated s/t sites seems to be similar and the increase of the s+t predictor's accuracy may be a result of expanded training datasets.
using the composition of k-spaced amino acid pairs  based encoding scheme, the proposed method was trained and tested in a new and stringent o-glycosylation dataset with the assistance of support vector machine .
as one of the most common protein post-translational modifications, glycosylation is involved in a variety of important biological processes.
based on the same datasets, cksaap_oglysite resulted in a higher accuracy than the conventional binary encoding based method .
we also merged the training datasets of s and t sites and integrated the prediction of s and t sites into one single predictor .
