some of these may be useful to breeders who select for increased protein/oil content or altered fatty acid ratios in the seeds.
we discovered  <dig> snps located on ten different chromosomes that are significantly associated with the seven seed composition traits in our wild soybean sample.
using a genome-wide association  approach with nearly  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms , we investigated the genetic basis of protein, oil and all five fatty acid levels in seeds from a sample of  <dig> wild soybeans , the progenitor of domesticated soybean, to identify quantitative trait loci  affecting these seed composition traits.
the results also provide additional insight into the genetic architecture of these traits in a large sample of wild soybean, and suggest some new candidate genes whose molecular effects on these traits need to be further studied.
eight snps co-localized with qtls previously uncovered in linkage or association mapping studies conducted with cultivated soybean samples, while the remaining snps appeared to be in novel locations.
cultivated soybean  is a major agricultural crop that provides a crucial source of edible protein and oil.
for each of the seven traits, most of the snps produced differences between the average phenotypic values of the two homozygotes of about one-half standard deviation and contributed over 3% of their total variability.
decreased amounts of saturated palmitic acid and increased amounts of unsaturated oleic acid in soybean oil are considered optimal for human cardiovascular health and therefore there has considerable interest by breeders in discovering genes affecting the relative concentrations of these fatty acids.
two snps were common for two or more fatty acids, suggesting loci with pleiotropic effects.
quantitative trait locifatty acidsproteinoilcandidate genesgwasthe charlotte research institute1603-020song bao-hua http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100005562north carolina biotechnology center2014-cfg-8005song bao-hua http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000057national institute of general medical sciencesr15gm122029song bao-hua issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
this is the first gwa study conducted on seed composition traits solely in wild soybean populations, and a number of qtls were found that have not been previously discovered.
we also identified some candidate genes that are involved in fatty acid metabolism and regulation.
