the second pattern has a high evolutionary impact, as the expansion involves two or more gene copies in a block, with the duplicated block located next to the original block  or at some distance from the original block .
we showed that lses involve genes that are tied to defense and pathogenesis mechanisms as well as in the fundamental life cycle of vibrionaceae species.
this evolution is driven by several forces, among them gene duplication and lateral gene transfer, which are believed to provide raw material for functional redundancy and novelty.
here we present the results of a detailed comparison of the genomes of eleven vibrionaceae strains that have distinct life styles and distinct phenotypes.
our results provide evidence of genome plasticity and rapid evolution within the family vibrionaceae.
these lses occurred in two distinct patterns: the first type yields one or more copies of a single gene; we call this a single gene expansion.
taxa from the family vibrionaceae are diversified in their life styles; some species are free living, others are symbiotic, and others are human pathogens.
the family vibrionaceae is found in the gammaproteobacteria and is abundant in aquatic environments.
such lineage specific expansions could reveal components in bacterial systems that, by their enhanced genetic variability, can be tied to responses to environmental challenges, interesting phenotypes, or adaptive pathogenic responses to host challenges.
the steadily increasing number of prokaryotic genomes has accelerated the study of genome evolution; in particular, the availability of sets of genomes from closely related bacteria has facilitated the exploration of the mechanisms underlying genome plasticity.
abundant duplicate genes have been identified in the eleven vibrionaceae strains, with 1–11% of the whole genomes composed lineage specific radiations.
the core genome shared by all eleven strains is composed of  <dig>  genes, which make up about 31%–50% of the genome repertoire.
