gsea of tumor gene expression profile demonstrated the hypoxic status of the tumor in patients with poor prognosis.
nb-hypo classifier prediction resulted in 2 % classification error when applied to clinically defined low-intermediate risk neuroblastoma patients.
the prediction was 100 % accurate in assessing the death of five low/intermediated risk patients.
we trained and validated the classifier in a leave-one-out cross-validation analysis on  <dig> tumor gene expression profiles.
more than fifty percent of neuroblastoma  patients with adverse prognosis do not benefit from treatment making the identification of new potential targets mandatory.
we developed a robust classifier predicting neuroblastoma patients’ outcome with a very low error rate and we provided independent evidence that the poor outcome patients had hypoxic tumors, supporting the potential of using hypoxia as target for neuroblastoma treatment.
multi-layer perceptron  was trained on the expression values of the  <dig> probe sets constituting nb-hypo signature to develop a predictive model for neuroblastoma patients’ outcome.
we aimed at developing a classifier predicting neuroblastoma patients’ outcome based on the assessment of the adverse effects of tumor hypoxia on the progression of the disease.
hypoxia is a condition of low oxygen tension, occurring in poorly vascularized tissues, which activates specific genes and contributes to the acquisition of the tumor aggressive phenotype.
we utilized the expression of the  <dig> probe sets of the nb-hypo signature in  <dig> neuroblastoma tumors to develop a mlp classifier predicting patients’ outcome .
we utilized the expression data of  <dig> tumors in a leave-one-out analysis to select and construct the classifier and the expression data of the remaining  <dig> tumors to test the classifier performance in an external dataset.
we defined a gene expression signature , which measures the hypoxic status of the neuroblastoma tumor.
neuroblastomahypoxiaoutcome predictiongene set enrichment analysisgene signaturetwelfth annual meeting of the italian society of bioinformatics  milan, italy 3- <dig> june  <dig> http://www.bioinformatics.it/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
we externally tested the resulting nb-hypo classifier on an independent  <dig> tumors’ set.
the nb-hypo classifier predicted the patients’ outcome with the remarkable accuracy of 87 %.
we utilized the gene set enrichment analysis  to evaluate the enrichment of hypoxia related gene sets in patients predicted with “poor” or “good” outcome.
