using all 8-base pair long sequences as a test set, we have identified the dna sequences that are enriched in promoters of housekeeping genes, focusing on those dna sequences which are preferentially localized in the proximal promoter.
abundant 8-mers that are preferentially localized in the proximal promoters and exhibit the best enrichment in rnap bound promoters are all variants of six known cpg-containing tfbs: ets, nrf- <dig>  boxa, sp <dig>  cre, and e-box.
although the promoters of these genes are known to contain cpg islands, the specific dna sequences that are associated with high rnap binding to housekeeping promoters has not been described.
these results suggest that only transcription factor binding sites  that contain the cpg dinucleotide are involved in rnap binding to housekeeping promoters while tfbs that do not contain a cpg are involved in regulated promoter activity.
experimental emsa results demonstrate that methylation of the cpg in the ets, nrf- <dig>  and sp <dig> motifs prevent dna binding in nuclear extracts in both keratinocytes and liver.
chip-chip experiments from three mouse tissues, liver, heart ventricles, and primary keratinocytes, indicate that 94% of promoters have similar rnap binding, ranging from well-bound to poorly-bound in all tissues.
virtually all sequences enriched in promoters with high rnap binding values contain a cpg dinucleotide.
unmethylated cpg dinucleotides in the tfbs in cpg islands allow the transcription factors to find their binding sites which occur only in promoters, in turn localizing rnap to promoters.
in general, tfbs that do not contain a cpg are involved in regulated gene expression while tfbs that contain a cpg are involved in constitutive gene expression with some cpg containing sequences also involved in inducible and tissue specific gene regulation.
the frequency of these six dna motifs can predict housekeeping promoters as accurately as the presence of a cpg island, suggesting that they are the structural elements critical for cpg island function.
the promoters of housekeeping genes are well-bound by rna polymerase ii  in different tissues.
