transposons were found on scaffolds carrying polyketide synthase encoding genes, responsible for production of t-toxin in race t. strong evidence of ectopic recombination was found, demonstrating that tes can play an important role in the modulation of genome architecture of this species.
there are two races, race o and race t that differ by the absence  and presence  of ~  <dig> -mb of dna encoding genes responsible for the production of t-toxin, which makes race t much more virulent than race o. the presence of repetitive elements in fungal genomes is considered to be an important source of genetic variability between different species.
so, this study provides information about the potential impact of tes on the evolution of c. heterostrophus.
additionally, it was shown that ectopic recombination promoted by tes appears to be the major event in the genome reorganization of this species and that a large number of elements are still potentially active.
a detailed analysis of class i and ii tes identified in the near complete genome sequence of race o was performed.
the co-localization of effector genes and tes, therefore, exposes those genes to high rates of point mutations.
various potentially active tes were found near coding regions and may modify the expression and structure of these genes by acting as ectopic recombination sites.
in total in race o,  <dig> new families of transposons were identified.
the repeat induced point mutation  silencing mechanism was shown to have high specificity in c. heterostrophus, acting only on transposons near coding regions.
in c. heterostrophus, the rip silencing mechanism is efficient and selective.
this may accelerate the rate of evolution of these genes, providing a potential advantage for the host.
cochliobolus heterostrophus is a dothideomycete that causes southern corn leaf blight disease.
transposable elementscochliobolus heterostrophusrepeat-induced point mutationgenomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
new families of transposons were identified.
