the three candidates identified in this study, col3a <dig>  dlg <dig>  and rnf <dig>  are valuable targets for further evaluation with a larger sample size of normal and cancer tissue or serum samples.
genego analysis results indicated this set as neoplasm enriched.
finally, the differential expression patterns of three selected cancer biomarker candidates were confirmed by real-time qpcr analysis.
after examined the candidates in protein interaction network, public tissue expression databases, and literatures, we selected three genes for further evaluation by real-time qpcr with eight major normal and cancer tissues.
searching digitized transcriptome using cmh enabled us to identify multi-cancer differentially expressed gene candidates.
although the availability of public databases make possible the comprehensive mining of degs among the ests from multiple tissue types, existing studies usually employed statistics suitable only for two categories.
on the other hand, simple pooling of cancer and normal genes from multiple tissue types runs the risk of simpson's paradox.
our methodology demonstrated simultaneously analysis for cancer biomarkers of multiple tissue types with the est data.
the higher-than-normal tissue expression of col3a <dig>  dlg <dig>  and rnf <dig> in some of the cancer tissues is in agreement with our in silico predictions.
seven hundred and twenty three primary deg candidates  were selected from a curated est database with the application of cochran-mantel-haenszel statistic .
here we presented a different approach which searched for multi-cancer deg candidates by analyzing all pertinent ests in all categories and narrowing down the cancer biomarker candidates via integrative analysis with microarray data and selection of secretory and membrane protein genes as well as incorporation of network analysis.
cross-examination with microarray data further narrowed the list down to  <dig> genes, among which  <dig> had membrane or secretory annotations.
3- <dig> october  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  eleventh international conference on bioinformatics  bangkok, thailand
multi-class test has been developed to enable the finding of tissue specific genes, but subsequent search for cancer genes involves separate two-category test only on the ests of the tissue of interest.
