consistent with recent evidence that ldb16p and sei1p form a functional unit, the pa puncta phenotype in the ldb16Δ sei1Δ strain was rescued by human seipin.
pa puncta were detected with three different probes: opi1p, spo20p and pah1p.
a system of droplet induction was used to show that pa puncta were not present until droplets were formed; the puncta appeared regardless of whether droplets consisted of triacylglycerol or steryl ester.
suppression of pa puncta requires the first  <dig> amino acids of sei1p , a domain that is also important for initiation of droplet assembly.
moreover, pa puncta in the sei1Δ strain expressing sei1pΔnterm was suppressed by overexpression of ldb16p, suggesting a functional interaction of nterm with this protein.
overexpression of both sei1p and ldb16p, but not sei1p alone, is sufficient to cause a large increase in droplet number.
in the absence of the yeast seipin homolog sei1p , droplets are slow to bud from the endoplasmic reticulum, lack the normal component of proteins on their surface, are highly heterogeneous in size and shape, often bud into the nucleus, and promote local proliferation of the endoplasmic reticulum in which they become tangled.
we hypothesize that seipin prevents formation of membranes with extreme curvature at endoplasmic reticulum/droplet junctions that would attract phosphatidic acid.
seipin prevents a localized accumulation of phosphatidic acid  at er-droplet junctions.
deletion strains were used to demonstrate that a single phosphatidic acid-producing enzyme is not responsible for the generation of the puncta, and the puncta remain resistant to overexpression of enzymes that metabolize phosphatidic acid, suggesting that this lipid is trapped in a latent compartment.
seipinlipid dropletsphosphatidic acidfld1sei1ldb16issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
seipin is required for the correct assembly of cytoplasmic lipid droplets.
however, ldb16p alone increases triacylglycerol accumulation in the ldb16Δ sei1Δ background.
