one from a heart disease study and another from acetaminophen  exposure in rat liver that causes centrilobular necrosis.
the strategy involves constructing an objective function with the sum of the squared euclidean distances for numeric microarray and clinical chemistry data and simple matching for histopathology categorical values in order to measure dissimilarity of the samples.
the biological processes cell growth and/or maintenance, amine metabolism, and stress response were shown to discern between no and moderate levels of acetaminophen-induced centrilobular necrosis.
we present a more formal approach, the modk-prototypes algorithm, for clustering biological samples based on simultaneously considering microarray gene expression data and classes of known phenotypic variables such as clinical chemistry evaluations and histopathologic observations.
following modk-prototypes clustering of the acetaminophen-exposed samples, informative genes from the cluster prototypes were identified that are descriptive of, and phenotypically anchored to, levels of necrosis of the centrilobular region of the rat liver.
a cluster's prototype, formed from the mean of the values for numeric features and the mode of the categorical values of all the samples in the group, is representative of the phenotype of the cluster members.
the use of well-known and traditional measurements directly in the clustering provides some guarantee that the resulting clusters will be meaningfully interpretable.
the dynamic validity index for numeric data was modified with a category utility measure for determining the number of clusters in the data sets.
separate weighting terms are used for microarray, clinical chemistry and histopathology measurements to control the influence of each data domain on the clustering of the samples.
the modk-prototypes algorithm partitioned the simulated data into clusters with samples in their respective class group and the heart disease samples into two groups  with an accuracy of 79%.
the inability of clustering algorithms to incorporate biological data in the grouping process can limit proper interpretation of the data and its underlying biology.
commonly employed clustering methods for analysis of gene expression data do not directly incorporate phenotypic data about the samples.
