bovine ephemeral fever  is a febrile disease of cattle that is transmitted by arthropod vectors such as mosquitoes and culicoides biting midges.
arboviral diseaseatmospheric dispersal modelingbovine ephemeral feverconditional autoregressive modelculicoides biting midgesepidemiologyjapanmosquitospatial analysiswindborne spreadresearch project for improving food safety and animal health of the ministry of agriculture, forestry and fisheriesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the results of the dispersion model indicated the likely transmission of the infected vectors by wind on the local scale and on the long-distance scale.
the possibility of between-island transmission by windborne vectors and transmission by long-distance migration of infected vectors were examined using atmospheric dispersion models.
this study revealed that the condition of a terrain and land use significantly influenced disease transmission.
spatial analysis showed that paddy fields, farmlands, and slope gradients had a significant impact on the 1-km cell-level incidence risk.
in this study, an epidemiological analysis was conducted to understand the temporal and spatial characteristics of the outbreak.
an outbreak of bef recently occurred in ishigaki island and surrounding islands that are located southwest of japan.
factors associated with the disease spread within ishigaki island were investigated by hierarchical bayesian models.
in september  <dig>  the first case of the disease was detected in the western part of ishigaki island.
a plausible incursion event of infected vectors from southeast asia to ishigaki island was estimated to have occurred at the end of august.
these factors are important in assessing favorable environments for related vectors.
these findings would be helpful for developing a surveillance program and developing preventive measures against bef.
the dispersion model demonstrated the high possibility of between-island transmission by wind.
in 1 month, it had rapidly spread to the southern part of the island and to surrounding islands, and led to  <dig> suspected cases of bef during the outbreak.
