our data suggest that one of the selected genes, namely, aodhn <dig> plays an important role to mitigate salt and drought stress responses.
furthermore, some functional insights were obtained by growing e. coli cells expressing aodhn <dig>  growth of e. coli cells expressing aodhn <dig> was significantly higher than that of the control cells without aodhn <dig> under salinity and drought stresses, suggesting that the mangrove dehydrin protein helps to mitigate the abiotic stresses.
salt stress is a major challenge for growth and development of plants.
qrt-pcr analysis of avicennia showed up-regulation of aodhn <dig> in response to salt and drought treatments.
qrt-pcr analysis showed that  <dig> of these were specifically enriched in the salt gland-rich tissues.
thirty-four ests were identified to be enriched in salt gland-rich tissues of a. officinalis leaves.
the major classes of ests identified include those known to be involved in regulating metabolic processes , stress response , transcription , signal transduction  and transport functions .
a dehydrin gene was chosen for further experimental analysis, because it is significantly highly expressed in salt gland cells, and dehydrins are known to be involved in stress remediation in other plants.
the mangrove tree avicennia officinalis has evolved salt tolerance mechanisms such as salt secretion through specialized glands on its leaves.
although a number of structural studies on salt glands have been done, the molecular mechanism of salt secretion is not clearly understood.
avicennia officinalissalinitydehydrinsubtractive hybridizationleaf salt glandsdrought stressissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
by subtractive hybridization  of cdna from salt gland-rich cell layers  with mesophyll tissues as the driver, several expressed sequence tags  were identified.
phylogenetic analysis and further characterization of this gene suggested that aodhn <dig> belongs to group ii late embryogenesis abundant proteins.
full-length avicennia officinalis dehydrin <dig>  cdna was obtained by rapid amplification of cdna ends.
a visual interactive map generated based on predicted functional gene interactions of the identified ests suggested altered activities of hydrolase, transmembrane transport and kinases.
