in this study the effects of elp and hfbi fusion tags on recombinant protein accumulation levels and pb formation was examined in stable transgenic nicotiana tabacum.
the accumulation of recombinant protein and pb formation was evaluated in two cultivars of nicotiana tabacum transformed with green fluorescent protein  fused to elp or hfbi, both targeted and retrieved to the er.
furthermore, these tags induced the formation of pbs in a concentration-dependent manner, where a specific level of recombinant protein accumulation was required for pbs to appear.
elastin-like polypeptide , hydrophobin i  and zera® are three fusion partners found to increase the accumulation levels of recombinant proteins and induce the formation of protein bodies  in leaves when targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum  in transient expression assays.
two different strategies have been commonly used for the expression of recombinant proteins in plants: transient expression mediated by agrobacterium; or stable transformation of the plant genome.
plants are recognized as an efficient and inexpensive system to produce valuable recombinant proteins.
however, the use of plants as bioreactors still faces two main limitations: low accumulation levels of some recombinant proteins and lack of efficient purification methods.
protein bodyprotein body formationelastin-like polypeptideelphydrophobin ihfbitobaccotransgenic expressionmolecular farminggreen fluorescent protein
the elp and hfbi tags increased the accumulation of the recombinant protein and induced the formation of pbs in leaves of stable transgenic plants from both cultivars.
the use of elp and hfbi tags as fusion partners in stable transgenic plants of tobacco is feasible and promising.
moreover, agro-infiltration of plants accumulating low levels of recombinant protein with p <dig>  a suppressor of post-transcriptional gene silencing , increased accumulation levels in four independent transgenic lines, suggesting that ptgs might have caused the low accumulation levels in these plants.
in a constitutive environment, these tags increase the accumulation levels of the recombinant protein and induce the formation of pbs regardless of the cultivar used.
however, a specific level of recombinant protein accumulation needs to be reached for pbs to form.
