all of the nuclear receptor protein sequences contain a highly homologous dna-binding domain and a less conserved ligand-binding domain with the exception of the nr0a group.
the d. pulex genome also contains nuclear receptor orthologs that are present in insects and nematodes but not vertebrates, including putative nuclear receptors within the nr0a group.
the d. pulex genome contains several nuclear receptors that have vertebrate orthologs.
gene products were detected in adult female d. pulex for  <dig> of the  <dig> receptors.
nuclear receptor expression was evaluated and receptors were subjected to phylogenetic analyses to gain insight into evolution and function.
nuclear receptors are ancient proteins with highly conserved dna-binding domains.
some nuclear receptors are ubiquitous among the metazoans, while others are unique to specific phylogenetic groups.
however, relative to insects, little is known about the nuclear receptors of crustaceans.
the aim of this study was to identify putative nuclear receptors from the first assembled genome of a crustacean daphnia pulex http://wfleabase.org.
twenty-five putative nuclear receptors were identified in d. pulex based on the presence of a conserved dna-binding domain.
the dna-binding domains of the nuclear receptors of d. pulex contain the same degree of conservation that is typically found within nuclear receptors of other species.
phylogenetic analysis revealed the presence of all seven receptor subfamilies.
the nuclear receptor superfamily currently consists of seven gene subfamilies that encompass over  <dig> distinct receptor proteins.
however, several nuclear receptor members that are represented in vertebrates are absent from d. pulex.
a novel group of receptors, designated hr <dig>  was identified in d. pulex that groups with the hr96/cenhr8/48/daf <dig> clade, but forms its own sub-clade.
most of the receptors identified in d. pulex have orthologs within the vertebrate and invertebrate lineages examined with the exception of the novel hr <dig> group and the dappu-hr <dig> and potentially the dappu-hr <dig> receptors found in d. pulex.
