we concluded that hidden markov models and random forest imputation are more suitable to studies that aim analyses of highly heritable traits while pedigree-based methods can be used to best analyze traits with low heritability.
the more complete this data is, the more powerful will be the results of analysis.
this study aims to  compare the genetic variance in a single-nucleotide polymorphism panel of soybean with missing data imputed using various methods,  evaluate the imputation accuracy and post-imputation quality associated with these methods, and  evaluate the impact of imputation method on heritability and the accuracy of genome-wide prediction of soybean traits.
the genotypic matrix captured the highest amount of genetic variance when missing loci were imputed by the method proposed in this paper.
despite the notable contribution to heritability, advantages in genomic prediction were not observed by changing the imputation method.
the imputation methods we evaluated were as follows: multivariate mixed model, hidden markov model, logical algorithm, k-nearest neighbor, single value decomposition, and random forest.
nevertheless, there are next-generation technologies that seek to provide genotypic information in spite of great proportions of missing data.
success in genome-wide association studies and marker-assisted selection depends on good phenotypic and genotypic data.
it means that genotypic data from genotyping technologies that provide a high proportion of missing values, such as gbs, should be handled carefully because the imputation method will impact downstream analysis.
we identified significant differences across imputation methods in a dataset missing 20 % of the genotypic values.
we propose an imputation method based on multivariate mixed models using pedigree information.
we used raw genotypes from the soynam project and the following phenotypes: plant height, days to maturity, grain yield, and seed protein composition.
our methods comparison indicate that heritability of traits can be affected by the imputation method.
