we performed a genome-wide temporal gene expression and functional enrichment analysis of thp- <dig> cells treated with 100 μm of vit c, a physiologically relevant concentration of the vitamin.
vitamin c  is an essential dietary nutrient, which is a potent antioxidant, a free radical scavenger and functions as a cofactor in many enzymatic reactions.
modulatory effects of vitamin c on thp- <dig> cells were revealed by differential expression of genes starting from 8 h onwards.
this study provides a rational basis for the use of the vitamin c- thp- <dig> cell model, to study biochemical and cellular responses to stresses, including infection with m. tuberculosis and other intracellular pathogens.
vitamin cthp-1macrophagesmicroarraygene expressionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001407department of biotechnology , ministry of science and technologydepartment of science and technology, indiaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
the thp- <dig> cell line is widely used for studying macrophage functions and for analyzing host cell-pathogen interactions.
vit c is also considered to enhance the immune effector function of macrophages, which are regarded to be the first line of defence in response to any pathogen.
a comparative analysis of vit c-mediated modulation of gene expression data in thp-1cells and human skin fibroblasts disclosed an overlap in certain functional processes such as ‘regulation of transcription’, ‘cell cycle’ and ‘extracellular matrix organization’, and thp- <dig> specific responses, namely, ‘regulation of gene expression’ and ‘ion homeostasis’.
it was noteworthy that vit c modulated the ‘immune system’ process throughout the time-course.
this study reveals the genome-wide effects of physiological levels of vit c on thp- <dig> gene expression.
the multitude of effects impacted by vit c in macrophages highlights its role in maintaining homeostasis of several cellular functions.
the number of differentially expressed genes peaked at the earliest time-point i.e.
8 h followed by temporal decline till 96 h. further, functional enrichment analysis based on statistically stringent criteria revealed a gamut of functional responses, namely, ‘regulation of gene expression’, ‘signal transduction’, ‘cell cycle’, ‘immune system process’, ‘camp metabolic process’, ‘cholesterol transport’ and ‘ion homeostasis’.
