the release of auxin response factors  from their aux/iaa partners allows arfs to mediate auxin-responsive changes in downstream gene transcription.
the autocatalytic ethylene production associated with the ripening of climacteric fruits was not significantly altered in transgenic tomato fruits.
the results demonstrate that auxin accelerates fruit softening independently of ethylene action and this is probably mediated through the upregulation of many cell-wall metabolism genes.
the findings of the present study highlighted the critical role of psltir <dig> as positive regulator of auxin-signalling in coordinating the development of leaves and fruits.
in an attempt to understand the potential role of auxin during fruit development, a plum auxin receptor, psltir <dig>  has previously been characterized at the cellular, biochemical and molecular levels, but the biological significance of this protein is still lacking.
the short shelf-life of transgenic tomatoes was associated with dramatic upregulation of several genes encoding proteins involved in cell-wall degradation, which determine fruit softening and subsequent fruit shelf-life.
the present study sheds light into the involvement of psltir <dig> in regulating leaf morphology, fruit development and fruit softening-associated ripening, but not autocatalytic ethylene production.
this was manifested by the entire leaf morphology of transgenic tomato plants compared to the wild-type compound leaf patterning.
auxin binding to the f-box receptor proteins promotes the formation of scftir <dig> ubiquitin ligase complex that targets the auxin repressors, aux/iaas, for degradation via the ubiquitin/26s proteasome pathway.
in the present study, tomato  was used as a model to investigate the phenotypic and molecular changes associated with the overexpression of psltir <dig>
nevertheless, the fruit shelf-life characteristics were affected by transgene presence, mainly through enhancing fruit softening rate.
moreover, transgenic plants produced parthenocarpic fruits, a characteristic property of auxin hypersensitivity.
