in addition, three specific replacements  were only found between 03-human sars-covs and strains from 02– <dig> interspecies epidemic group, which reveals that selective sweep may also force the evolution of s genes before the jump of sars-covs into human hosts.
the spike  protein is one of the best characterized proteins of sars-cov, which plays a key role in sars-cov overcoming species barrier and accomplishing interspecies transmission from animals to humans, suggesting that it may be the major target of selective pressure.
positive selection was detected in the first two groups, which represent the course of sars-cov interspecies transmission and of viral adaptation to human host, respectively.
these indicate that s protein experiences variable positive selective pressures before reaching stabilization.
by investigating the adaptive evolution of s protein, we identified twelve amino acid sites  in the s protein under positive selective pressure.
the variation of positive selective pressures and positively selected sites are likely to contribute to the adaptive evolution of s protein from animals to humans.
since certain residues at these positively selected sites are associated with receptor recognition and/or membrane fusion, they are likely to be the crucial residues for animal-to-human transmission of sars-covs, and subsequent adaptation to human hosts.
it is believed that animal-to-human transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome  coronavirus  is the cause of the sars outbreak worldwide.
based on phylogenetic tree and epidemiological investigation, sars outbreak was divided into three epidemic groups: 02– <dig> interspecies, 03-early-mid, and 03-late epidemic groups in the present study.
a total of  <dig> sites in 02– <dig> interspecies epidemic group and  <dig> sites in 03-early-mid epidemic group were identified under positive selection.
moreover, it was showed that a larger proportion  of positively selected sites was located in receptor-binding domain  than in heptad repeat 1-hr <dig> region in 02– <dig> interspecies epidemic group , and a greater percentage  of these sites occurred in hr1–hr <dig> region than in rbd in 03-early-mid epidemic group .
these suggest that functionally different domains of s protein may not experience same positive selection in each epidemic group.
however, the process of adaptive evolution of s protein and the exact positively selected sites associated with this process remain unknown.
