the first aim of the work was to analyze in detail the complexity of the aggregates formed upon overexpression of recombinant proteins in e. coli.
finally, the possibility of separating aggregate fractions with different complexities offers new options for biotechnological strategies aimed at improving the yield of folded and active recombinant proteins.
the three further aggregate sub-classes were otherwise indistinctly precipitated in the pellet.
a sucrose step gradient succeeded in separating aggregate subclasses of a gfp-gst fusion protein with specific biochemical and biophysical features, providing a novel approach for studying recombinant protein aggregates.
these results were also confirmed by electron microscopy analysis of the macro-structure formed by the different aggregates.
large fibrils were rapidly assembled when the recombinant protein was incubated in the presence of cellular extracts, but the gfp-gst fusion purified soon after lysis failed to undergo amyloidation, indicating that other cell components probably participate in the active formation of large aggregates.
the total lysate separated into  <dig> different fractions whereas only the one with the lowest density was detected when the supernatant recovered after ultracentrifugation was loaded onto the sucrose gradient.
all of them showed an increased complexity of the recombinant protein aggregates starting from the top of the sucrose gradient  to the bottom .
finally, we showed that aggregates of lower complexity are more efficiently disaggregated by a combination of molecular chaperones.
the aggregation state of the gfp-gst recovered from each of the four fractions was further characterized by examining three independent biochemical parameters.
an additional analytical tool is now available to investigate the aggregation process and separate subclasses by their mass.
it was possible to demonstrate the complexity of the aggregation pattern of a recombinant protein expressed in bacteria and to characterize biochemically the different aggregate subclasses.
the distribution of the recombinant protein among the four subclasses was strongly dependent on the dnak availability, with larger aggregates formed in dnak- mutants.
