high sfp detection performances of both genome and transcript hybridizations indicated that microarrays of a complex genome  can be effectively utilized for whole genome genotyping to conduct mutant mapping and analysis of quantitative traits such as gene expression levels.
in large genome species, transcript hybridization to expression arrays has been used for genotyping.
we compared the single feature polymorphism  detection performance of whole-genome and transcript hybridizations using the affymetrix genechip® rice genome array, using the rice cultivars with full genome sequence, japonica cultivar nipponbare and indica cultivar 93- <dig>  both genomes were surveyed for all probe target sequences.
we investigated optimum conditions for sfp detection in both whole genome and transcript hybridization using differences between perfect match and mismatch probe intensities of non-polymorphic targets, assuming that these differences are representative of those between mismatch and perfect targets.
the optimizations allowed a more than 20% increase in true sfp detection in whole-genome hybridization and a large improvement of sfp detection performance in transcript hybridization.
for transcript hybridization, stable sfp detection was achieved for highly expressed genes, and about  <dig>  sfps were detected at a high sensitivity  in both shoot and young panicle transcripts.
several statistical methods of sfp detection by whole-genome hybridization were compared under the optimized conditions.
causes of false positives and negatives in sfp detection in both types of hybridization were investigated.
although rice is a fully sequenced model plant of medium genome size , there are a few examples of the use of rice oligonucleotide array as a genotyping tool.
significance analysis of the microarray for log-transformed raw intensities of pm probes gave the best performance in whole genome hybridization, and  <dig>  true sfps were detected with  <dig> % false positives by whole genome hybridization.
in small genome species , whole-genome dna hybridization to expression arrays has been used for various applications.
high-density oligonucleotide arrays are effective tools for genotyping numerous loci simultaneously.
only completely matched 25-mer single copy probes of the nipponbare genome were extracted, and sfps between them and 93- <dig> sequences were predicted.
