the highest expressed annotated gene in this tissue was serine protease nasvi2eg <dig>  which has previously been implicated in the apoptotic activity of n. vitripennis venom.
this venom induces several dramatic changes in the host, including developmental arrest, immunosuppression, and altered metabolism.
for this reason we were interested in determining the expression levels of venom encoding genes in the venom gland, as this information could be used to rank candidates for further study.
to do this we carried out deep transcriptome sequencing of the venom gland and ovary tissue and used rna-seq to rank the venom protein encoding genes by expression level.
the generation of a specific venom gland transcriptome dataset also provides further opportunities to investigate novel features of this specialised organ.
rna-seq revealed that the highest expressed venom encoding gene in the venom gland was ‘venom protein y’.
as expected the rna-seq confirmed that venom encoding genes are almost exclusively expressed in the venom gland relative to the neighbouring ovary tissue.
finally, metatranscriptomic analysis of the venom gland transcriptome finds little evidence for the role of wolbachia in the venom system.
novel genes appear to perform key roles in n. vitripennis venom function, with over half of the  <dig> highest expressed venom encoding loci lacking bioinformatic annotations.
prior to egg laying the parasitoid wasp nasonia vitripennis envenomates its pupal host with a complex mixture of venom peptides.
however, currently very little is known about the specific functions of individual venom peptides or what mechanisms underlie the hosts response to envenomation.
many of the venom peptides also lack bioinformatically derived annotations because no homologs can be identified in the sequences databases.
the expression level information provided here for the n. vitripennis venom protein encoding genes represents a valuable dataset that can be used by the research community to rank candidates for further functional characterisation.
the rna interference system of n. vitripennis provides a method for functional characterisation of venom protein encoding genes, however working with the current list of  <dig> candidates represents a daunting task.
the high throughput sequencing data also provided evidence for the existence of an additional  <dig> previously undescribed transcribed regions in the n. vitripennis genome.
