our findings unequivocally emphasized that n-terminal extension of mtmetap1c contributes towards the functionality of the enzyme presumably by regulating active site residues through "action-at-a-distance" mechanism and we for the first time are reporting this unique function of the enzyme.
modelling of mtmetap1a based on mtmetap1c crystal structure revealed the distinct spatial arrangements of identical active site amino acid residues and their mutations affected the enzymatic activities of both the proteins.
the metap action for exclusion of n-terminal methionine is mandatory in 50-70% of nascent proteins.
we cloned genes encoding two such metalloproteases  present in mycobacterium tuberculosis and expressed them as histidine-tagged proteins in escherichia coli.
furthermore, mutational analysis revealed that val- <dig> and pro- <dig> of mtmetap1c are crucial for its enzymatic activity.
it specifically removes the terminal methionine in all organisms, if the penultimate residue is non-bulky and uncharged.
such an activity is required for proper sub cellular localization, additional processing and eventually for the degradation of proteins.
consistent with this observation, molecular dynamic simulation studies of wild-type and these variants strongly suggest their involvement in maintaining active site conformation of mtmetap1c.
methionine aminopeptidase  is a ubiquitous enzyme in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, which catalyzes co-translational removal of n-terminal methionine from elongating polypeptide chains during protein synthesis.
strikingly, we observed that  <dig> amino acid long n-terminal extension of mtmetap1c, compared to its other family members, contributes towards the activity and stability of this enzyme, which has never been reported for any methionine aminopeptidase.
circular dichroism spectroscopic studies as well as monitoring of enzyme activity indicated high temperature stability  of mtmetap1a compared to that of the mtmetap1c.
although they have different substrate preferences, for met-ala-ser, we found, mtmetap1c had significantly high enzyme turnover rate as opposed to mtmetap1a.
