we also propose a new approach to benchmark data set construction.
therefore, robust assessment of motif discovery methods becomes important, both for validation of existing tools and for identification of promising directions for future research.
we show that for many data sets in a recently proposed benchmark suite for motif discovery, none of the common motif models can accurately discriminate the binding sites from remaining sequence.
we present one benchmark suite with data sets that allow good discrimination between positive and negative instances with the common motif models.
we present another benchmark suite where pwm, iupac and mismatch motif models are not able to discriminate reliably between positive and negative instances.
this suite could be used for evaluating more powerful motif models.
our improved benchmark suites have been designed to differentiate between the performance of motif discovery algorithms and the power of motif models.
this approach is based on collections of binding site fragments that are ranked according to the optimal level of discrimination achieved with our algorithms.
this allows us to select subsets with specific properties.
algorithms are presented for finding position weight matrices , iupac-type motifs and mismatch motifs with optimal discrimination of binding sites from remaining sequence.
an important step in annotation of sequenced genomes is the identification of transcription factor binding sites.
we use a machine learning perspective to analyze collections of transcription factors with known binding sites.
we provide a web server where users can download our benchmark suites, submit predictions and visualize scores on the benchmarks.
synthetic data sets may avoid this problem, but we show on some previously proposed benchmarks that there may be a strong bias towards a presupposed motif model.
this may obscure the distinction between the potential performance of the motif discovery tool itself versus the intrinsic complexity of the problem we are trying to solve.
these data sets are suitable for evaluating algorithms for motif discovery that rely on these models.
