a high level of genetic variation was found on early growth traits and on components of the relative growth rate  as indicated by significant differences between accessions and by the high heritability values .
jaccard’s similarity and cluster analysis by upgm  with arithmetic mean and pca  indicated higher variability in central american accessions compared to asian, african and south american accessions.
in the set of central american accessions.
the pool of central american accessions showed very large genetic variation as assessed by dna-marker variation compared to accessions from other regions.
central american accessions also showed the highest phenotypic variation and should be considered as the most important source for plant breeding.
phenotypic variation included seed morphological characteristics, seed oil content and fatty acid composition and early growth traits.
the fatty acid composition of jatropha oil significantly differed  between regions.
jatropha curcasgenetic diversityphenotypic variationaflpssrtrapfatty acid compositionheritabilityrgrslanar
in this study,  <dig> accessions from asia , africa , south america  and central america  were evaluated at genetic and phenotypic level to find genetic variation and important traits for oilseed production.
genetic variation was assessed with ssr , trap  and aflp  techniques.
analysis of molecular variance  indicated high genetic variation within regions  and low variation across regions .
some variation in early growth traits was found within a group of accessions from asia and africa, while these accessions did not differ in a single dna-marker, possibly indicating epigenetic variation.
the main bottleneck to elevate jatropha  from a wild species to a profitable biodiesel crop is the low genetic and phenotypic variation found in different regions of the world, hampering efficient plant breeding for productivity traits.
pic values were higher than in other regions.
accessions from the central american population contain alleles that were not found in the accessions from other populations.
