cpgcluster's cgis overlapping with the transcription start site  show the highest statistical significance, as compared to the islands in other genome locations, thus qualifying cpgcluster as a valuable tool in discriminating functional cgis from the remaining islands in the bulk genome.
therefore, none of the main statistical properties of cpg islands  are needed as search parameters, which may lead to the high specificity and low overlap with spurious alu elements observed for cpgcluster predictions.
cpgcluster was benchmarked against five other cgi finders by using a test sequence set assembled from an experimental cgi library.
given the higher frequency of cpg dinucleotides at cgis, as compared to bulk dna, the distance distributions between neighboring cpgs should differ for bulk and island cpgs.
despite their involvement in the regulation of gene expression and their importance as genomic markers for promoter prediction, no objective standard exists for defining cpg islands , since all current approaches rely on a large parameter space formed by the thresholds of length, cpg fraction and g+c content.
cpgcluster reached the highest overall accuracy values, while showing the lowest rate of false-positive predictions.
cpgcluster uses only integer arithmetic, thus being a fast and computationally efficient algorithm able to predict statistically significant clusters of cpg dinucleotides.
another outstanding feature is that all predicted cgis start and end with a cpg dinucleotide, which should be appropriate for a genomic feature whose functionality is based precisely on cpg dinucleotides.
since a minimum-length threshold is not required, cpgcluster can find short but fully functional cgis usually missed by other algorithms.
the only search parameter in cpgcluster is the distance between two consecutive cpgs, in contrast to previous algorithms.
the cgis predicted by cpgcluster present the lowest degree of overlap with alu retrotransposons and, simultaneously, the highest overlap with vertebrate phylogenetic conserved elements .
