we isolated gpx homologs via in silico screening of genomic and/or expressed sequence tag databases of eukaryotic organisms including protostomian species.
the overall distribution of the phgpx-like proteins with different biochemical properties was biased across taxa; selenium- and glutathione -dependent proteins were exclusively detected in platyhelminth and deuterostomian species, whereas selenium-independent and thioredoxin -dependent enzymes were isolated in the other taxa.
biochemical properties of these proteins vary along with their donor organisms, which has complicated the phylogenetic classification of diverse phgpx-like proteins.
our present study would be beneficial to get detailed insights into the complex gpx evolution, and to understand the molecular basis of the specialized physiological implications of this antioxidant system in their respective donor organisms.
comparative analysis of invertebrate gpx genes provides informative evidence to support the modular pathways of gpx evolution, which have been accompanied with sporadic expansion/deletion and exon-intron remodeling.
the differentiated enzymatic properties might be acquired by the evolutionary relaxation of selection pressure and/or biochemical adaptation to the acting environments.
despite efforts for comprehensive analyses, the evolutionary aspects of gpx genes in invertebrates remain largely unknown.
genes showing strong similarity to the mammalian phgpx genes were commonly found in all genomes examined.
in comparison of genomic organization, the gsh-dependent phgpx genes showed a conserved architectural pattern, while their trx-dependent counterparts displayed complex exon-intron structures.
with the dichotomized fashion in genomic organizations, a highly polytomic topology of their phylogenetic trees implied that the gpx genes have multiple evolutionary intermediate forms.
phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidases , the most abundant isoforms of gpx families, interfere directly with hydroperoxidation of lipids.
