in this study, we present the complete genome sequence of methylacidiphilum fumariolicum solv, obtained using pacific biosciences single-molecule real-time  sequencing technology.
unravelling the m. fumariolicum solv genome and its epigenetic regulation allow for robust characterization of biological processes that are involved in oxidizing methane.
aerobic methanotrophs can grow in hostile volcanic environments and use methane as their sole source of energy.
in addition, genes involved in nitrogen fixation were upregulated in cell cultures growing in nitrogen fixing conditions, indicating the presence of active nitrogenase.
the discovery of three verrucomicrobial methylacidiphilum strains has revealed diverse metabolic pathways used by these methanotrophs, including mechanisms through which methane is oxidized.
the genome contains  <dig>  annotated genes and  <dig> functional subsystems including all key metabolic pathways that are associated with methylacidiphilum strains, including the cbb pathway for co <dig> fixation.
phylogenetic analysis of the particulate methane mono-oxygenase operon separates the methylacidiphilum strains from other verrucomicrobial methanotrophs.
however, partial conservation of methyltransferases between m. fumariolicum solv and m. infernorum v <dig> indicates potential differences in the global methylation state of methylacidiphilum strains.
in turn, they offer a better understanding of the evolution, the underlying physiological and ecological properties of solv and other methylacidiphilum strains.
the genome assembles to a single  <dig>  mbp chromosome with an average gc content of  <dig> %.
methylacidiphilum fumariolicum solvgenome assemblysingle molecule sequencingpacific biosciencesmethylationgene expressionverrucomicrobial methanotrophsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
however, it does not encode the serine cycle and ribulose monophosphate pathways for carbon fixation.
rna-seq analysis of cell cultures growing in three different conditions revealed the deregulation of two out of three pmocab operons.
characterization of the global methylation state of m. fumariolicum solv revealed methylation of adenines and cytosines mainly in the coding regions of the genome.
our findings provide novel insights into the global methylation state of verrucomicrobial methanotroph m. fumariolicum solv.
