the observed genetic diversity distribution and historical demographic profile suggests that the history of m. simplex does not match the scenario suggested for other atlantic forest species.
our results show that m. simplex presents a shallow phylogeographic structure with isolation by distance among the studied populations, living in an almost panmictic population.
our data suggest that over evolutionary time m. simplex did not undergo dramatic range fragmentation, but rather it likely persisted in largely interconnected populations.
the atlantic forest represents an excellent opportunity to test phylogeographic hypotheses, because it has a wide range of vegetation types, including unforested habitats covered predominantly by herbaceous and shrubby plants, which are strongly influenced by the harsh environment with strong wind and high insolation.
we used partial sequences of the mitochondrial gene cytochrome oxidase i and nuclear gene wingless from  <dig> specimens and  <dig> specimens, respectively, to assess the phylogeography and demographic history of this species.
here, we investigated the distribution of genetic diversity in the endemic sand dune ant mycetophylax simplex across its known range along the brazilian coast, with the aim of contributing to the understanding of alternative phylogeographic patterns.
such demographic events were likely triggered by the expansion of the shorelines during the lowering of the sea level.
brazilian atlantic forestmycetophylax simplexformicidaeneotropical regiongene flowgenetic structuresand dunesrestingasea-level changesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
the growing number of contrasting phylogeographic patterns within and among species and regions have shown that quaternary events influenced the distribution of species in more ways than first supposed.
during past glacial periods, many species of forest-dwelling animals experienced range contractions.
instead, it underwent demographic changes and range expansions during glacial periods.
