we present the complete mitochondrial genome sequences of five mud shrimps, austinogebia edulis, upogebia major, thalassina kelanang , nihonotrypaea thermophilus and neaxius glyptocercus .
phylogenetic analyses based on the concatenated nucleotide and amino acid sequences of  <dig> protein-coding genes indicate the possible polyphyly of mud shrimps, supporting the division of the group into two infraorders.
all five genomes encode a standard set of  <dig> protein-coding genes, two ribosomal rna genes,  <dig> transfer rna genes and a putative control region.
the evolutionary history and relationships of the mud shrimps  are contentious, with previous attempts revealing mixed results.
each of the two gebiidea species  and two axiidea species  share unique gene order specific to their infraorders and analyses further suggest these two derived gene orders have evolved independently.
phylogenetic analyses on the mt genome sequences and the distinct gene orders provide further evidences for the divergence between the two mud shrimp infraorders, gebiidea and axiidea, corroborating previous molecular phylogeny and justifying their infraordinal status.
the mud shrimps were once classified in the infraorder thalassinidea.
mitochondrial  genome sequence and structure can be especially powerful in resolving higher systematic relationships that may offer new insights into the phylogeny of the mud shrimps and the other decapod infraorders, and test the hypothesis of dividing the mud shrimps into two infraorders.
mitochondrial genome sequences appear to be promising markers for resolving phylogenetic issues concerning decapod crustaceans that warrant further investigations and our present study has also provided further information concerning the mt genome evolution of the decapoda.
except for t. kelanang, mud shrimp mitochondrial genomes exhibited rearrangements and novel patterns compared to the pancrustacean ground pattern.
recent molecular phylogenetic analyses, however, suggest separation of the group into two individual infraorders, gebiidea and axiidea.
the inclusion of mt genome from more taxa, in particular the reptant infraorders polychelida and glypheidea is required in further analysis.
