protection of pufa oxidation is a critical factor in oil quality.
the disadvantage of the high pufa content in flax oil is high susceptibility to oxidation, which can result in carcinogenic compound formation.
among phenolics the caffeic acid was most effective in increasing oil stability.
the aim of this study was to investigate the impact of phenylpropanoid contents on the oil properties important during the whole technological process from seed storage to grinding and oil pressing, which may influence health benefits as well as shelf-life, and to establish guidelines for the selection of new cultivars.
antioxidant properties of secondary metabolites were analyzed by dpph method.
flaxseed oil is characterized by high content of essential polyunsaturated fatty acids  promoted as a human dietary supplement protecting against atherosclerosis.
in one approach, in order to increase oil stability, exogenous substances added are mainly lipid soluble antioxidants from the isoprenoid pathway, such as tocopherol and carotene.
increased accumulation of phenolic compounds in flax seeds was achieved by three different strategies that modify genes coding for enzymes from the phenylpropanoid pathway.
flaxseed oiloil stabilityantioxidant activityphenolic compoundsradical scavenging activityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
the three types of transgenic flax had different phenylpropanoid profiles detected in oil, highly increasing its stability.
the stability of oils was investigated: a) during regular storage by measuring acid value peroxide value p-anisidine value malondialdehyde, conjugated dienes and trienes; b) by using accelerated rancidity tests by tbars reaction; c) by thermoanalytical - differential scanning calorimetry .
we found that hydrophilic phenylpropanoids more than lipophilic isoprenoid compounds determine oil stability however they can work synergistically.
however one of investigated transgenic lines has high ala content making it suitable as omega- <dig> source.
