the aim of this work was to compare the transcriptional responses of two species, drosophila antonietae and drosophila meridionalis, and identify genes potentially related to responses to odors released by their host cactus, cereus hildmannianus.
for d. meridionalis we obtained  <dig> uss,  <dig> of which were orthologous with genes from other drosophila species.
the expression of  <dig> genes from d. meridionalis and  <dig> from d. antonietae were further analyzed by quantitative real time-pcr, showing that four genes were significantly overexpressed in d. antonietae and six in d. meridionalis.
our results revealed the differential expression of genes related to responses to odor stimuli by a cactus, in two associated fly species.
functional information  revealed that these differentially expressed genes are related to metabolic processes, detoxification mechanisms, signaling, response to stimuli, and reproduction.
our findings provide insight into how the use of c. hildmannianus may have arisen independently in the two fly species, through genetic differentiation in metabolic pathways to effectively explore this cactus as a host.
cactophilic drosophila species have received much attention because larval development occurs in the necrotic tissues of cacti, and both larvae and adults feed on these tissues.
the two fly species are sympatric in most of their populations and use this same host cactus in nature.
the activation of these genes may reflect different metabolic pathways used by these flies in their interaction with this host cactus.
although the majority of activated genes were similar between the two species, we also observed that certain metabolic pathways were specifically activated, especially those related to signaling pathways and detoxification mechanisms.
such drosophila-cactus interactions include effects of the host plant on the physiology and behavior of the flies, especially so their nutritional status, mating condition and reproduction.
we obtained  <dig> unique sequences  for d. antonietae in a suppression subtractive hybridization screen,  <dig> of these uss had matches with genes predicted for other drosophila species.
