this toolbox implements a novel computationally-optimized algorithm for estimating many of the main information theoretic quantities and bias correction techniques used in neuroscience applications.
the new toolbox presented here implements fast and data-robust computations of the most relevant quantities used in information theoretic analysis of neural data.
information theory is an increasingly popular framework for studying how the brain encodes sensory information.
it can therefore significantly enlarge the domain of application of information theory to neuroscience, and lead to new discoveries about the neural code.
here we introduce a new c- and matlab-based information theoretic toolbox, specifically developed for neuroscience data.
first, we verify that these algorithms provide accurate and unbiased estimates of the information carried by analog brain signals  even when using limited amounts of experimental data.
this is due to the limited-sampling bias which affects calculation of information, to the complexity of the techniques to eliminate the bias, and to the lack of publicly available fast routines for the information analysis of multi-dimensional responses.
we illustrate this breakdown by analyzing lfps recorded from primary visual cortex during presentation of naturalistic movies.
third, we explain how the toolbox can be used to break down the information carried by different features of the neural signal into distinct components reflecting different ways in which correlations between parts of the neural signal contribute to coding.
the toolbox can be easily used within matlab, the environment used by most neuroscience laboratories for the acquisition, preprocessing and plotting of neural data.
despite its widespread use for the analysis of spike trains of single neurons and of small neural populations, its application to the analysis of other types of neurophysiological signals  has remained relatively limited so far.
this test is important since existing algorithms were so far tested primarily on spike trains.
