overexpression and purification strategy presented here describes an efficient protocol for the production of a highly active and stable cuzn-superoxide dismutase in its recombinant form in e. coli system.
yield of the purified recombinant protein was ~ 4 mg l− <dig> of culture volume and the bacterial biomass was ~  <dig>  g l− <dig>  the recombinant pea chloroplastic sod was found to possess nearly  <dig> fold higher superoxide dismutase activity and the peroxidase activity was also  <dig> fold higher as compared to commercially available cuzn-superoxide dismutase.
heterologous expressioncd spectroscopyhomology modellingni-nta purificationperoxidase activitysuperoxide dismutaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
the enzyme has gained wide interest in pharmaceutical industries due to its highly acclaimed antioxidative properties.
the strategy can be utilized for the large-scale preparation of active cuzn-superoxide dismutase and thus it has wide application in pharmaceutical industries and also for elucidating the potential of this protein endowed with exceptional stability and activity.
the recombinant expression of this protein in its enzymatically active and stable form is highly desired and hence optimization of culture conditions and characterization of the related biochemical properties are essential to explore the significance of the enzyme in physiological, therapeutic, structural and transgenic research.
; superoxide anion into molecular oxygen and hydrogen peroxide.
the enzyme was found to be exceptionally stable as evident from ph and temperature incubation studies and maintenance of sod activity upon prolonged storage.
cuzn-superoxide dismutase  is a unique enzyme, which can catalyzes the dismutation of inevitable metabolic product i.e.
high-level expression of the chloroplastic isoform of pisum sativum cuzn-sod was achieved at 18°c, upon isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside induction and the process was optimized for maximum recovery of the protein in its soluble  form.
