in this study, we quantify the performance of state-of-the-art phylogenetic network inference methods on large-scale datasets using empirical data sampled from natural mouse populations and a range of simulations using model phylogenies with a single reticulation.
in the presence of gene flow, a phylogeny cannot be described by a tree but is instead a directed acyclic graph known as a phylogenetic network.
phylogenetic networkphylogenetic inferencephylogenomicsphylogeneticsscalabilitylarge-scaleincomplete lineage sortinggene flowmutationperformance studymousehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000083directorate for computer and information science and engineering1565719liu kevin j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
branching events in phylogenetic trees reflect bifurcating and/or multifurcating speciation and splitting events.
both phylogenetic trees and networks are typically reconstructed using computational analysis of multi-locus sequence data.
none of the probabilistic methods completed analyses of datasets with  <dig> taxa or more after many weeks of cpu runtime.
the impact of both dimensions of scale on phylogenetic tree inference has been well characterized by recent studies; in contrast, the scalability limits of phylogenetic network inference methods are largely unknown.
we find that, as in the case of phylogenetic tree inference, the performance of leading network inference methods is negatively impacted by both dimensions of dataset scale.
the advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies has brought about two main scalability challenges:  dataset size in terms of the number of taxa and  the evolutionary divergence of the taxa in a study.
the improved accuracy obtained with probabilistic inference methods comes at a computational cost in terms of runtime and main memory usage, which become prohibitive as dataset size grows past twenty-five taxa.
the most accurate methods were probabilistic inference methods which maximize either likelihood under coalescent-based models or pseudo-likelihood approximations to the model likelihood.
we conclude that the state of the art of phylogenetic network inference lags well behind the scope of current phylogenomic studies.
