the degs up-regulated in resistant seedlings included a set of putative signal receptor genes encoding disease resistance protein homologs, calcineurin b-like -interacting protein kinases , f-box family proteins , and abscisic acid  receptor; transcriptional factor  genes of multiple families; genes homologous to apoptosis-inducing factor , flowering locus t-like protein , and subtilisin-like protease.
our global gene expression profiling presents a comprehensive view of transcriptomic regulation in the wpbr pathosystem and yields novel insights on molecular and biochemical mechanisms of disease resistance in conifers.
we report here rna-seq analysis results using illumina deep sequencing of primary needles of western white pine  infected with wpbr.
currently little transcriptomic and genomic data are available to understand molecular interactions in the wpbr pathosystem.
about  <dig>  p. monticola unigenes produced orthologous hits in the pinus gene index  database  and  <dig>  genes were expressed actively  in the healthy tissues.
de novo gene assembly was used to generate the first p. monticola consensus transcriptome, which contained  <dig>  unique transcripts with an average length of  <dig>  bp and a total length of  <dig>  mb.
a large proportion of the down-regulated degs were related to photosystems, the metabolic pathways of carbon fixation and flavonoid biosynthesis.
the novel p. monticola transcriptome data provide a basis for future studies of genetic resistance in a non-model, coniferous species.
three hundred and ten degs were regulated similarly in both susceptible and resistant seedlings and  <dig> degs showed regulatory differences between susceptible and resistant seedlings post infection by c. ribicola.
degs up-regulated in resistant seedlings also included a wide diversity of down-stream genes .
comparison of transcriptomes from wpbr-susceptible and -resistant genotypes revealed a total of  <dig> differentially expressed genes  with a significant fold change >  <dig>  during p. monticola- c. ribicola interactions.
defence responsedisease resistancerna-seq analysistranscriptome profilingwhite pine-blister rust  interaction
five-needle pines are important forest species that have been devastated by white pine blister rust  across north america.
