results for selected genes were confirmed by real time rt-pcr.
the slt2/mpk <dig> gene was confirmed to be essential for myo1Δ strain viability, supporting that the up regulated stress response genes are regulated by the pkc <dig> cell integrity pathway.
suppression of nikkomycin z hypersensitivity together with slt2p phosphorylation was caused by the overexpression of ribosomal protein genes rpl <dig> and rps <dig>  these ribosomal protein mrnas were down regulated in the myo1Δ arrays, suggesting that down regulation of ribosomal biogenesis may affect cell integrity in myo1Δ strains.
following this analysis of global mrna expression in yeast myo1Δ strains, we conclude that  <dig> genes were differentially regulated in myo1Δ strains and that the stress response and protein biosynthesis gene categories were coordinately regulated in this mutant.
myo1p deficiency in yeast  causes a cell separation defect characterized by the formation of attached cells, yet it also causes abnormal budding patterns, formation of enlarged and elongated cells, increased osmotic sensitivity, delocalized chitin deposition, increased chitin synthesis, and hypersensitivity to the chitin synthase iii inhibitor nikkomycin z. to determine how differential expression of genes is related to these diverse cell wall phenotypes, we analyzed the global mrna expression profile of myo1Δ strains.
overexpression of ribosomal protein genes rpl <dig> and rps <dig> suppressed the hypersensitivity to nikkomycin z and increased the levels of phosphorylated slt2p in myo1Δ strains.
global mrna expression profiles of myo1Δ strains and their corresponding wild type controls were obtained by hybridization to yeast oligonucleotide microarrays.
increased levels of phosphorylated slt2p were also observed in wild type strains under these conditions.
the saccharomyces cerevisiae myo <dig> gene encodes the myosin ii heavy chain , a protein required for normal cytokinesis in budding yeast.
gene set enrichment analysis revealed the significant over-representation of genes in the protein biosynthesis and stress response categories.
