this study supports the integration of gs models in advanced-generation tree breeding programs, given that high genomic prediction accuracy was obtained with a relatively small number of markers due to high relatedness and family structure in the population.
as such, gs represents a promising approach to accelerate tree breeding, which is especially relevant for the genetic improvement of boreal conifers characterized by long breeding cycles.
genomic selection  uses information from genomic signatures consisting of thousands of genetic markers to predict complex traits.
in boreal spruce breeding programs and similar ones with long breeding cycles, much larger gain per unit of time can be obtained from genomic selection at an early age than by the conventional approach.
genomic selectionblack sprucewood propertiestree improvement and breedinggenomic-estimated breeding valuesgene snpsfonds de recherche du québec - nature et technologiecanadian wood fibre centreministère des forêts, de la faune et des parcs du québechttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008762genome canadahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000233genome british columbiagénome québecissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
only slightly higher model accuracy was obtained when using marker subsets that were identified to carry large effects, indicating a minor role for short-range ld in this population.
in forward selection, gains per unit of time were three times higher with the gs approach than with conventional selection.
genomic profiles were obtained from  <dig> single nucleotide polymorphisms  representative of as many gene loci distributed among the  <dig> linkage groups common to spruce.
in addition, models were also accurate across sites, indicating little genotype-by-environment interaction in the area investigated.
in the present study, we tested gs in an advanced-breeding population of the boreal black spruce  for growth and wood quality traits, and concurrently examined factors affecting gs model accuracy.
validation using independent sets of trees showed that gs model accuracy was high, related to trait heritability and equivalent to that of conventional pedigree-based models.
using information from half-sibs instead of full-sibs led to a significant reduction in model accuracy, indicating that the inclusion of relatedness in the model contributed to its higher accuracies.
about  <dig> to  <dig> markers were sufficient to obtain gs model accuracy almost equivalent to that obtained with all markers, whether they were well spread across the genome or from a single linkage group, further confirming the implication of relatedness and potential long-range linkage disequilibrium  in the high accuracy estimates obtained.
gs models were obtained for four growth and wood traits.
