we hypothesised that early immunological changes could not only act as potential prognostic biomarkers for the subsequent development of disease but also shed light on the pathogenesis of endometritis in the postpartum dairy cow.
a link betwene the dysregulated inflammatory response and the composition of the uterine microbial communities was suggested by the presence of significant differences in uterine bacterial trflp profiles between hc and ce groups.
significantly over-represented gene ontology terms were identified using go-seq, and pathway analysis was performed using kegg.
next-generation sequencing from endometrial biopsies taken at 7 dpp identified significant induction of inflammatory gene expression in all cows.
despite the common inflammatory profile and enrichment of the toll-like receptor and nfκb pathways,  <dig> genes and  <dig> mirnas were significantly differentially expressed between healthy cows  and cows which subsequently developed ce at  <dig> dpp .
despite a common early inflammatory profile, elevated and differential expression of specific immune genes may identify cows at risk of prolonged inflammation and the development of ce postpartum.
while significant differential expression of  <dig> genes in the transcriptome of healthy cows between  <dig> and  <dig> dpp showed the transition from a proinflammatory to tissue profliferation and repair, only  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in cows with ce , indicating the arrest of such a transition.
our data suggests that the il <dig> and il <dig> inflammatory cascade activated early postpartum is resolved thereby restoring homeostasis in healthy cows by  <dig> dpp, but this transition fails to occur in cows which develop ce.
the regulation of endometrial inflammation has important consequences for the resumption of bovine fertility postpartum.
all cows experience bacterial influx into the uterus after calving; however a significant proportion fail to clear infection leading to the development of cytological endometritis  and compromised fertility.
terminal-restriction fragment length polymorphism  was used to obtain fingerprints of the microbial communities present.
