to evaluate the prediction accuracy, an additional  <dig> soybean accessions were evaluated for sensitivity to trsv, which resulted in a correlation of  <dig>   between actual and predicted severities.
a single locus responsible for trsv sensitivity in soybean was identified on chromosome  <dig>  two leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase genes were located near the locus and may control sensitivity of soybean to trsv infection.
genome-wide association study  is a useful tool for detecting and characterizing traits of interest including those associated with disease resistance in soybean.
trsv-induced disease sensitivities of the  <dig> soybean pis were rated on a one to five scale with plants rated as one exhibiting mild symptoms and plants rated as five displaying terminal bud necrosis .
the genomic estimated breeding values for the remaining  <dig>  unscreened soybean pis in the usda soybean germplasm collection were obtained using the gapit r package.
by using a genome-wide marker set to predict phenotypic values, genomic prediction for phenotype-unknown but genotype-determined pis has become possible.
furthermore, a comprehensive genomic prediction for trsv sensitivity for all accessions in the usda soybean germplasm collection was completed.
genome association and prediction integrated tool genome-wide association studies genomic predictionsingle nucleotide polymorphism soybean tobacco ringspot virus issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the gwas identified a single locus on soybean chromosome  <dig> strongly associated with trsv sensitivity.
cross-validation showed a correlation of  <dig>   to trsv sensitivity without including the most significant snp marker from the gwas as a covariate, which was a better estimation compared to the mean separation by using significant snps.
the availability of  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphism  markers  on  <dig>  soybean and wild soybean plant introductions  in the usda soybean germplasm collection allows for fast and robust identification of loci associated with a desired phenotype.
the goal of this study was to describe the genetic architecture associated with sensitivity to tobacco ringspot virus  infection in the usda soybean germplasm collection.
