the sigma factor gene family encoded by the bc species-group appears to be the result of a dynamic gene-duplication and gene-loss process that in previous analyses underestimated the true heterogeneity of the sigma factor content in the bc species-group.
it has been established for some time that the most rapidly evolving and evolutionarily flexible portions of the bacterial genome are regulatory sequences and transcriptional networks.
thus, examining sigma factor divergence in these organisms would concurrently examine both regulatory sequences and transcriptional networks important for divergence.
while classical microbial taxonomy proposed these organisms as distinct species, newer molecular phylogenies and comparative genome sequencing suggests that these organisms should be classified as a single species .
phylogenetic analysis of the bc species-group utilizing  <dig> single-copy genes of the family bacillaceae suggests that several taxonomic revisions of the genus bacillus should be considered.
how do we account for the underlying similarity of these phenotypically diverse microbes?
other studies have suggested that the sigma factor gene family of these organisms has diverged and expanded significantly relative to their ancestors; sigma factors are those portions of the bacterial transcriptional apparatus that control rna polymerase recognition for promoter selection.
expansion of the sigma factor gene family appears to have preferentially occurred within the extracytoplasmic function  sigma factor genes, while the primary alternative  sigma factor genes are, in general, highly conserved with those found in b. subtilis.
we began this examination by comparison to the sigma factor gene set of b. subtilis.
within the bc species-group there is little indication that the currently recognized species form related sub-groupings, suggesting that they are members of the same species.
divergence of the sigma-controlled transcriptional regulons among various members of the bc species-group likely has a major role in explaining the diversity of phenotypic characteristics seen in members of the bc species-group.
