as one solution, the researcher may choose to sequence additional orthologous genes of appropriate evolutionary rate for the taxa in the study.
gracillariidae, lithocolletinae + leucanthiza, and acrocercops and parectopa groups were strongly supported in nearly every analysis.
from our tests for compositional heterogeneity and strong bootstrap values obtained when synonymous changes are excluded, we tentatively conclude that bucculatricidae is closely related to gracillariidae + roeslerstammiidae + yponomeutidae.
we then compared results from different data sets to assess whether one sampling design can be favored over another.
our results strongly support the monophyly of a g.b.r.y.
thus, the addition of sites that have low levels of saturation and compositional heterogeneity can greatly improve results.
each data set was subject to five different models and partitioning schemes of non-synonymous and synonymous changes.
partial augmentation of genes led to high support for deep divergences, especially when non-synonymous changes were analyzed alone.
clade, a group comprised of gracillariidae + bucculatricidae + roeslerstammiidae + yponomeutidae, when analyzed with non-synonymous changes only, but this group was frequently split when synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions were analyzed together.
1) partially or fully augmenting a data set with more characters increased bootstrap support for particular deep nodes, and this increase was dramatic when non-synonymous changes were analyzed alone.
we target gracillariidae, a cretaceous-age  group of leaf-mining moths to test whether the strategy of adding genes for a subset of taxa can improve branch support for deep nodes.
the concatenated data set comprising all genes and all taxa and three other data sets of different taxon and gene sub-sampling design were analyzed with maximum likelihood.
after finding that many deep divergences remained weakly supported, we sequenced eleven additional genes  for a 27-taxon subset.
however, because each study differs in the number of characters and taxa, there is still a need for additional studies that examine whether incomplete sampling designs are likely to aid at increasing deep node resolution.
we find strong evidence for the exclusion of douglasiidae from gracillarioidea sensu davis and robinson .
increasing the number of taxa without an increase in number of characters led to lower bootstrap support; increasing the number of characters without increasing the number of taxa generally increased bootstrap support.
4) the difficulty in determining the phylogenetic placement of bucculatricidae is probably attributable to compositional heterogeneity at the third codon position.
researchers conducting molecular phylogenetic studies are frequently faced with the decision of what to do when weak branch support is obtained for key nodes of importance.
we initially sequenced ten genes  for  <dig> taxa that represent the major lineages of gracillariidae plus outgroups.
however, generating large, complete data matrices can become increasingly difficult as the number of characters increases.
gracillaria group was well supported in some analyses, but less so in others.
