we use demo datasets to demonstrate the usage and intuitive user interface of chipseek.
for examining the potential functions of peaks, chipseek provides peak annotation, visualization of peak genomic location, motif identification, sequence extraction, and comparison between datasets.
chip-seqchip-chipanalysis toolweb-servicespeak annotationmotif identificationfilter toolscomparisonissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
chip assay followed by next generation sequencing  or microarray  is often used to study patterns of protein-binding profiles in different cell types and in cancer samples on a genome-wide scale.
chipseek can provide statistical summary of the dataset including histogram of peak length distribution, histogram of distances to the nearest transcription start site , and pie chart  of genomic locations for users to have a comprehensive view on the dataset for further analysis.
to reveal the identity of the proteins associated with the specific region on dna, chromatin immunoprecipitation  is the most widely used technique.
all the results and figures produced by chipseek can be downloaded for further analysis.
however, only a limited number of bioinformatics tools are available for chip datasets analysis.
we present chipseek, a web-based tool for chip data analysis providing summary statistics in graphs and offering several commonly demanded analyses.
chipseek provides a user-friendly interface for biologists to analyze large-scale chip data without requiring any programing skills.
the analysis tools built into chipseek, especially the ones for selecting and examine a subset of peaks from chip data, provides invaluable helps for exploring the high through-put data from either chip-seq or chip-chip.
dna-binding proteins such as transcription factors, epigenetic and chromatin modifiers are responsible for regulating specific gene expression pattern and may result in different phenotypes.
beyond that, chipseek also offers users the flexibility to filter peaks and re-analyze the filtered subset of peaks.
