here, we report the complete nucleotide sequence of five mitochondrial genomes of gastropods , and we analyze them together with another ten complete mitochondrial genomes of gastropods currently available in molecular databases in order to reconstruct the phylogenetic relationships among the main lineages of gastropods.
caenogastropoda and vetigastropoda are sister taxa, as well as, patellogastropoda and heterobranchia.
phylogenetic reconstruction with commonly used methods of phylogenetic inference  arrived at a single topology, which was used to reconstruct the evolution of mitochondrial gene rearrangements in the group.
gastropod mitochondrial genomes exhibit an unusually great variety of gene orders compared to other metazoan mitochondrial genome such as e.g those of vertebrates.
the gene order of the vetigastropoda might represent the ancestral mitochondrial gene order for gastropoda and we propose that at least three major rearrangements have taken place in the evolution of gastropods: one in the ancestor of caenogastropoda, another in the ancestor of patellogastropoda, and one more in the ancestor of heterobranchia.
hence, gastropod mitochondrial genomes constitute a good model system to study patterns, rates, and mechanisms of mitochondrial genome rearrangement.
comparative analyses with other mollusk mitochondrial genomes allowed us to describe molecular features and general trends in the evolution of mitochondrial genome organization in gastropods.
four main lineages were identified within gastropods: caenogastropoda, vetigastropoda, patellogastropoda, and heterobranchia.
however, this kind of evolutionary comparative analysis requires a robust phylogenetic framework of the group under study, which has been elusive so far for gastropods in spite of the efforts carried out during the last two decades.
within heterobranchia, the most heterogeneous group of gastropods, neither euthyneura  nor pulmonata  nor opisthobranchia  were recovered as monophyletic groups.
