the d. noxia genome displays a widespread, extensive reduction in the number of genes per ortholog group, including defensive, detoxification, chemosensory, and sugar transporter groups in comparison to the acyrthosiphon pisum genome, including a 65% reduction in chemoreceptor genes.
the russian wheat aphid, diuraphis noxia kurdjumov, is one of the most important pests of small grains throughout the temperate regions of the world.
diuraphis noxiarussian wheat aphidplant-insect interactionsphytotoxicaphidgenomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
d. noxia’s reduced gene content of may reflect the influence of phytotoxic feeding in shaping the d. noxia genome, and in turn in broadening its host range.
the d. noxia genome will provide an important contrast to the a. pisum genome and advance functional and comparative genomics of insects and other organisms.
we sequenced and de novo assembled the genome of d. noxia biotype  <dig>  the strain most virulent to resistance genes in wheat.
these genes exhibited less homology with those salivary genes commonly expressed in insect saliva, such as glucose dehydrogenase and trehalase, yet greater conservation among genes that are expressed in d. noxia saliva but not detected in the saliva of other insects.
this genome is the second sequenced aphid genome, and the first of a phytotoxic insect.
the presence of methylation-related genes, including cytosine methylation, is consistent with other parthenogenetic and polyphenic insects.
thirty of  <dig> known d. noxia salivary genes were found in this assembly.
this phytotoxic aphid causes severe systemic damage symptoms in wheat, barley, and other small grains as a direct result of the salivary proteins it injects into the plant while feeding.
genes involved in insecticide activity and endosymbiont-derived genes were also found, as well as genes involved in virus transmission, although d. noxia is not a viral vector.
d. noxia has the most at-rich insect genome sequenced to date , with a bimodal cpg distribution and a complete set of methylation related genes.
