molecular heterogeneity of the isolates was investigated based on sequence analysis of glta, its, rpob genes, eric-pcr, as well as using an established multilocus sequence typing  method.
strain differentiation of b. bovis isolates was attempted based on sequence analysis of glta, its, rpob, and eric-pcr assay.
members of the genus bartonella exhibit high degrees of genetic diversity and ecologic plasticity.
new mlst sequence types were identified in malaysian b. bovis isolates.
b. bovis isolates were differentiated into six genotypes using the approach.
of the six mlst sequence types identified, five were designated new sequence types , while one  had been reported previously from thailand isolates.
b. bovis was detected from eight of 200 h. bispinosa ticks and none from the r. microplus ticks.
the current study reported the first detection of b. bovis infection in the cattle and h. bispinosa ticks in peninsular malaysia.
further study is necessary to explore the zoonotic potential of b. bovis and the vector compatibility of h. bispinosa ticks.
a new lineage  is proposed for a single isolate obtained from a dairy cow.
this study was conducted to investigate the prevalence of bartonella species in  <dig> beef cattle,  <dig> dairy cattle,  <dig> sheep and  <dig> goats in eight animal farms across peninsular malaysia.
b. bovis was detected using bartonella glta-pcr assays from ten  of  <dig> cattle blood samples, of which three  were from beef cattle and seven  were from dairy cattle.
bartonella-specific pcr assays and sequence analysis of partial fragments of the citrate synthase gene were used for detection and identification of b. bovis.
isolation of b. bovis was attempted from pcr-positive blood samples.
the carriage rate of b. bovis in ticks was also determined in this study.
none of the blood samples from the sheep and goats understudied were positive for b. bovis.
isolation of b. bovis was successful from all pcr-positive cattle blood samples, except one.
at least six genotypes of b. bovis were found circulating in the cattle understudied.
all except one isolates were segregated into lineage ii.
