these differences in gene transcript levels associated with critical processes during seed development are consistent with the fact that somatic embryos do not fully develop the large storage cotyledons found in zygotic embryos.
expression levels of genes involved in fatty acid metabolism, flavonoid biosynthesis and seed storage protein genes were also differentially expressed in the two types of embryos.
the expression of  <dig>  genes was determined at  <dig> developmental time points during zygotic embryogenesis  and  <dig> time points during cacao somatic embryogenesis .
many tf genes, putatively involved in ethylene metabolism and response, were more strongly expressed in ses as compared to zes.
two major limitations of cacao se remain: the efficiency of embryo production is highly genotype dependent and the lack of full cotyledon development results in low embryo to plant conversion rates.
these results provide insight towards design of improved protocols for cacao somatic embryogenesis.
the relatively higher expression of ethylene and flavonoid related genes during se suggests that the developing tissues may be experiencing high levels of stress during se maturation caused by the in vitro environment.
within the ze time course,  <dig>  differentially expressed genes were enriched for functions related to responses to abiotic and biotic stimulus, metabolic and cellular processes.
large numbers of genes were differentially regulated during various stages of both ze and se development in cacao.
the expression of genes involved in the synthesis of auxin, polyunsaturated fatty acids and secondary metabolites was higher in ses relative to zes despite lack of lipid and metabolite accumulation.
with the goal to better understand se development and to improve the efficiency of se conversion we examined gene expression differences between zygotic and somatic embryos using a whole genome microarray.
theobroma cacao l. is a tropical fruit tree, the seeds of which are used to create chocolate.
