increased expression of notch signaling in synchrony with nestin may be linked to proliferation and “de-differentiation” of reactive astrocytes; the significance of enhanced tnf-α, il-1β and inos expression in reactive astrocytes by scutellarin may be neuroprotective but this remains speculative.
electron microscopy showed marked hypertrophy and cell expansion of tnc <dig> astrocytes bearing many filamentous processes indicative of enhanced astrocyte reaction when treated with cm + sl.
this study was aimed to determine if scutellarin would also affect the reactive astrocytes that play an important role in tissue repair.
study of the above biomarkers was then extended to reactive astrocytes in scutellarin injected mcao rats.
in mcao rats, scutellarin also augmented the expression of the above markers in reactive astrocytes; moreover, astrocytes were evidently hypertrophic.
tnc <dig> astrocytes remained relatively unreactive in terms of expression of different biomarkers to direct scutellarin treatment when compared with the control cells.
scutellarin, an anti-inflammatory agent, effectively suppressed microglia activation in rats with middle cerebral artery occlusion .
the results suggest that scutellarin regulates astrogliosis; more importantly, it is microglia-mediated as demonstrated in vitro.
robust microglia activation, acute in onset, was followed by astrogliosis.
expression of gfap and notch- <dig> and its members: notch receptor intracellular domain , and transcription factor hairy and enhancer of split- <dig> , together with nestin and proinflammatory mediators was assessed by immunofluorescence staining in tnc <dig> astrocytes treated, respectively, with bv- <dig> conditioned medium  and cm + lipopolysaccharide   serving as the controls, and conditioned medium derived from lps-activated bv- <dig> cells pretreated with scutellarin .
scutellarincerebral ischemiaastrogliosisgfapnotchnestinproinflammatory mediatorstnc1issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
