syndromic surveillance methods have been developed as a complement to traditional health data analyses, to allow the early detection of unusual health events.
furthermore, the proposed typology allows each case to be attributed to a syndrome, thus enabling the exhaustive surveillance of health events through time series analyses.
the clusters reflected the most distinct and most frequent disease entities on which the surveillance network focused.
they could be used to define distinct syndromes characterised by specific post-mortem findings.
syndrome definition from post-mortem findings is potentially useful for early outbreak detection because it uses the earliest available information on disease in wildlife.
then hierarchical ascendant clustering was used to partition the data.
this paper aims to define syndromes that could be used for the syndromic surveillance of wildlife health data.
a three-step procedure was applied: first, a multiple correspondence analysis was performed on necropsy data to reduce them to their principal components.
in view of the multiplicity and heterogeneity of the available information, the authors suggest constructing syndromic classes by a multivariate statistical analysis and classification procedure grouping cases that share similar pathological characteristics.
finally the k-means algorithm was applied to strengthen the partitioning.
the importance of wildlife disease surveillance is increasing, because wild animals are playing a growing role as sources of emerging infectious disease events in humans.
wildlife disease monitoring in france, from  <dig> onward, has allowed numerous diagnostic data to be collected from wild animals found dead.
the authors wanted to identify distinct pathological profiles from these historical data by a global analysis of the registered necropsy descriptions, and discuss how these profiles can be used to define syndromes.
the chosen statistical clustering method was found to be a useful tool to retrospectively group cases from our database into distinct and meaningful pathological entities.
