however, the amount of intraspecific variation in mating strategy and selfing capacity has only been assessed for a few species.
intraspecific variation in mating system was found in all four species.
our results for four different species suggest that intraspecific variation in mating system may be common, at least among temperate calcicole ferns, and that genotypes with high selfing capacity may be present among polyploid as well as diploid ferns.
previous studies on the reproductive biology of ferns showed that mating strategies vary among species, and that polyploid species often show higher capacity for self-fertilization than diploid species.
our results therewith support the idea that selection for selfing genotypes may occur during long-distance colonization, even in normally outcrossing, diploid ferns.
sporophyte production was tested at different levels of inbreeding, by culturing gametophytes in isolation, as well as in paired cultures with a genetically different gametophyte.
the surprisingly high selfing capacity of all genotypes obtained from the kuinderbos populations might be due to the isolated position of these populations.
sporophyte production in isolation was high for kuinderbos genotypes of all four species.
in two species one genotype from the kuinderbos showed enhanced sporophyte production in paired cultures.
we examined intra-and interspecific variation in potential for self-fertilization among four rare fern species, of which two were diploids and two were tetraploids: asplenium scolopendrium , asplenium trichomanes subsp.
yet, such variation may have important consequences during colonization, as the establishment of any selfing genotypes may be favoured after long-distance dispersal .
we tested gametophytes derived from various genetically different sporophytes from populations in a recently planted forest colonized through long-distance dispersal , as well as from older, less disjunct populations.
these populations may have established through single-spore colonization, which is only possible for genotypes capable of self-fertilization.
