while most gamma gliadins are monomeric proteins containing eight conserved cysteine residues, some contain an additional cysteine residue that enables them to be linked with other gluten proteins into large polymers that are critical for flour quality.
the ability to differentiate among the gamma gliadins is important for studies of wheat flour quality because proteins with similar sequences can have different effects on functional properties.
this approach makes it possible to distinguish closely related proteins, to associate individual proteins with sequences of specific genes, and to evaluate proteomic data in a biological context to better address questions about wheat flour quality.
nine of the contigs encoded full-length proteins and four of the proteins contained nine cysteine residues.
contigs from four different publicly available est assemblies encoded proteins that were perfect matches with some, but not all, of the butte  <dig> gamma gliadins and the complement of identical proteins was different for each assembly.
the gamma gliadins are a complex group of proteins that together with other gluten proteins determine the functional properties of wheat flour.
the proteins have unusually high levels of glutamine and proline and contain large regions of repetitive sequences.
in a pilot experiment, proteins corresponding to six butte  <dig> gamma gliadin contigs were distinguished by ms/ms, including one containing the extra cysteine residue.
the complement of gamma gliadin genes expressed in the wheat cultivar butte  <dig> was evaluated by analyzing publicly available expressed sequence tag  data.
a specialized database that included the sequences of butte  <dig> gamma gliadins was constructed for identification of flour proteins by tandem mass spectrometry .
unique peptide tags specific for butte  <dig> gamma gliadins are reported.
inclusion of cultivar-specific gamma gliadin sequences in databases maximizes the number and quality of peptide identifications and increases sequence coverage of these gamma gliadins by ms/ms.
