finally, analysis of the predicted gene targets of mirnas using the go and ko databases indicated that a range of metabolic and other cellular functions known to be associated with salt stress were up-regulated in broccoli treated with salt.
little is known about the role of mirnas in the response of broccoli to salt stress.
in this study, broccoli subjected to salt stress and broccoli grown under control conditions were analyzed by high-throughput sequencing.
a comprehensive study of broccoli mirna in relation to salt stress has been performed.
the differential regulation of mirnas between control and salt-stressed broccoli indicates that mirnas play an integral role in the regulation of responses to salt stress.
broccolisalt stresshigh-throughput sequencingmicrornaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
furthermore,  <dig> putative known and  <dig> putative candidate mirnas that were differentially expressed between control and salt-stressed broccoli were revealed by their read counts and confirmed by the use of stem-loop real-time rt-pcr.
the brassica vegetable, broccoli , is very popular with a wide range of consumers, but environmental stresses such as salinity are a problem worldwide in restricting its growth and yield.
amongst these, the putative conserved mirnas, mir <dig> and mir <dig>  and two putative candidate mirnas, mir <dig> and mir <dig>  were the most strongly down-regulated when broccoli was salt-stressed, whereas the putative conserved mirna, mir396a, and the putative candidate mirna, mir <dig>  were the most up-regulated.
we report significant data on the mirna profile of broccoli that will underpin further studies on stress responses in broccoli and related species.
micrornas  are a new class of endogenous regulators of a broad range of physiological processes, which act by regulating gene expression post-transcriptionally.
the prediction of mirna targets was undertaken using the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  orthology  database and gene ontology -enrichment analyses.
