corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis biovar ovis, a facultative intracellular pathogen, is the etiologic agent of caseous lymphadenitis in small ruminants.
to better understand the c. pseudotuberculosis infection process and to identify potential factors which could be involved in its virulence, experimental infection was carried out in a murine model using the strain 1002_ovis and followed by a comparative proteomic analysis of the strain before and after passage.
the experimental infection assays revealed that strain 1002_ovis exhibits low virulence potential.
also, the proteome from recovered condition revealed different classes of proteins involved in detoxification processes, pathogenesis and export pathways, indicating the presence of distinct mechanisms that could contribute in the infectious process of this pathogen.
during the infection process, c. pseudotuberculosis changes its gene expression to resist different types of stresses and to evade the immune system of the host.
this study shows that c. pseudotuberculosis modifies its proteomic profile in the laboratory versus infection conditions and adapts to the host context during the infection process.
these results enhance our understanding of the factors that might influence in the virulence of c. pseudotuberculosis.
the proteome exclusive to the recovered strain contained important virulence factors such as cp <dig> proteinase and phospholipase d exotoxin, the major virulence factor of c. pseudotuberculosis.
label-free proteomic analysis of the culture supernatants of strain 1002_ovis before and after passage in mice revealed that  <dig> proteins were differentially expressed.
corynebacterium pseudotuberculosisbacterial label-free proteomiccaseous lymphadenitisbacterial virulenceserial passageextracellular proteinsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
the screening proteomic performed us enable identify known virulence factors, as well as potential proteins that could be related to virulence this pathogen.
however, the strain recovered from the spleen of infected mice and used in a new infection challenge showed a dramatic change in its virulence potential.
however, factors contributing to the infectious process of this pathogen are still poorly documented.
