overall immunofluorescence labelling of late stage embryos with jim <dig> antibody was weaker than that of jim <dig>  western blot analysis supported the above immunolocalization data.
this treatment also decreased the plant regeneration capacity in embryogenic banana cultures.
these results suggest that hydroxyproline rich glycoproteins play an important developmental role, especially in the process of regeneration and germination of embryos during plant regeneration via somatic embryogenesis.
in this study, the localization and function of hydroxyproline rich glycoproteins in embryogenic cells  and somatic embryos of banana were investigated by using immunobloting and immunocytochemistry with monoclonal jim <dig> and jim <dig> antibodies as well as by treatment with  <dig> -dehydro-l-proline , and by immunomodulation with the jim <dig> antibody.
on the other hand, hydroxyproline rich glycoprotein epitopes were found to be enriched in early embryogenic cells as well as in various developmental stages of somatic embryos.
proper content and localization of hydroxyproline rich glycoproteins seem to be essential for the formation and regeneration of banana somatic embryos.
immunofluorescence labelling of jim <dig> and jim <dig> hydroxyproline rich glycoprotein epitopes was relatively weak in non-embryogenic cells , mainly on the edge of small cell aggregates.
hydroxyproline rich glycoproteins  are implicated to have a role in many aspects of plant growth and development but there is limited knowledge about their localization and function during somatic embryogenesis of higher plants.
embryogenic cells , proembryos and globular embryos showed strong labelling of hydroxyproline rich glycoprotein epitopes, especially in their cell walls and outer surface layer, so-called extracellular matrix .
embryo-like structures, which developed after  <dig> -dhp treatment showed aberrant non-compact epidermis with discontinuous ecm at the outer surface as well as much less immunolabelling with the jim <dig> antibody.
the treatment with  <dig> -dhp inhibited the development of embryogenic cells and decreased the rate of embryo germination.
