this approach to background reduction could be expanded for application to protein motif prediction in the protein interior.
a high incidence of true-positives in our results suggests that several previously unidentified tripeptide patterns are strong candidates for representing novel peptide motifs of a widely employed nature in the c-terminal biology of eukaryotes.
as a limited number of such motifs have been identified, the potential exists for genome-wide statistical analysis and comparative genomics to reveal novel peptide signatures functioning in a c-terminal dependent manner.
we have applied a novel methodology to the prediction of c-terminal-anchored peptide motifs involving a simple z-statistic and several techniques for improving the signal-to-noise ratio.
finally, comparative genomics was used to identify tripeptides significantly occurring in multiple species.
our application of comparative genomics, statistical over-representation and the adjustment for protein family homology has generated several hypotheses concerning the c-terminal topology as it pertains to sorting and potential protein interaction signals.
we examined the statistical over-representation of position-specific c-terminal tripeptides in  <dig> eukaryotic proteomes.
in addition to a high statistical over-representation of these known motifs, a collection of significant tripeptides with a high propensity for biological function exists between species, among kingdoms and across eukaryotes.
similarly, as c-terminal homology among members of large protein families may artificially inflate tripeptide counts in an irrelevant and obfuscating manner, gene-family clustering was performed prior to the analysis in order to assess tripeptide over-representation across protein families as opposed to across all proteins.
several short peptide motifs involved in protein sorting roles and dependent upon their proximity to the c-terminus for proper function have already been characterized.
sequence randomization models and simple-sequence masking were applied to the successful reduction of background noise.
motifs of note include a serine-acidic peptide  as well as several lysine enriched motifs found in nearly all eukaryotic genomes examined.
the carboxy termini of proteins are a frequent site of activity for a variety of biologically important functions, ranging from post-translational modification to protein targeting.
these include the pts <dig> peroxisomal targeting signal , the er-retention signal , the er-retrieval signal for membrane bound proteins , the prenylation signal  and the caax box prenylation motif.
