the epidemiology of map is poorly understood, particularly with respect to the role of wildlife reservoirs and the controversial issue of zoonotic potential .
interspecies transmission of map between wildlife species and domestic livestock on the same property provides further evidence to support a role for wildlife reservoirs of infection.
this study was undertaken to determine the genetic diversity of map, enhance our understanding of the host range and distribution and assess the potential for interspecies transmission.
the results of this study showed that it is necessary to use multiple genotyping techniques targeting different sources of genetic variation to obtain the level of discrimination necessary to investigate transmission dynamics and trace the source of map infections.
<dig> map isolates from seven european countries representing  <dig> different host species were genotyped by standardized is <dig> - restriction fragment length polymorphism , pulsed-field gel electrophoresis , amplified fragment length polymorphisms  and mycobacterial interspersed repeat unit-variable number tandem repeat  analyses.
identical genotypes were obtained from map isolated from different host species co-habiting on the same property strongly suggesting that interspecies transmission occurs.
point estimates for simpson's index of diversity calculated for the individual typing techniques were in the range of  <dig>  to  <dig>  but a combination of all three methods increased the discriminating power to  <dig> , sufficient for investigating transmission dynamics.
genotypic discrimination of map isolates is pivotal to descriptive epidemiology and resolving these issues.
evidence for interspecies transmission between wildlife and domestic ruminants on the same property was demonstrated in four cases, between wildlife species on the same property in two cases and between different species of domestic livestock on one property.
furthermore, the combination of genotyping techniques may depend on the geographical location of the population to be tested.
mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis  causes an infectious chronic enteritis  principally of ruminants.
