homologous sequences were considered as systems 1) having a high redundancy of information reflected by the magnitude of their alignment scores, 2) which components are the amino acids that can independently be damaged by random dna mutations.
from these assumptions, we deduced that information shared at each amino acid position evolved with a constant rate, corresponding to the information hazard rate, and that pairwise sequence alignment scores should follow a gumbel distribution, which parameters could find some theoretical rationale.
extreme value distribution of alignment scores, assessed from high scoring segments pairs following the karlin-altschul model, can also be deduced from the reliability theory applied to molecular sequences.
in the asymptotic limit of long sequences, the karlin-altschul model is based on the computation of a p-value, assuming that the number of high scoring matching regions above a threshold is poisson distributed.
this model also provides a link between concepts of biological sequence analysis and of systems biology.
we built a model of evolution of sequences based on aging, as meant in reliability theory, using the fact that the amount of information shared between an initial sequence and the sequences in its lineage  is a decreasing function of time.
confidence in pairwise alignments of biological sequences, obtained by various methods such as blast or smith-waterman, is critical for automatic analyses of genomic data.
here, the "reliability" of a sequence refers to the ability to conserve a sufficient functional level at the folded and maturated protein level .
it reflects the redundancy of information between homologous sequences, under functional conservative pressure.
in systems aging, the failure rate is related to the systems longevity.
simulations of z-value distribution is known to fit with a gumbel law.
z-values allow the deduction of an upper bound of the p-value  following the tulip theorem.
in particular, one parameter corresponds to the information hazard rate.
