to test our null hypothesis we constructed an enzyme network from the kegg  database.
we speculate that redundancy in an enzyme network may be reflected by betweenness centrality but not by closeness centrality.
our analysis falsifies the hypothesis that phylogenetic profile of enzymes is independent of enzyme network importance.
we calculated three network indices of topological importance: the degree or the number of connections of a network node; closeness centrality, which measures how close a node is to others; and betweenness centrality measuring how frequently a node appears on all shortest paths between two other nodes.
a metabolic network is the sum of all chemical transformations or reactions in the cell, with the metabolites being interconnected by enzyme-catalyzed reactions.
we ask if there are relationships between the phylogenetic profile of an enzyme, or the number of different bacterial species that contain it, and its topological importance in the metabolic network.
this is because metabolic networks often consist of distinct functional modules and some are not in the centre of the network.
both betweenness and closeness centralities are non-local measures of topological importance and it is intriguing that they have contrasting power of predicting phylogenetic profile in bacterial species.
enzymes that occur in many bacterial species tend to be those that have high network importance.
enzymes in these peripheral parts of a network might be important for cell survival and should therefore occur in many bacterial species.
enzyme phylogenetic profile correlates best with betweenness centrality and also quite closely with degree, but poorly with closeness centrality.
our results show that phylogenetic profile correlates better with degree and betweenness centrality, but less so with closeness centrality.
closeness centrality reflects phylogenetic profile poorly.
our null hypothesis is that phylogenetic profile is independent of topological importance.
we also discuss factors influencing the correlation between phylogenetic profile and topological importance.
