the combined molecular, phylogenetic and cytogenetic data obtained in this study provided evidence for a unique triparental origin of triploid onion a.
× cornutum chromosomes corresponded to their respective positions in the three putative parental species, a. cepa, a. pskemense, and a. roylei.
× cornutum with three putative parental species, a. cepa, a. pskemense, and a. roylei.
here we report the phylogenetic analyses of the internal transcribed spacers its1- <dig> s-its <dig> of 35s rdna and the non-transcribed spacer  region of 5s rdna of a.
reconstruction of the parental origins of cultivated plants from wild relatives, especially after long periods of domestication, is not a trivial task.
gish  using dna of the three putative parental diploids corroborated the results of the phylogenetic study.
an established minor garden crop, triploid onion allium × cornutum  , is widespread in southeastern asia and europe.
both its and nts sequence data revealed intra-individual variation in triploid onion, and these data clustered into the three main clades, each with high sequence homology to one of three other species of section cepa: a. cepa, a. roylei, and unexpectedly, the wild asian species allium pskemense b. fedtsh.
allium pskemense is therefore inferred to be the third, so far unknown, putative parental species of triploid onion allium × cornutum.
the localisation of 35s and 5s rdna in a.
allium × cornutumallium cepaallium royleiallium pskemensetriparental hybridtriploidfluorescence in situ hybridisation its1- <dig> s-its25s rdna non-transcribed spacer genomic in situ hybridisation
× cornutum, whereas the third parental species remained hitherto unknown.
× cornutum and its relatives of the section cepa.
× cornutum and its putative parental species by double fluorescent in situ hybridisation .
allium cepa l. and allium roylei stearn were suggested as two putative parental species of a.
the 35s and 5s rrna genes were found to be localised on somatic chromosomes of a.
