the current study's goal is to characterize the robustness of biofilm antibiotic tolerance to medically and industrially relevant culturing perturbations.
colony biofilm antibiotic tolerances were not robust to perturbations.
the current study presents a basis for robustness analysis of biofilm antibiotic tolerance.
biofilm antibiotic tolerance can vary in unpredictable manners based on modest changes in culturing conditions.
however even after decades of investigation, the in vivo efficacy of many antimicrobial strategies is still debated suggesting there is a need for better understanding of biofilm antimicrobial tolerances.
the predictability of an antibiotic tolerance response is essential to developing, testing, and employing antimicrobial strategies.
the presented data suggest it is essential to test antimicrobial strategies over a range of culturing perturbations relevant to the targeted application.
in addition, the highly dynamic antibiotic tolerance responses observed here may explain why some current antimicrobial strategies occasionally fail.
the antibiotic tolerance of escherichia coli colony biofilms was tested against beta-lactam and aminoglycoside class antibiotics.
here, antibiotic tolerance was defined in terms of culturable biofilm cells recovered after a twenty four hour antibiotic treatment.
altering basic culturing parameters like nutritional environment or temperature resulted in very different, non-intuitive antibiotic tolerance responses.
for instance, the majority of medical infections are thought to involve biofilms.
control scenario tolerances were compared to tolerances under culturing perturbations including 1) different nutritional environments 2) different temperatures 3) interruption of cellular quorum sensing and 4) different biofilm culture ages.
some minor perturbations like increasing the glucose concentration from  <dig>  to  <dig> g/l caused a ten million fold difference in culturable cells over a twenty four hour antibiotic treatment.
