we first compared the accuracy and sensitivity of both sequencers using plasmid dna and different ratios of wild type and mutant plasmid.
we compared the suitability of two benchtop next-generation sequencers for whole genome influenza a quasispecies analysis: the illumina miseq sequencing-by-synthesis and the ion torrent pgm semiconductor sequencing technique.
after mapping of the reads to the reference genome, we found that the detection limit for reliable recognition of variants in the viral genome required a frequency of  <dig> % or higher.
we also optimized an rt-pcr protocol to obtain uniform coverage of all eight genomic rna segments.
the data analysis pipeline that we propose here will also help to standardize variant calling in small rna genomes based on next-generation sequencing data.
our approach underlines the power and limitations of two commonly used next-generation sequencers for the analysis of influenza virus gene diversity.
influenza viruses exist as a large group of closely related viral genomes, also called quasispecies.
we conclude that the illumina miseq platform is better suited for detecting variant sequences whereas the ion torrent pgm platform has a shorter turnaround time.
the composition of this influenza viral quasispecies can be determined by an accurate and sensitive sequencing technique and data analysis pipeline.
the majority of sequencing errors were substitutions on the illumina miseq and insertions and deletions, mostly in homopolymer regions, on the ion torrent pgm.
this threshold exceeds the background error rate resulting from the rt-pcr reaction and the sequencing method.
the sequencing reads obtained with both sequencers could successfully be assembled de novo into the segmented influenza virus genome.
illumina miseq sequencing reads were one and a half times more accurate than those of the ion torrent pgm.
influenza virusquasispeciesnext-generation sequencingillumina miseqion torrent pgmrt-pcrissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
