the precursor peptides of these natural products are ribosomally produced, upon which a combination of modification enzymes installs diverse functional groups.
genome mining suggests a complex diversification of modification enzymes and precursor peptides to create more than  <dig> distinct families of tomms, nine of which have not heretofore been described.
this genetically encoded peptide-based strategy allows for rapid diversification of these natural products by mutation in the precursor genes merged with unique combinations of modification enzymes.
many of the identified tomm families have an abundance of diverse precursor peptide sequences as well as unfamiliar combinations of modification enzymes, signifying a potential wealth of novel natural products on known and unknown biosynthetic scaffolds.
these biosynthetic gene clusters are predicted to produce diverse final products, and the identification of additional combinations of modification enzymes could expand the potential of combinatorial natural product biosynthesis.
multigeneblast was used to group gene clusters contain a d protein.
a number of techniques were used to identify tomm biosynthetic gene clusters from the d protein containing gene clusters.
precursor peptides from these gene clusters were also identified.
here we report the bioinformatic characterization of nearly  <dig>  tomm gene clusters from genomes in the european molecular biology laboratory  and the european bioinformatics institute  sequence repository.
given the remarkable structural and functional diversity displayed by known tomms, a comprehensive bioinformatic study to catalog and classify the entire ripp class was undertaken.
all ycao domain-containing proteins  and the surrounding genomic regions were were obtained from the european molecular biology laboratory  and the european bioinformatics institute .
although many tomms have been explored, the increased availability of genome sequences has illuminated several unexplored tomm producers.
ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides  are a burgeoning class of natural products with diverse activity that share a similar origin and common features in their biosynthetic pathways.
genome miningthiazoleoxazoleribosomal peptidepost-translational modificationnatural productssecondary metabolitesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
both sequence similarity and phylogenetic analysis were used to classify the  <dig> diverse tomm clusters identified.
thiazole/oxazole-modified microcins  are a class of ripps defined by the presence of heterocycles derived from cysteine, serine, and threonine residues in the precursor peptide.
phylogenetic analysis suggests a widespread distribution of tomms across multiple phyla; however, producers of similar tomms are generally found in the same phylum with few exceptions.
