the parasitic nematode heterodera glycines displays incomplete host-mediated hatching behavior wherein some h. glycines individuals hatch only in the presence of a host-derived cue while others hatch in water alone.
furthermore, h. glycines shows variable hatching behavior based on oviposition location.
in this study, we established a detailed timeline of the h. glycines pre-hatch development from early embryogenesis to the pre-hatched j <dig>  these descriptive data were then used to test hypotheses regarding the effect of host stimulus and oviposition location on pre-hatch development.
we found that h. glycines develops from a single-cell egg to a fully formed j <dig> in approximately 172 hours.
we also found that the primary motor nervous system of h. glycines did not complete development until late in pre-hatch j <dig> development.
these data suggest possible structural requirements for h. glycines hatching.
as expected, exposure of h. glycines eggs to host-derived cues increased the percentage of nematodes that hatched.
the pattern of early embryonic development in h. glycines was very similar to that recently described in the related parasitic nematode meloidogyne incognita.
however, the speed of h. glycines pre-hatch development was approximately three times faster than reported for m. incognita.
similarly, we found no obvious differences in the pre-hatch developmental timeline between eggs laid in an egg sac or retained within the mother.
many parasites regulate their development to synchronize their life cycle with a compatible host.
our results suggest that hatching stimulants do not affect embryogenesis itself but only influence the hatching decision once j <dig> development is complete.
these results provide insight into the primary survival mechanism for this important parasite.
however, exposure to hatching cues did not affect pre-hatch development.
the stylet-based mouthpart, which is used to pierce the eggshell during hatching, is not completely formed until late in pre-hatch j <dig> development and is preceded by the formation of stylet protractor muscles.
similarly, the oviposition location does not alter the rate of embryogenesis.
