as the name suggests, it is a measure of how biologically homogeneous the clusters are.
we evaluated the performance of ten well known clustering algorithms on two gene expression data sets and identified the optimal algorithm in each case.
here we quantify the performance of a given unsupervised clustering algorithm applied to a given microarray study in terms of its ability to produce biologically meaningful clusters using a reference set of functional classes.
two separate choices of the functional classes were used for this data set and the results were compared for consistency.
this can be used to quantify the performance of a given clustering algorithm such as upgma in grouping genes for a particular data set and also for comparing the performance of a number of competing clustering algorithms applied to the same data set.
in this paper, we introduce two performance measures for evaluating the results of a clustering algorithm in its ability to produce biologically meaningful clusters.
a cluster analysis is the most commonly performed procedure  on a set of gene expression profiles.
functional information of annotated genes available from various go databases mined using ontology tools can be used to systematically judge the results of an unsupervised clustering algorithm as applied to a gene expression data set in clustering genes.
the first measure is a biological homogeneity index .
the second performance measure is called a biological stability index .
a good clustering algorithm should have high bhi and moderate to high bsi.
for a given clustering algorithm and an expression data set, it measures the consistency of the clustering algorithm's ability to produce biologically meaningful clusters when applied repeatedly to similar data sets.
the second data set contains the expression profiles over time of positively expressed genes  during sporulation of budding yeast.
such a reference set may come from prior biological knowledge specific to a microarray study or may be formed using the growing databases of gene ontologies  for the annotated genes of the relevant species.
