gdsl esterases/lipases are a newly discovered subclass of lipolytic enzymes that are very important and attractive research subjects because of their multifunctional properties, such as broad substrate specificity and regiospecificity.
potentially important regions for substrate specificity are highlighted, in accordance with protein three-dimensional model and location of the phylogenetic specific conserved motifs.
the present study provides a platform for the selection of candidate genes for further detailed functional study.
the differential expression of some representative genes were confirmed by quantitative real-time pcr.
the phylogenetic analysis, together with protein motif architectures, and the expression profiling were analysed to predict the possible biological functions of the rice osgelp genes.
a complete overview of this family in rice is presented, including the chromosome locations, gene structures, phylogeny, and protein motifs.
compared with the current knowledge regarding these enzymes in bacteria, our understanding of the plant gdsl enzymes is very limited, although the gdsl gene family in plant species include numerous members in many fully sequenced plant genomes.
among the osgelps and the plant gdsl esterase/lipase proteins of known functions,  <dig> motifs were found that represent the core secondary structure elements or appear specifically in different phylogenetic subclades.
with combination of the genomic, phylogenetic, microarray expression, protein motif distribution, and protein structure analyses, we were able to create supported basis for the functional prediction of many members in the rice gdsl esterase/lipase family.
in this study, an extensive bioinformatics analysis identified  <dig> genes in the rice osgelp gene family.
our current genomic analysis, for the first time, presents fundamental information on the organization of the rice osgelp gene family.
in the present study, we describe the rice osgelp  gene family at the genomic and proteomic levels, and use this knowledge to provide insights into the multifunctionality of the rice osgelp enzymes.
the specification and distribution of identified putative conserved clade-common and -specific peptide motifs, and their location on the predicted protein three dimensional structure may possibly signify their functional roles.
