this protein modification plays an important role in bacterial pathogenesis, and is facilitated by the dsb  family of the redox proteins.
the importance of a secondary dba-dsbi mrna structure for dsbi mrna translation was verified by estimating individual dsbi gene expression from its own promoter.
these results support the concept that iron concentration - also through its influence on dsb gene expression - might control the abundance of extracytoplasmic proteins during different stages of infection.
moreover, the present work documents that synthesis of dsbi oxidoreductase is controlled by the mechanism of translational coupling.
our work further shows that synthesis of the dsbi membrane oxidoreductase is controlled by a translational coupling mechanism.
in the c. jejuni 81- <dig> genome, the dsb genes of the oxidative pathway are arranged in three transcriptional units: dsba2-dsbb-asta, dsba <dig> and dba-dsbi.
fur involvement in dsb gene regulation was proven by a reporter gene study in a c. jejuni wild type strain and its isogenic fur mutant.
an electrophoretic mobility shift assay  confirmed that analyzed genes are members of the fur regulon but each of them is regulated by a disparate mechanism, and both the iron-free and the iron-complexed fur are able to bind in vitro to the c. jejuni promoter regions.
the present work shows that iron concentration is a significant factor in dsb gene transcription.
the dsb oxidative pathway in campylobacter jejuni is more complex than the one in the laboratory e. coli k- <dig> strain.
many bacterial extracytoplasmic proteins are stabilized by intramolecular disulfide bridges that are formed post-translationally between their cysteine residues.
these proteins function in two parallel pathways in the periplasmic space: an oxidation pathway and an isomerization pathway.
the dba expression is not only essential for the translation of the downstream dsbi gene, but also dba protein that is produced might regulate the activity and/or stability of dsbi.
their transcription responds to an environmental stimulus - iron availability - and is regulated in a fur-dependent manner.
