when considering the evolution of genome architecture, host species jumps might play a very important role, by allowing evolutionary intermediates to be competitive.
furthermore, in both hosts we observed increases in viral fitness in few lineages, and host-specific convergent evolution at the genomic level was only found in n. benthamiana.
alternatively, highly virulent microparasites could also curtail host development, thereby limiting both the host resources available to them and their own within-host effective population size.
adaptationexperimental evolutiongenome architecture evolutionhost-pathogen interactionsvirulencevirus evolutionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000925john templeton foundation22371elena santiago f. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004963seventh framework programmeict-610427elena santiago f. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003329ministerio de economía y competitividadbfu2012-30805bfu2015-65037-pelena santiago f. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
we compared the results to those previously obtained in the natural host, nicotiana tabacum, where we have shown that carriage of egfp has a high fitness cost and its loss serves as a real-time indicator of adaptation.
the results of this study do not lend support to the hypothesis that high virulence impedes microparasites’ evolution.
as a first exploration of this hypothesis, we evolved tobacco etch virus carrying an egfp fluorescent marker in two semi-permissive host species, nicotiana benthamiana and datura stramonium, for which it has a large difference in virulence.
during the evolution experiment, marker loss leading to viable virus variants was only observed in one lineage of the host for which the virus has low virulence, d. stramonium.
this result was consistent with the observation that there was a fitness cost of egfp in this host, while surprisingly no fitness cost was observed in the host for which the virus has high virulence, n. benthamiana.
theory suggests that high virulence could hinder between-host transmission of microparasites, and that virulence therefore will evolve to lower levels.
in this case, high virulence might restrain the mutation supply rate and increase the strength with which genetic drift acts on microparasite populations.
rather, they exemplify that jumps between host species can be game changers for evolutionary dynamics.
