in conclusion, b. petrii appears to be the first member of the genus in which horizontal gene transfer events have massively shaped its genome structure.
furthermore, we show that gi <dig> is self transmissible and by conjugation can be transferred to b. bronchiseptica thus proving it to be an active integrative and conjugative element
among the members of the genus bordetella b. petrii is unique, since it is the only species isolated from the environment, while the pathogenic bordetellae are obligately associated with host organisms.
the results show that phenotypic variation of b. petrii is correlated with the presence of genomic islands.
another feature distinguishing b. petrii from the other sequenced bordetellae is the presence of a large number of mobile genetic elements including several large genomic regions with typical characteristics of genomic islands collectively known as integrative and conjugative elements .
in fact, the genome sequence of b. petrii revealed the presence of at least seven large genomic islands mostly encoding accessory metabolic functions involved in the degradation of aromatic compounds and detoxification of heavy metals.
for the clc-like elements gi <dig> to gi <dig> of b. petrii we provide evidence that tandem insertion of these islands which all encode highly related integrases and attachment sites may also lead to incorporation of genomic dna which originally was not part of the island and to the formation of huge composite islands.
these elements mainly encode accessory metabolic factors enabling this bacterium to grow on a large repertoire of aromatic compounds.
by integration of a tetracycline resistance cassette into gi <dig> we found this island to be rather unstable and to be lost from the bacterial population within about  <dig> consecutive generations.
we show that this variability can be attributed to the presence of a large number of metastable mobile genetic elements on its chromosome.
during in vitro culture of bordetella petrii colony variants appear frequently.
four of these islands  are highly related to iceclc of pseudomonas knackmussii sp.
for all but one of these islands  we could detect circular intermediates.
