in this work, we assembled a dynamic genome-scale metabolic model for glucose-limited, aerobic cultivations of pichia pastoris.
moreover, given specific bioprocess limitations and strain characteristics, the model suggests that implementation of a decreasing specific growth rate during the feed phase of a fed-batch culture results in a 25% increase of the volumetric productivity of the protein.
once identified, the non-relevant ones were iteratively fixed until a priori robust modeling structures were found for each type of cultivation.
lastly, the model was employed as a case study to analyze the metabolic flux distribution of a fed-batch culture and to unravel genetic and process engineering strategies to improve the production of recombinant human serum albumin .
in this work, we formulated a dynamic genome scale metabolic model of pichia pastoris that yields realistic metabolic flux distributions throughout dynamic cultivations.
pichia pastoris shows physiological advantages in producing recombinant proteins, compared to other commonly used cell factories.
next, the robustness of these reduced structures was confirmed by calibrating the model with new datasets, where no sensitivity, identifiability or significance problems appeared in their parameters.
starting from an initial model structure for batch and fed-batch cultures, we performed pre/post regression diagnostics to ensure that model parameters were identifiable, significant and sensitive.
dfbapichia pastorispre/post regression diagnosticssensitivityidentifiabilitysignificancegenome-scale metabolic modelingfed-batchmomabioprocess optimizationreparametrizationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100009465corporación de fomento de la producciónproject 11ceii-9568agosin eduardo http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002848comisión nacional de investigación científica y tecnológica2214023021140759torres paulina issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
the deletion of methylene tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase could increase the hsa volumetric productivity by 630%.
this yeast is mostly grown in dynamic cultivation systems, where the cell’s environment is continuously changing and many variables influence process productivity.
currently, there are five genome-scale metabolic reconstructions of p. pastoris which have been used to predict extracellular cell behavior in stationary conditions.
the model can be calibrated with experimental data to rationally propose genetic and process engineering strategies to improve the performance of a p. pastoris strain of interest.
