while these results suggest commonality between sappα and our previously reported analysis of plasticity-related gene expression, we found little crossover between these datasets.
our results demonstrate that sappα rapidly and persistently regulates gene expression in rat hippocampus.
ingenuity pathway analysis predicted that short-term exposure to sappα elicited a multi-level transcriptional response, including upregulation of immediate early gene transcription factors , modulation of the chromatin environment, and apparent activation of the constitutive transcription factors creb and nf-κb.
slices were exposed to  <dig> nm sappα or phosphate buffered saline for  <dig> min,  <dig> h or  <dig> h and sappα-associated gene expression profiles were produced for each time-point using affymetrix rat gene  <dig>  st arrays .
treatment of organotypic hippocampal slice cultures with  <dig> nm sappα induced temporally distinct gene expression profiles, including mrna and microrna associated with alzheimer’s disease.
having demonstrated that treatment with human recombinant sappα was protective against n-methyl d-aspartate-induced toxicity, we next explored the sappα-induced gene expression profiles.
as these effects are enduring, we hypothesised that regulation of gene expression may be of importance and examined temporally specific gene networks and pathways induced by sappα in rat hippocampal organotypic slice cultures.
in contrast, medium and long exposure to sappα resulted in an overall downregulation of gene expression.
importantly, dynamic regulation of nf-κb appears to be integral to the transcriptional response across all time-points.
the gene networks formed following medium and long exposure to sappα were associated with inflammatory response, apoptosis, neurogenesis and cell survival; functions likely to be the basis of the neuroprotective effects of sappα.
differential processing of the amyloid precursor protein liberates either amyloid-ß, a causative agent of alzheimer’s disease, or secreted amyloid precursor protein-alpha , which promotes neuroprotection, neurotrophism, neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity.
