population diversity tests supported positive selection at the family level, but showed no significant departure from neutrality when considering intra-family allelic sequence diversity and all families combined.
the pfmsp <dig> block <dig> locus presents a very large population sequence diversity.
there is no evidence of positive selection for intra-family sequence diversity, consistent with the observed characteristics of the antibody response.
family distribution showed no significant temporal fluctuation over the  <dig> y period surveyed.
the locus displays three family types and one recombinant type, each with multiple allelic forms differing by single nucleotide polymorphism as well as sequence, copy number and arrangement variation of three amino acid repeats.
the family-specific antibody responses observed in endemic settings support immune selection operating at the family level.
the parasite population consisted in a large number of low frequency alleles, alongside one high-frequency and three intermediate frequency alleles.
antibody specificity remained unchanged with cumulated exposure to an increasingly large number of alleles.
the locus appears under antibody-mediated diversifying selection in a variable environment that maintains a balance between the various family types without selecting for sequence variant allelic forms.
to address this question, population allelic polymorphism and sequence variant-specific antibody responses were studied in a single senegalese rural community where malaria transmission is intense and perennial.
the lack of stable acquisition of novel antibody specificities despite exposure to novel allelic forms is reminiscent of clonal imprinting.
sequencing of  <dig> pcr fragments identified  <dig> distinct alleles, including numerous novel alleles in each family and multiple novel alleles of recombinant types.
genetic evidence for diversifying selection identified the merozoite surface protein <dig> block <dig>  as a putative target of protective immunity against plasmodium falciparum.
reactivity profiles were individual-specific, mapped to the family-specific flanking regions and to repeat sequences shared by numerous allelic forms within a family type.
seroprevalence, analysed using biotinylated peptides displaying numerous sequence variants, was moderate and increased with age.
