bioinformatic analysis of upstream regulatory regions identified conserved combinations  of putative transcription factor binding sites shared by genes expressed in the same trophoblast subtype, supporting the notion that local regulatory elements, rather than locus control regions, specify subtype-specific expression.
whereas there is a single prl gene in humans that is expressed by the pituitary, there are an additional  <dig> genes in mice including the placental lactogens  and prolactin-related proteins  whose expression is limited to the placenta.
this detailed analysis uncovered several new markers for some trophoblast cell types that will be useful for future analysis of placental structure in mutant mice with placental phenotypes.
second, most genes are expressed in multiple trophoblast cell subtypes though none were detected in the chorion, where trophoblast stem cells reside, or in syncytiotrophoblast of the labyrinth layer.
third, bioinformatic comparisons of upstream regulatory regions identified predicted transcription factor binding site modules that are shared by genes expressed in the same trophoblast subtype.
fourth, further diversification of gene products from the prl/pl locus occurs through alternative splice isoforms for several genes.
there was also no correlation in expression between genes that were most closely related or between adjacent genes in the prl/pl locus.
to understand the regulation and potential functions of these genes, we conducted a detailed temporal and spatial expression study in the placenta between embryonic days  <dig>  and e <dig>  in three genetic strains.
in the present study, a detailed temporal and spatial placental expression map was generated for all murine prl/pl family members from e <dig>  to e <dig>  of gestation in three genetic strains.
more importantly, several main conclusions about regulation of the locus are apparent.
we found that not one family member has the same expression pattern as another when both temporal and spatial data were examined.
first, no two family members have the same expression pattern when both temporal and spatial data are examined.
further diversification in expression was also detected as splice variants for several genes.
