the present study investigated whether apl and any apl subtypes are associated with canine thrombocytopenia, in particular, immune-mediated thrombocytopenia  that usually manifests with severe thrombocytopenia.
furthermore, aps is moderately associated with both canine immune thrombocytopenia and severe thrombocytopenia negative for aplt, whereas aβ2gpi, and apc are moderately relevant to canine immune thrombocytopenia.
in contrast, api is not significantly associated with canine immune thrombocytopenia.
in humans, the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies  is frequently found in immune thrombocytopenia.
among outpatient dogs, acl, being highly prevalent in outpatient dogs with thrombocytopenia , is an important risk factor for thrombocytopenia , immune thrombocytopenia , or severe thrombocytopenia negative for aplt .
in addition, aps is a risk factor for immune thrombocytopenia or severe thrombocytopenia negative for aplt , whereas apc and aβ2gpi are risk factors for immune thrombocytopenia .
of all the apl subtypes tested here, acl is highly associated with canine thrombocytopenia, including immune thrombocytopenia, severe thrombocytopenia negative for aplt, and less severe thrombocytopenia.
anticardiolipin antibodiesantiphosphatidylserine antibodiesanti-β <dig> glycoprotein i antibodiesantiphosphatidylcholine antibodiesantiphospholipid antibodiesimmune thrombocytopeniaantiplatelet antibodiesministry of education, taiwan, r.o.c.atuchiou shiow-her  animal disease diagnostic center, national chung hsing university, taiwan, r.o.c.
indirect elisas were performed to compare serum levels of apl subtypes, including anticardiolipin antibodies , antiphosphatidylserine antibodies , antiphosphatidylcholine , and anti-β <dig> glycoprotein i antibodies , and antiphosphatidylinositol antibodies , among different groups or subgroups of dogs.
sera were collected from  <dig> outpatient dogs with thrombocytopenia , and  <dig> of which having severe thrombocytopenia  were further divided into subgroups based on the presence of positive antiplatelet antibodies   or the absence of aplt .
in addition, sera of  <dig> outpatient dogs without thrombocytopenia , and  <dig> healthy dogs  were analyzed for comparison.
