we divided the microarray data set again according to the expression ratio of gene tp <dig>  after the discordance enrichment analysis, we observed overall similar results and the above two pathways are still the most significant detections.
we apply our method to a microarray expression data set collected from forty-five matched tumor/non-tumor pairs of tissues for studying pancreatic cancer.
the detected pathways will be useful for our further understanding of the role of gene pnlip in pancreatic cancer research.
more interestingly, only these two pathways have been identified for their association with pancreatic cancer in a pathway analysis of genome-wide association study  data.
furthermore, our method can also be applied to genome-wide expression data collected by the recent rna-seq technology.
with the current microarray and rna-seq technologies, two-sample genome-wide expression data have been widely collected in biological and medical studies.
our purpose is to understand whether any gene sets are enriched in discordant behaviors among these subsets .
the log-ratio ranges from a negative value  to a positive value .
the log-ratio also ranges from a negative value  to a positive value .
the model-based probability of discordance enrichment can be calculated for gene set detection.
it is statistically efficient with linearly increased parameter space when the number of data sets is increased.
in this study, a statistical method is proposed for detecting discordance gene set enrichment.
our method is based on a two-level multivariate normal mixture model.
integrative analysis can be conducted when multiple data sets are available.
our proposed statistical method is useful in the detection of these pathways.
the related differential expression analysis and gene set enrichment analysis have been frequently conducted.
we divided the data set into a series of non-overlapping subsets according to the tumor/non-tumor paired expression ratio of gene pnlip .
then, we consider gene tp <dig> that is well-known for its role as tumor suppressor in cancer research.
among the top list of detected pathways, the neuroactive ligand receptor interaction and olfactory transduction pathways are the most significant two.
