injuries penetrating synovial structures are common in equine practice and often result in septic synovitis.
the purpose of the current study was to investigate the usefulness of serial measurements of plasma saa as a monitoring tool for the response to treatment of horses presented with injuries penetrating synovial structures.
a total of  <dig> horses with a wound penetrating a synovial structure were included in the current study.
therefore, serial measurements of plasma saa could potentially be used as an additional inexpensive, quick and easy tool for monitoring the treatment response in otherwise healthy horses presented with injuries penetrating synovial structures.
equidsserum amyloid a injury synovial structureseptic synovitiswound infectionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
significantly increased plasma levels of serum amyloid a  have been found in various infectious conditions in horses including wounds and septic arthritis.
plasma saa levels were found to decrease rapidly once the infectious stimulus was eliminated.
in the current study plasma saa concentrations were measured every  <dig> hours  during the course of treatment.
patients in this group had significantly lower median plasma saa levels  between 48 h  and 96 h  after surgery.
a significant decrease  in plasma saa levels was also observed between 96 h after surgery  and 6 days  after surgery .
in contrast to group  <dig> patients in group 2 had either very high initial plasma concentrations , an increase or persistently high concentrations of plasma saa after the first surgery .
in this group low saa values at admission  and peak concentrations at 48 h after surgery  were observed followed by a decrease in plasma saa concentration over time.
a decrease in plasma saa concentrations between two consecutive time points could be associated with positive response to treatment in the current study.
horses in group  <dig>   only needed one surgical intervention.
four horses  required more than one surgical intervention.
