computational models play an increasingly important role in systems biology for generating predictions and in synthetic biology as executable prototypes/designs.
mudi is an approximate probabilistic model checking platform which enables users to choose between frequentist and bayesian, estimate and statistical hypothesis testing based validation approaches.
results generated by computational models can be applied to real life applications only if the models have been validated first.
we developed and implemented a methodology for the automatic validation of computational models with respect to both their spatial and temporal properties.
given a collection of time series data and a formal spatio-temporal specification the model checker mudi  determines probabilistically if the formal specification holds for the computational model or not.
the formal methodology implemented in mudi enables the validation of computational models against spatio-temporal logic properties and is a precursor to the development and validation of more complex multidimensional and multiscale models.
stochastic spatial discrete event system probabilistic bounded linear spatial temporal logic spatio-temporalmultidimensionalmodel checkingmudicomputational modelmodel validationsystems biologysynthetic biologyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
time series data generated by such models is provided as input to parameterised image processing modules which automatically detect and analyse spatial patterns  and clusters of such patterns .
for capturing how spatial and numeric properties change over time the probabilistic bounded linear spatial temporal logic is introduced.
for real life  applications there is a need to scale up and build more complex spatio-temporal multiscale models; these could enable investigating how changes at small scales reflect at large scales and viceversa.
we illustrate the expressivity and efficiency of our approach based on two biological case studies namely phase variation patterning in bacterial colony growth and the chemotactic aggregation of cells.
stochastic biological systems are represented by abstract models which assume a linear structure of time and a pseudo-3d representation of space .
the validation of larger scale systems  additionally requires capturing how spatial patterns and their properties change over time, which are not considered by traditional non-spatial approaches.
traditional in silico model checking techniques only capture how non-dimensional properties  evolve over time and are suitable for small scale systems .
