similar results were obtained in the transcriptome sequencing experiments.
a lower average daily feed intake was found in low-rfi birds compared to high-rfi birds.
some of these genes were relevant to appetite, cell activities, and fat metabolism, such as cckar, hsp90b <dig>  and pck <dig>  some potential genes within the  <dig> kb flanking region of the significant rfi-related snps detected in gwas  were also identified as degs in chickens with divergent rfis.
low rfi selection enables a reduction in feed intake without affecting growth performance.
however, the effective variants or major genes dedicated to phenotypic differences in rfi in quality chickens are unclear.
residual feed intakegenome-wide association studyrna-sequencingquality chickensthe high technology research and development program of china2013aa102501zhang xiquan the national key technology research and development program2014bad08b08zhang dexiang the china agriculture research systemcars-42-g <dig>  cars-42-z17zhang xiquan issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
more than half of the effective snps were located in a 1 mb region  of chicken  chromosome   <dig>  thus, focusing on this region should enable a deeper understanding of energy utilization.
the gwas findings showed that the 1 mb narrow region of gga <dig> should be important because it contained genes involved in energy-consuming processes, such as lipogenesis, social behavior, and immunity.
residual feed intake  is a powerful indicator for energy utilization efficiency and responds to selection.
in general, low-rfi birds seemed to optimize energy employment by reducing energy expenditure in cell activities, immune responses, and physical activity compared to eating.
rna sequencing was performed to profile the liver transcriptomes of four male chickens selected from the high and low tails of the rfi.
gwas showed that  <dig> of the significant single nucleotide polymorphisms  associated with the rfi  accounted for  <dig>  % of the additive genetic variance.
