human phb genes have been found to be associated with various diseases.
the results highlighted that phb genes might be involved in important functions so that the duplicated genes are under the evolutionary pressure to derive new function.
phb  gene family is involved in a variety of functions important for different biological processes.
however, segmental duplication is predominant in arabidopsis.
in order to better guide the gene function analysis and understand the evolution of the phb gene family, we therefore carried out the comparative genome analysis of the phb genes across different kingdoms.
despite the importance of the phb gene family, no comprehensive gene family analysis has been carried to evaluate the relatedness of phb genes across different species.
the relatedness, motif distribution, and intron/exon distribution all indicated that phb genes is a relatively conserved gene family.
despite being a conserved gene family, various gene duplication events led to the expansion of the phb genes.
both segmental and tandem gene duplication were involved in arabidopsis phb gene family expansion.
phb gene family is a conserved gene family and accounts for diverse but important biological functions based on the similar molecular mechanisms.
the conserved gene evolution indicated that the study in the model species can be translated to human and mammalian studies.
the phb genes can be classified into  <dig> classes and each class have a very deep evolutionary origin.
with arabidopsis as the model species, we found that phb gene intron/exon structure and domains are also conserved during the evolution.
the highly diverse biological function indicated that more research needs to be carried out to dissect the phb gene function.
recent studies by our group and others have shown diverse function of phb genes in plants for development, senescence, defence, and others.
19– <dig> february  <dig> seventh annual mcbios conference.
phb genes are ubiquitously present in divergent species from prokaryotes to eukaryotes.
the phb genes within the class maintained the same motif patterns during the evolution.
