however, molecular bases and regulatory mechanisms for early osmotic signaling events remain poorly elucidated.
analyses of cultured cells with altered levels of this putative ca2+-permeable mechanosensitive channel indicate that osmca <dig> is involved in regulation of plasma membrane ca2+ influx and ros generation induced by hypo-osmotic stress in cultured rice cells.
a promoter-reporter assay suggested that osmca <dig> mrna is widely expressed in seed embryos, proximal and apical regions of shoots, and mesophyll cells of leaves and roots in rice.
we also generated and characterized osmca1-rnai transgenic plants and cultured cells; osmca1-suppressed plants showed retarded growth and shortened rachises, while osmca1-suppressed cells carrying ca2+-sensitive photoprotein aequorin showed partially impaired changes in cytosolic free ca2+ concentration  induced by hypo-osmotic shock and trinitrophenol, an activator of mechanosensitive channels.
pharmacological analyses show ca2+ influx mediated by mechanosensitive ca2+ channels to influence induction of osmotic signals, including ros generation.
we have identified a sole mca ortholog in the rice genome and developed both overexpression and suppression lines.
hypo-osmotic shock-induced ros generation mediated by nadph oxidases was also enhanced in osmca1-overexpressing cells.
on recognizing osmotic signals, plant cells initiate activation of a widespread signal transduction network that induces second messengers and triggers inducible defense responses.
osmca <dig> was specifically localized at the plasma membrane.
ca2+ uptake was enhanced in osmca1-overexpressing suspension-cultured cells, suggesting that osmca <dig> is involved in ca2+ influx across the plasma membrane.
mechanosensing and its downstream responses are speculated to involve sensory complexes containing ca2+-permeable mechanosensitive channels.
we here identified and investigated osmca <dig>  the sole rice homolog of putative ca2+-permeable mechanosensitive channels in arabidopsis .
characteristic early signaling events include ca2+ influx, protein phosphorylation and generation of reactive oxygen species .
