mycobacterial rhomboids contain putative rhomboid catalytic signatures, with the protease active site stabilized by phenylalanine.
although valuable insights to the roles of rhomboids are provided, the data herein only lays a foundation for future investigations for the roles of rhomboids in mycobacteria.
rhomboids are ubiquitous proteins with diverse functions in all life kingdoms, and are emerging as important factors in the biology of some pathogenic apicomplexa and providencia stuartii.
we report detailed phylogenetic and genomic analyses devoted to prokaryotic rhomboids of an important genus, mycobacterium.
map2425c and map2426c provide the first evidence for a split homologous rhomboid, contrasting whole orthologs of genetically related species.
the orthologs of rv <dig> clustered with eukaryotic rhomboids and contained eukaryotic motifs, suggesting a possible common lineage.
the rv <dig>  orthologs represent prokaryotic rhomboids whose progenitor may be the ancestors of eukaryotic rhomboids.
mycobacterial rhomboids are active rhomboid proteases with different evolutionary history.
there was a genome-wide conservation and organization of the orthologs of rv <dig> arranged in proximity with glutamate racemase , while the orthologs of rv <dig> appeared evolutionary unstable and were lost in mycobacterium leprae and the mycobacterium avium complex.
transcription assays indicated that both mycobacterial rhomboids are possibly expressed.
a novel nonsense mutation at the trp <dig> codon split the rhomboid of mycobacterium avium subsp.
paratuberculosis into two hypothetical proteins  that are identical to mav_ <dig> of mycobacterium avium.
although prokaryotic genomes contain one rhomboid, actinobacteria can have two or more copies whose sequences have not been analyzed for the presence putative rhomboid catalytic signatures.
many mycobacterial genomes contained two phylogenetically distinct active rhomboids orthologous to rv <dig>  and rv <dig>  of mycobacterium tuberculosis h37rv, which were acquired independently.
the topology and transmembrane helices of the rv <dig> orthologs were similar to those of eukaryotic secretase rhomboids, while those of rv <dig> orthologs were unique.
