thus multiple strains can coexist by partitioning resources and stable high diversity is created by negative frequency-dependent selection from phage.
density-dependent mortality from phage predation limits the density of any single bacterial strain, preventing competitive exclusion by faster-growing strains.
these findings have implications for the role of phage in ecosystem processes, where they have mainly been considered as a mortality factor; these results suggest that on long timescales phage may actually increase bacterial productivity by aiding the evolution of faster-growing strains.
furthermore, these results suggest that the therapeutic use of phage to treat bacterial infections  could have unintended negative side-effects.
in addition, frequency-dependent selection for resistance creates transient local trade-offs between growth rate and resistance that allow bacterial strains to adapt across fitness valleys.
thus bacterial populations that  would have been trapped at sub-optimal local peaks in the adaptive landscape are able  to reach alternate higher peaks than could have been reached by mutation alone.
thus phage, in contrast to their deleterious effects on individual host cells, can confer an evolutionary benefit to bacterial populations.
also, resistance to phage often affects host fitness by pleiotropy  and/or direct costs of resistance mechanisms.
selection pressures imposed by phage are often frequency-dependent, such that rare phenotypes are favoured; this occurs when infection depends on some form of genetic matching.
standing bacterial diversity promotes adaptation in dynamic environments, since it increases the likelihood of a pre-existing genotype being suited to altered conditions.
bacteriophage  are of key importance in ecological processes at scales from biofilms to biogeochemical cycles.
here a simple model of bacteria and bacteriophage coevolving in a resource-limited chemostat is used to study the effect of coevolving phage on the evolution of bacterial hosts.
