however, existing event-based systems typically ignore additional information within the textual context of events that can determine, amongst other things, whether an event represents a fact, hypothesis, experimental result or analysis of results, whether it describes new or previously reported knowledge, and whether it is speculated or negated.
our results show that eventmine-mk can outperform other state-of-the-art systems that participated in this task.
to allow easy integration into text mining systems, eventmine-mk is provided as a uima component that can be used in the interoperable text mining infrastructure, u-compare.
this system has been integrated into eventmine, a state-of-the-art event extraction system, in order to create a more advanced system  that not only extracts events from text automatically, but also assigns five different types of meta-knowledge to these events.
based on a corpus of  <dig>  medline abstracts, fully manually annotated with both events and associated meta-knowledge, we have constructed a machine learning-based system that automatically assigns meta-knowledge information to events.
we have constructed the first practical system that extracts both events and associated, detailed meta-knowledge information from biomedical literature.
the automatically assigned meta-knowledge information can be used to refine search systems, in order to provide an extra search layer beyond entities and assertions, dealing with phenomena such as rhetorical intent, speculations, contradictions and negations.
research into event-based text mining from the biomedical literature has been growing in popularity to facilitate the development of advanced biomedical text mining systems.
this finer grained search functionality can assist in several important tasks, e.g., database curation  and pathway enrichment .
the automatic recognition of such information can permit the training of systems allowing finer-grained searching of events according to the meta-knowledge that is associated with them.
