compared with traditional mva pathway, the novel pathway is shortened by  <dig> steps.
a novel biosynthetic pathway of isoprene in e. coli was established by co-expressing the heterologous mvae gene encoding acetyl-coa acetyltransferase/hmg-coa reductase and mvas gene encoding hmg-coa synthase from enterococcus faecalis, fatty acid decarboxylase  and oleate hydratase .
in brief, this study provided an alternative method for isoprene biosynthesis, which is largely different from the well-developed mep pathway or mva pathway.
we firstly introduced fatty acid decarboxylase  from jeotgalicoccus species into e. coli to directly convert mva into 3-methy-3-buten-1-ol.
and then to transform 3-methy-3-buten-1-ol to isoprene, oleate hydratase  from elizabethkingia meningoseptica was overexpressed in e. coli.
in this study, by using metabolic engineering techniques, the novel mva-mediated biosynthetic pathway of isoprene was successfully assembled in e. coli bl <dig> with the heterologous mva upper pathway, oletje from jeotgalicoccus species and ohyaem from elizabethkingia meningoseptica.
in addition, this is the first report on the reaction of converting mva into 3-methy-3-buten-1-ol by fatty acid decarboxylase  from jeotgalicoccus species.
to deal with the increasingly severe energy crisis and environmental consequences, biofuels and biochemicals generated from renewable resources could serve as a promising alternative for replacing petroleum as a source of fuel and chemicals, among which isoprene  in particular is of great significance in that it is an important platform chemical, which has been used in industrial production of synthetic rubber for tires and coatings or aviation fuel.
furthermore, to enhance isoprene production, a further optimization of expression level of oletje, ohyaem was carried out by using different promoters and copy numbers of plasmids.
the final engineered strain, yjm <dig>  bearing the innovative biosynthetic pathway of isoprene, was found to produce isoprene up to  <dig>  mg/l and 620 mg/l under flask and fed-batch fermentation conditions, respectively.
