given that mitochondria play important roles in fungal virulence and the susceptibility/resistance of fungi to fungicides, we performed the first functional analysis of this organelle in ceratocystis using integrated “omics” approaches.
the ascomycete fungus ceratocystis cacaofunesta is the causal agent of wilt disease in cacao, which results in significant economic losses in the affected producing areas.
comparisons among the gene ontology results of the predicted mtprot of c. cacaofunesta, neurospora crassa and saccharomyces cerevisiae revealed no significant differences.
our results confirmed the existence of  <dig> hypothetical proteins and  <dig> novel proteins of which  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, had putative mitochondrial localization.
in addition to the known mitochondrial role in pathogenicity, our results demonstrated that the global function analysis of this organelle is similar in pathogenic and non-pathogenic fungi, suggesting that its relevance in the lifestyle of these organisms should be based on a small number of specific proteins and/or with respect to differential gene regulation.
further functional characterization of these proteins could enhance our understanding of the role of mitochondria in phytopathogenicity.
the c. cacaofunesta mitochondrial genome  consists of a single,  <dig> -bp circular molecule, making this the second largest mtdna among the sordariomycetes.
bioinformatics analysis revealed the presence of  <dig> conserved genes and  <dig> intronic open reading frames in c. cacaofunesta mtdna.
here, we predicted the mitochondrial proteome  of c. cacaofunesta, which is comprised of  <dig>  polypeptides -  <dig> proteins that are mitochondrially encoded and  <dig>  that are nuclearly encoded.
moreover, c. cacaofunesta mitochondria were isolated, and the mtprot was subjected to mass spectrometric analysis.
in this regard, particular interest should be directed towards mitochondrial proteins with unknown function and the novel protein that might be specific to this species.
the experimental proteome validated 27% of the predicted mtprot.
transcriptome analysis revealed  <dig> probable novel genes.
cacao wilt diseaseceratocystis cacaofunestamitogenomicsmitochondrial proteomefungal virulence
the present study provides the first partial genomic analysis of a species of the ceratocystis genus and the first predicted mitochondrial protein inventory of a phytopathogenic fungus.
despite the economic importance of the ceratocystis complex of species, no genomic data are available for any of its members.
