tyra membership in apparent operons  was examined, and patterns of conserved synteny in relationship to organismal positions on the 16s rrna tree were ascertained for members of the domain bacteria.
we propose that the ancestral tyra dehydrogenase had broad specificity for both the cyclohexadienyl and pyridine nucleotide substrates.
this protein family typifies many that are challenging for bioinformatic analysis because of relatively modest sequence conservation and small size.
a number of aromatic-pathway genes  have fused with tyra, and it must be more than coincidental that the free-standing counterparts of all of the latter fused genes exhibit a distinct trace of syntenic association.
indeed, tyra proteins of this type persist today, but it is also common to find instances of narrowed substrate specificities, as well as of acquisition via gene fusion of additional catalytic domains or regulatory domains.
in some clades a qualitative change associated with either narrowed substrate specificity or gene fusion has produced an evolutionary "jump" in the vertical genealogy of tyra homologs.
family members share a catalytic core region of about  <dig> kda, where inhibitors operate competitively by acting as substrate mimics.
the tyra protein family includes members that catalyze two dehydrogenase reactions in distinct pathways leading to l-tyrosine and a third reaction that is not part of tyrosine biosynthesis.
an interactive tool is provided for prediction of substrate specificity.
phylogenetic relationships of tyra domains were evaluated in the context of combinatorial patterns of specificity for the two substrates, as well as the presence or absence of a variety of fusions.
interactive alignments for a suite of catalytic-core tyra domains of differing specificity are also provided to facilitate phylogenetic analysis.
the evolution of tyra proteins within the broader context of how their regulation evolved and to what extent tyra co-evolved with other genes as common members of aromatic-pathway regulons is now feasible as an emerging topic of ongoing inquiry.
