it allows researchers to assign statistical probabilities to patterns of gene expression that fit a priori expectations/hypotheses, it preserves the data's ability to show the researcher interesting, yet unanticipated gene expression patterns, and assigns the majority of anova-significant genes to non-overlapping patterns.
second, for each anova-significant gene, all pairwise contrast results are encoded to create unique pattern id numbers.
the # genes found in each pattern in the data is identified as that pattern's 'actual' frequency.
finally, different patterns may have different probabilities of occurring by chance, importantly influencing researchers' conclusions about a pattern and its constituent genes.
researchers using rna expression microarrays in experimental designs with more than two treatment groups often identify statistically significant genes with anova approaches.
however, the anova test does not discriminate which of the multiple treatment groups differ from one another.
linear contrasts and template correlations work extremely well, especially when the researcher has a priori information pointing to a particular pattern/template among the different treatment groups.
in our hands, ppm works well for studies using from three to six treatment groups in which the researcher is interested in treatment-related patterns of gene expression.
hardware/software limitations and extreme number of theoretical expression patterns limit utility for larger numbers of treatment groups.
thus, over a moderate range of treatment groups, ppm appears to work well.
third, using monte carlo simulations, those patterns' frequencies are estimated in random data .
applied to a published microarray experiment, the statigen program successfully flagged patterns that had been manually assigned in prior work, and further identified other gene expression patterns that may be of interest.
further, all pairwise comparisons can be used to identify particular, treatment group-dependent patterns of gene expression.
we developed a four step, post hoc pattern matching  algorithm to automate single channel gene expression pattern identification/significance.
the ppm procedure is designed to augment current microarray analysis procedures by allowing researchers to incorporate all of the information from post hoc tests to establish unique, overarching gene expression patterns in which there is no overlap in gene membership.
thus, post hoc tests, such as linear contrasts, template correlations, and pairwise comparisons are used.
