bacteria have developed a repertoire of signalling mechanisms that enable adaptive responses to fluctuating environmental conditions.
stochastic modelling suggests diverse noise-induced switching behaviours between the stable states, depending on the expression levels of the c-di-gmp-producing  and -degrading  enzymes and reveals the quantitative difference in stable c-di-gmp levels between distinct phenotypes.
furthermore, the presented work provides a detailed insight into the interactions between the multiple dgc- and pde-type enzymes and the role of c-di-gmp in dynamical regulation of cellular decisions.
this behaviour may implicate an intrinsic feature of the system allowing for a fast adaptive response  versus a slow transition to the curli-off state, in line with experimental observations.
the most dominant type of behaviour is characterised by a fast switching from curli-off to curli-on with a slow switching in the reverse direction and the second most dominant type is a long-term differentiation into curli-on or curli-off cells.
our work supports the hypothesis that the phenotypic heterogeneity of curli expression in biofilm cells is induced by bistable regulation at the post-translational level.
our approach yields a mechanistic explanation for the phenotypic heterogeneity of curli fiber expression.
logical modellingstochastic modellingbistabilityphenotypic heterogeneitybiofilmc-di-gmpescherichia coliissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
the aim is to evaluate the topological structure of the underlying signalling network and to identify and analyse model parameterisations that satisfy observations from a set of genetic knockout experiments.
we introduce a structured modelling workflow combining logical network topology analysis with time-continuous deterministic and stochastic modelling.
network topology and biochemical kinetics, and allows for an incorporation of experimental data from heterogeneous sources.
in this work, we elucidate the potential role of post-translational bistability as a source for this heterogeneity.
the combination of logical and continuous modelling enables a thorough analysis of different determinants of bistable regulation, i.e.
