we also identified five potential revisions to previously annotated mirnas at the mirna termini, two cases of highly abundant mirna* sequences,  <dig> mirna clusters, and  <dig> cases where more than one pre-mirna hairpin produces the same or highly similar mature mirnas.
a better understanding of the functions of these mirnas will offer new insights in mosquito biology and may lead to novel approaches to combat mosquito-borne infectious diseases.
the mature mirnas play key regulatory roles during embryonic development as well as other cellular processes.
direct experimental evidence for mosquito mirnas has been recently reported in anopheline mosquitoes based on small-scale cloning efforts.
they are also implicated in control of viral infection as well as innate immunity.
the combination of these approaches uncovered  <dig> different pre-mirnas in ae.
detailed expression analysis of eight of the  <dig> mosquito-specific mirnas in four divergent mosquito genera identified cases of clearly conserved expression patterns and obvious differences.
a number of mirnas showed higher levels in midgut from blood-fed female than that from sugar-fed female, which was confirmed by northern blots on two of these mirnas.
northern blots also revealed several mirnas that showed stage-specific expression.
the expression profiles of a few mirnas suggest stage-specific functions and functions related to embryonic development or blood feeding.
new insights were gained on the evolution of conserved and lineage-specific mirnas in mosquitoes.
a pre-mirna is processed to make a mirna:mirna* duplex, which is then separated to generate a mature mirna and a mirna*.
we obtained approximately  <dig>   <dig> small rna sequences from the yellow fever mosquito, aedes aegypti, by  <dig> sequencing of samples that were isolated from mixed-age embryos and midguts from sugar-fed and blood-fed females, respectively.
this study provides the first systematic analysis of mirnas in ae.
thirteen mirnas, including eight novel mirnas identified in this study, are currently only found in mosquitoes.
