recent developments in molecular genetics, such as platforms for genome-wide genotyping and sequencing, provide an opportunity to identify genes and pathways that influence production traits.
these genes are involved in ion transport and metal ion binding; act as membrane or transmembrane proteins; and belong to gene clusters that are likely related to the transport and catalysis of molecules through the cell membrane and essential mechanisms of nutrient absorption.
we potentially identified genes and pathways that play key roles in hepatic metabolic adaptations to oxidative stress such as those involved in antioxidant mechanisms.
among the over-represented pathways were drug or xenobiotic metabolism, complement and coagulation cascades, nrf2-mediated oxidative stress, melatonin degradation and glutathione metabolism.
these results improve our understanding of the metabolic mechanisms underlying feed efficiency in beef cattle and will help develop strategies for selection towards the desired phenotype.
it is known that transcriptional networks influence feed efficiency-related traits such as growth and energy balance.
differential gene expression analysis between high residual feed intake  and low residual feed intake  groups was performed to provide insights into the molecular mechanisms that underlie feed efficiency-related traits in beef cattle.
this study sought to identify differentially expressed genes in animals genetically divergent for residual feed intake , using rna sequencing methodology  to obtain information from genome-wide expression profiles in the liver tissues of nelore cattle.
some previously identified mechanisms were supported and new pathways controlling feed efficiency in nelore cattle were discovered.
efficiency of feed utilization is important for animal production because it can reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve industry profitability.
genes with functions in cellular signaling, growth and proliferation, cell death and survival were also differentially expressed.
