marker-assisted selection  and genomic selection  based on genome-wide marker data provide powerful tools to predict the genotypic value of selection material in plant breeding.
in hybrid rye, genomic selection is superior to marker-assisted selection.
marker-assisted selectiongenomic selectioncross-validationhybrid ryerelatednessevaluation locationstesting yearsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
within each of the two bi-parental populations, accuracies differed depending on the relatedness of the respective parental lines.
in contrast, accuracy of prediction based on an estimation set from one population to a test set from the other population was low despite that the two bi-parental segregating populations under scrutiny shared one parental line.
however, it achieves high accuracies of prediction only for selection candidates closely related to the plant material evaluated in field trials, resulting in a rather pessimistic prognosis for distantly related material.
both, the numbers of evaluation locations and testing years in trials contribute equally to prediction accuracy.
based on extended field evaluation data for grain yield, plant height, starch content and total pentosan content of elite hybrid rye derived from testcrosses involving two bi-parental populations that were genotyped with  <dig> molecular markers, we compared the accuracy of prediction of mas and gs in a cross-validation approach.
mas delivered generally lower and in addition potentially over-estimated accuracies of prediction than gs by ridge regression best linear unbiased prediction .
limiting the number of locations or years in field testing reduced the accuracy of prediction of gs equally, supporting the view that to establish robust gs calibration models a sufficient number of test locations is of similar importance as extended testing for more than one year.
the grade of relatedness of the plant material included in the estimation and test sets clearly affected the accuracy of prediction of gs.
