there have been no systematic attempts to explore and utilise epiallelic variation, and so extend the range of phenotypes available for selection in crop improvement.
we demonstrate the potential of stochastic chemically-induced hypomethylation to generate novel and valuable variation for crop improvement.
the generation of stochastically hypomethylated populations has utility in epiallele discovery for a wide range of crop plants, and has considerable potential as an intervention strategy for crop improvement.
modulating the methylation status of cytosine can generate epialleles, which have been detected and characterised at specific loci in several plant systems, and have the potential to generate novel and relatively stable phenotypes.
each 5-azac-treated line represents a unique combination of hypomethylated epialleles.
targeted chemical intervention using 5-azac has advantages over transgenic or mutant modulation of methyltransferases, allowing stochastic generation of epialleles across the genome.
there was coincident phenotypic variation among these lines for a range of seed yield and composition traits, including increased seed protein content and decreased oil content, as well as decreased erucic acid and corresponding increases in linoleic and/or palmitic acid.
epigenetic marks superimposed on the dna sequence of eukaryote chromosomes provide agility and plasticity in terms of modulating gene expression, ontology, and response to the environment.
we demonstrated transgenerational inheritance of some phenotypes.
dose–response was sigmoidal for several traits, similar to that observed for chemical mutagens such as ems.
when compared to untreated controls, 5-aza c-treated lines exhibited reduced immuno-staining of 5mc on pachytene chromosomes, and methylation sensitive amplified polymorphism  profiles that were both divergent and more variable.
we developed an approach for generating novel epialleles by perturbation of the dna methylation status.
systematic analysis of dose–response to 5-azac in b. rapa guided generation of a selfed stochastically hypomethylated population, used for forward screening of several agronomic traits.
5- azacytidine  provides selective targeting of 5mcg, which in plants is associated with exonic dna.
the approach and populations developed are available for forward and reverse screening of epiallelic variation and subsequent functional and inheritance studies.
