the early toxicological mechanisms of u chemical toxicity in salmon has for the first time been systematically profiled.
the results showed that various toxicity pathways involved in mitochondrial functions, oxidative stress, nuclear receptor signaling, organ damage were commonly affected by all du concentrations.
these degs were associated with known gene ontology functions such as generation of precursor metabolites and energy, carbohydrate metabolic process and cellular homeostasis.
these moas may subsequently lead to downstream events such as apoptosis, dna repair, hypoxia signaling and immune response.
the fish were exposed to three environmentally relevant concentrations of du  for  <dig> h. hepatic transcriptional responses were studied using microarrays in combination with quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction .
the salmon degs were then mapped to mammalian orthologs and subjected to protein-protein network and pathway analysis.
eight genes representative of several key pathways were further verified using qpcr no significant formation of micronuclei in the red blood cells or alterations of plasma stress variables were identified.
the current study suggested that the mitochondrion may be a key target of u chemical toxicity in salmon.
the present study aimed to characterize the chemical toxicity of u in atlantic salmon  using depleted uranium  as a test model.
uranium  is a naturally occurring radionuclide that has been found in the aquatic environment due to anthropogenic activities.
future efforts to link transcriptional responses to adverse effects have been outlined as important for understanding of potential risk to aquatic organisms.
exposure to u may pose risk to aquatic organisms due to its radiological and chemical toxicity.
plasma variables and chromosomal damages were also studied to link transcriptional responses to potential physiological changes at higher levels.
the induction of oxidative stress and uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation may be two potential modes of action  of du.
