to document the crosstalk between the host and microbiota, we used gnotobiotic models to study the influence of two major commensal bacteria, bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and faecalibacterium prausnitzii, on this intestinal mucus layer.
our study reveals the importance of the balance between two main commensal bacteria in maintaining colonic epithelial homeostasis via their respective effects on mucus.
b. thetaiotaomicron and f. prausnitzii, which are metabolically complementary, modulate, in vivo, the intestinal mucus barrier by modifying goblet cells and mucin glycosylation.
when b. thetaiotaomicron was associated with f. prausnitzii, an acetate consumer and a butyrate producer, the effects on goblet cells and mucin glycosylation were diminished.
we determined whether b. thetaiotaomicron affected goblet cell differentiation, mucin synthesis and glycosylation in the colonic epithelium.
b. thetaiotaomicron, an acetate producer, increased goblet cell differentiation, expression of mucus-related genes and the ratio of sialylated to sulfated mucins in mono-associated rats.
using a mucus-producing cell line, we showed that acetate up-regulated klf <dig>  a transcription factor involved in goblet cell differentiation.
f. prausnitzii is of particular physiological importance because it can be considered as a sensor and a marker of human health.
b. thetaiotaomicron, therefore, stimulates the secretory lineage, favoring mucus production.
b. thetaiotaomicron is known to use polysaccharides from mucus, but its effect on goblet cells has not been addressed so far.
we then investigated how f. prausnitzii influenced the colonic epithelial responses to b. thetaiotaomicron.
f. prausnitzii, by attenuating the effects of b. thetaiotaomicron on mucus, may help the epithelium to maintain appropriate proportions of different cell types of the secretory lineage.
the intestinal mucus layer plays a key role in the maintenance of host-microbiota homeostasis.
germ-free ratsgoblet cellsmucin o-glycosylationklf4short chain fatty acid
