b. japonicum cpac  <dig>  is outstanding in its saprophytic capacity and competitiveness, whereas b. diazoefficiens cpac  <dig>  is known for its high efficiency in fixing nitrogen.
the genomes of cpac  <dig> and cpac  <dig> were compared to each other and also to those of b. japonicum usda 6t and b. diazoefficiens usda 110t.
differences in genome size were found between species, with b. japonicum having larger genomes than b. diazoefficiens.
here we contribute with information on the genomes of two commercial strains that are broadly applied to soybean crops in the tropics.
in cpac  <dig>  more genes were associated with secondary metabolites, nutrient transport, iron-acquisition and iaa metabolism, potentially correlated with higher saprophytic capacity and competitiveness than seen with cpac  <dig>  in cpac  <dig>  more genes were related to the metabolism of amino acids and hydrogen uptake, potentially correlated with higher efficiency of nitrogen fixation than seen with cpac  <dig>
about 10% of the genomes was composed of exclusive genes of each strain, but up to 98% of them were of unknown function or coded for mobile genetic elements.
the soybean-bradyrhizobium symbiosis can be highly efficient in fixing nitrogen, but few genomic sequences of elite inoculant strains are available.
symbiosisnodulationnitrogen fixationcompetitivenesssecretion systemshorizontal gene transfermembrane transporterssurface polysaccharidessecondary metabolismphytohormone synthesisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
in addition to the symbiotic region, several genomic islands were identified.
although most of the four genomes were syntenic, genome rearrangements within and between species were observed, including events in the symbiosis island.
both are well adapted to tropical soils.
several differences and similarities detected between the two elite soybean-inoculant strains and between the two species of bradyrhizobium provide new insights into adaptation to tropical soils, efficiency of n <dig> fixation, nodulation and competitiveness.
altogether, these features must confer high genomic plasticity that might explain adaptation and differences in symbiotic performance.
