here, we performed the first itraq-based quantitative proteome and phosphorylated proteins analyses during wheat grain development.
the proteome profiles and phosphoprotein characterization of the metabolic proteins during grain development of the elite chinese bread wheat cultivar yanyou  <dig> were studied using the itraq-based quantitative proteome approach, tio <dig> microcolumns, and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry .
our results revealed a complex quantitative proteome and phosphorylation profile during wheat grain development.
of the  <dig> deps, six protein expression patterns were identified, most of which were up, down, and up-down expression patterns.
hierarchical clustering analysis indicated that the deps involved in starch biosynthesis, storage proteins, and defense/stress-related proteins significantly accumulated at the late grain development stages, while those related to protein synthesis/assembly/degradation and photosynthesis showed an opposite expression model during grain development.
the recently developed isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation  method allows sensitive and accurate protein quantification.
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction  analysis of  <dig> representative genes encoding different metabolic proteins showed certain transcriptional and translational expression differences during grain development.
particularly, some key deps involved in starch biosynthesis and stress/defense were phosphorylated, suggesting their roles in wheat grain development.
phosphorylated proteins analyses demonstrated that  <dig> deps such as agpase, sucrose synthase, hsp <dig>  and serpins were phosphorylated in the developing grains and were mainly involved in starch biosynthesis and stress/defense.
the  <dig> deps were classified into nine functional categories mainly involved in different metabolic processes and located in the membrane and cytoplasm.
two-dimensional gel-based approaches are limited by the low identification rate of proteins and lack of accurate protein quantitation.
numerous deps are involved in grain starch and protein syntheses as well as adverse defense, which set an important basis for wheat yield and quality.
