a moderate increase in transcriptional levels  was observed for several pex genes, which are involved in peroxisome biogenesis.
consistent with this, also various pex genes were upregulated.
these organelles are crucial to support growth on methanol, as they contain key enzymes of methanol metabolism.
upregulated genes also included genes encoding other enzymes of methanol metabolism as well as of peroxisomal β-oxidation.
during exponential growth on glucose, cells of h. polymorpha typically contain a single, small peroxisome that is redundant for growth while on methanol multiple, enlarged peroxisomes are present.
in this study, changes in the transcriptional profiles during adaptation of h. polymorpha cells from glucose- to methanol-containing media were investigated using dna-microarray analyses.
two hours after the shift of cells from glucose to methanol nearly 20%  of the approximately  <dig> annotated h. polymorpha genes were significantly upregulated with at least a two-fold differential expression.
transcriptional profiling of h. polymorpha cells shifted from glucose to methanol showed the expected downregulation of glycolytic genes together with upregulation of the methanol utilisation pathway.
methylotrophic yeast species  can grow on methanol as sole source of carbon and energy.
these organisms are important cell factories for the production of recombinant proteins, but are also used in fundamental research as model organisms to study peroxisome biology.
in addition, an increase was observed in expression of the several atg genes, which encode proteins involved in autophagy and autophagy processes.
the strong upregulation of atg genes is possibly due to induction of autophagy processes related to remodeling of the cell architecture required to support growth on methanol.
highest upregulation  was observed for the genes encoding the transcription factor mpp <dig> and formate dehydrogenase, an enzyme of the methanol dissimilation pathway.
these processes may also be responsible for the enhanced peroxisomal β-oxidation, as autophagy leads to recycling of membrane lipids.
