our discovery highlights the remarkable ability of dna transposons to colonize and shape genomes from all domains of life, as well as giant viruses.
transposable elements are mobile dna sequences that are widely distributed in prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes, where they represent a major force in genome evolution.
our findings continue to blur the division between viral and cellular genomes, adhering to the emerging view that the content, dynamics, and evolution of the genomes of giant viruses do not substantially differ from those of cellular organisms.
here, we report a family of miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements  in the pandoravirus salinus genome, representing the first description of a virus populated with a canonical transposable element family that proliferated by transposition within the viral genome.
genome evolutionminiature inverted-repeat transposable element virusissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
however, transposable elements have rarely been documented in viruses, and their contribution to viral genome evolution remains largely unexplored.
ten of the  <dig> mites in the p. salinus genome are located within coding regions of predicted genes, while others are close to genes, suggesting that these transposons may have contributed to viral genetic novelty.
these observations suggest that the submariner mites of p. salinus belong to the widespread tc1/mariner superfamily and may have been mobilized by an amoebozoan host.
pandoraviruses are recently described dna viruses with genome sizes that exceed those of some prokaryotes, rivaling parasitic eukaryotes.
the mite family, which we name submariner, includes  <dig> copies with all the hallmarks of mites: short length, terminal inverted repeats, ta target site duplication, and no coding capacity.
however, no mobile genetic elements have yet been reported in pandoravirus genomes.
submariner elements show signs of transposition and are undetectable in the genome of pandoravirus dulcis, the closest known relative pandoravirus salinus.
these large genomes appear to include substantial noncoding intergenic spaces, which provide potential locations for transposable element insertions.
we identified a dna transposon related to submariner in the genome of acanthamoeba castellanii, a species thought to host pandoraviruses, which contains remnants of coding sequence for a tc1/mariner transposase.
