mutation of flaa resulted in non-motile vf39sm and extremely reduced motility in  <dig>  individual mutations of flab and flac resulted in shorter flagellar filaments and consequently reduced swimming and swarming motility for both strains.
the results obtained from this study demonstrate that flaa, flab, and flac are major components of the flagellar filament while flad and flag are minor components for r. leguminosarum strains  <dig> and vf39sm.
motility and chemotaxis are important in the ecology of r. leguminosarum to provide a competitive advantage during the early steps of nodulation, but the mechanisms of motility and flagellar assembly remain poorly studied.
three flagellins  and five flagellins  were detected by mass spectrometry in the flagellar filaments of strains  <dig> and vf39sm, respectively.
we also observed differences between the two strains, wherein flae and flah appear to be minor components of the flagellar filaments in vf39sm but these flagellin subunits may play more important roles in  <dig>  this paper also demonstrates that the flagellins of  <dig> and vf39sm are possibly glycosylated.
the predicted flagellins of  <dig> are highly similar or identical to the corresponding flagellins in vf39sm.
r. leguminosarum strains  <dig> and vf39sm have seven flagellin genes , which are transcribed separately.
all flagellins exhibit conserved amino acid residues at the n- and c-terminal ends and are variable in the central regions.
the flagellar filament and the motility of  <dig> strains with mutations in flad and flag were not significantly affected while flae and flah mutants exhibited shortened filaments and reduced swimming motility.
five flagellin subunits  are highly similar to each other, whereas flad and flah are more distantly related.
mutant vf39sm strains carrying individual mutations in flad, flae, flah, and flag were not significantly affected in motility and filament morphology.
this paper addresses the role of the seven flagellin genes in producing a functional flagellum.
