the conservation of gene structure, the presence of specific motifs and domains and the genomic synteny argue for a common phylogenetic origin of forisomes and other p-proteins.
in addition, one common and three subgroup specific protein motifs were found in the amino acid sequences of seo proteins.
even in fabaceae some seo genes appear to not encode forisome components.
we performed a comprehensive genome-wide comparative analysis by screening the m. truncatula, glycine max, arabidopsis thaliana, vitis vinifera and solanum phureja genomes, and a malus domestica est library for homologs of mtseo <dig>  mtseo <dig> and mtseo <dig> and identified numerous novel seo genes in fabaceae and even non-fabaceae plants, which do not possess forisomes.
the unexpected occurrence of forisome-like genes in non-fabaceae plants may indicate that these proteins encode species-specific p-proteins, which is backed up by the phloem-specific expression profiles.
we constructed hidden markov models that identified three conserved protein domains, which characterize seo proteins when present in combination.
the phloem of dicotyledonous plants contains specialized p-proteins  that accumulate during sieve element differentiation and remain parietally associated with the cisternae of the endoplasmic reticulum in mature sieve elements.
seo genes are organized in genomic clusters and the conserved synteny allowed us to identify several m. truncatula vs g. max orthologs as well as paralogs within the g. max genome.
all seo genes have a similar exon-intron structure and are expressed predominantly in the phloem.
wounding causes p-protein filaments to accumulate at the sieve plates and block the translocation of photosynthate.
recently, the molecular characterization of three genes encoding forisome components in the model legume medicago truncatula  was reported, but little is known about the molecular characteristics of p-proteins in non-fabaceae.
phylogenetic analysis revealed the presence of several subgroups with fabaceae-specific subgroups containing all of the known as well as newly identified forisome component proteins.
