identification of base composition bias and utilization of the combined data of whole mitochondrial genome sequences has allowed recovery of a strongly supported phylogeny that is upheld when using multiple alternative outgroups for the ursidae, a mammalian family that underwent a rapid radiation since the mid- to late pliocene.
we revisit the contentious relationships within ursidae by analyzing complete mt genome sequences and evaluating the performance of both entire mt genomes and constituent mtdna genes in recovering a phylogeny of extremely recent speciation events.
this mitochondrial genome-based phylogeny provides strong evidence that the spectacled bear diverged first, while within the genus ursus, the sloth bear is the sister taxon of all the other five ursines.
despite the small number of ursid species, bear phylogeny has long been a focus of study due to their conservation value, as all bear genera have been classified as endangered at either the species or subspecies level.
although the whole mitochondrial dna sequence based phylogeny is robust, it remains in conflict with phylogenetic relationships suggested by analysis of limited nuclear-encoded data, a situation that will require gathering more nuclear dna sequence information.
the ursidae family represents a typical example of rapid evolutionary radiation.
the latter group is divided into the brown bear/polar bear and the two black bears/sun bear assemblages.
it remains to be seen if the reliability of mt genome analysis will hold up in studies of other difficult phylogenetic issues.
this study provides a robust ursidae phylogenetic framework for future validation by additional independent evidence, and also has significant implications for assisting in the resolution of other similarly difficult phylogenetic investigations.
previous analyses with a single mitochondrial  gene or a small number of mt genes either provide weak support or a large unresolved polytomy for ursids.
these findings resolve the previous conflicts between trees using partial mt genes.
