we propose a complex network analysis tool, pyramabs, which was developed to integrate vertical and horizontal relationships and extract information at various granularities to create a pyramid from a complex system of interacting objects.
networks are a flexible and convenient method of representing interactions in a complex system, and an increasing amount of information in real-world situations is described by complex networks.
we considered the analysis of a complex network as an iterative process for extracting meaningful information at multiple granularities from a system of interacting objects.
pyramabs was designed to interpret a complex network through a disclosure of a pyramid of abstractions.
at present, the organization of system modules is typically limited to either a multilevel hierarchy that describes the "vertical" relationships between modules at different levels , or a single-level graph that represents the "horizontal" relationships among modules .
interpretations in this form are more accurate and more meaningful than multilevel dendrograms or single-level graphs.
we first tested pyramabs on hierarchical random networks to verify its ability to find the module organization pre-embedded in the networks.
the abstraction pyramid is a new knowledge representation that combines vertical and horizontal viewpoints at different degrees of abstraction.
the pyramid depicts the nested structure implied in a complex system, and shows the vertical relationships between abstract networks at different levels.
according to gene ontology  and the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes , the vertical relationships identified from the ppi and metabolic pathways correctly characterized the inclusion  relationship, and the horizontal relationships provided a good indication of the functional closeness between modules.
both types of organizations fail to provide a broader and deeper view of the complex systems that arise from an integration of vertical and horizontal relationships.
our experiments with pyramabs demonstrated its ability to perform knowledge mining in complex systems.
in addition, at each level the abstract network of modules, which are connected by weighted links, represents the modules' horizontal relationships.
we later tested it on a protein-protein interaction  network and a metabolic network.
the quality of the interpretation of the networks depends on the completeness and expressiveness of the extracted knowledge representations.
