we then extend the model to a more general formulation that can include the existing scca models.
the emergence of high-throughput genomic datasets from different sources and platforms , and copy number variation ) has greatly enhanced our understandings of the interplay of these genomic factors as well as their influences on the complex diseases.
it outperforms the two scca methods  by identifying the correlated features with more true positives while controlling total discordance at a lower level on the simulated data, even if the group effect does not exist or there are irrelevant features grouped with true correlated features.
it is challenging to explore the relationship between these different types of genomic data sets.
we propose a new group sparse cca method  along with an effective numerical algorithm to study the mutual relationship between two different types of genomic data .
pathway analysis is further performed for biological interpretation of those features.
we use a graphical representation of the samples with a pair of canonical variates to demonstrate the discriminating characteristic of the selected features.
compared with our proposed cca-group sparse models, cca-l <dig> tends to select less true correlated features while cca-group inclines to select more redundant features.
we apply the model to feature/variable selection from two data sets and compare our group sparse cca method with existing scca methods on both simulation and two real datasets .
however, they overlook the structural or group effect within genomic data in the analysis, which often exist and are important .
the cca-sparse group method incorporates group effects of features into the correlation analysis while performs individual feature selection simultaneously.
conventional cca method does not work effectively if the number of data samples is significantly less than that of biomarkers, which is a typical case for genomic data .
group sparse ccagenomic data integrationfeature selectionsnp
in this paper, we focus on a multivariate statistical method, canonical correlation analysis  method for this problem.
