neuronal density and od of map2-positive cells in the mcao group were significantly lower than those in the sham group, whereas the neuronal density and od of map2-positive cells in the hucb-msc group were higher than those in mcao and saline groups .
transplanted hucb-mscs might ameliorate ischemic damage by influencing neuronal metabolites in the infarct area, providing additional evidence for neuroprotection by stem cells.
rabbits  were equally divided into sham, middle cerebral artery occlusion , hucb-msc, and saline groups.
nsss in the hucb-msc group at  <dig> and 14 days after reperfusion were lower than in mcao and saline groups .
compared with mcao and saline groups at 2 weeks after mcao, the infarction volume in the hucb-msc group had decreased remarkably .
because there is little research on the effects of transplanted stem cells on neuronal metabolites in infarct areas, we transplanted human umbilical cord blood mesenchymal stem cells  into cerebral ischemic rabbits and examined the neuronal metabolites.
no significant changes were observed in cbcs or serum biochemical parameters, suggesting that intravenous infusion of hucb-mscs is safe for rabbits in the short-term.
we also evaluated complete blood cell counts and serum biochemical parameters.
compared with saline and mcao groups at 24 h and 2 weeks after mcao, naa/cr and cho/cr ratios had increased significantly, whereas the lac/cr ratio had decreased significantly in the hucb-msc group .
significant neuronal metabolic changes occurred in the infarct area at 24 h and 2 weeks after mcao.
the effects of hucb-msc transplantation were assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy , neurological severity scores , infarct area volume, neuronal density, and optical density  of microtubule-associated protein  <dig> -positive cells.
the rabbit ischemic model was established by mcao.
cbcs and biochemical parameters were unchanged in the mcao group at 24 h and 2 weeks after hucb-msc transplantation.
human umbilical cord blood mesenchymal stem cellscerebral ischemiaproton magnetic resonance spectroscopymiddle cerebral artery occlusion
1h-mrs revealed an elevation in the lactate /creatine including phosphocreatine  ratio and a decrease in the n-acetylaspartate /cr and choline-containing phospholipids /cr ratios at 24 h after mcao in the mcao group .
