we genotyped snp and ssr loci to identify genetic clusters, and sequenced two plastid regions  and a nuclear gene  to confirm species’ divergence and compare species delimitation methods.
species delimitation in closely related plant taxa can be challenging because  reproductive barriers are not always congruent with morphological differentiation,  use of plastid sequences might lead to misinterpretation,  rare species might not be sampled.
ssr results were confirmed by sequence data from the nuclear region at <dig> which revealed three distinct ‘fields for recombination’ corresponding to  west african m. regia,  central african samples with leaf traits of m. regia, and  all m. excelsa samples.
recognizing cryptic species is particularly crucial for economically exploited species because some hidden taxa might actually be endangered as they are merged with more abundant species.
tropical forestsmiliciacryptic speciesspecies delimitationsnpmicrosatellitesdna sequencesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
we also examined whether ecological niche differentiation was congruent with sampled genetic structure.
in central africa, two genetic clusters were consistently inferred by both types of markers, while a few scattered samples, sympatric with the preceding clusters but exhibiting leaf traits of m. regia, were grouped with the west african m. regia cluster based on snps or formed a distinct cluster based on ssrs.
it is surprising that the occurrence of two species in central africa was not reported for this well-known timber tree.
we revisited molecular-based species delimitation in the african genus milicia, currently divided into m. regia  and m. excelsa .
west african m. regia, west african and east african m. excelsa samples constituted three well distinct genetic clusters according to snps and ssrs.
niche modelling techniques yielded a significant correlation between niche overlap and genetic distance.
none of the plastid sequences provide indication of distinct clades of the three species-like units.
