cellular processes underlying memory formation are evolutionary conserved, but natural variation in memory dynamics between animal species or populations is common.
this study is the first to describe and compare expression patterns of both protein-coding and antisense transcripts, at different time points after conditioning, of two closely related animal species that differ in ltm formation.
these include genes from various signalling cascades, including several members of the ras and pi <dig> kinase signalling pathways, and glutamate receptors.
the genetic basis of this fascinating phenomenon is poorly understood.
furthermore, antisense transcripts aligning to a number of known memory genes were detected, which may have a role in regulating these genes.
closely related species of nasonia parasitic wasps differ in long-term memory  formation: n. vitripennis will form transcription-dependent ltm after a single conditioning trial, whereas the closely-related species n. giraulti will not.
genes that were differentially expressed  after conditioning in n. vitripennis, but not in n. giraulti, were identified as candidate genes that may regulate ltm formation.
these expression patterns were then analysed with go enrichment analyses for each species and time point, which demonstrated an enrichment of signalling-related genes immediately after conditioning in n. vitripennis only.
analyses of known ltm genes and genes with an opposing expression pattern between the two species revealed additional candidate genes for the difference in ltm formation.
this transcriptome analysis is a valuable resource for future in-depth studies to elucidate the role of candidate genes and antisense transcription in natural variation in ltm formation.
interestingly, several other known ltm genes were exclusively differentially expressed in n. giraulti, which may indicate an ltm-inhibitory mechanism.
rna was collected from heads of both species before and immediately,  <dig> or 24 hours after conditioning, with  <dig> replicates per time point.
it was sequenced strand-specifically, which allows distinguishing sense from antisense transcripts and improves the quality of expression analyses.
among the de transcripts were also antisense transcripts.
several candidate genes that may regulate differences in ltm have been identified.
