poplars exhibited strong growth reduction and increased p use efficiency in response to lower p availabilities.
here, we studied whole-plant p uptake kinetics and expression profiles of members of the pht families under high, intermediate and low p availability in the woody crop poplar  in relation to plant performance.
the relative p uptake rate increased with intermediate and decreased with low p availability.
the maximum p uptake rate was more than 13-times higher in p-starved than in well-supplied poplars.
the minimum concentration for net p uptake from the nutrient solution was  <dig>  μm.
expression profiles of distinct members of the pht families, especially those of pht <dig> were linked with changes in p uptake and allocation at whole-plant level.
in well-supplied plants, only low uptake rate was found.
because the p concentrations in soil solutions are generally in the lower micro-molar range, even below the apparent km-values, our findings suggest that bare-rooted poplars are prone to suffer from p limitations in most environments.
the km for whole-root uptake ranged between 26 μm and 20 μm in poplars with intermediate and low p availability, respectively.
uptake efficiency for p increased with decreasing p availability, but could not overcome a threshold of about 1 μm p in the nutrient solution.
other members  exhibited higher expression in roots than in leaves and were in most cases up-regulated in response to p deficiency.
it is transported into and allocated inside plants by four families of phosphate transporters  with high or low affinity to phosphate.
all pht <dig> members studied showed significant up-regulation upon p starvation and were higher expressed in roots than leaves, with the exception of ptpht1; <dig>  ptpht1; <dig> and ptpht1; <dig> showed root- and p starvation-specific expression.
the regulation was tissue-specific with lower p responsiveness in leaves than in roots.
various members of the pht <dig>  pht <dig> and pht <dig> families showed higher expression in leaves than in roots, but were unresponsive to p deprivation.
