camellia taliensis is one of the most important wild relatives of cultivated tea tree, c. sinensis.
candidate genes for major metabolic pathways involved in tea quality were identified and experimentally validated using rt-qpcr.
such comprehensive est datasets provide an unprecedented opportunity for identifying genes involved in several major metabolic pathways and will accelerate functional genomic studies and genetic improvement efforts of tea trees in the future.
further gene expression profiles showed that they are differentially regulated at different developmental stages.
however, owning to a large genome size of ~ <dig> gb and structurally complex genome, there are fairly limited genetic information and particularly few genomic resources publicly available for this species.
the species extensively occupies mountainous habitats representing a wide-range abiotic tolerance and biotic resistance and thus harbors valuable gene resources that may greatly benefit genetic improvement of cultivated tea tree.
to better understand the key pathways determining tea flavor and enhance tea tree breeding programs, we performed a high-throughput transcriptome sequencing for c. taliensis.
moreover, comparative analyses revealed that c. taliensis shows a remarkable expansion of lea genes, compared to c. sinensis, which might contribute to the observed stronger stress resistance of c. taliensis.
in this study, approximate  <dig>  million high-quality paired-end reads, accounting for ~ <dig> gb of sequence data, were generated from tender shoots, young leaves, flower buds and flowers using illumina hiseq  <dig> platform.
de novo assembly with further processing and filtering yielded a set of  <dig>  transcripts with an average length of 685 bp and an n <dig> of 995 bp.
to gain insights into the evolution of these genes, we aligned them to the previously cloned orthologous genes in c. sinensis, and found that considerable nucleotide variation within several genes involved in important secondary metabolic biosynthesis pathways, of which flavone synthase ii gene  is the most variable between these two species.
we reported the first large-coverage transcriptome datasets for c. taliensis using the next-generation sequencing technology.
