the micro-array data were analysed to identify predictive markers, using a random forest algorithm combined with a logistic regression model.
the combination of a mixed-genome micro-array and statistical analysis using a random forest algorithm has identified virulence markers in a consistent way.
legionnaires’ diseaselegionella pneumophilavirulence-associated epitopepneumonianegative predictive valuerandom forest algorithmenvironmental exposuregenomotypingmicro-arraypublic health
our results suggest that genetic differences in legionella strains exist between geographically distinct entities.
this marker encodes for a structural toxin protein rtxa, described for l. pneumophila as a factor involved in virulence and entry in both human cells and amoebae.
three of the french markers differed from the dutch markers, one showed considerable overlap and was found in one of the legionella genomes .
the five dutch markers insufficiently predicted the patient or environmental origin of the french legionella strains.
the lorraine strain and related dutch and french legionella strains contain a marker that encodes a rtxa protein which probably is involved in the increased prevalence in clinical isolates.
the current set of predictive markers is insufficient to justify its use as a reliable test in the public health field in france.
in our study, we verify whether these five dutch markers can predict the patient or environmental origin of a french legionella strain collection.
within serogroup  <dig>  large differences in prevalence in clinical isolates have been described.
the pneumonia is almost exclusively caused by the species l. pneumophila, of which serogroup  <dig> is responsible for 90% of patients.
it may be necessary to develop region-specific mixed-genome microarrays that are constantly adapted and updated.
a total of  <dig> french patient isolates and environmental strains were compared using a mixed-genome micro-array.
this model showed a negative predictive value of 91%.
in addition, we identify new potential virulence markers and verify whether these can predict better.
the sequences of the identified markers were compared with eleven known legionella genomes, using blastn and blastx; the functionality for each of the predictive markers was checked in the literature.
subsequent analyses identified four predictive markers for the french collection that were used for the logistic regression model.
a recent study, using a dutch legionella strain collection, identified five virulence associated markers.
legionella is a water and soil bacterium that can infect humans, causing a pneumonia known as legionnaires’ disease.
