this finding sheds important light on the evolution of male traits in social insects and the general mechanisms of sexual selection.
aggregationmale competitionsexual selectionspermsocial insectscoordenação de aperfeiçoamento de pessoal de nível superior conselho nacional de desenvolvimento científico e tecnológico 478982/2013-5jaffé rodolfo issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
ejaculate quality is also expected to be under selection, because queens are long-lived and store sperm for life, so males with higher quality ejaculates are expected to provide queens with larger and longer-lived colonies, which in turn may produce more daughter queens .
persistence in male aggregations thus seems to select more competitive males with higher quality sperm.
sperm viability was associated with persistence time in the aggregation, and males that persisted longer presented shorter spermatozoa and higher variation in sperm length than recently arrived males.
male mating ability was assessed through the capacity of a male to reach an aggregation and persist on it; while sperm viability, sperm number, and sperm morphology were used as proxies for sperm quality.
reproductive success is determined by the interplay between mating and fertilization success.
considering the action of pre and post-copulatory sexual selection on male traits, three scenarios might thus be expected: positive, negative or no association between male mating ability and fertilization success.
in social insect species with male-biased sex ratios and queen monogamy, males face particularly strong pre-copulatory sexual selection since they must compete with thousands of other males for a unique mating opportunity.
our work is the first one to reveal an association between male competitive ability and fertilization success in a monogamous social insect.
male size and sperm viability were not correlated, suggesting that the observed patterns were not due to trade-offs in male resource allocation.
here we explored these scenarios in the stingless bee scaptotrigona aff.
however, sperm traits of males that reached aggregations did not differ from those of males collected inside their colonies.
