however, to provide the necessary focus, we have tested our approach in two functional recognition tasks: translation initiation site and stop codon recognition.
recognizing the different functional parts of genes, such as promoters, translation initiation sites, donors, acceptors and stop codons, is a fundamental task of many current studies in bioinformatics.
in this paper, we present a methodology for combining tens or even hundreds of different classifiers for an improved performance.
the proposed method achieves better accuracy than the best state-of-the-art method both in terms of the geometric mean of the specificity and sensitivity and the area under the receiver operating characteristic and precision recall curves.
however, with the rapid evolution of our ability to collect genomic information, it has been shown that combining many sources of evidence is fundamental to the success of any recognition task.
this approach can be used for any of the functional recognition tasks cited above.
furthermore, our approach shows a more principled way for selecting the best genomes to be combined for a given recognition task.
our approach has proven to be a powerful tool for improving the performance of functional site recognition, and it is a useful method for combining many sources of evidence for any recognition task in bioinformatics.
although the experiments were performed for translation initiation site and stop codon recognition, any other recognition task may benefit from our methodology.
the results also show that the common approach of heuristically choosing the species to be used as source of evidence can be improved because the best combinations of genomes for recognition were those not usually selected.
site recognitioncombination of evidencetranslation initiation site recognitionstop codon recognitionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006280ministerio de ciencia y tecnología http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002878consejería de economía, innovación, ciencia y empleo, junta de andalucía issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
we can use the evidence for the prediction of sites in a certain species, such as human, or other species as needed.
currently, the most successful methods use powerful classifiers, such as support vector machines with various string kernels.
