in order to determine how cellular composition and inter-organ interactions influence gene expression upon pharmacological activation of pparα, we performed a meta-analysis of transcriptomics data obtained from mouse hepatocytes , mouse liver slices , and mouse livers exposed to a pparα agonist.
in all models, activation of pparα significantly altered processes related to various aspects of lipid metabolism.
pparα-dependent regulation of genes/processes involved in lipid metabolism is mostly independent of the presence of non-parenchymal cells or systemic factors, as it was observed in all liver models.
however, the full spectrum of pparα biology at the level of lipid metabolism, immunity, carcinogenesis, as well as novel aspects of pparα signaling such as coagulation, vesicular trafficking and the extracellular matrix, seems to require systemic factors, as it was observed exclusively in vivo.
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha fibrateslipid metabolisminflammationparenchymal and non-parenchymal liver cellsmouse liver modelstranscriptomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
the aim was to obtain a comprehensive view of common and model-specific pparα-dependent genes and biological processes to understand the impact of cross-talk between parenchymal and non-parenchymal fractions as well as the effect of inter-organ interactions on the hepatic pparα transcriptome.
to this end we analyzed microarray data of experiments performed in mouse primary hepatocytes treated with the pparα agonist wy <dig> for  <dig> or  <dig> h , mouse precision cut liver slices treated with wy <dig> for  <dig> h , and livers of wild type and ppara knockout mice treated with wy <dig> for  <dig> h or  <dig> days .
in ex vivo and in vivo models, pparα activation significantly regulated processes involved in inflammation; these processes were unaffected in hepatocytes.
only in vivo models showed significant regulation of genes involved in coagulation, carcinogenesis, as well as vesicular trafficking and extracellular matrix.
pparα-dependent regulation of inflammatory genes requires the presence of non-parenchymal cells, as it was observed only ex vivo and in vivo.
it is presumed that the functions of pparα in liver depend on cross-talk between parenchymal  and non-parenchymal  fractions as well as inter-organ interactions.
