furthermore, through comparative transcriptomic and proteomic studies, we generated a global perspective regarding the changes in metabolic pathways under autotrophic and heterotrophic growth conditions.
however, until the present study, neither its genome sequence nor the platform required for molecular manipulations were available.
in addition, three chlorella-specific hexose-proton symporter -like genes were identified that enable the consumption of glucose and, consequently, heterotrophic growth.
transcriptomic and proteomic results provided insight into its extraordinary ability to accumulate large amounts of lipid.
moreover, the rapid synthesis of pyruvate, upregulation of most enzymes involved in fatty acid synthesis, and downregulation of enzymes involved in fatty acid degradation favor the synthesis of fatty acids within the cell.
we generated a draft genome for c. protothecoides, and compared its genome size and gene content with that of chlorella variabilis nc64a and coccomyxa subellipsoidea c- <dig>  this comparison revealed that c. protothecoides has a reduced genome size of  <dig>  mbp, about half that of its close relatives.
the c. protothecoides genome encodes a smaller number of genes, fewer multi-copy genes, fewer unique genes, and fewer genome rearrangements compared with its close relatives.
microalgaechlorella protothecoidesgenome sequenceproteomicoil accumulationhexose-proton symportertranscriptomelipidissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
despite similarities to other chlorella, c. protothecoides has a smaller genome than its close relatives.
the c. protothecoides draft genome will promote the use of this species as a research model.
meanwhile, the cells were not only capable of quickly assimilating glucose but also showed accelerated glucose catabolism through the upregulation of glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid  cycle.
under heterotrophic conditions, enzymes involved in photosynthesis and co <dig> fixation were almost completely degraded, either as mrnas or as proteins.
genes involved in glucose utilization were identified, and these genes explained its ability to grow heterotrophically.
<dig> is regarded as one of the best candidates for commercial manufacture of microalgae-derived biofuel.
