and other mastitis associated gram-positive, catalase-negative cocci is still based upon biochemical tests and serological methods, which frequently provide ambiguous identification results.
an overall identification rate of 100% at species level for  <dig> strains unknown to the ann and the library was achieved by combining ann and the spectral database, thus demonstrating the suitability of our ftir identification system for routine diagnosis.
although the ftir identification system turned out being slightly superior to maldi-tof ms in terms of identification on species level, both methods offer interesting alternatives to conventional methods currently used in mastitis diagnosis as both of them provide high accuracy at low operating costs once the instrument is acquired.
a blind study, including  <dig> clinical samples from dairy cows, revealed a 100% correct species identification rate for ftir and  <dig> % for maldi-tof ms, indicating that these techniques are valuable tools for diagnosis.
using the microflex lt system, maldi biotyper software™  we achieved an accuracy rate of  <dig> %.
the routine diagnosis of streptococcus spp.
we therefore aimed to establish an accurate identification system for differential diagnosis of mastitis associated streptococcus spp.
based on a panel of  <dig> isolates from cases of bovine mastitis, an unsupervised ftir spectral reference library was established and an artificial neural network  - assisted identification system was developed.
bovine mastitisftir spectroscopymaldi-tof msartificial neural network
all bacterial isolates were previously identified by species-specific pcr and/or 16s rrna gene sequence analysis.
in addition, we investigated the potential of matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry  for the identification of mastitis associated streptococcus spp.
this study clearly demonstrates that ftir spectroscopy as well as maldi-tof ms can significantly improve and facilitate the identification and differentiation of mastitis associated streptococcus spp.
