furthermore, we exposed the fish to the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug indomethacin prior to ptz, and we measured its effect on seizure latency, number of seizure behaviors, and mrna expression of il1b, cox2b, and c-fos.
we used quantitative real-time pcr to assess the mrna expression of il1b, cox2a, cox2b, and c-fos, and visual inspection was used to monitor seizure latency and the number of seizure-like behaviors.
moreover, we observed that in larvae exposed to indomethacin, seizure latency increased and the number of seizure-like behaviors decreased.
in addition, we demonstrated the anticonvulsant effect of indomethacin based on  the inhibition of ptz-induced c-fos transcription,  increase in seizure latency, and  decrease in the number of seizure-like behaviors.
it has been demonstrated that the zebrafish model of pentylenetetrazole -evoked seizures and the well-established rodent models of epilepsy are similar pertaining to behavior, electrographic features, and c-fos expression.
although this zebrafish model is suitable for studying seizures, to date, inflammatory response after seizures has not been investigated using this model.
indomethacin treatment prior to ptz-induced seizures downregulated the mrna expression of il1b, cox2b, and c-fos.
our results are supported by previous evidences suggesting that zebrafish is a suitable alternative for studying inflammation, seizures, and the effect of anti-inflammatory compounds on seizure suppression.
because a relationship between epilepsy and inflammation has been established, in the present study we investigated the transcript levels of the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin- <dig> beta  and cyclooxygenase- <dig>  after ptz-induced seizures in the brain of zebrafish 7 days post fertilization.
we found a short-term upregulation of il1b, and we revealed that cox2b, but not cox2a, was induced after seizures.
furthermore, anti-inflammatory effect of indomethacin is clearly demonstrated by the downregulation of the mrna expression of il1b and cox2b.
