m. smegmatis and s. typhimurium were able to induce important membrane changes that were characterised by abundant filopodia and lamellipodia formation.
s. typhimurium infection induced the highest fluid-phase uptake, although both mycobacteria also induced fluid uptake.
raji b cells can internalise s. typhimurium and mycobacteria through an active process, such as macropinocytosis, although the resolution of the infection depends on factors that are inherent in the virulence of each pathogen.
m. tuberculosis infection also induced actin rearrangement-driven membrane changes; however, the b cells were not able to control this infection.
the phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate  treatment of b cells induced filopodia and lamellipodia formation, the production of spacious vacuoles , and the fluid-phase uptake that is characteristic of macropinocytosis.
in our model, b cells were infected with mycobacterium tuberculosis , mycobacterium smegmatis , and salmonella typhimurium .
macropinocytosisb lymphocytesraji cellsmycobacterium smegmatismycobacterium tuberculosissalmonella typhimuriumcytoskeleton
traditionally, b cells have been considered non-phagocytic cells; therefore, the uptake of bacteria by b cells is not extensively documented.
in this study, we analysed some of the features of non-specific bacterial uptake by b lymphocytes from the raji cell line.
our observations revealed that the raji b cells were readily infected by the three bacteria that were studied.
the classical roles of b cells include the production of antibodies and cytokines and the generation of immunological memory, these being key factors in the adaptive immune response.
the intracellular growth of these bacteria was also controlled by b cells.
all of the infections induced changes in the cellular membrane during bacterial internalisation.
a macropinocytosis inhibitor such as amiloride was used and abolished the bacterial uptake and the fluid-phase uptake that is triggered during the bacterial infection.
these membrane changes were driven by actin cytoskeletal rearrangements.
however, their role in innate immunity is currently being recognised.
