we performed phylogeographic and demographic analyses of n. magellanica from  <dig> localities along its distribution in pacific patagonia, atlantic patagonia, and the falkland/malvinas islands.
mitochondrial  dna analyses of  <dig> individuals of n. magellanica revealed an absence of genetic differentiation in the species with a single genetic unit along pacific patagonia.
however, we detected significant genetic differences among three main groups named pacific patagonia, atlantic patagonia and falkland/malvinas islands.
lower levels of genetic diversity in inland sea areas suggest that fjords and channels represent the areas most recently colonized by the species.
these results suggest that historical and contemporary processes represent the main factors shaping the modern biogeography of most shallow marine benthic invertebrates inhabiting the patagonian province.
this species inhabits ice-free rocky ecosystems, has a narrow bathymetric range and consequently should have been severely affected by recurrent glacial cycles during the quaternary.
migration rate estimations indicated asymmetrical gene flow, primarily from pacific patagonia to atlantic patagonia  and the falkland/malvinas islands .
demographic reconstruction in pacific patagonia suggests a recent recolonization process  supported by neutrality tests, mismatch distribution and the median-joining haplotype genealogy.
absence of genetic structure, a single dominant haplotype, lack of correlation between geographic and genetic distance, high estimated migration rates and the signal of recent demographic growth represent a large body of evidence supporting the hypothesis of rapid postglacial expansion in this species in pacific patagonia.
quaternarycape horn currentlast glacial maximumpost-glacial recolonizationexpansion-contraction modelnacella magellanicalarval dispersalasymmetric gene flowpatagonian provincefalkland/malvinas islands
significant genetic differences among pacific, atlantic and falkland/malvinas islands populations may be also explained through disparities in their respective glaciological and geological histories.
the falkland/malvinas islands, more than representing a glacial refugium for the species, seems to constitute a sink area considering the strong asymmetric gene flow detected from pacific to atlantic sectors.
patagonia extends for more than  <dig>  km of irregular coasts is an area especially apt to evaluate how historic and contemporary processes influence the distribution and connectivity of shallow marine benthic organisms.
the true limpet nacella magellanica has a wide distribution in this province and represents a suitable model to infer the quaternary glacial legacy on marine benthic organisms.
this expansion could have been sustained by larval dispersal following the main current system in this area.
