in addition, we are able to identify known causal relationships between mutations and gene expression changes in pi3k/akt and tp <dig> pathways.
we propose a novel formulation of integrating somatic mutation and gene expression data to infer the temporal sequence of events from cross-sectional data.
this paper proposes a new model to infer the temporal sequence in which mutations occur and lead to changes at the gene expression level during cancer progression.
furthermore, we apply the proposed mixed integer linear program to identify the temporal order in which genes mutate and, simultaneously, the changes they produce at the gene expression level during cancer progression.
our approach identifies a partition of mutation events which gradually produce gene expression changes to a partition of genes over time.
a major problem in identifying the best therapeutic targets for cancer is the molecular heterogeneity of the disease.
different mutations may affect these cellular anachronisms through a combination of molecular interactions which may be dynamically changing during cancer progression.
in this paper we address the problem of cancer heterogeneity by modeling cancer progression using somatic mutation and gene expression cross-sectional data.
cancer progressionsomatic mutationgene expressionmixed integer linear programbreast cancerissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the proposed formulation is tested using both simulated data and real breast cancer data with matched somatic mutations and gene expression measurements from the cancer genome atlas.
the approach is general and can be applied to any data sets with available somatic mutations and gene expression measurements.
first, we classify the genes as oncogenes or tumor suppressors based on the frequency of driver mutations.
then, we select those genes with most frequent driver mutations and a set of genes known to play roles in cancer development.
as expected, the most frequently mutated genes in breast cancer are pik3ca and tp <dig> genes.
using a mixed integer linear program we model the interaction between groups of different mutated genes and the resulting modifications at the gene expression level.
