an rna-seq approach was used to perform global transcriptome profiling on the roots of resistant  and susceptible  sunflower genotypes infected with v. dahlia.
an inverse effect was observed in the down-regulated genotype-specific degs in the resistant genotype.
the selection of more resistant genotypes is a desirable strategy to reduce contamination.
for the up-regulated genotype-specific differentially expressed genes  in the resistant genotype, higher average fold-changes were observed in the resistant genotype compared to those in the susceptible genotype.
many of these genes, such as cngc, rboh, fls <dig>  jaz, myc <dig> npr <dig> and tga, regulate crucial points in defense-related pathway and may contribute to v. dahliae resistance in sunflower.
the transcriptome profiling results provided a clearer understanding of the transcripts associated with the crosstalk between sunflower and v. dahliae.
the results identified several differentially expressed unigenes involved in the hyper sensitive response  and the salicylic acid /jasmonic acid -mediated signal transduction pathway for resistance against v. dahliae.
these results are useful for screening resistant sunflower genotypes.
most of the genes were demonstrated to participate in plant defense responses; these genes included peroxidase , glutathione peroxidase, aquaporin pip, chitinase, l-ascorbate oxidase, and lrr receptors.
in rd, sd and d datasets,  <dig> genes were associated with svw resistance in a genotype-common transcriptional pattern.
moreover,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were directly related to svw resistance in the resistant and susceptible genotypes, respectively, in a genotype-specific transcriptional pattern.
kegg analyses showed that  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes were classified into plant hormone signal transduction, plant-pathogen interaction and flavonoid biosynthesis categories, respectively.
a deeper knowledge of the molecular mechanisms and genetic basis underlying sunflower verticillium wilt is necessary to accelerate breeding progress.
different pairwise transcriptome comparisons were examined over a time course .
sunflower verticillium wilt  is a vascular disease caused by root infection with verticillium dahliae .
