significantly affected pathways were associated with signal transduction, immune system, cellular processes, development and metabolism.
clustering of expression models revealed stable up-regulation as the main pattern occurring in the bw throughout the three stages of sus progression.
using quantitative real-time pcr, twenty representative degs were selected to validate the sequencing results.
in this study, we characterized the transcriptomes in a. japonicus challenged with vibrio splendidus to elucidate the changes in gene expression throughout the three stages of sus progression.
rna sequencing of  <dig> cdna libraries from various tissues and developmental stages of sus-affected a. japonicus yielded  <dig> million raw reads, of which  <dig> million high-quality reads were generated by deep-sequencing using the illumina hiseq™  <dig> platform.
transcriptome comparisons between healthy and sus-affected a. japonicus revealed greater differences in gene expression profiles in the body walls  than in the intestines , respiratory trees  and coelomocytes .
dynamic changes in global gene expression occur during sus progression in a. japonicus.
sea cucumber apostichopus japonicus is an important economic species in china, which is affected by various diseases; skin ulceration syndrome  is the most serious.
ninety-two differentially expressed genes  were divided into four functional categories: attachment/pathogen recognition , inflammatory reactions , oxidative stress response  and apoptosis .
the reference transcriptome comprised a combination of the illumina reads,  <dig> sequencing data and sanger sequences obtained from the public database to generate  <dig>  unigenes ;  <dig>  were annotated.
elucidation of these changes is important in clarifying the molecular mechanisms associated with the development of sus in sea cucumber.
sea cucumber skin ulceration syndromerna sequencingdynamic expression profileshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31272687zhou zunchun natural science foundation of liaoning province, china 2015020786yang aifu technology project of liaoning province, china2015103044zhou zunchun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
