the third module performs three fold validations of the obtained degs.
the performance curves obtained using  <dig> simulated microarray datasets each following two different distributions indicate the superiority of the unified framework over the other reported algorithms.
empirical analyses on  <dig> artificial datasets and  <dig> real microarray datasets illustrate the efficacy of the proposed approach.
the proposed framework has three interrelated modules:  gene ranking, ii) significance analysis of genes and  validation.
the performance of the unified framework is compared with well-known ranking algorithms such as t-statistics, significance analysis of microarrays , adaptive ranking, combined adaptive ranking and two-way clustering.
empirical analyses show that the unified framework outperformed other gene selection methods in selecting differentially expressed genes from microarray data.
further analyses on  <dig> real cancer datasets and  <dig> parkinson's datasets show the similar improvement in performance.
this paper presents a unified framework for the robust selection of genes from the two-sample as well as multi-sample microarray experiments.
the robustness of the proposed unified framework in gene selection is first illustrated using false discovery rate analysis.
this paper presents a unified framework for finding differentially expressed genes  from the microarray data.
in addition, the analysis on  <dig> sets of parkinson's data is performed to demonstrate the scalability of the proposed method to multi-sample microarray datasets.
the analyses on  <dig> cancer datasets demonstrate the utility of the proposed approach on microarray datasets with two classes of samples.
the scalability of the proposed unified approach to multi-sample  microarray datasets is addressed using three sets of parkinson's data.
the conversion of ranks to p-values, the fusion of p-values and fdr analysis aid in the identification of significant genes which cannot be judged based on gene ranking alone.
the degs are selected using the fdr analysis.
the  <dig> fold validation, namely, robustness in selection of genes using fdr analysis, clustering, and visualization demonstrate the relevance of the degs.
the first module uses two gene selection algorithms, namely, a) two-way clustering and b) combined adaptive ranking to rank the genes.
