most of the biological processes modulated by the vitamin supplements were associated to developmental process, protein metabolic process, transport and response to inflammation.
in the liver, most of the genes modulated by the vitamin treatments involved protein metabolic process while developmental process appeared to be more affected by the treatments in mammary gland.
the results indicate that several metabolic processes were modulated by the supplementation of vitamins in early-lactating dairy cows.
in addition, the results suggest that the vitamin supplements promoted liver regeneration and reduced catabolism of lipids in early lactation.
it classifies the  <dig> genes according to molecular function, biological process and protein class.
microarray analysis identified  <dig> genes in hepatic tissue and  <dig> genes in the mammary gland whose expression was modified by the vitamin supplements.
thus, by studying the transcriptome activity in these tissues, the effect of supplements of both vitamins on the metabolism of both liver and mammary gland, was investigated.
dairy cowlivermammary glandvitamin b9vitamin b12microarraynovalait - agriculture et agroalimentaire canada - fonds de recherche du québec nature et technologies - ministère de l’agriculture, des pêcheries et de l’alimentation du québec, québec, québec, canada2010-lt-136286issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
samples from both tissues were analyzed by microarray and qpcr to identify genes differentially expressed in hepatic and mammary tissues.
the present study was undertaken to verify whether this supplementation positively modifies the pathways involved in milk and milk component synthesis.
a combined supplement of vitamins b <dig> and b <dig> was reported to increase milk and milk component yields of dairy cows without effect on feed intake.
for this study,  <dig> multiparous holstein dairy cows were assigned to  <dig> blocks of  <dig> animals each according to previous 305-day milk production.
liver and mammary biopsies were performed on lactating dairy cows 64 ± 3 days after calving.
