we have successfully expressed and produced gram quantities per liter of active tyrosinase in recombinant e. coli by optimizing the expression conditions and fed-batch cultivation strategy.
so far, the best production yield reported for tyrosinase was about 1 g l- <dig>  which was achieved by cultivating the filamentous fungus trichoderma reesei for 6 days.
effects of various key cultivation parameters on tyrosinase production were first examined in batch cultures to identify optimal conditions.
with the fed-batch process, a final biomass concentration of 37 g l- <dig>  and a tyrosinase activity of  <dig> u ml- <dig> were obtained in 28 hours, leading to a yield of active tyrosinase of about 3 g l- <dig>  the highest overall volumetric productivity of 103 mg of active tyrosinase per liter and hour  was determined, which is approximately  <dig> times higher than that obtained in batch cultures.
it was found that a culture temperature of 32 °c and induction at the late growth stage were favorable, leading to a highest tyrosinase activity of  <dig>  u ml- <dig>  the fed-batch process was performed by using an exponential feeding strategy to achieve high cell density.
tyrosinaserecombinant protein productionhigh cell densityfed batch culturebioprocess engineeringexponential feeding
due to the potential applications of tyrosinase in biotechnology, in particular in biocatalysis and for biosensors, it is desirable to develop a suitable low-cost process for efficient production of this enzyme.
a specific tyrosinase production rate of 103 mg l−1 h− <dig> and a maximum volumetric activity of 464 mu l−1 h- <dig> were achieved in this study.
tyrosinase is a bifunctional enzyme that catalyzes both the hydroxylation of monophenols to o-diphenols  and the subsequent oxidation of the diphenols to o-quinones .
in this work, tyrosinase from verrucomicrobium spinosum was expressed in escherichia coli and its production was studied in both batch and fed-batch cultivations.
exponential feed of substrate helped to prolong the exponential phase of growth, to reduce the fermentation time and thus the cost.
