trichera is a prime example for rapid diversification, mostly taking place during pliocene and pleistocene.
due to the prevalence of reticulate evolution spanning three ploidy levels, knautia is considered one of the taxonomically most intricate groups in the european flora.
whether polyploids originated via autopolyploidy or allopolyploidy is unclear due to the weak genetic separation among species.
extensive spread out of the balkans started in the pleistocene about  <dig>  ma.
where and when did the initial diversification in knautia take place, and how did it proceed further?
numerous cycles of habitat fragmentation and subsequent reconnections likely promoted hybridisation and polyploidisation.
thus, the dynamic polyploid evolution, the lack of crossing barriers within ploidy levels supported by conserved floral morphology, the highly variable leaf morphology and unstable indumentum composition prevent establishing a well-founded taxonomic framework.
did knautia undergo a similarly recent  rapid radiation as other genera with similar ecology and overlapping distribution?
trichera, we present nine aflp-characterised informal species groups, which coincide only partly with former traditional groups.
trichera was in central parts of the balkan peninsula, roughly 4 ma.
on the basis of its and plastid dna sequences as well as aflp fingerprints obtained from  <dig> populations of almost all species of the genus we asked the following questions.
polyploidy is one of the most important evolutionary pathways in flowering plants and has significantly contributed to their diversification and radiation.
extensive haplotype sharing and unresolved phylogenetic relationships suggest that these processes occurred rapidly and extensively.
according to our genetic data, the genus originated in the early miocene and started to diversify in the middle miocene, whereas the onset of radiation of sect.
did polyploids evolve within the previously recognised diploid groups or rather from hybridisation between groups?
the diversification of knautia was centred in the eastern mediterranean.
