in-depth analysis of transcriptomic data can help provide these targets.
the assembly of  <dig>  million and  <dig> million sequences from c. oncophora and o. ostertagi, respectively, resulted in  <dig>  and  <dig>  transcripts.
among these, 69% and 73% of the predicted peptides encoded by c. oncophora and o. ostertagi had homologues in other nematodes.
approximately 21% of the transcripts in c. oncophora and 22% in o. ostertagi were up-regulated in a particular stage.
functional molecular signatures were detected for 46% and 35% of the transcripts in c. oncophora and o. ostertagi, respectively.
pathway analyses showed significant associations between life-cycle stages and peptides involved in energy metabolism in o. ostertagi whereas metabolism of cofactors and vitamins were specifically up-regulated in the parasitic stages of c. oncophora.
this study characterized transcriptomes from multiple life stages from both c. oncophora and o. ostertagi.
domains previously implicated in growth and development such as chromo domains and the madf domain tended to dominate in the free-living stages.
more in-depth examinations of the most prevalent domains led to knowledge of gene expression changes between the free-living  and parasitic  stages.
in contrast, domains potentially involved in feeding such as the zinc finger and cap domains dominated in the parasitic stages.
the results of this study show distinct differences in the genes involved in the free-living and parasitic life cycle stages.
cooperia oncophora and ostertagia ostertagi are among the most important gastrointestinal nematodes of cattle worldwide.
the data produced will enable better annotation of the upcoming genome sequences and will allow future comparative analyses of the biology, evolution and adaptation to parasitism in nematodes.
substantial differences were observed also between gene ontology terms associated with free-living and parasitic stages.
new methods of control and alternative drug targets are necessary.
