however, for a large fraction of reases with known sequences, the three-dimensional fold and the architecture of the active site remain unknown, mostly due to extreme sequence divergence that hampers detection of homology to enzymes with known folds.
analysis of the r.hpy188i model in the light of sequence conservation among its homologs revealed an unusual variant of the active site, in which the typical tyr residue of the yig half-motif had been substituted by a lys residue.
our results reveal that in the case of proteins with no or few detectable homologs in the standard "non-redundant" database, it is useful to expand this database by adding the metagenomic sequences, which may provide evolutionary linkage to detect more remote homologs.
moreover, some of its homologs have the otherwise invariant arg residue in a non-homologous position in sequence that nonetheless allows for spatial conservation of the guanidino group potentially involved in phosphate binding.
moreover, fold-recognition analysis of the extended r.hpy188i family revealed its relationship to the giy-yig domain and allowed for computational modeling of the r.hpy188i structure.
in order to increase the amount of evolutionary information in the multiple sequence alignment, we have expanded our sequence database searches to include sequences from metagenomics projects.
psi-blast searches of the non-redundant protein sequence database reveal only  <dig> homolog .
catalytic domains of type ii restriction endonucleases  belong to a few unrelated three-dimensional folds.
this search resulted in identification of  <dig> further members of r.hpy188i family, both from metagenomics and the non-redundant database.
it also provides important insight into sequence-structure-function relationships in the giy-yig nuclease superfamily.
bioinformatics analyses supported by mutagenesis experiments suggested that some reases belong to the hnh fold , and that a small group represented by r.eco29ki belongs to the giy-yig fold.
