the tc gene sequences of thirteen yersinia strains were compared, revealing a high degree of gene order conservation, but also remarkable differences with respect to pseudogenes, sequence variability and gene duplications.
oral uptake experiments with manduca sexta revealed a higher larvae lethality of yersinia strains harbouring the tc-paiye in comparison to strains lacking this island.
these data confirm a role of tcaa upon oral uptake only, and suggest the presence of further insecticidal determinants in yersinia strains formerly unknown to kill insects.
towards m. sexta and g. mellonella demonstrated here for the first time points to insects as a natural reservoir for yersiniae.
this study investigated the tc gene distribution among yersiniae and the phylogenetic relationship between tccc proteins, thus contributing novel aspects to the current discussion about the evolution of insecticidal toxins in the genus yersinia.
strain w <dig> and its tcaa deletion mutant did not exhibit a significantly different toxicity towards g. mellonella.
following subcutaneous infection of galleria mellonella larvae with five non-human pathogenic yersinia spp.
the toxic potential of several yersinia spp.
pcr analysis revealed the presence of the tc-paiye and of tccc2'/3'-homologues in all biotype 2– <dig> strains tested, and their absence in most representatives of biotypes 1a and 1b.
and four y. enterocolitica strains, we observed a remarkable variability of their insecticidal activity ranging from 20%  to 90%  dead larvae after five days.
phylogenetic analysis of  <dig> tccc sequences indicates the presence of the tc-paiye in an ancestor of yersinia.
toxin complex  proteins termed tcaabc, tcdab, and tccabc with insecticidal activity are present in a variety of bacteria including the yersiniae.
outside the tc pathogenicity island  of y. enterocolitica strain w <dig>  a pseudogene  encoding proteins with homology to tccc and similarity to tyrosine phosphatases at its c-terminus was identified.
