the rotational angle of a transmembrane helix is related to the exposed surface of a transmembrane helix, since lipid exposure gives the degree of accessibility of each residue in lipid environment.
first, we observed from the development set of  <dig> protein chains that the lipid exposure, i.e., the relative accessible surface area  of residues in the lipid environment, generated from high-resolution protein structures could infer the rotational angles with a mean absolute angular error  of  <dig> ˚.
rotational angles of transmembrane helices are characterized by their folded structures and could be inferred by the hydrophobic moment; however, the folding mechanism of membrane proteins is not yet fully understood.
here, we present an analysis of the relationship between rotational angles and lipid exposure and a support-vector-machine method, called tmexpo, for predicting both structural features from sequences.
tmexpo can better predict rasa and rotational angles than the compared methods.
when rotational angles can be accurately predicted, free modeling of transmembrane protein structures in turn may benefit from a reduced complexity in ensembles with a significantly less number of packing arrangements.
structural modeling of membrane proteins requires a multidimensional approach, and one critical geometric parameter is the rotational angle of transmembrane helices.
furthermore, sequence-based prediction of both rotational angle and lipid exposure can provide essential information when high-resolution structures are unavailable and contribute to experimental design to elucidate transmembrane protein functions.
to the best of our knowledge, there have been few advances in investigating whether an environment descriptor of lipid exposure could infer a geometric parameter of rotational angle.
more importantly, the predicted rasa from tmexpo achieved an maae of  <dig> ˚, which is better than  <dig> ˚ obtained by the best of the compared hydrophobicity scales.
since membrane protein structures are challenging to crystallize, computational approaches are essential for elucidating the sequence-to-structure relationships.
lastly, tmexpo outperformed the compared methods in rasa prediction on the independent test set of  <dig> protein chains and achieved an overall matthew’s correlation coefficient, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and precision of  <dig> ,  <dig> %,  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> %, respectively.
