the purpose of this study was to isolate α-mangostin from the mangosteen  and investigate antibacterial activity and mechanisms of action when used singly and when combined with oxacillin against oxacillin-resistant staphylococcus saprophyticus  strains.
finally, also damage to the peptidoglycan structure.
checkerboard assays showed the synergistic activity of isolated α-mangostin  plus oxacillin  at a fractional inhibitory concentration index  of  <dig> .
enzyme assays demonstrated that isolated α-mangostin had an inhibitory activity against β-lactamase in a dose-dependent manner.
tem results clearly showed that these orss- <dig> cells treated with this combination caused peptidoglycan and cytoplasmic membrane damage, irregular cell shapes and average cell areas were significantly larger than the control.
these findings provide evidence that isolated α-mangostin alone has not only some activity but also shows the synergistic activity with oxacillin against orss- <dig>  the chromone and isoprenyl structures could play a significant role in its action.
in addition, the cm permeability of orss- <dig> was also increased by this combination of actives.
clearly, confocal microscopic images confirmed that this combination caused considerable peptidoglycan damage and dna leakage.
firstly, potential effects of cytoplasmic membrane disruption and increases permeability.
this synergistic activity may involve three mechanisms of action.
α-mangostingarcinia mangostanaoxacillinoxacillin-resistant s. saprophyticussynergistic activitymechanism of actionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004396thailand research fundphd58i <dig> code 5712035sirichaiwetchakoon kittipot issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
future studies require clinical trials to establish if the synergy reported can be translated to animals and humans.
we proposes the potential to develop a novel adjunct phytopharmaceutical to oxacillin for the treatment of orss.
the modes of action of these compounds were also investigated by enzyme assay, transmission electron microscopy , confocal microscopic images, and cytoplasmic membrane  permeabilization studies.
the minimum inhibitory concentration , checkerboard and killing curve were determined.
