however, the molecular mechanisms by which bmp <dig> facilitates planar cell polarity, cortical actin rearrangements, lamellipodia formation and chemotaxis of mesenchymal progenitors are poorly understood.
our aim was to uncover the molecular mechanism by which bmp <dig> facilitates chemotaxis via the bmp2-dependent activation of pi3k and spatiotemporal control of pip <dig> production important for actin rearrangements at the mesenchymal cell cytocortex.
we unveiled the molecular mechanism by which bmp <dig> induces non-smad signalling by pi3k and the role of the second messenger pip <dig> in bmp2-induced planar cell polarity, cortical actin reorganisation and lamellipodia formation.
using mass spectrometry, we found the highly pip3-sensitive ph-domain protein ll5β to act as a novel bmp <dig> effector in orchestrating cortical actin rearrangements.
we mapped the pi3k interaction to a region within the bmprii kinase.
either bmp <dig> stimulation or increasing amounts of bmpri facilitated p55γ association with bmprii, but bmprii kinase activity was not required for the interaction.
our results provide evidence for an important contribution of the bmp2-pi3k - pip3-ll5β signalling axis in mesenchymal progenitor cell chemotaxis.
we demonstrate molecular insights into bmp2-induced pi3k signalling on the level of actin reorganisation at the leading edge cytocortex.
by using protein interaction studies, we identified the class ia pi3k regulatory subunit p55γ to act as a specific and non-redundant binding partner for bmp receptor type ii  in concert with the catalytic subunit p110α.
by use of live cell imaging we found that knock-down of p55γ or ll5β or pharmacological inhibition of pi3k impaired bmp2-induced migratory responses.
bmp-induced chemotaxis of mesenchymal progenitors is fundamental for vertebrate development, disease and tissue repair.
we visualised bmp2-dependent pip <dig> production via pi3k p55γ/p110α and were able to localise pip <dig> to the leading edge of intact cells during the process of bmp2-induced planar cell polarity and actin dependent lamellipodia formation.
