here we identify eight potential reference genes and examine their expression stability at different rearing density treatments in neural tissue of the australian plague locust.
reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction  is the most sensitive method available for determining changes in gene expression.
based on calculations performed with the genorm and normfinder programs, the best combination of two genes for normalization of gene expression data following crowding in the australian plague locust was ef1a and arm.
the australian plague locust, chortoicetes terminifera, is among the most promising species to unravel the suites of genes underling the density-dependent shift from shy and cryptic solitarious behaviour to the highly active and aggregating gregarious behaviour that is characteristic of locusts.
the relative transcription levels of these eight genes were then analyzed in three treatment groups differing in rearing density , each made up of five pools of four neural tissue samples from 5th instar nymphs.
such normalization allowed us to show that c. terminifera crowding did not change the neuronal expression of the sparc gene, a gregarious phase-specific gene identified in brains of the desert locust, s. gregaria.
arm and ef1a is the most stably expressed combination of two reference genes of the eight examined for reliable normalization of rt-qpcr assays studying density-dependent behavioural change in the australian plague locust.
we applied their use to studying a target gene that encodes a ca2+ binding glycoprotein, sparc, which was previously found to be up-regulated in brains of gregarious desert locusts, schistocerca gregaria.
this is because it lacks many of the major phenotypic changes in colour and morphology that accompany phase change in other locust species.
interestingly, expression of this gene did not vary with rearing density in the same way in brains of the two locust species.
unlike s. gregaria, there was no effect of any crowding treatment in the australian plague locust.
such comparative results on density-dependent gene regulation provide insights into the evolution of gregarious behaviour and mass migration of locusts.
however, to accurately monitor the expression of target genes, it is essential to select an appropriate normalization strategy to control for non-specific variation between samples.
