a novel lightcycler fret pair labelled with atto <dig> and atto647n was established for parallel triplex detection with antiparallel duplex as a control for the general applicability of these fluorophores for tm determination.
validation of tm showed low intra- and inter-assay coefficient of variation;  <dig> % and  <dig> % for parallel triplex and  <dig> % and  <dig> % for antiparallel duplex.
labelling of dna probes with atto fluorophore increased tm of antiparallel duplexes significantly, but not tm of parallel triplexes.
we have established a novel ph independent fret pair with high fluorescence signals on the lightcycler platform for both antiparallel duplex and parallel triplex formation.
the variance on tm determinations was significant lower on the lightcycler platform compared to uv absorbance measurements, which enable discrimination of dna structures with very similar tm.
this fret pair is especially suitable for Δtm and tm determinations of ph dependent parallel triplex formation.
melting of triplex and duplex structures were accompanied by a large decrease in fluorescence intensity leading to well defined tm and high reproducibility.
the atto fluorophores were ph stable from ph  <dig>  to  <dig> .
measurements of tm and fluorescence intensity over time and multiple runs showed great time and light stability of the atto fluorophores.
this method is very suitable for ph independent melting point  determination performed at basic or neutral ph, as a high throughput alternative to uv absorbance measurements.
at acidic ph quenching of fam is not very suitable, since the fluorescence of fam is strongly ph dependent and drops with acidic ph.
therefore, nucleic acid triplexes show strong ph dependence and are stable only at acidic ph.
hoogsteen based parallel triplex helix formation requires protonation of cytosines in the triplex forming strand.
this led us to establish a new ph independent fluorophore based measuring system on the lightcycler for thermal stability studies of parallel triplexes.
