salmonella enterica serovar enteritidis  has emerged as one of the most important food-borne pathogens for humans.
lipopolysaccharide , as a component of the outer membrane, is responsible for the virulence and smooth-to-rough transition in s. enteritidis.
in this study, we screened s. enteritidis signature-tagged transposon mutant library using monoclonal antibody against somatic o <dig> antigen  and o <dig> factor rabbit antiserum to identify novel genes that are involved in smooth-to-rough transition.
these data indicate that the rfbg gene is involved in smooth-to-rough transition, swimming motility and virulence of s. enteritidis.
se slide agglutination test and elisa test showed that rfbg mutants do not stimulate animals to produce agglutinating antibody.
a total of  <dig> mutants were screened and one mutant with transposon insertion in rfbg gene had smooth-to-rough transition phenotype.
enteritidissignature-tagged mutagenesis smooth-to-rough transitiono <dig> mabthe national key research and development program special project2016yfd0501607pan zhiming the special fund for agroscientific research in the public interest201403054jiao xinan  the national natural science foundation of china31320103907jiao xinan the national natural science foundation of china31230070jiao xinan the graduate research and innovation projects in jiangsu provincekyzz15_0366jiao yang the “six talent peaks program” of jiangsu provinceny-028pan zhiming the yangzhou university science and technology innovation teamthe priority academic program development of jiangsu higher education institutions issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
furthermore, somatic o-antigen antibody-based approach to screen signature-tagged transposon mutants is feasible to clarify lps biosynthesis and to find suitable markers in diva-vaccine research.
in order to verify the role of rfbg gene, an rfbg insertion or deletion mutant was constructed using λ-red recombination system.
in addition, the half-lethal dose  of the rfbg deletion mutant strain was  <dig>  -fold higher than that of the parent strain in a mouse model when injected intraperitoneally.
