supertree methods combine phylogenies with overlapping sets of taxa into a larger one.
when the source trees host a significant number of topological conflicts or have a small taxon overlap, supertree methods of both kinds can propose poorly resolved, hence uninformative, supertrees.
two biological case studies on animals confirm that the stc preprocess successfully detects anomalies in the source trees while stc+physic_ist provides well-resolved supertrees agreeing with current knowledge in systematics.
physic_ist aims at inferring supertrees that satisfy the same appealing theoretical properties as with physic, while being as informative as possible under this constraint.
to overcome this problem, we propose to infer non-plenary supertrees, i.e.
we detail a variant of the physic veto method called physic_ist that can infer non-plenary supertrees.
the paper introduces and tests two new methodologies, physic_ist and stc, that demonstrate the interest in inferring non-plenary supertrees as well as preprocessing the source trees.
performing large-scale simulations, we observe that stc+physic_ist infers much more informative supertrees than physic, while preserving low type i error compared to the well-known mrp method.
topological conflicts frequently arise among source trees for methodological or biological reasons, such as long branch attraction, lateral gene transfers, gene duplication/loss or deep gene coalescence.
when topological conflicts occur among source trees, liberal methods infer supertrees containing the most frequent alternative, while veto methods infer supertrees not contradicting any source tree, i.e.
supertrees that do not necessarily contain all the taxa present in the source trees, discarding those whose position greatly differs among source trees or for which insufficient information is provided.
additionally, we propose a statistical preprocessing step called stc  to correct the source trees prior to the supertree inference.
stc is a liberal step that removes the parts of each source tree that significantly conflict with other source trees.
combining stc with a veto method allows an explicit trade-off between veto and liberal approaches, tuned by a single parameter.
