understanding the molecular basis of domestication can provide insights into the processes of rapid evolution and crop improvement.
these results suggest that regulatory changes of gene expressions may have played a predominant role in domestication.
genetic diversity was significantly reduced in western cultivars, probably through bottlenecks and selection.
however, a high proportion of genetic diversity  is currently retained in western cultivars.
the reduction in genetic diversity in western cultivars due to domestication bottleneck/selection may have been offset by introgression from wild carrot.
here we demonstrated the processes of carrot domestication and identified genes under selection based on transcriptome analyses.
of these,  <dig>  were validated and used to genotype a large set of cultivated carrot, wild carrot and other wild daucus carota subspecies, primarily of european origin.
phylogenetic analysis indicated that eastern carrot may originate from western asia and western carrot may be selected from eastern carrot.
western carrots may originate from eastern carrots.
the root transcriptomes of widely differing cultivated and wild carrots were sequenced.
expression patterns differed radically for some genes between cultivated and wild carrot roots which may be related to changes in root traits.
differential gene expression patterns between cultivated and wild carrot roots may be a signature of strong selection for favorable cultivation traits.
model simulation indicated high and asymmetric gene flow from wild to cultivated carrots, spontaneously and/or by introgression breeding.
different wild d. carota subspecies may have contributed to the domestication of cultivated carrot.
the silencing of allergen-protein-like genes in cultivated carrot roots suggested strong human selection to reduce allergy.
nevertheless, high genetic differentiation exists between cultivated and wild carrots  showing the strong effects of selection.
the activated expression of carotenoid-binding-protein genes in cultivars could be related to the high carotenoid accumulation in roots.
