direct interactions with specific host proteins and the ability to influence interactions among host proteins are important components for f. tularensis to avoid host-cell defense mechanisms and successfully establish an infection.
although direct host-pathogen protein-protein binding is only one aspect of francisella virulence, it is a critical component in directly manipulating and interfering with cellular processes in the host cell.
the analysis of the accompanying y2h data identified intracellular protein trafficking between the early endosome to the late endosome as an important component in virulence attenuation for these virulence factors.
tularensis schu s <dig> strain, we deployed a combined in silico, in vitro, and in vivo analysis to identify virulence factors and their interactions with host proteins to characterize bacterial infection mechanisms.
furthermore, we also used the y2h data to investigate host protein binding of two known virulence factors, showing that direct protein binding was a component in the modulation of the inflammatory response via activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases and in the oxidative stress response.
we initially used comparative genomics and literature to identify and select a set of  <dig> putative and known virulence factors for analysis.
francisella tularensis is a select bio-threat agent and one of the most virulent intracellular pathogens known, requiring just a few organisms to establish an infection.
host-pathogen interactionsprotein-protein interactionsfrancisella tularensisintracellular pathogenvirulence factorshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000774defense threat reduction agency cbs.medbio.
although several virulence factors are known, we lack an understanding of virulence factors that act through host-pathogen protein interactions to promote infection.
to address these issues in the highly infectious f. tularensis subsp.
three of these, Δftt0482c, Δftt1538c, and Δftt <dig>  showed attenuation in lethality and can thus be considered novel f. tularensis virulence factors.
we were able to create five transposon insertion mutants and used them in an intranasal balb/c mouse challenge model to establish 50 % lethal dose estimates.
<dig> .bh.021reifman jaques http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000182medical research and mater1iel command, u.s. army medical department issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
based on the bacterial protein interaction profile with both hosts, we selected seven novel putative virulence factors for mutant construction and animal validation experiments.
