genes encoding loda-like proteins have been detected in several bacterial classes.
l-amino acid oxidases  have been generally described as flavoproteins that oxidize amino acids releasing the corresponding ketoacid, ammonium and hydrogen peroxide.
the generation of hydrogen peroxide gives to these enzymes antimicrobial characteristics.
the aim of this work has been to study the distribution of genes similar to loda and/or goxa in sequenced microbial genomes and to get insight into the evolution of this novel family of proteins through phylogenetic analysis.
the marine bacterium marinomonas mediterranea synthesizes loda, the first known lao that contains a quinone cofactor.
l-amino acid oxidasequinone cofactorpost-translational modificationlysine oxidaseglycine oxidaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
laos are of great biotechnological interest in different applications such as the design of biosensors, biotransformations and biomedicine.
they are involved in processes such as biofilm development and microbial competition.
the vast majority of the genes detected are in a genome region with a nearby lodb-like gene suggesting a specific interaction between both partner proteins.
phylogenetic analysis revealed that loda-like proteins can be clustered in different groups.
interestingly, loda and goxa are in different groups, indicating that those groups are related to the enzymatic activity of the proteins detected.
however, they are absent in archaea and detected only in a small group of fungi of the class agaromycetes.
recently, goxa, a quinoprotein with sequence similarity to loda but with a different enzymatic activity  has been described.
sequence alignment of the loda-like proteins allowed the detection of several conserved residues.
genome mining has revealed for the first time the broad distribution of loda-like proteins containing a ctq cofactor in many different microbial groups.
loda is encoded in an operon that contains a second gene coding for lodb, a protein required for the post-translational modification generating the cofactor.
this study provides a platform to explore the potentially novel enzymatic activities of the proteins detected, the mechanisms of post-translational modifications involved in their synthesis, as well as their biological relevance.
