we also use the collinearity index to identify small groups of highly correlated parameters.
therefore, before attempting to perform parameter estimation  it is important to characterize the subset of identifiable parameters and their interplay.
once this is achieved, it is still necessary to perform parameter estimation, which poses additional challenges.
our contributions alleviate the difficulties that appear at different stages of the identifiability analysis and parameter estimation process.
parameter estimationdynamic modelsidentifiabilityglobal optimizationregularizationoverfittinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007601horizon 2020686282http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004963seventh framework programme289384minecodpi2014-55276-c5-2-rissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
the results files can be visualized using cytoscape, showing the identifiable and non-identifiable groups of parameters together with the model structure in the same graph.
we present a methodology that  detects high-order relationships among parameters, and  visualizes the results to facilitate further analysis.
we use a collinearity index to quantify the correlation between parameters in a group in a computationally efficient way.
it enables the practical identifiability analysis of dynamic models of large size, and accelerates their calibration.
the identifiability analysis techniques are implemented as a matlab toolbox called visid, which is freely available as open source from github .
we show how to combine global optimization and regularization techniques for calibrating medium and large scale biological models with moderate computation times.
the visualization tool allows modellers to detect parts that are problematic and need refinement or reformulation, and provides experimentalists with information that can be helpful in the design of new experiments.
kinetic models of biochemical systems usually consist of ordinary differential equations that have many unknown parameters.
then we evaluate the practical identifiability of the estimated parameters using the proposed methodology.
some of these parameters are often practically unidentifiable, that is, their values cannot be uniquely determined from the available data.
