our study provides a systematic in silico analysis of maize nac transcription factors in which we propose a nomenclature for maize genes encoding nac transcription factors, based on their chromosomal position.
including four other defence-related nac transcription factors of maize and functionally characterized arabidopsis and rice nac transcription factors, we observed an enrichment of nac transcription factors involved in host defense regulation in clade g. in silico analyses identified putative binding elements for the defence-induced erf, myc <dig>  tga and wrky transcription factors in the promoters of four out of the six defence-related maize nac transcription factors, while one of the analysed maize nac did not contain any of these potential binding sites.
to date, the majority of the studied nac proteins are involved in the response to abiotic stress, to biotic stress and in the regulation of developmental processes.
we have found that two nac transcription factors, zmnac <dig> and zmnac <dig>  are transcriptionally induced both during the initial biotrophic as well as the ensuing necrotrophic colonization of maize leaves by the hemibiotrophic ascomycete fungus c. graminicola.
nac transcription factors belong to a large family of plant-specific transcription factors with more than  <dig> family members in monocot and dicot species.
our phylogenetic analysis has revealed that the majority of the yet described pathogen responsive nac proteins from all plant species belong to clade g and suggests that they are phylogenetically related.
maize nac transcription factors involved in the biotic stress response have not yet been identified.
to assess the phylogenetic relation of zmnac <dig> and zmnac <dig>  we studied the family of maize nac transcription factors based on the recently annotated b <dig> genome information.
we have further identified five pathogen-responsive maize nac transcription factors that harbour putative binding elements for other defence-associated transcription factors in the proximal promoter region, indicating an involvement of the described nacs in the maize defence network.
nac transcription factormaizecolletotrichum graminicolabiotic stress responsephylogenynac domaindna binding element
zmnac <dig> and zmnac <dig> both belong to clade g and appear to have arisen by a recent gene duplication event.
