crp concentrations and /-quotient did not express significant differences between infected and healthy animals or during the course of infection.
the quotient / in balf peaked significantly in acutely infected animals , showed a time-dependent decrease during the recovery phase , and was significantly higher compared to healthy controls.
increasing clinical illness correlated significantly with increasing lbp—and decreasing albumin concentrations in blood, both verifying a systemic acute phase response.
cumulating reports suggest that acute phase proteins  do not only play a role as systemic inflammatory mediators, but are also expressed in different tissues as local reaction to inflammatory stimuli.
chlamydia psittaciacute phase proteinslungbloodbroncho-alveolar lavagebovinerespiratory infectionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
in infected animals, absolute concentrations of lbp and hp in balf correlated significantly with the respiratory score.
in conclusion, absolute concentrations of lbp in blood and balf as well as the quotient / in balf perfectly paralleled the clinical course of respiratory illness after infection.
broncho-alveolar lavage fluid  was obtained from all  <dig> calves experimentally infected with c. psittaci at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dpi, and from  <dig> uninfected healthy calves.
the present study aimed to evaluate presence and changes in luminal lung concentrations of the apps haptoglobin , lipopolysaccharide binding protein , c-reactive protein , and lactoferrin  in calves with an acute respiratory disease experimentally induced by chlamydia  psittaci.
concentrations of bovine serum albumin , hp, lbp, crp and lf in balf were determined by elisa.
beside lbp, the suitability of hp and lf as local biomarkers of respiratory infections in cattle and their role in the local response to pathogens is worth further investigation, while crp does not seem to play a role in local defense mechanisms of the bovine lung.
intra-bronchial inoculation of the pathogen resulted in a consistent respiratory illness.
