comparison with the fully sequenced grass genomes indicated good coverage and correct representation of a. myosuroides transcriptome in alomybase.
contrary to target-site resistance, ntsr mechanisms are far from being fully elucidated.
a. myosuroides plants with ntsr were first affected by herbicide action like sensitive plants, but ultimately overcame it.
non-target-site resistance  endowed by mechanisms neutralising the herbicide or compensating for its action is considered the most agronomically noxious type of resistance.
analysis of differences in transcriptomic herbicide response between resistant and sensitive plants did not allow identification of processes directly explaining ntsr.
our data confirmed that gene regulation is at the root of herbicide response and of ntsr.
rna sequencingtranscriptomicsherbicide responsenon-target-site resistancealopecurus myosuroides weedacetolactate synthaseacetohydroxyacid synthaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
assembly of over 159m high-quality illumina reads generated a transcriptomic resource  containing  <dig>  potentially active contigs  predicted to encode  <dig>  peptides with 74 % go annotation, of which  <dig> were assigned to protein families presumably involved in ntsr.
our purpose was to establish a transcriptome resource allowing investigation of the transcriptomic bases of ntsr in the major grass weed alopecurus myosuroides l.  for which almost no genomic or transcriptomic data was available.
a part of weed response to herbicide stress, ntsr is considered to be largely driven by gene regulation.
alomybase proved to be a relevant resource to support ntsr transcriptomic studies, and constitutes a valuable tool for future research aiming at elucidating gene regulations involved in ntsr in a. myosuroides.
they were predicted to encode three cytochromes p <dig> , one peroxidase and one disease resistance protein.
herbicide resistance in agrestal weeds is a global problem threatening food security.
cloned plants were sampled over seven time-points ranging from before until 73 h after herbicide application.
the part of the herbicide transcriptomic response common to the resistant and the sensitive plants was consistent with the expected effects of acetolactate-synthase inhibition, with striking similarities observed with published arabidopsis thaliana data.
