go analysis reflected dramatically over-represented biological processes associated with torcetrapib including activation of cell death, apoptosis and regulation of rna metabolic process.
our study provided unique insights into the biological processes of torcetrapib-associated off-target adverse effects in a systems biology visual angle.
enriched signaling pathways uncovered that il- <dig> receptor beta chain in t cell activation, platelet-derived growth factor receptor  beta signaling pathway, il2-mediated signaling events, erbb signaling pathway and signaling events mediated by hepatocyte growth factor receptor  might play decisive characters in the adverse cardiovascular effects associated with torcetrapib.
in particular, we highlighted the importance of pdgfr, hgfr, il- <dig> receptor and erbb1tyrosine kinase might be direct off-targets, which were highly related to the unfavorable adverse effects of torcetrapib and worthy of further experimental validation.
torcetrapib, a cholesteryl ester transfer protein  inhibitor which raises high-density lipoprotein  cholesterol and reduces low-density lipoprotein  cholesterol level, has been documented to increase mortality and cardiac events associated with adverse effects.
the david functional annotation tool was applied for gene ontology  analysis, while pathway enrichment analysis was clustered by toppfun.
in the present study, we developed a systems biology approach by combining a human reassembled signaling network with the publicly available microarray gene expression data to provide unique insights into the off-target adverse effects for torcetrapib.
after constructing the human signaling network, the over-expressed microarray genes were mapped to illustrate the context-specific network.
furthermore, potential off-targets of torcetrapib were predicted by a reverse docking approach.
finally, a reverse docking algorithm in silico between torcetrapib and transmembrane receptors was conducted to identify the potential off-targets.
