transcription promoters, methylation regions, and transcription insulators have the highest density of disease variants, with  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> disease variants per one million base pairs, respectively.
mendelian disease variants and recurrent cancer somatic mutations are 22-fold and 10- fold significantly enriched in promoter regions respectively , compared with allele-frequency-matched genomic background.
we further found that regulatory regions are located within over 50% coding exon regions.
compared against nine different types of regulatory regions from fantom <dig> and encode projects, we found that different types of disease variants show distinctive propensity for particular regulatory elements.
in this study, we curated and categorized  <dig>  mendelian disease variants,  <dig>  complex disease variants,  <dig>  cancer predisposing germline variants, and  <dig>  recurrent cancer somatic mutations.
furthermore, mendelian disease variants and recurrent cancer somatic mutations share very similar distribution across types of functional effects.
these results will be useful for an overall understanding about the differences among the pathogenic mechanisms of various disease-associated variants.
separate from these two categories, cancer predisposing germline variants are 27-fold enriched in histone modification regions , 10-fold enriched in chromatin physical interaction regions , and 6-fold enriched in transcription promoters .
identifying these diseased-related regulatory elements will shed light on understanding the mechanisms of how these variants regulate gene expression and ultimately result in disease formation and progression.
disease-associated variants in different disease categories are preferentially located in particular regulatory elements.
the invention of high throughput sequencing technologies has led to the discoveries of hundreds of thousands of genetic variants associated with thousands of human diseases.
recent genome-wide functional genomics studies, such as fantom <dig> and encode have uncovered a large number of regulatory elements across hundreds of different tissues or cell lines in the human genome.
these findings provide an opportunity to study the interaction between regulatory elements and disease-associated genetic variants.
disease-associated variantsregulatory elementsrecurrent cancer somatic mutationcancer predisposing germline variantmendelian diseasecomplex diseasepromoterhistone modificationchromatin physical interaction <dig>  <dig>  <dig>  vari-sig 2014: identification and annotation of genetic variants in the context of structure, function and disease boston, ma, usa
