while producing larger offspring can increase their competitive ability, this often comes at a cost to their colonization ability.
varying life-history parameters has a marked influence on coexistence conditions and yields evolutionary stable strategies for both modes of reproduction.
our consideration of space highlights the importance of dispersal, which can limit the success of low-dispersers through kin competition, and enhance coexistence conditions for different strategies in spatially structured environments.
our simulations show that colonisers outperform competitors in environments subject to higher temporal and spatial heterogeneity and are favoured when agents mature late and invest heavily in reproduction, whereas competitors dominate in low-disturbance, high resource environments and when maintenance costs are low.
we test our model using two reproductive strategies which represent extremes of the ccto and are common in ants.
the ccto permits species employing different reproductive strategies to coexist over a wide range of life-history and environmental parameters, and is likely to be an important factor in structuring ant communities.
nonetheless, we show that these strategies can coexist over a wide range of life-history and environmental parameter values, and that coexistence can in most cases be explained by a ccto.
this competition–colonization trade-off  is thought to be an important mechanism supporting coexistence of alternative strategies in a wide range of taxa.
colony foundationcolony fissionformicidaecompetition–colonization trade-offevolution of dispersalagent-based modelhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of science 25440187cronin adam l. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
our model combines explicit resource competition and spatial dynamics, allowing us to tease-apart the influence of, and explore the interaction between, the ccto and the spatial structure of the environment.
however, the relative importance of an alternative and possibly synergistic mechanism—spatial structuring of the environment—remains the topic of some debate.
