nearly half of the cpgs in human liver show a significant difference in methylation comparing fetal and adult samples.
in contrast, adult overexpressed genes showed fetal hypermethylation that differed from the similarly expressed genes.
methylation of genes overexpressed in fetal liver showed the same pattern as seen for genes that were similarly expressed in fetal and adult liver.
these findings indicate fundamentally different roles for and/or regulation of dna methylation in human fetal and adult liver.
there was a trend among all sites toward higher methylation in the adult samples with the most frequent difference in beta being  <dig> .
an examination of gene region-specific methylation showed that sites proximal to the transcription start site or within the first exon with a significant fetal-adult difference in beta  showed an inverse relationship with gene expression.
sites proximal to the transcription start site or within the first exon that show a transition from hypermethylation in the fetus to hypomethylation or intermediate methylation in the adult are associated with inverse changes in gene expression.
we analyzed the methylome and transcriptome of three human fetal liver samples  and three adult human liver samples.
analysis for dna methylation using the illumina infinium 450 k humanmethylation beadchip showed that 42 % of the quality filtered  <dig>  methylation sites differed significantly between adult and fetal tissue .
however, only limited data are available regarding the relationship between methylation and gene expression in human development.
gene expressionmethylationliverfetal developmentissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
adult overexpression was associated with metabolic pathways and, in particular, cytochrome p <dig> enzymes while fetal overexpression reflected enrichment for dna replication and repair.
differences were small; 69 % of the significant sites differed in their mean methylation beta value by ≤ <dig> .
dna methylation is an important epigenetic control mechanism that has been shown to be associated with gene silencing through the course of development, maturation and aging.
