three putative genes in the upstream pathway, including genes for geraniol-10-hydroxylase , secologanin synthase , and strictosidine synthase  were cloned and analyzed.
through functional annotation, a total of  <dig>  unigenes were annotated at least once against the ncbi nucleotide , non-redundant protein , uniprot/swissprot, kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes , and arabidopsis thaliana proteome  databases.
with respect to the branch pathway of cpt synthesis, six cytochrome p450s transcripts were selected as candidate transcripts by detection of transcript expression in different tissues using qrt-pcr.
according to est annotation, catalytic features prediction, and expression analysis, novel putative transcripts involved in cpt biosynthesis and transport were discovered in c. acuminata.
in addition, one glucosidase gene was identified that might participate in cpt biosynthesis.
further analysis identified  <dig> ests representing  <dig> enzyme genes that are involved in the backbone of the cpt biosynthetic pathway in the library.
the expression level of the three genes was also detected using qrt-pcr in c. acuminata.
camptotheca acuminata is a nyssaceae plant, often called the "happy tree", which is indigenous in southern china.
for cpt transport, three of  <dig> transcripts for multidrug resistance protein  transporters were also screened from the dataset by their annotation result and gene expression analysis.
from a constructed cdna library of young c. acuminata leaves, a total of  <dig>  unigenes, with an average length of  <dig> bp, were obtained after assembly of  <dig>  high quality reads using gs de novo assembler software.
c. acuminata produces the terpenoid indole alkaloid, camptothecin , which exhibits clinical effects in various cancer treatments.
despite its importance, little is known about the transcriptome of c. acuminata and the mechanism of cpt biosynthesis, as only few nucleotide sequences are included in the genbank database.
this study produced a large amount of transcriptome data from c. acuminata by  <dig> pyrosequencing.
this study will facilitate further identification of key enzymes and transporter genes in c. acuminata.
