plant parasitism represents an extraordinary interaction among flowering plants: parasitic plants use a specialized organ, the haustorium, to invade the host vascular system to deprive host plants of water and nutrients.
parasitic plantshaustoriumnucleotide diversityallelic polymorphismpopulation geneticstranscriptional responses
we further demonstrate that tvpirin encodes a protein shorter than the one previously reported.
our results suggest that tvqr <dig> and tvpirin have most likely evolved highly distinct roles for haustorium formation.
unlike tvpirin, tvqr <dig> might have been under diversifying selection to maintain a diverse collection of polymorphisms, which might be related to the recognition of an assortment of hif and non-hif quinones as substrates for successful haustorial establishment in a wide range of host plants.
to date, two genes involved in haustorium initiation in t. versicolor have been identified: tvqr <dig>  a quinone oxidoreductase that generates the active hif from dmbq, and tvpirin, a transcription co-factor that regulates several other dmbq- responsive and –non-responsive genes.
in addition, the pattern of polymorphisms in these genes is unknown, even though nucleotide changes in tvqr <dig> and tvpirin may have contributed to the ability of t. versicolor to develop haustoria.
here we show that tvqr <dig> and tvpirin are transcriptionally upregulated by both dmbq and peonidin in t. versicolor roots.
in the t. versicolor natural population of northern california, tvqr <dig> exhibited remarkably higher molecular diversity and more recombination events than tvpirin, with the highest non-synonymous substitution rate in the substrate recognition and catalytic domain of the tvqr <dig> protein.
the two most effective haustorium inducing factors  known for the parasitic plant triphysaria versicolor  are peonidin, an antioxidant flavonoid, and  <dig> -dimethoxybenzoquinone , an oxidative stress agent.
various compounds present in exudates of host plants trigger haustorium development.
yet, while tvqr <dig> also responded to juglone, a non-hif quinone with toxicity comparable to that of dmbq, tvpirin did not.
