we also describe how a spatial gradient of nutrients and oncological drugs affects the tumor progression.
the simulations qualitatively reproduce the time evolution of the morphologies of these tumors as well as the morphological patterns follow the growth curves observed in patients.
s this model is able to reproduce the observed increment/decrement of tumor size in response to the pharmacological treatment with gemcitabine.
most of the current reaction-diffusion tumor models are deterministic and do not model the diffusion as a local state-dependent process in a non-homogeneous medium at the micro- and meso-scale of the intra- and inter-cellular processes, respectively.
we incorporated this generalized law in a reaction-based stochastic simulation framework implementing an efficient version of gillespie algorithm for modeling the dynamics of the interactions between tumor cell, nutrients and gemcitabine in a spatial domain expressing a nutrient and drug concentration gradient.
many of the current models treat both diffusion/consumption of nutrients and cell proliferation.
the application of this approach to he scase of non-small cell lung cancer treated with gemcitabine is also novel.
we present a stochastic reaction-diffusion model of non-small cell lung cancer growth in the specification formalism of the tool redi, we recently developed for simulating reaction-diffusion systems.
the parameters of the model have been taken from recet literature and also inferred from real tumor shrinkage curves measured in patients suffering from non-small cell lung cancer.
furthermore, a stochastic reaction-diffusion model in which diffusive transport of the molecular species of nutrients and chemotherapy drugs as well as the interactions of the tumor cells with these species is a novel approach.
the diffusion coefficient is explicitly expressed as a function depending on the local conditions of the medium, such as the concentration of molecular species, the viscosity of the medium and the temperature.
