also, our method outperforms existing methods with regard to classification of active compounds for cancers.
furthermore, we propose a new method that exploits functional features of the drug-specific pathways to predict new indications as well as adverse reactions.
lastly, we discuss several predictions for both therapeutic indications and side-effects through the published literature.
for adverse reactions, our predictions were significantly enriched in an independent database derived from the food and drug administration  adverse event reporting system and meaningfully cover an adverse reaction database provided by health canada.
the dominant paradigm in understanding drug action focuses on the intended therapeutic effects and frequent adverse reactions.
drug pathwaydrug-signaling pathwaydrug actionpharmacodynamicsdrug repurposingdrug repositioningadverse reactionsside effectshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003725national research foundation of koreanrf-2015r1a2a2a03004088yoon youngmi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
for therapeutic uses, our predictions significantly overlapped with clinical trials and an up-to-date drug-disease association database.
in this platform, an adoption of three conceptual levels imitating drug perturbation allows these pathways to be realistically rendered in comparison to those of other models.
however, this approach may limit opportunities to grasp unintended drug actions, which can open up channels to repurpose existing drugs and identify rare adverse drug reactions.
advances in systems biology can be exploited to comprehensively understand pharmacodynamic actions, although proper frameworks to represent drug actions are still lacking.
our study addresses how we can computationally represent drug-signaling pathways to understand unintended drug actions and to facilitate drug discovery and screening.
we suggest a novel platform to construct a drug-specific pathway in which a molecular-level mechanism of action is formulated based on pharmacologic, pharmacogenomic, transcriptomic, and phenotypic data related to drug response .
