most chelicerates with rearranged mitochondrial genes show a genome-wide reversal of the ca nucleotide bias typical for arthropods on their major coding strand, and instead possess a gt bias.
based on comparisons with the crystal structure of the bacterial ribosome, two of these helices were likely contact points with trna t-arms or d-arms as they pass through the ribosome during protein synthesis.
phylogenetic analyses of all  <dig> mitochondrial protein-coding gene sequences consistently yield trees that place pseudoscorpions as sister to acariform mites.
no mitochondrial genomes of pseudoscorpions have been published, but the mitochondrial genomes of some lineages of chelicerata possess unusual features, including short rrna genes and trna genes that lack sequence to encode arms of the canonical cloverleaf-shaped trna.
additionally, some chelicerates possess an atypical guanine-thymine nucleotide bias on the major coding strand of their mitochondrial genomes.
we sequenced the mitochondrial genomes of two divergent taxa from the chelicerate order pseudoscorpiones.
yet despite their extensive rearrangement, these pseudoscorpion mitochondrial genomes possess a ca bias on the major coding strand.
we find that these genomes possess unusually short trna genes that do not encode cloverleaf-shaped trna structures.
indeed, in one genome, all  <dig> trna genes lack sequence to encode canonical cloverleaf structures.
one genome is rearranged with respect to the location of protein-coding genes, the small rrna gene, and at least  <dig> trna genes.
the other genome contains  <dig> trna genes in novel locations.
the well-supported phylogenetic placement of pseudoscorpions as sister to acariformes differs from some previous analyses based on morphology.
the mitochondrial gene arrangements of both pseudoscorpions differ from the ancestral chelicerate gene arrangement.
we inferred secondary structures of the lsu rrnas from both pseudoscorpions, and find that they have lost multiple helices.
