theobroma cacao, the chocolate tree, is an important economic crop in east africa, south east asia, and south and central america.
furthermore, our studies revealed that tcbbm transcript levels could serve as a biomarker for embryogenesis in cacao tissue.
results from transient expression of tcbbm provide confirmation that transcription factors can be used to enhance se without compromising plant development and avoiding gmo plant production.
the technology would benefit the propagation of elite varieties with low regeneration potential as well as the production of transgenic plants, which similarly requires somatic cell reprogramming.
tcbbm overexpression in a. thaliana and t. cacao led to phenotypes associated with se that did not require exogenous hormones.
an ortholog of the arabidopsis thaliana bbm gene  was characterized in t. cacao .
this work describes the use of the transcription factor baby boom  to promote the transition of somatic cacao cells from the vegetative to embryonic state.
while transient ectopic expression of tcbbm provided only moderate enhancements in embryogenic potential, constitutive overexpression dramatically increased se proliferation but also appeared to inhibit subsequent development.
propagation of elite varieties has been achieved through somatic embryogenesis  but low efficiencies and genotype dependence still presents a significant limitation for its propagation at commercial scales.
baby boomsomatic embryogenesistheobroma cacaocell reprogrammingplant propagationtransient gene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
manipulation of transcription factors has been used to enhance the formation of ses in several other plant species.
this strategy could compliment a hormone-based method of reprogramming somatic cells and lead to more precise manipulation of se at the regulatory level of transcription factors.
tcbbm expression was observed throughout embryo development and was expressed at higher levels during se as compared to zygotic embryogenesis .
