although restrained by a limited dataset, our comprehensive study suggests a genotype-phenotype correlation in β-mannosidosis.
<dig> november- <dig> december  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  tenth international conference on bioinformatics – first iscb asia joint conference  <dig>  kuala lumpur, malaysia
in general, the proximity of mutations to the active site determines the severity of phenotypic expressions.
a predictive approach for detecting likely β-mannosidosis is also demonstrated where we have extrapolated observed mutations from one species to homologous positions in other organisms based on the proximity of the mutations to the enzyme active site and their co-location from different organisms.
x-ray crystallographic structure of β-mannosidase from bacteroides thetaiotaomicron was used as template for 3d structural modeling of the wild-type enzymes containing all the associated ligands.
mutations in the manba gene that codes for lysosomal β-mannosidase, result in improper coding and malfunctioning of protein, leading to β-mannosidosis.
mapping mutations to the manba gene sequence has identified five mutational hot-spots.
studying the location of mutations on the enzyme structure is a rational approach in order to understand the functional consequences of these mutations.
accordingly, the pathology and clinical manifestations of the disease could be correlated to the genotypic modifications.
higher expression of the exoglycosidase chitobiase is said to play a vital role in determining disease phenotypes in human and mouse.
the wild-type and inherited mutations of β-mannosidase were studied across four different species, human, cow, goat and mouse employing a previously demonstrated comprehensive homology modeling and mutational mapping technique, which reveals a correlation between the variation of genotype and the severity of phenotype in β-mannosidosis.
apart from aiding the detection of mutational hotspots in the gene, where novel mutations could be disease-implicated, this approach also provides a way to predict new disease mutations.
