the identification, classification, phylogenetic reconstruction, conserved motifs, chromosome distribution, functional annotation, expression patterns, and interaction networks of the ap2/erf transcription factor superfamily were predicted and analyzed.
orthologous gene interaction networks were constructed, and included seven cbf and four ap <dig> genes, primarily involved in cold regulatory pathways and ovule development, respectively.
the chinese cabbage ap2/erf superfamily was classified into four families, including ap <dig>  erf, rav, and soloist.
distribution mapping results showed ap2/erf superfamily genes were localized on the  <dig> chinese cabbage chromosomes.
variation in the number of members in gene families due to genome triplication may contribute to the broad range of phenotypic plasticity, and increased tolerance to environmental extremes observed in brassica species.
the evolution of the ap2/erf transcription factor superfamily in chinese cabbage resulted from genome triplication and tandem duplications.
in the present study,  <dig> putative ap2/erf transcription factor proteins were identified from the chinese cabbage genome database, and compared with proteins from  <dig> additional species.
ap2/erf transcription factor expression levels exhibited differences among six tissue types based on expressed sequence tags .
a comprehensive analysis of the physiological functions and biological roles of ap2/erf superfamily genes in chinese cabbage is required to fully elucidate ap2/erf, which provides us with rich resources and opportunities to understand crop stress tolerance mechanisms.
chinese cabbage  is a member of one of the most important leaf vegetables grown worldwide, which has experienced thousands of years in cultivation and artificial selection.
the entire chinese cabbage genome sequence, and more than forty thousand proteins have been obtained to date.
in the ap2/erf superfamily,  <dig> orthologous genes were identified between chinese cabbage and arabidopsis.
chinese cabbageap2/erfstress tolerancegene expressioninteraction networkprotein annotation
the ap2/erf proteins, one of the most important families of transcriptional regulators, play a crucial role in plant growth, and in response to biotic and abiotic stressors.
the erf family was further divided into dreb and erf subfamilies.
transcription factors are important regulators involved in plant developmental and physiological processes.
the genome has undergone triplication events since its divergence from arabidopsis thaliana , however a high degree of sequence similarity and conserved genome structure remain between the two species.
