an automated routine identifying human nonsynonymous snp amino acid missense substitutions for any mhc gene mined the ncbi snp data base.
the routine tested  <dig> mhc genes coding muscle and non-muscle isoforms and identified  <dig> missense mutation positions in the motor domain with  <dig> already implicated in heart disease and another  <dig> lacking sequence homology with a skeletal mhc isoform for which a crystallographic model is available.
several functional-crucial sub-domains are infiltrated by a large number of snp substitution sites suggesting these domains are engineered by evolution to be too-robust to be disturbed by otherwise intrusive sequence changes.
energy transduction is the definitive systemic feature of the myosin motor performed by coordinating in a time ordered sequence: atp hydrolysis at the active site, actin affinity modulation at the actin binding site, and the lever-arm rotation of the power stroke.
the latter includes the active site, the actin binding site, the rigid lever-arm, and regions facilitating their communication.
these sub-domains are apparently highly sensitive to any missense substitution suggesting they have failed to evolve a robust sequence paradigm for performing their function.
single nucleotide polymorphisms  affect the mhc sequence of many isoforms expressed in striated muscle, smooth muscle, and non-muscle tissue.
myosin performs atp free energy transduction into mechanical work in the motor domain of the myosin heavy chain .
in particular, to discover snp distribution over the conserved sub-domains and surmise what it implies about sub-domain stability and criticality in the energy transduction mechanism.
the remaining  <dig> snp substitutions were found to be distributed over mhc with  <dig> falling outside identified functional sub-domains and  <dig> in or very near to myosin sub-domains assigned specific crucial functions in energy transduction.
two functional sub-domains are snp-free or relatively snp-deficient but contain many disease implicated mutants.
