visual exploration of the large-scale atlas data sets allows researchers to mine data to find new meaning and make sense at scales from single samples to entire populations.
we have done this through the use of common visualization workflows, into which we rapidly deploy visual tools.
ultimately these visual tools enable new inferences, new analyses and further refinement of the large scale data being provided in atlases such as peptideatlas and the cancer genome atlas.
as the composition of the atlases changes, and our understanding of the biology increase, new tasks will continually arise.
specifically the tools are designed to allow for: the visual mining of thousands of mass spectrometry experiments, to assist in designing informed targeted protein assays; and the interactive analysis of hundreds of genomes, to explore the variations across different cancer genomes and cancer types.
this paper discusses an approach to the development of visual mining tools capable of supporting the mining of massive data collections used in systems biology research, and also discusses lessons that have been learned providing tools for both local researchers and the wider community.
these atlases represent large repositories of raw and processed experiment data generated to support the identification of biomarkers through mass spectrometry  and the genomic characterization of cancer .
these visualizations follow common metaphors where possible to assist users in understanding the displayed data.
it is therefore important to provide the means to make the data available in a suitable manner in as short a time as possible.
rapid development of tools and task specific views allows researchers to mine large-scale data almost as quickly as it is produced.
information visualization provides a solution to this problem, as it allows for direct manipulation and interaction with diverse and complex data.
providing linked task specific views that allow a user to start from points of interest  enables targeted exploration of thousands of spectra and genomes.
the mining of massive repositories of biological data requires the development of new tools and techniques.
the analytic software must solve the dichotomy that exists between the need to allow for a high level of scientific reasoning, and the requirement to have an intuitive and easy to use tool which does not require specialist, and often arduous, training to use.
