pure visual approaches depend, however, on the individual judgement of the analyst and are hard to automate.
therefore, the identification of extreme observations is an important step of quality control before doing further data analysis.
bagplot and gemplot surround the regular observations with convex hulls and observations outside these hulls are regarded as outliers.
standard outlier detection methods for univariate data are however not applicable, since the considered data are high-dimensional, i.e.
existing methods for automated outlier detection are only dedicated to data of a single experimental groups.
a clear advantage over other methods is that multiple experimental groups can be displayed in the same figure although outlier detection is performed for each individual group.
usually, outliers in high-dimensional data are solely detected by visual inspection of a graphical representation of the data by the analyst.
typical graphical representation for high-dimensional data are hierarchical cluster tree or principal component plots.
we demonstrate the usefulness of this approach on multiple sets of artificial data as well as one set of gene expression data from a next-generation sequencing experiment, and compare the new method to other common approaches.
results are very sensitive to the addition or removal of a single observation.
in this work we propose to use bagplots, the 2-dimensional extension of the boxplot, to automatically identify outliers in the subspace of the first two principal components of the data.
analyses of molecular high-throughput data often lack in robustness, i.e.
furthermore, we present for the first time the gemplot, the 3-dimensional extension of boxplot and bagplot, which can be used in the subspace of the first three principal components.
the convex hulls are determined separately for the observations of each experimental group while the observations of all groups can be displayed in the same subspace of principal components.
bagplots and gemplots in subspaces of principal components are useful for automated and objective outlier identification in high-dimensional data from molecular high-throughput experiments.
bagplotgemplothigh-dimensional dataoutlierprincipal component analysisministry of science and culture of lower saxony, germanyn-renntissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
