from this we make the following predictions:  under reduced lis <dig> and enhanced dcx expression, we predict a reduced bipolar migration in rats, and  under enhanced dcx expression in mice we predict a normal or a higher bipolar migration.
specifically:  the model revealed the possibility that under conditions of lis <dig> reduced expression, neurons experience an oscillatory neuron-glial association prior to the multipolar stage; and  we hypothesized that observed morphology variations in rats and mice may be explained by a single difference in the way that lis <dig> and dcx stimulate bipolar motility.
neuronal migration, the process by which neurons migrate from their place of origin to their final position in the brain, is a central process for normal brain development and function.
here we present a computational model of neuronal migration, in which four key molecular entities, lis <dig>  dcx, reelin and gaba, form a molecular program that mediates the migration process.
we present here a system-wide computational model of neuronal migration that integrates theory and data within a precise, testable framework.
our model accounts for a range of observable behaviors and affords a computational framework to study aspects of neuronal migration as a complex process that is driven by a relatively simple molecular program.
this paper thus reports a first step toward a comprehensive in-silico model of neuronal migration.
specifically, the model reproduced migration phases, cellular dynamics and population distributions that concur with experimental observations in normal neuronal development.
advances in experimental techniques have revealed much about many of the molecular components involved in this process.
notwithstanding these advances, how the molecular machinery works together to govern the migration process has yet to be fully understood.
the model simulated the dynamic migration process, consistent with in-vivo observations of morphological, cellular and population-level phenomena.
analysis of the model gave rise to unforeseen insights that could guide future experimental study.
