when the same amount of agsa and c-terminal 11-aa truncated agsa were mixed , good chaperone activity for all substrates and temperatures was observed.
temperature-controlled gel filtration chromatography showed that purified agsa could maintain large oligomeric complexes up to 50°c.
destabilization of oligomeric complexes was observed for n-terminal 11- and 17-aa truncated agsa; c-terminal 11-aa truncated agsa could not form large oligomeric complexes.
truncations of agsa until the n-terminal 23rd and c-terminal 11th amino acid  from both termini preserved its in vivo chaperone activity.
to investigate the aggregation prevention mechanisms of agsa, we constructed n- or c-terminal truncated mutants and compared their properties with wild type agsa.
agsa showed significant overall homology to wheat shsp <dig>  allowing its three-dimensional structure to be predicted.
detectable intermolecular exchanges between agsa oligomers at 25°c were not observed using fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis; however, significant exchanges between agsa oligomers and c-terminal truncated agsa were observed at 25°c.
our data demonstrate that agsa has several regions necessary for efficient chaperone activity: region important for lysozyme chaperone activity are located outer surface of the oligomeric complex while those region important for insulin are located inside the oligomeric complex and those for mdh are located within the n-terminal arm.
in addition, the equilibrium between the oligomer and the dimer structures appears to be important for its efficient chaperone activity.
agsa prevented the aggregation of denatured lysozyme, malate dehydrogenase  and citrate synthase  but did not prevent the aggregation of insulin at 25°c.
a small heat shock protein agsa was originally isolated from salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium.
agsa appeared to promote survival at lethal temperatures by cooperating with other chaperones in vivo.
n-terminal 17-aa truncated agsa showed no chaperone activity towards mdh.
c-terminal 11-aa truncated agsa showed weak or no chaperone activity towards lysozyme, mdh and cs although it prevented the aggregation of insulin at 25°c.
