enolase reportedly plays important roles in several bacterial pathogens, but its role in m. synoviae has not been established.
these results suggested that the m. synoviae enolase plays an important role in m. synoviae metabolism, and could potentially impact m. synoviae infection and immunity.
these results reveal that m. synoviae enolase has good catalytic activity for conversion of 2-pga to pep, and binding activity with chicken plg and human fn.
the binding assays demonstrated that rmseno was able to bind to chicken plg and human fn proteins.
western blot and immuno-electron microscopy analyses confirmed that enolase was distributed on the surface and within the cytoplasm of m. synoviae cells.
mycoplasma synoviae is an avian pathogen that can lead to respiratory tract infections and arthritis in chickens and turkeys, resulting in serious economic losses to the poultry industry.
an inhibition assay showed that the adherence of m. synoviae to df- <dig> cells pre-treated with plg could be effectively inhibited by treatment with rabbit anti-rmseno serum.
mycoplasma synoviaeenolaseenzymatic activityadherenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
then the enzymatic activity, immunogenicity and binding activity with chicken plasminogen  and human fibronectin  was evaluated.
therefore, in this study, the enolase encoding gene  of m. synoviae was amplified from strain wvu <dig> and expressed in e. coli bl <dig> cells.
we demonstrated that the recombinant m. synoviae enolase protein  can catalyze the conversion of 2-phosphoglycerate  to phosphoenolpyruvate , the km and vmax values of rmseno were  <dig>  × 10− <dig> m and  <dig>  μmol/l/min, respectively.
a complement-dependent mycoplasmacidal assay demonstrated that rabbit anti–rmseno serum had distinct mycoplasmacidal efficacy in the presence of complement, which also confirmed that enolase was distributed on the surface of m. synoviae.
rabbit anti–rmseno serum displayed an obvious complement-dependent mycoplasmacidal effect and adherent inhibition effect.
