computational pharmacology can uniquely address some issues in the process of drug development by providing a macroscopic view and a deeper understanding of drug action.
in this study, we created a weighted and integrated drug-target interactome  to provide a comprehensive resource of drug-target associations for computational pharmacology.
starting from  <dig> known scz drugs and their targets, we inferred a total of  <dig> potential scz drugs through the associations of drug-target with score_s higher than two in windtome and human protein-protein interactions.
its application to the scz drug repurposing demonstrated that the windtome is promising to serve as a useful resource for drug repurposing.
compared with the results using other score_s cutoff values, single data source, or the data from stitch, the inference of  <dig> scz-related drugs had the highest performance.
however, the drug-target associations coming from different sources and various assays have much noise, leading to an inflation of the inference errors.
to reduce the inference errors, it is necessary and critical to create a comprehensive and weighted data set of drug-target associations.
to assess the reliability of the drug-target associations, we assigned two scores  to each drug-target association based on their data sources and publication references.
consequently, the windtome contains  <dig>  drug-target associations among  <dig>  compounds and  <dig>  genes.
the windtome generated in this study contains comprehensive drug-target associations with confidence scores.
among the  <dig> scz-related drugs,  <dig> drugs have been investigated in clinical trials for scz treatment and  <dig> drugs for the treatment of other mental disorders, respectively.
we first collected drug-target interactions from six commonly used drug-target centered data sources including drugbank, kegg, ttd, matador, pdsp ki database, and bindingdb.
then, we employed the record linkage method to normalize drugs and targets to the unique identifiers by utilizing the public data sources including pubchem, entrez gene, and uniprot.
