the 2lomb search in the reduced t2d data reveals that four intronic snps in pgm <dig> , two intronic snps in lmx1a , two intronic snps in park <dig>   <dig>  parkin) and three intronic snps in gys <dig> ) are associated with the disease.
after primarily screening for snps that locate within or near  <dig> candidate genes and exhibit no marginal single-locus effects, the t2d data set is reduced to  <dig>  snps from  <dig> genes.
the interaction models constructed from the 2lomb outputs via a multifactor dimensionality reduction  method are also included for the confirmation of epistasis detection.
the 2lomb result suggests that there is no interaction between each pair of the identified genes that can be described by purely epistatic two-locus interaction models.
moreover, there are no interactions between these four genes that can be described by purely epistatic multi-locus interaction models with marginal two-locus effects.
the simulation results indicate that 2lomb produces a low false-positive error.
purely epistatic multi-locus interactions cannot generally be detected via single-locus analysis in case-control studies of complex diseases.
an omnibus permutation test on ensembles of two-locus analyses can detect purely epistatic multi-locus interactions with marginal two-locus effects.
however, exhaustive multi-locus analysis requires prohibitively large computational efforts when problems involve large-scale or genome-wide data.
the algorithm consists of four main steps: two-locus analysis, a permutation test, global p-value determination and a progressive search for the best ensemble.
2lomb is benchmarked against an exhaustive two-locus analysis technique, a set association approach, a correlation-based feature selection  technique and a tuned relieff  technique.
furthermore, there is no explicit proof that a combination of multiple two-locus analyses can lead to the correct identification of multi-locus interactions.
the proposed 2lomb algorithm performs an omnibus permutation test on ensembles of two-locus analyses.
recently, many two-locus and multi-locus analysis techniques have been shown to be promising for the epistasis detection.
moreover, 2lomb has the best performance in terms of an ability to identify all causative single nucleotide polymorphisms  and a low number of output snps in purely epistatic two-, three- and four-locus interaction problems.
the findings provide an alternative explanation for the aetiology of t2d in a uk population.
the study also reveals that snps from large-scale or genome-wide case-control data which are discarded after single-locus analysis detects no association can still be useful for genetic epidemiology studies.
