in sum, mir- <dig> plays an important role in the differential pathogenicity of bp and bt via mir-3473-traf3-tnf-α network, and regulates tnf-α release, cell apoptosis and animal survival after bp treatment.
in this study, we have found a specific microrna is related to bacterial virulence and provide insight into the mechanism for host-bacteria interaction, which suggests that potential oligonucleotides should be applied against bacterial infection.
burkholderia thailandensis , with a high sequence similarity to bp, is thought to be an avirulent organism.
burkholderia pseudomallei burkholderia thailandensis tnf-αapoptosismir-3473traf3nf-κbhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china81471914mao xuhu issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
in addition, targetscan suggested that mir- <dig> possibly target traf <dig> , a well-known negative regulator of the nf-κb pathway, which was probably involved in the tnf-α induction and apoptosis in cells with bp infection.
we found that bp and bt had similar phenotypes in terms of intracellular replication, dissemination , tnf-α release and apoptosis in raw <dig>  macrophages or tc- <dig> pulmonary cell but in different level.
especially, at the late infection phases , bp showed faster intracellular growth, stronger cytotoxicity, and higher tnf-α release.
and mir- <dig> inhibitor was able to decrease the tnf-α release of mice and prolong the survival of mice with bp infection.
in recent years, micrornas have been researched in many diseases, but seldom involved in bacterial infection, bacteria-host interaction or explaining the differences between virulent and avirulent species.
after microrna array analysis, we found some micrornas were significantly expressed in macrophages treated by bp.
burkholderia pseudomallei  is the causative agent of melioidosis, a kind of tropical disease.
since there are numerous similarities between bp and bt, their differences in pathogenesis of host response and related mechanism are still undermined.
