we observed alteration in biological functions related to extracellular matrix function and organization, cellular adhesion, muscle growth, lipid metabolism and proteolysis.
genes related to lipid metabolism and proteolysis were found among those upregulated in ib.
these results provide valuable information about genetic mechanisms determining the phenotypic differences on growth and meat quality between the genetic types studied, mainly related to the development and function of the extracellular matrix and also to some metabolic processes as proteolysis and lipid metabolism.
the two main genetic types in iberian pig production show important phenotypic differences in growth, fattening and tissue composition since early developmental stages.
the objective of this work was the evaluation of muscle transcriptome profile in piglets of both genetic types, in order to identify genes, pathways and regulatory factors responsible for their phenotypic differences.
loin muscle chemical composition showed significant differences between genetic types in intramuscular fat content  and in saturated  and monounsaturated fatty acid proportions .
the statistical analysis of gene expression data allowed the identification of  <dig> differentially expressed  genes between genetic types ,  <dig> upregulated in ib and  <dig> upregulated in du×ib.
correlation among the expression of these rf and de genes show relevant differences between genetic types.
regulatory factors  potentially involved in the expression differences were identified by calculating the regulatory impact factors.
transcription factors and regulatory mechanisms are proposed for these altered biological functions.
iberian pigtranscriptomegenetic typetranscription factorsgrowthmeat qualitymetabolismissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
contemporary families coming from pure iberian pigs  or from crossing with duroc boars  were generated.
twenty-nine rf were found, some of them with known relationship with tissue development , adipogenesis , or extracellular matrix processes .
candidate genes with known effects on muscle growth were found among the de genes upregulated in du×ib.
piglets  were slaughtered at weaning  and longissimus dorsi was sampled for composition and gene expression studies.
