to test the hypothesis that these high levels of sa, and their presumed associated fitness costs of pathogen associated defenses in irsipk plants had nullified the ja-deficiency-mediated growth benefits in these plants, we genetically reduced sa levels in irsipk plants.
signaling mediated by wipk, but not sipk, is associated with large fitness costs in competing n. attenuata plants, demonstrating the contrasting roles that these two mapks play in regulating the plants’ growth-defense balance.
we discuss the role of sipk as an important regulator of plant fitness, possibly by modulating sa-ja crosstalk as mediated through ethylene signaling.
two mitogen-activated protein kinases , salicylic acid -induced protein kinase  and wound-induced protein kinase  are rapidly activated after perception of herbivory and both kinases regulate herbivory-induced ja levels and ja-mediated defense metabolite accumulations.
induced defense responses to herbivores are generally believed to have evolved as cost-saving strategies that defer the fitness costs of defense metabolism until these defenses are needed.
the fitness costs of jasmonate -mediated defenses have been well documented.
early signaling components that mediate herbivore-induced defense responses in nicotiana attenuata, have been well characterized and here we examine their growth and fitness costs during competition with conspecifics.
fitness costsinduced defensemapkherbivorynicotiana attenuatasalicylic acidjasmonic acidethylenenitrogenphotosynthesis
as expected, irwipk and lox3-silenced plants out-performed their competing wt plants.
we also evaluated whether the increased fitness of plants with reduced sa or ja levels resulted from increased nitrogen or co <dig> assimilation rates, and found no evidence that greater intake of these fitness-limiting resources were responsible.
reducing sa levels partially recovered the biomass and fitness deficits of irsipk plants.
surprisingly, irsipk plants, which have the largest reductions in ja signaling, did not.
phytohormone profiling of leaves revealed that irsipk plants accumulated higher levels of sa compared to wt.
