a second element of the historical associations between alnus and its fungal symbionts is a host-dependent speciation , here observed in alnicola and alpova in relation with alnus subgen.
finally host shifts from alnus subgen.
the aim was to develop an evolutionary framework on host specificity and diversification of basidiomycetes in this highly specialized plant-fungus symbiosis.
patterns of host specificity and phylogenies of alnicola and lactarius suggest coevolution as a basal factor of speciation in relation with the subgeneric diversification of alnus, possibly due to the very selective pressure of the host.
however, active or very recent host extensions clearly occurred in corsica, where some fungi usually associated with alnus glutinosa on mainland europe locally extend there to a. alnobetula subsp.
fungal phylogenies are compared and discussed in relation to the host, with a focus on species boundaries by associating taxonomic, systematic and molecular information.
the degree of parallel speciation, host switching, and patterns of biogeography were explored in the historical associations between alders and three ecm taxa of basidiomycetes: alnicola , alpova , and lactarius .
are known to host an exceptional species-poor and specialized ectomycorrhizal  fungal community compared to other tree species, but the host-specificity pattern and its significance in terms of fungal diversification and speciation remain poorly documented.
phylogenetic analyses were conducted on all sequence data sets  using maximum likelihood reconstruction and bayesian inference.
from these,  <dig> sequences of four dna regions  were successfully obtained and analyzed in addition with  <dig> sequences available in genbank and unite databases.
mycorrhizal fungi form intimate associations with their host plants that constitute their carbon resource and habitat.
alnus to a. alnobetula are found in most lineages of alnicola , alpova  and lactarius , but they do not represent such a common event as could be expected by geographic proximity of trees from the two subgenera.
suaveolens without significant genetic or morphological deviation.
