gene ontology analysis was performed to obtain clues about biological function of the maize nsltps .
in this study, we carried out a genome-wide analysis of nsltp gene family in maize and identified  <dig> nsltp genes, which can be divided into five types .
in plant, non-specific lipid transfer proteins  are small, basic proteins that have been reported to be involved in numerous biological processes such as transfer of phospholipids, reproductive development, pathogen defence and abiotic stress response.
the dynamic expression patterns of zmltps family across the different developmental stages showed that several of them exhibit tissue-specific expression, indicative of their important roles in maize life cycle.
the analyses of putative upstream regulatory elements showed both shared and distinct transcriptional regulation motifs of zmltps, further indicating that zmltps may play roles in diverse biological processes.
our results provide new insights into the phylogenetic relationships and characteristic functions of maize nsltps and will be useful in studies aimed at revealing the global regulatory network in maize development and stress responses, thereby contributing to the maize molecular breeding with enhanced quality traits.
additionally, the three-dimensional structures of representative nsltps were studied with homology modeling to understand their molecular functions.
gene duplication analysis indicated that both tandem and segmental duplication contribute to the diversification of this gene family.
our analyses demonstrated that some zmltps exhibited a delayed expression pattern after the infection of ustilago maydis and differentially expressed under drought, salt and cold stresses, and these may be a great help for further studies to improve the stress resistance and tolerance in maize breeding.
furthermore, we focused on the roles of maize nsltps in biotic and abiotic stress responses.
to date, only a tiny fraction of plant nsltps have been functionally identified, and even fewer have been identified in maize .
