active bat has recently been observed in adult humans, albeit in much lower relative quantities than small mammals.
in small mammals brown adipose tissue  plays a predominant role in regulating energy expenditure  via adaptive thermogenesis.
nevertheless the bat-enriched mirna profiles established in the present study suggest targets to investigate in the control bat development and ee.
results were analysed using expressionsuite software with the global mean expression value of all expressed mirnas in a givensample used as the normalisation factor.
comparing and contrasting the molecular mechanisms controlling bat growth and development in mice and humans will increase our understanding or how human bat is developed and may identify potential therapeutic targets to increase ee.
the large number of mirnas found only in mouse bat or only in human bat highlights the differing molecular profile between species that is likely to influence the functional role of bat across species.
bio-informatic analyses was used to predict gene targets followed by ingenuity pathway analysis.
micrornas are molecular mechanisms involved in mouse bat development however, little is known about the mirna profile in human bat.
the aims of this study were to establish a mouse bat-enriched mirna profile and compare this with mirnas measured in human bat.
to achieve this we firstly established a mouse bat enriched-mirna profile by comparing mirnas expressed in mouse bat, white adipose tissue and skeletal muscle.
we identified  <dig> mouse bat-enriched mirnas that were predicted to target genes potentially involved in growth and development.
we also identified  <dig> mirnas expressed in both mouse and human bat, of which  <dig> were enriched in mouse bat.
for the first time,  <dig> mirnas were identified in human bat but absent in mouse bat, and  <dig> mirnas were expressed in mouse but not in human bat.
following this the bat-enriched mirnas predicted to target genes potentially involved in growth and development were identified.
of these  <dig> mirnas, mir-20a was predicted to target myf <dig> and pparγ, two important genes involved in brown adipogenesis, as well as bmp <dig> and bmpr <dig>  genes involved in white adipogenesis.
micrornabrown adipose tissueskeletal muscleobesitytype  <dig> diabetesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
from this sub-set bioinformatics analysis suggested a potential role of mir-20a in the control of cell fate and this warrants further investigation.
the present study has identified a small sub-set of mirnas common to both mouse and human bat.
mirna levels were measured using pcr-based mirna arrays.
