in this work, physiological parameters and the hormonal regulation of carrizo citrange and cleopatra mandarin, two citrus genotypes, in response to the combined action of high temperatures and water deprivation were studied.
in addition, these responses are differently modulated depending on the particular stress tolerance of citrus genotypes.
furthermore, an experimental design spanning 24 h stress duration, heat stress applied alone induced higher stomatal conductance and transpiration in both genotypes whereas combined water deprivation partially counteracted this response.
cleopatra mandarin is more susceptible to the combination of high temperatures and water deprivation than carrizo citrange.
experiments indicated that carrizo citrange is more tolerant to the stress combination than cleopatra mandarin.
comparing both genotypes, carrizo citrange showed higher phostosystem-ii efficiency and lower oxidative damage than cleopatra mandarin.
carrizo citrangecleopatra mandarincombined stress conditionsheathormone regulationsalicylic acidhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003329ministerio de economía y competitividadagl2013-42038-rgómez-cadenas aurelio http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004834universitat jaume ihttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004834universitat jaume ip1ib2013-23gómez-cadenas aurelio issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
hormonal profiling in leaves revealed that salicylic acid  accumulated in response to individual stresses but to a higher extent in samples subjected to the combination of heat and drought .
the objective was to characterize particular responses to the stress combination.
on the contrary, abscisic acid  accumulation was higher in water-stressed plants followed by that observed in plants under stress combination.
sa accumulation correlated with the up-regulation of pathogenesis-related gene  <dig> , as a downstream response.
inhibition of aba accumulation during heat stress and combined stresses was achieved primarily through the up-regulation of cscyp707a leading to phaseic acid  and dehydrophaseic acid  production.
modulation of aba levels was likely carried out by the induction of 9-neoxanthin cis-epoxicarotenoid dioxygenase  and aba 8’-hydroxylase  while conversion to aba-glycosyl ester  was a less prominent process despite the strong induction of aba o-glycosyl transferase .
this is likely a result of a higher transpiration rate in carrizo that could allow a more efficient cooling of leaf surface ensuring optimal co <dig> intake.
