our results highlight the importance of tailoring the feature selection and classification methodology to the sample size and biological context of the dna methylation study.
we show that for relatively large sample sizes feature selection using test statistics is similar for m and β-values, but that in the limit of small sample sizes, m-values allow more reliable identification of true positives.
finally, in unsupervised modelling of cancer diagnosis, we find that non-negative matrix factorisation  clearly outperforms principal components analysis.
we also demonstrate that classification using the elastic net and support vector machine  clearly outperforms competing methods like lasso and spca.
the elastic net emerges as a powerful classification algorithm for large-scale dna methylation studies, while nmf does well in the unsupervised context.
using a total of  <dig> large illumina infinium 27k methylation data sets, encompassing over  <dig>  samples from a wide range of tissues, we here provide an evaluation of popular feature selection, dimensional reduction and classification methods on dna methylation data.
specifically, we find that variance filtering improves the detection of true positives in studies with large effect sizes, but that it may lead to worse performance in studies with smaller yet significant effect sizes.
while feature selection and classification methods have been comprehensively explored in the context of gene expression data, relatively little is known as to how best to perform feature selection or classification in the context of illumina infinium methylation data.
we also show that the effect of variance filtering on feature selection is study-specific and dependent on the phenotype of interest and tissue type profiled.
in contrast, supervised principal components improves the statistical power, especially in studies with small effect sizes.
given the rising importance of epigenomics in cancer and other complex genetic diseases, and in view of the upcoming epigenome wide association studies, it is critical to identify the statistical methods that offer improved inference in this novel context.
specifically, we evaluate the effects of variance filtering, supervised principal components  and the choice of dna methylation quantification measure on downstream statistical inference.
