interestingly, five duplicated ugt genes were identified, which showed differential expression in various tissues.
flax has a large number of ugt genes including few flax diverged ones.
phylogenetic analysis and expression profiles of these genes identified tissue and condition specific repertoire of ugt genes from this crop.
expression patterns of these genes were investigated using publicly available expressed sequence tag , microarray data and reverse transcription quantitative real time pcr .
comparison of the flax ugts with orthologs from four other sequenced dicot genomes indicated that seven ugts were flax diverged.
the rt-qpcr results of  <dig> selected genes were also coherent with the digital expression analysis.
seventy-three per cent of these genes  showed expression evidence in  <dig> tissues examined and indicated varied expression profiles.
taking advantage of the newly assembled draft genome sequence of flax, we identified  <dig> udp glycosyltransferase  genes from flax using a conserved signature motif.
the glycosylation process, catalyzed by ubiquitous glycosyltransferase  family enzymes, is a prevalent modification of plant secondary metabolites that regulates various functions such as hormone homeostasis, detoxification of xenobiotics and biosynthesis and storage of secondary metabolites.
phylogenetic analysis of these protein sequences clustered them into  <dig> major groups .
of the seven intron loss/gain positions detected, two intron positions were conserved among most of the ugts, although a clear relationship about the evolution of these genes could not be established.
identification and characterization of udp glycosyltransferase  genes from flax could provide valuable basic information about this important gene family and help to explain the seed specific glycosylated metabolite accumulation and other processes in plants.
plant genome sequencing projects are useful to discover complexity within this gene family and also pave way for the development of functional genomics approaches.
