albopictus is a medically significant vector and is currently considered the most invasive mosquito in the world.
our transcriptome database provides a rich resource for the comparative genomics and functional genetics of ae.
our contig filtering approach, where we took advantage of strong sequence similarity to the fully sequenced genome of aedes aegypti, as well as other reference organisms, resulted in  <dig>  high-quality, conservative ests.
analysis of expression by qpcr for  <dig> of these genes indicated a high correlation of expression levels between  <dig> sequence data and qpcr, but congruence of statistically significant differential expression was low.
the asian tiger mosquito, aedes albopictus , represents an outstanding emerging model to investigate the molecular basis of photoperiodic diapause in a well-defined ecological and evolutionary context.
albopictus oocytes destined to become diapausing or non-diapausing pharate larvae.
finally, our analysis illustrates a useful approach that draws from a closely related reference genome to generate high-confidence ests in a non-model organism.
many temperate insects survive the harsh conditions of winter by undergoing photoperiodic diapause, a pre-programmed developmental arrest initiated by short day lengths.
to generate novel sequence information for this species, as well as to discover transcripts involved in diapause preparation, we sequenced the transcriptome of ae.
seven genes identified as differentially expressed based on qpcr have putative functions that are consistent with the insect diapause syndrome; three genes have unknown function and represent novel candidates for the transcriptional basis of diapause.
additionally, the identification of differentially expressed transcripts related to diapause enriches the limited knowledge base for the molecular basis of insect diapause, in particular for the preparatory stage.
despite the well-established ecological significance of photoperiodic diapause, the molecular basis of this crucial adaptation remains largely unresolved.
