preliminary molecular analyses suggest a five- to ten-fold reduction in heterozygosity in the social s. mimosarum compared with the periodic-social species.
such a decline in effective population size is expected to affect population genetic and molecular evolutionary processes, resulting in reduced genetic diversity and relaxed selective constraint across the genome.
furthermore, an increased ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous polymorphisms in the social species indicated relaxed efficiency of selection.
taken together, these features are expected to result in a strong reduction in the effective population size.
the  <dig>  three-way ortholog genes identified in this study provide a unique resource for comparative studies of the eco-genomics, population genetics and molecular evolution of repeated evolution of inbreeding sociality within the stegodyphus genus.
however, no genetic resources are available for this genus.
open reading frames  could be deduced from  <dig>  of the three-way alignments.
we present the analysis of high throughput transcriptome sequencing of three stegodyphus species.
from non-normalized cdna libraries, we obtained on average  <dig>  putative uni-genes for each species.
this genus is therefore an ideal model for comparative studies of the molecular evolutionary and population genetic consequences of the transition to a regularly inbreeding mating system.
in the genus stegodyphus, permanent sociality and regular inbreeding has evolved independently three times from periodic-social  ancestors.
relaxed selection could not be detected in the s. mimosarum lineage, suggesting that there has been a recent transition to sociality in this species.
the evolution of sociality in spiders involves a transition from an outcrossing to a highly inbreeding mating system, a shift to a female biased sex ratio, and an increase in the reproductive skew among individuals.
however, there was no sign of relaxed selection on the phylogenetic branch leading to s. mimosarum.
