change trends between consecutive time points in time-series data have been so far not well explored.
in this work we present a new method based on extracting main features of the change trend and level of gene expression between consecutive time points.
the tc method is demonstrated with data from yeast cell cycle and compared with the lc method and the widely used pearson correlation coefficient  based clustering method.
<dig> % compared with the lc method and  <dig> % with the pcc method for a p-value threshold of  <dig> e- <dig>  moreover, the percentage of the inferred gene pairs consistent with databases by our method is generally higher than the lc method and similar to the pcc method.
it should be emphasized that the overlapping of gene pairs detected by the three methods is normally not very high, indicating a necessity of combining the different methods in search of functional association of genes from time-series data.
the tc method can significantly augment the current major methods to infer functional linkages and biological network and is well suitable for exploring temporal relationships of gene expression in time-series data.
although the tc method predicts an overall lower number of gene pairs than the other two methods at a same p-value threshold, the additional number of gene pairs inferred by the tc method is considerable: e.g.
for a p-value threshold of 1e- <dig> the percentage of process-identity and function-similarity gene pairs among the shared part of the three methods reaches  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively, building a good basis for further experimental and functional study.
a significant number of the gene pairs only inferred by the tc method are process-identity or function-similarity pairs or have well-documented biological interactions, including  <dig> known protein interactions and some known cell cycle related regulatory interactions.
the biological significance of the gene pairs is examined with several large-scale yeast databases.
the increasing availability of time-series expression data opens up new possibilities to study functional linkages of genes.
present methods used to infer functional linkages between genes from expression data are mainly based on a point-to-point comparison.
the new method considers time shifts and inverted relationships in a similar way as the local clustering  method but the latter is merely based on a point-to-point comparison.
the method, termed as trend correlation , includes two major steps:  <dig>  calculating a maximal local alignment of change trend score by dynamic programming and a change trend correlation coefficient between the maximal matched change levels of each gene pair;  <dig>  inferring relationships of gene pairs based on two statistical extraction procedures.
furthermore, the combined use of methods is important to infer more complete regulatory circuits and network as exemplified in this study.
