with this strategy we were able to identify markers tightly linked to two color pattern genes: d and cr, which were then used to screen h. erato bac libraries in order to identify clones for sequencing.
here we have demonstrated the tractability of progressing from a genetic linkage map to genomic sequence data in heliconius butterflies.
gene density across  <dig> kb of bac sequences appeared relatively low, although the number of predicted open reading frames was typical for an insect.
we focused analyses on the d- and cr-linked h. erato bac sequences and on the yb-linked h. melpomene bac sequence.
we found that repeated elements constitute 26% and 20% of bac sequences from h. erato and h. melpomene respectively.
we have also shown that fine-scale gene order is highly conserved between distantly related heliconius species, and also between heliconius and b. mori.
a comparative analysis between homologous regions of h. erato  and h. melpomene  revealed high levels of sequence conservation and microsynteny between the two species.
scoring aflp polymorphisms in h. erato broods allowed us to survey loci at approximately  <dig> kb intervals across the genome.
it is of great interest to identify the specific genes that control the mimetic wing patterns of h. erato and h. melpomene.
the majority of these repetitive sequences appear to be novel, as they showed no significant similarity to any other available insect sequences.
with over  <dig> parapatric races differing in their warningly colored wing patterns, the butterfly heliconius erato provides a fascinating example of an adaptive radiation.
together with matching races of its co-mimic heliconius melpomene, h. erato also represents a textbook case of müllerian mimicry, a phenomenon where common warning signals are shared amongst noxious organisms.
this paper reports on a comparative analysis of genomic sequences linked to color pattern mimicry genes in heliconius.
we also observed signs of fine scale conservation of gene order between heliconius and the moth bombyx mori, suggesting that lepidopteran genome architecture may be conserved over very long evolutionary time scales.
