since the identification of a second talin gene in vertebrates, it has become increasingly clear that vertebrate talin <dig> and talin <dig> have non-redundant roles as essential links between integrins and the actin cytoskeleton in distinct plasma membrane-associated adhesion complexes.
the i/lweq module also targets mammalian talin <dig> to focal adhesion complexes, which are dynamic multicomponent assemblies required for cell adhesion and cell motility.
this suggests that multicellular organisms require multiple talins as components of adhesion complexes.
the conserved c-terminal i/lweq module is important for talin function.
the nonvertebrate chordate ciona intestinalis has only one talin gene, but alternative splicing of the talin mrna produces two proteins with different c-terminal i/lweq modules.
the i/lweq modules of the two proteins also have different affinities for f-actin.
consistent with the hypothesis that talin-a and talin-b have different roles in cell adhesion, the distinct i/lweq modules of talin-a and talin-b possess different subcellular targeting determinants.
the i/lweq module of talin-a is targeted to focal adhesions, where it most likely serves as the link between integrin and the actin cytoskeleton.
the talin-b i/lweq module is not targeted to focal adhesions, but instead preferentially labels f-actin stress fibers.
these different properties of c. intestinalis the talin-a and talin-b i/lweq modules mimic the differences between mammalian talin <dig> and talin <dig>
given that c. intestinalis is an excellent model system for chordate biology, the study of talin-a and talin-b will lead to a deeper understanding of cell adhesion in the chordate lineage and how talin functions have been parceled out to multiple proteins during metazoan evolution.
although talin <dig> is essential for focal adhesion function, talin <dig> is not targeted to focal adhesions.
we show here that, based on their distribution in cdna libraries, talin-a and talin-b are differentially expressed during c. intestinalis development.
thus, c. intestinalis contains two talins, talin-a and talin-b, with potentially different activities, despite having only one talin gene.
vertebrates and d. discoideum contain two talin genes that encode proteins with different functions.
the urochordate c. intestinalis has a single talin gene but produces two separate talins by alternative splicing that vary in a domain crucial for talin function.
in c. intestinalis, alternative splicing, rather than gene duplication followed by neo-functionalization, accounts for the presence of multiple talins with different properties.
