to identify genes responding to ph stress a global transcriptional analysis of s. meliloti strain  <dig> following a ph shift from ph  <dig>  to ph  <dig>  was carried out.
it was shown that the short term response to acidic ph stress does not result in a simple induction or repression of genes, but in a sequence of responses varying in their intensity over time.
the results display a versatile response of s. meliloti  <dig> represented by distinct expression profiles of subsets of genes with functional relation.
the most striking functional groups responding to the shift to acidic ph were genes of the exopolysaccharide i biosynthesis as well as flagellar and chemotaxis genes.
while the genes of the exopolysaccharide i biosynthesis  were up-regulated, the expression level of the flagellar and chemotaxis genes  simultaneously decreased in response to acidic ph.
the obtained microarray data was filtered and grouped by k-means clustering in order to obtain groups of genes behaving similarly concerning their expression levels throughout the time course.
obviously, the response to acidic ph is not based on a few specific genes, but involves whole sets of genes associated with various cellular functions.
it is noteworthy, that several genes coding for hypothetical proteins of unknown function could be identified as up-regulated in response to the ph shift.
in detail, oligo-based whole genome microarrays were used in a time course experiment.
the eight generated clusters could be subdivided into a group of four clusters containing genes that were up-regulated and another group of four clusters containing genes that were down-regulated in response to the acidic ph shift.
the expression profile of the four down-regulated clusters could be characterized as  permanently,  permanently and progressive,  transiently, and  ultra short down-regulated.
genes coding for proteins with functional relation were mostly cumulated in the same cluster, pointing to a characteristic expression profile for distinct cellular functions.
other responding functional groups of genes mainly belonged to nitrogen uptake and metabolism , methionine metabolism  as well as ion transport systems .
