high-performance liquid chromatography analysis demonstrated that mild folate depletion  sufficed to induce imbalance in both the nucleotide and adomet pools in all prostate cell lines.
we studied the consequences of long-term, mild folate depletion in a model comprised of three syngenic cell lines derived from the transgenic adenoma of the mouse prostate  model, recapitulating different stages of prostate cancer; benign, transformed and metastatic.
random oligonucleotide-primed synthesis  revealed a significant increase in uracil misincorporation and dna single strand breaks, while spectral karyotype analysis  identified five novel chromosomal rearrangements in cells grown with mild folate depletion.
this study demonstrates that prostate cells are highly susceptible to genetic and epigenetic changes consequent to mild folate depletion as compared to cells grown with supraphysiological amounts of folate  routinely used in tissue culture.
these results provide a strong rationale for studying the effects of folate manipulation on the prostate in vivo, where cells might be more sensitive to changes in folate status resulting from folate supplementation or antifolate therapeutic approaches.
the link between folate depletion and the genesis and progression of cancers of epithelial origin is of high clinical relevance, but still unclear.
using global approaches, we identified an increase in cpg island and histone methylation upon folate depletion despite unchanged levels of total 5-methylcytosine, indicating a broad effect of folate depletion on epigenetic regulation.
these genomic changes coincided with phenotype changes in the prostate cells including increased anchorage-independent growth and reduced sensitivity to folate depletion.
folate  is essential for cellular proliferation as it is involved in the biosynthesis of deoxythymidine monophosphate  and s-adenosylmethionine .
we recently demonstrated that sensitivity to low folate availability is affected by the rate of polyamine biosynthesis, which is prominent in prostate cells.
we, therefore, hypothesized that prostate cells might be highly susceptible to genetic, epigenetic and phenotypic changes consequent to folate restriction.
