therefore, based on the peptidomic database of human protein isoforms for proteomics experiments, our objective is to design a new alternative splicing database to 1) provide more coverage of genes, transcripts and alternative splicing, 2) exclusively focus on the alternative splicing, and 3) perform context-specific alternative splicing analysis.
alternative splicing is an important and widespread mechanism for generating protein diversity and regulating protein expression.
moreover, the quality of the database was validated with comparison to other known databases and two case studies: 1) in liver cancer and 2) in breast cancer.
the combination of alternative splicing database and tandem mass spectrometry provides a powerful technique for identification, analysis and characterization of potential novel alternative splicing protein isoforms from proteomics.
the sasd provides the scientific community with an efficient means to identify, analyze, and characterize novel exon skipping and intron retention protein isoforms from mass spectrometry and interpret them at the context of pathway, disease, drug and organ specificity or custom gene set with maximum coverage and exclusive focus on alternative splicing.
we used a three-step pipeline to create a synthetic alternative splicing database  to identify novel alternative splicing isoforms and interpret them at the context of pathway, disease, drug and organ specificity or custom gene set with maximum coverage and exclusive focus on alternative splicing.
the database has a web-based user interface that allows users to search, display and download a single gene/transcript/protein, custom gene set, pathway, disease, drug, organ related alternative splicing.
high-throughput identification and analysis of alternative splicing in the protein level has more advantages than in the mrna level.
the sasd is a comprehensive database containing  <dig>  genes ,  <dig>  transcripts , and  <dig> , <dig> alternative splicing peptides, and also covering about  <dig>  pathways,  <dig>  diseases,  <dig>  drugs, and  <dig> organs.
first, we extracted information on gene structures of all genes in the ensembl genes  <dig> database and incorporated the integrated pathway analysis database.
lastly, we translated the artificial transcripts into alternative splicing peptides.
