rank species occupancy curves revealed high species dominance regardless of disturbance: within any disturbance class a few species occupied nearly every site and most species were found in a low proportion of sites.
we investigated  <dig> boreal vascular plant communities varying  <dig> – 100% in proportion of human land use.
we suggest that broad occupancy-based intercommunity patterns are insensitive to human land use extent in boreal vascular plants, perhaps because of ubiquity of generalists, low species richness, and history of natural disturbance.
anthropogenic disturbancebiodiversitybiotic homogenizationboreal forestcommunity structurehuman land useniche widthrank species occupancy curvespecializationvascular plantsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
these results contrast previous findings in more species rich, complex or spatially heterogeneous systems and ecological models.
however, species were more widespread and displayed more even occupancy in intermediately disturbed communities than among communities of either low or high disturbance.
evenness of species occupancy declines, such that species become either widespread of rare.
we therefore tested whether human disturbance impacts dominance/evenness of species occupancy in communities, specialism/generalism of species, and functional biotic homogenization in the spatially relatively homogeneous, species poor boreal forest region of alberta, canada.
niche theory predicts that human disturbance should influence the assembly of communities, favouring functionally homogeneous communities dominated by few but widespread generalists.
these patterns have often been observed, but it is unclear if they are a general result of human disturbance or specific to communities that are rich in species, in complex, spatially heterogeneous environments where the problem has often been investigated.
we defined specialists and generalists based on turnover in co-occupants and thereby assessed impacts of human disturbance on specialization of species and community homogenization.
communities with greater human disturbance were not more functionally homogeneous; they did not harbor communities with more generalists.
