arizonae, stenotrophomonas maltophilia and vibrio parahaemolyticus was evidenced.
however, we cannot ascribe the observed difference to the diversity of animal species, as other factors, including especially different characteristics of the living environments, may play a role.
a clear predominance of gram positive isolates in tortoises and gram negative isolates in turtles was found.
only one isolate of kocuria varians/rosea, staphylococcus aureus, staphylococcus auricularis, staphylococcus haemolyticus, staphylococcus lentus, morganella morganii, pasteurella multocida, pasteurella pneumotropica/haemolytica, proteus spp., pseudomonas putida, salmonella enterica ssp.
the presence in  <dig> animals of mycoplasma spp.
detection of multiple bacterial infection was clearly greater in tortoises compared to turtles.
that chelonians are often carrier of bacteria with zoonotic potential is a well-known fact, in particular with regard to salmonella spp.
most frequently isolated bacterial species were bacillus spp.
and in  <dig> animal with severe conjunctivitis of chlamydia spp.
worthy of note is the finding of chlamydia spp.
, staphylococcus xylosus , sphingomonas paucimobilis , staphylococcus sciuri and aeromonas hydrophila/caviae , ochrobactrum anthropi , citrobacter freundii, enterobacter cloacae and pseudomonas luteola .
our aim was to investigate the bacterial and fungal flora present in the eyes of healthy and pathological chelonians and to compare findings in turtles with those in tortoises.
in a severe case of conjunctivitis, though we cannot epidemiologically assess a cause-effect relationship between presence of chlamydia and disease.
therefore, it is not surprising the detection of a strain of salmonella enterica ssp.
samples were taken from the conjunctival sacs of  <dig>  diseased and healthy, chelonians  and submitted to bacterial and fungal investigation.
almost all bacterial species isolated may have clinical significance, mostly as opportunistic pathogens, both for humans and animals.
thirteen animals , harboured a single bacterial species as sole isolate and twenty-one animals  harboured more than one species.
