for example, there should be a 1: <dig> ploidy relationship between genome a and b if genome b had an independent wgd subsequent to the divergence of the two genomes.
to compare multiple "subgenomes" derived from genome duplications, we need to relax the traditional requirements of "one-to-one" syntenic matchings of genomic regions in order to reflect "one-to-many" or more generally "many-to-many" matchings.
however this relaxation may result in the identification of synteny blocks that are derived from ancient shared wgds that are not of interest.
our goal is to objectively select subset of synteny blocks whose total scores are maximized while respecting the duplication history of the genomes in comparison.
we call this "quota-based" screening of synteny blocks in order to appropriately fill a quota of syntenic relationships within one genome or between two genomes having wgd events.
the computer program quota-align performs this task by creating a clear objective function that maximizes the compatible set of synteny blocks under given constraints on overlaps and depths .
we show through simulations and real examples using plant genomes in the rosid superorder that the quota-based screening can eliminate ambiguous synteny blocks and focus on specific genomic evolutionary events, like the divergence of lineages  and the most recent wgd .
the quota-align algorithm screens a set of synteny blocks to retain only those compatible with a user specified ploidy relationship between two genomes.
there are two major contributions of quota-align: 1) reducing the block screening task to a bip problem, which is novel; 2) providing an efficient software pipeline starting from all-against-all blast to the screened synteny blocks with dot plot visualizations.
it is difficult to accurately interpret chromosomal correspondences such as true orthology and paralogy due to significant divergence of genomes from a common ancestor.
we have formulated the synteny block screening as an optimization problem known as "binary integer programming" , which is solved using existing linear programming solvers.
