dna sequences were clustered and otus were assigned using the arb silva database and qiime.
we found no differences in species diversity and evenness among the groups.
we found that neisseria abundance was significantly decreased in both groups when compared to controls.
to do so, we used swabs to sample the oral biofilm of  <dig> subjects; including  <dig> control-individuals with no or very low consumption of alcohol and no consumption of tobacco,  <dig> who were chronic and heavy users of both substances and  <dig> active smokers that reported no significant alcohol consumption.
controls showed higher abundance of aggregibacter, whilst smokers/drinkers had lower abundances of fusobacteria.
smokers had significant increases in prevotella and capnocytophaga and reductions in granulicatella, staphylococcus, peptostreptococcus and gemella when compared to the two other groups.
our results indicate that the continued use of tobacco or alcohol plus tobacco significantly reduces bacterial richness, which apparently leads to a reduction in inter-group variability, turning the respective biofilms into a more homogenous microenvironment in terms of bacterial community composition, with possible consequences for human oral diseases.
however, we found a significant decrease in species richness in only smokers and in smokers/drinkers when compared to controls.
the chronic and heavy use of these two substances is at the heart of numerous diseases and may wreak havoc on the human oral microbiome.
this study delves into the changes that alcohol and tobacco may cause on biofilms of the human oral microbiome.
samples from only smokers clustered closer together than to controls and smokers/drinkers, and also had a significant reduction in inter-group dissimilarity distances, indicating a more homogenous group than controls.
dna was extracted from swabs and the v <dig> region of the 16s rrna gene was pcr amplified and sequenced using the ion torrent pgm platform, generating  <dig>  million high quality reads.
