disease severity was measured by the extent of shoot necrosis over time.
the results suggest a relationship between rootstock-regulated fire blight susceptibility and sorbitol dehydrogenase, phenylpropanoid metabolism, protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum, and endocytosis, among others.
we identified  <dig> transcripts whose steady-state expression levels correlated with the degree of fire blight susceptibility of the scion/rootstock combinations.
transcripts known to be differentially expressed during e. amylovora infection were disproportionately represented among these transcripts.
rootstocks influence many phenotypic traits of the scion, including resistance to pathogens such as erwinia amylovora, which causes fire blight, the most serious bacterial disease of apple.
the purpose of the present study was to quantify rootstock-mediated differences in scion fire blight susceptibility and to identify transcripts in the scion whose expression levels correlated with this response.
rootstock influence on scion fire blight resistance was quantified by inoculating three-year old, orchard-grown apple trees, consisting of 'gala' scions grafted to a range of rootstocks, with e. amylovora.
a second-generation apple microarray representing  <dig>  transcripts was developed and was used to test these correlations in an orchard-grown population of trees segregating for fire blight resistance.
of the  <dig> transcripts originally identified using the first-generation array,  <dig> had expression levels that correlated with fire blight resistance in the breeding population.
rootstocks had significant effects on the fire blight susceptibility of 'gala' scions, and rootstock-regulated gene expression patterns could be correlated with differences in susceptibility.
using an apple dna microarray representing  <dig>  unique transcripts, gene expression patterns were compared in healthy, un-inoculated, greenhouse-grown 'gala' scions on the same series of rootstocks.
this study illustrates the utility of our rootstock-regulated gene expression data sets for candidate trait-associated gene data mining.
