subsequently, a quantitative trait locus  mapping was performed with an advanced intercross recombinant inbred lines  mapping population estc .
in silico analysis of genes located in the associated qtl intervals identified a number of possible candidate genes involved in coumarins biosynthesis.
they belong to coumarins, a class of phytochemicals with significant biological activities that is widely used in medical application and cosmetics industry.
together, our results demonstrate for the first time that arabidopsis is an excellent model for studying the genetic and molecular basis of natural variation in coumarins biosynthesis in plants.
it was shown previously that coumarins  occur in arabidopsis thaliana  roots, but until now nothing is known about natural variation of their accumulation in this model plant.
in order to reveal the genetic basis of both scopolin and scopoletin biosynthesis, two sets of methanol extracts were made from arabidopsis roots and one set was additionally subjected to enzymatic hydrolysis prior to quantification done by high-performance liquid chromatography .
the identified qtls explained  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the observed phenotypic variation in scopolin and scopoletin content, respectively.
although numerous studies showed that a variety of coumarins occurs naturally in several plant species, the details of coumarins biosynthesis and its regulation is not well understood.
therefore, the genetic architecture of coumarins biosynthesis in arabidopsis has not been studied before.
here, the variation in scopolin and scopoletin content was assessed by comparing seven arabidopsis accessions.
we identified one qtl for scopolin and five qtls for scopoletin accumulation.
coumarinsnatural variationplant-environment interactionscopoletinscopolinsecondary metabolismqtl mappingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
importantly, we have identified new loci for this biosynthetic process.
it additionally provides a basis for fine mapping and cloning of the genes involved in scopolin and scopoletin biosynthesis.
