in this respect our results from this and previous studies suggest that chronic ts exposure can overcome nrf <dig> and nfκb-p <dig> dependent cytoprotective mechanisms of the brain microvascular endothelium possibly leading to bbb impairment and loss of bbb integrity.
thus, the goal of our study was to investigate the defense pathways activated at the bbb endothelial level by ts exposure.
this study provides a detailed analysis of nrf2-related cytoprotective mechanisms activated in response to 3r4f and uln-derived ts exposure correlating the results with their oxidative and inflammatory potential.
with the exception of nicotine, both full flavor  and decotinized  cigarettes activated nrf <dig> and nfκβ pathways in hcmec/d <dig> endothelial cells.
toxicants present in soluble cigarette smoke extracts  and not nicotine seem to be the primary determinant of vascular toxicity.
several detoxification and anti-oxidant genes including downstream products were also activated including nadh dehydrogenase quinone  <dig> , heme oxygenase- <dig> , catalytic and modifier subunits of glutamate-cysteine ligase , solute carrier-slc7a11).
increase of p-gp functional activity and depletion of gsh were also observed.
tobacco smoke  toxicity to the brain microvasculature is still an understudied area till date.
till date, several studies targeting the blood brain barrier  have shown some protective role of nrf <dig> in ischemia–reperfusion  injury, however, its functional role in chronic smokers subjected to a life-long oxidative stress has never been addressed.
specifically we focused on nrf <dig> and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated b signaling response  as the central protective mechanisms related to oxidative insult.
environmentendotheliumblood brain barrierinflammationtranscriptomicsalternativeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
gene expression levels of cytochrome p450s  and efflux transporters p-glycoprotein  and multi-drug resistance protein- <dig>  were also enhanced.
