detailed analysis of sequences from the genomic sequence assemblies revealed two large duplicate sequence blocks of  <dig>  bp and  <dig>  bp, respectively, and an incomplete copy of  <dig> bp in this region.
non-reciprocal genetic rearrangements associated with large duplicate sequence blocks could substantially contribute to the ighv region diversity.
in this way, individual haplotypes of different parental origins in the sperm donors could be analyzed separately and precisely.
the identified polymorphic region was further analyzed at the nucleotide sequence level using sequences from the three human genomic sequence assemblies in the database.
the variants of this polymorphism unusually diverged at the nucleotide sequence level and in ighv gene segment number, composition and organization, indicating a limited selection pressure in general.
the selected tags in single sperm from six unrelated healthy donors were amplified by multiplex pcr followed by microarray detection.
however, very little is known about the ranges of the duplication and the polymorphic region.
a large polymorphic region was identified using the selected sequence tags.
a polymorphic region was found to be located within the duplicated blocks.
segmental duplication and deletion were implicated for a region containing the human immunoglobulin heavy chain variable  gene segments,  <dig> iii/hv <dig>  and hv3019b <dig> .
however, the divergence level within the gene segments is significantly different from that in the intergenic regions indicating that these regions may have been subject to different selection pressures and that the ighv gene segments in this region are functionally important.
since the resulting polymorphisms may affect the number, composition and organization of the gene segments in this region, it may have significant impact on the function of the ighv gene segment repertoire, antibody diversity, and therefore, the immune system.
it contains up to  <dig> ighv gene segments depending on haplotypes.
because one of the gene segments, 3- <dig> , is associated with autoimmune diseases, it could be of diagnostic significance to learn about the variants in the haplotypes by using the multiplex haplotype analysis system used in the present study with dna sequence tags specific for the variants of all gene segments in this region.
this is mainly because of the difficulty associated with distinguishing between allelic and paralogous sequences in the ighv region containing extensive repetitive sequences.
to address these issues, unique dna sequence tags evenly distributed within and flanking the duplicated region implicated by the previous studies were selected.
four of the  <dig> haplotypes were shown to contain consecutively undetectable tags spanning in a variable range.
