matching cdna to predicted genes also revealed silent chromosomal regions, mostly at subtelomere regions.
designing and application of these genome-wide assays, however, requires accurate information on gene prediction and genome annotation.
we aimed to obtain cdna sequences to examine the accuracy of gene prediction in silico.
we constructed cdna libraries from mixed blood stages of p. falciparum parasite using the smart cdna library construction technique and generated  <dig> high-quality expressed sequence tags , including  <dig> from primer-walking experiments.
it is therefore necessary to annotate the parasite genome with experimental data, although obtaining complete cdna sequences from this parasite will be a formidable task due to the high at nature of the genome.
the genome sequence allows for the development of genome-wide approaches such as microarray and proteomics that will greatly facilitate our understanding of the parasite biology and accelerate new drug and vaccine development.
unfortunately, the genes in the parasite genome databases were mostly identified using computer software that could make some erroneous predictions.
assembly of our sequence tags produced  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons versus  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons when our est were assembled with est in public databases.
our data indicated that approximately 24% of the genes in the current databases were predicted incorrectly, although some of these inaccuracies could represent alternatively spliced transcripts, and that more genes than currently predicted have one or more additional introns.
alternative spliced and antisense transcripts were also detected.
this study provides valuable information for genome annotation that will be critical for functional analyses.
careful automatic software and manual alignments found an additional  <dig> genes that have introns different from those predicted, with  <dig> new introns discovered and  <dig> introns with sizes or locations different from those predicted.
