the rumen epithelial transcriptome from highly efficient  rfi, n = 9) and inefficient  rfi, n = 9) hereford x angus steers was obtained using rna-sequencing.
greater expression of mitochondrial genes and lower relative mitochondrial genome copy numbers suggest a greater rate of transcription in the rumen epithelial mitochondria of l-rfi steers.
there were  <dig> genes differentially expressed between the rumen epithelial tissues of l- and h- rfi steers  with  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated in l-rfi steers.
functional analysis revealed significant enrichment of genes involved in modulation of intercellular adhesion through adherens junctions, protein and cell turnover, and cytoskeletal organization that suggest possible increased tissue morphogenesis in the l-rfi steers.
our results suggest that the rumen epithelium of l-rfi  steers may have increased tissue morphogenesis that possibly increases paracellular permeability for the absorption of nutrients and increased energy production to support the energetic demands of increased tissue morphogenesis compared to those of h-rfi  animals.
functional analysis of up-regulated genes revealed their involvement in acetylation, remodeling of adherens junctions, cytoskeletal dynamics, cell migration, and cell turnover.
additionally, the l-rfi epithelium had increased expression of genes involved with the mitochondrion, acetylation, and energy generating pathways such as glycolysis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation.
many factors are known to contribute to differences in feed efficiency, however the underlying molecular mechanisms are largely unknown.
additionally, a weighted gene co-expression network analysis  identified a significant gene module containing  <dig> genes that was negatively correlated with rfi .
our study aimed to understand how host gene expression in the rumen epithelium contributes to differences in residual feed intake , a measure of feed efficiency, using a transcriptome profiling based approach.
feed efficiencyresidual feed intakerna-sequencingbeef cattlerumen epitheliumtranscriptomehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002715alberta livestock and meat agency2015p008rguan le luo issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
understanding how host gene expression profiles are associated with rfi could potentially lead to identification of mechanisms behind this trait, which are vital to develop strategies for the improvement of cattle feed efficiency.
