size exclusion chromatography indicated that the weight average molecular mass  of t. koksaghyz natural rubber is  <dig> - <dig>  kda.
we established a method for the purification of rubber particles - the active sites of rubber biosynthesis - from t. koksaghyz latex.
rubber particles showed rubber transferase activity of  <dig>  pmol min- <dig> mg- <dig>  ex vivo rubber biosynthesis experiments resulted in a skewed unimodal distribution of isopentenyl pyrophosphate  incorporation at a w of  <dig>  kda.
t. koksaghyz is amenable to genetic analysis and modification, and therefore could be used as a model species for the investigation and comparison of rubber biosynthesis.
because of their localization on rubber particles and their activity in yeast, we propose that the recently described t. koksaghyz cpts are the major rubber chain elongating enzymes in this species.
however, there is very little molecular data available for either the rubber polymer itself or its biosynthesis in t. koksaghyz.
characterization of recently isolated cis-prenyltransferases  from t. koksaghyz revealed that these enzymes are associated with rubber particles and are able to produce long-chain polyprenols in yeast.
t. koksaghyz rubber particles are similar to those described for h. brasiliensis.
photon correlation spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy revealed an average particle size of  <dig> nm, and 13c nuclear magnetic resonance  spectroscopy confirmed that isolated rubber particles contain poly with a purity >95%.
they contain very pure, high molecular mass poly and the chain elongation process can be studied ex vivo.
natural rubber is a biopolymer with exceptional qualities that cannot be completely replaced using synthetic alternatives.
in contrast, the russian dandelion taraxacum koksaghyz, which has long been considered as a potential alternative source of low-cost natural rubber, has a rapid life cycle and can be genetically transformed using a simple and reliable procedure.
