biological materials consisted of a parental susceptible strain together with three child strains selected across multiple generations with three insecticides from different classes: the pyrethroid permethrin, the neonicotinoid imidacloprid and the carbamate propoxur.
our results suggest that transcriptome modifications can be selected rapidly by insecticides and affect multiple biological functions.
indeed, insecticide selection often affects a large number of genes and various biological processes can hypothetically confer resistance.
focusing on detoxification enzymes revealed that permethrin selection strongly affected the polymorphism of several transcripts encoding cytochrome p <dig> monooxygenases likely involved in insecticide biodegradation.
previously neglected by molecular screenings, polymorphism variations of detoxification enzymes may play an important role in the adaptive response of mosquitoes to insecticides.
rna sequencingrna-seqinsecticide resistancemosquitodenguedetoxification enzymescytochrome p <dig> monooxygenasecypcuticletransporters
mosquito control programmes using chemical insecticides are increasingly threatened by the development of resistance.
in this context, the aim of the present study was to use rna sequencing  for comparing transcription level and polymorphism variations associated with adaptation to chemical insecticides in the mosquito aedes aegypti.
while imidacloprid selection was linked to the over transcription of many genes, permethrin selection was rather linked to polymorphism variations.
after ten generations, insecticide-selected strains showed elevated resistance levels to the insecticides used for selection.
rna-seq data allowed detecting over  <dig>  transcripts, of which  <dig> were differentially transcribed in insecticide-selected strains as compared to the susceptible strain.
among them, a significant enrichment of transcripts encoding cuticle proteins, transporters and enzymes was observed.
the present study confirmed the power of rna-seq for identifying concomitantly quantitative and qualitative transcriptome changes associated with insecticide resistance in mosquitoes.
polymorphism analysis revealed over  <dig> snps showing > 50% allele frequency variations in insecticide-selected strains as compared to the susceptible strain, affecting over  <dig> transcripts.
such resistance can be the consequence of changes in proteins targeted by insecticides , increased insecticide biodegradation , altered transport, sequestration or other mechanisms.
