expression of onac <dig> was up-regulated by drought stress and abscisic acid  but down-regulated by cold stress.
abscisic acid cold tolerancedrought tolerancenac transcription factoronac095rice national natural science foundation31272028song fengming national transgenic major project of china2014zx08009-003-001song fengming research fund for the doctoral program of higher education of china20120101110070song fengming issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
however, the onac095-srdx plants displayed an improved drought tolerance but exhibited an attenuated cold tolerance.
furthermore, onac095-srdx plants showed an increased aba sensitivity, contained an elevated aba level, and displayed altered expression of aba biosynthetic and metabolic genes as well as some aba signaling-related genes.
the onac095-oe plants showed comparable phenotype to wild type under drought and cold stress conditions.
functional analyses through dominant chimeric repressor-mediated suppression of onac <dig> demonstrate that onac <dig> plays opposite roles in drought and cold stress tolerance, acting as a negative regulator of drought response but as a positive regulator of cold response in rice.
the onac095-srdx plants had decreased water loss rate, increased proline and soluble sugar contents, and up-regulated expression of drought-responsive genes under drought condition, whereas the onac095-srdx plants accumulated excess reactive oxygen species, increased malondialdehyde content and down-regulated expression of cold-responsive genes under cold condition.
here, we report the characterization of a rice stress-responsive nac gene, onac <dig>  and the exploration of its function in drought and cold stress tolerance.
the nac  transcriptional factors constitute a large family with more than  <dig> members in rice and some of them have been demonstrated to play crucial roles in plant abiotic stress response.
onac <dig> protein had transactivation activity and the c <dig> domain in c-terminal was found to be critical for transactivation activity.
transgenic rice lines with overexpression of onac <dig>  and dominant chimeric repressor-mediated suppression of onac <dig>  were generated.
