hr and vmm were considered to be strong indicators of embryonic stress, as all treatments applied resulted in elevated heart rate and decreased embryo movement.
overall, manipulations in environmental  temperature during incubation produced more drastic changes in embryo development than humidity-related manipulations, especially where mortality and malformation rates were concerned.
temperature and relative humidity  are very important factors affecting embryo development, hatchability, and posthatch performance.
of all the parameters monitored throughout embryonic development the ones shown to be most affected were: albumen-weight to egg-weight ratio ; yolk-weight to egg-weight ratio ; embryo-weight to egg-weight ratio ; heart rate ; voluntary movements per minute ; mortality rates; malformation prevalence and type.
er tended to grow more slowly and remain lower than the established normal, especially in embryos challenged with temperature treatments.
mortality rates for both temperature-related treatments were higher during the first four days of incubation.
malformation rates were higher for embryos subjected to high incubation temperatures and were most prominently related to the abdominal wall, head, skull and limbs.
this paper describes changes in embryonic metabolism and behaviour, as well as in mortality and malformation rates, in response to manipulations in environmental temperature and relative humidity.
this study was aimed at establishing patterns of metabolic and behavioural response, as well as mortality and the development of malformations, all of which can potentially be used in monitoring incubating operations and diagnosing problems with faulty equipment.
changes in relative humidity have produced less radical effects on mortality.
together with further studies, these patterns may prove helpful in the diagnosis of equipment malfunctions relating to temperature or relative humidity.
this study aimed at characterizing embryonic metabolic and behavioural response to a harsh incubation environment generated by manipulations  in these two key factors.
the most significant changes in the evolution of ar and yr throughout incubation involved delay and reduction in the amplitude of the expected drop in albumen and yolk levels, reflecting lower nutrient consumption by the embryo.
