in grapevine, iaa plays an essential role during initial stages of berry development, since it delays fruitlet abscission by reducing the ethylene sensitivity in the abscission zone.
indole-3-acetic acid , the most abundant auxin, is a growth promoter hormone involved in several developmental processes.
when ga biosynthesis was blocked, iaa was capable to increase polar auxin transport, suggesting that its effect depends on ga content.
in this work, the use of radiolabeled iaa showed that auxin is basipetally transported during grapevine fruitlet abscission.
these results provide evidence that auxin homeostasis plays a central role during grapevine initial fruit development and that ga and iaa controls auxin homeostasis by reducing polar auxin transport.
this kind of transport is controlled by iaa, which regulates its own movement by modifying the expression and localization of pin-formed  auxin efflux facilitators that localize asymmetrically within the cell.
auxin homeostasis is very important to its function and this is achieved through the regulation of iaa biosynthesis, conjugation, degradation and transport.
this observation was further supported by immunolocalization of putative vvpin proteins that display a basipetal distribution in pericarp cells.
on the other hand, the hormone gibberellin  also activates the polar auxin transport by increasing pin stability.
during this time, iaa and ga are present, however the role of these hormones in the control of polar auxin transport is unknown.
polar auxin transport and transcripts of four putative vvpin genes decreased in conjunction with increased abscission, and the inhibition of polar auxin transport resulted in fruit drop.
ga <dig> and iaa treatments reduced polar auxin transport, but only ga <dig> treatment decreased vvpin transcript abundance.
auxin homeostasisfruitlet abscissiongrapevineiaapin efflux facilitatorspolar auxin transportfondecyt regular1150220arce-johnson patricio fondecyt postdoctorado3150608serrano alejandra nucleo milenio nc130030issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
finally, we observed significant changes in the content of several iaa-related compounds during the abscission period.
