the mammalian taste bud, a complex collection of taste sensory cells, supporting cells, and immature basal cells, is the structural unit for detecting taste stimuli in the oral cavity.
immunofluorescent staining using anti-ki <dig> antibodies showed that lps decreased the number of ki67-positive cells in the basal regions surrounding circumvallate taste buds, the niche for taste progenitor cells.
our results show that lps-induced inflammation inhibits taste progenitor cell proliferation and interferes with taste cell renewal.
whether inflammation, an underlying condition in some diseases associated with taste disorders, interferes with taste cell renewal and turnover is unknown.
these effects of inflammation may contribute to the development of taste disorders associated with infections.
even though the cells of the taste bud undergo constant turnover, the structural homeostasis of the bud is maintained by balancing cell proliferation and cell death.
intraperitoneal injection of lps rapidly induced expression of several inflammatory cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor -α, interferon -γ, and interleukin - <dig>  in mouse circumvallate and foliate papillae.
here we report the effects of lipopolysaccharide -induced inflammation on taste progenitor cell proliferation and taste bud cell turnover in mouse taste tissues.
to investigate whether lps inhibits taste cell renewal by suppressing taste progenitor cell proliferation, we studied the expression of ki <dig>  a cell proliferation marker.
compared with nongustatory lingual epithelial cells, taste cells express higher levels of several inflammatory receptors and signalling proteins.
brdu pulse-chase experiments showed that brdu-labeled taste cells had a shorter average life span in lps-treated mice than in controls.
lps accelerates cell turnover and modestly shortens the average life span of taste cells.
tnf-α and ifn-γ immunoreactivities were preferentially localized to subsets of cells in taste buds.
lps-induced inflammation significantly reduced the number of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine -labeled newborn taste bud cells 1- <dig> days after lps injection, suggesting an inhibition of taste bud cell renewal.
pcr array experiments showed that the expression of cyclin b <dig> and e2f <dig>  two key cell cycle regulators, was markedly downregulated by lps in the circumvallate and foliate epithelia.
quantitative real-time rt-pcr revealed that lps markedly reduced ki <dig> mrna levels in circumvallate and foliate epithelia.
