nov. the congruence between the genotypic clusters and the mtdna clades was absolute.
interspecific hybridization has also been found to be prevalent in many marine groups, for instance within dense congeneric assemblages, with introgressive gene-flow being the most common outcome.
allopolyploid speciation is otherwise completely unknown in brown seaweeds, and its unique occurrence within this genus  remains enigmatic.
the transitional coastline between point conception and monterey bay represented a diversity hotspot for the genus and the likely sites of extraordinary evolutionary events of allopolyploid speciation at sympatric range contact zones.
molecular markers are revealing a much more diverse and evolutionarily complex picture of marine biodiversity than previously anticipated.
fixed heterozygosity was apparent in a high proportion of loci in p. limitata and p. hybrida, with genetic analyses showing that the latter was composed of both h. californicus and p. arborescens genomes.
this study pinpoints how much diversity  potentially remains undiscovered even on a conspicuous seaweed genus from the well-studied californian intertidal shores let alone in other, less studied marine groups and regions/depths.
all four inferred species could be distinguished based on their general morphology.
h. californicus was congruent, whereas widespread p. limitata encompassed two additional narrow-endemic species from california - p. arborescens  and p. hybrida sp.
this study confirmed additional diversity and reticulation within ne pacific hesperophycus/pelvetiopsis, including the validity of the much endangered, modern climatic relict p. arborescens, and the identification of a new, stable allopolyploid species  with clearly discernable ancestry , morphology, and geographical distribution.
the three recovered mtdna clades did not match a priori species delimitations.
here, using a congeneric phylogeographic approach, we investigated two monotypic and geographically complementary sister genera of north-east pacific intertidal seaweeds , for which preliminary molecular tests revealed unexpected conflicts consistent with unrecognized cryptic diversity and hybridization.
