it is suggested that the stabilization provided by these chemically attached glycans comes from the steric hindrance that the sugars conveys on the protein surface therefore preventing the interaction of the protein internal electrostatics with that of the water molecules and thus reducing the protein structural dynamics upon moisture exposure.
the magnitude of the structural changes in tendency parallels the solid-state instability data .
water sorption leads to aggregation, inactivation, and structural changes of α-ct as has been similarly shown to occur for many other proteins.
furthermore, α-ct loses its native secondary and tertiary structure rapidly at increasing rh.
first, we investigated the consequences of moisture sorption on the stability and structural conformation of the model enzyme α-chymotrypsin  under controlled humidity conditions.
nevertheless, solid protein pharmaceuticals can also suffer from instability problems due to moisture sorption.
results showed that α-ct aggregates and inactivates as a function of increased relative humidity .
these instabilities correlate with an increase in protein structural dynamics as a result of moisture exposure.
herein, we employed chemical glycosylation to stabilize a solid-state protein formulation against moisture-induced deterioration in the lyophilized state.
to determine if these moisture-induced instability issues could be ameliorated by chemical glycosylation we proceeded to modify our model protein with chemically activated glycans of differing lengths ).
in this work, we present a novel methodology to stabilize proteins against structural perturbations in the solid-state since chemical glycosylation was effective in decreasing and/or preventing the traditionally observed moisture-induced aggregation and inactivation.
the fragile nature  of proteins makes them susceptible to detrimental events during processing, storage, and delivery.
the various glycoconjugates showed a marked decrease in aggregation and an increase in residual activity after incubation.
