to circumvent such problems we have engineered a novel er-targeted gfp construct, termed pin-kdel, into a 3rd generation replication-defective, self-inactivating lentiviral vector system capable of mediating gene transduction in diverse dividing and post-mitotic mammalian cells, including neurones.
although gfp can be phototoxic, the integrity of the cells and er was retained for several weeks and even after light exposure for periods up to  <dig> h. using lv-pin-kdel we have imaged the er in diverse fixed neuronal cultures and, using real-time imaging, found evidence for extensive, dynamic remodelling of the neuronal er in live hippocampal cultures, brain slices, explants and glia.
following its expression in hek <dig>  cells, lv-pin-kdel yielded a pattern of fluorescence that co-localised exclusively with the er marker sec61β but with no other major organelle.
lv-pin-kdel fluorescence revealed the endoplasmic reticulum as a tubular lattice structure whose morphology can change markedly within seconds.
finally, through a fluorescence loss in photobleaching  approach, continuous irradiation at a single region of interest removed all the fluorescence of lv-pin-kdel-transduced nerve cells in explant cultures, thus, providing compelling evidence that in neurons the endoplasmic reticulum is not only dynamic but also continuous.
the neuronal endoplasmic reticulum  is an extensive, complex endomembrane system, containing ca2+ pumps, and ca2+ channels that permit it to act as a dynamic calcium store.
images and continuous photobleaching experiments of lv-pin-kdel-transduced neurones demonstrate that the endoplasmic reticulum is a dynamic structure with a single continuous lumen.
unfortunately, available probes of er structure such as vital dyes are limited by their membrane specificity.
to explore the utility of the probe in resolving the er in live cells, hek <dig> or cos- <dig> cells were transduced with lv-pin-kdel and, after  <dig> h, imaged directly at intervals from  <dig> min to several hours.
the introduction of lv-pin-kdel is anticipated to greatly facilitate a real-time visualisation of the structural plasticity and continuous nature of the neuronal er in healthy and diseased brain tissue.
