to prevent further decline of potential resistance against pathogens, a conservation policy for the japanese black bear should be designed to maintain mhc rare variants in each local population.
the decline of dqb diversity might have been accelerated by the loss of rare variants that have been maintained by negative frequency-dependent selection.
the phylogenetic analysis suggests that mhc variants detected from the japanese black bear are derived from the dqb locus.
our findings, from calculating the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous substitutions, indicate that balancing selection has maintained genetic variation of peptide-binding residues at the dqb locus of the japanese black bear.
the low level of observed heterozygosity suggests that genetic drift reduced dqb diversity in the japanese black bear due to a bottleneck event at the population or species level.
this result suggests that the japanese black bears may also retain more potential resistance against pathogens than other endangered mammalian species.
nevertheless, dqb diversity of the black bear appears to be relatively high compared with some other endangered mammalian species.
among  <dig> of  <dig> samples, we identified  <dig> mhc variants that encoded  <dig> different amino acid sequences  and one putative pseudogene.
here, we analyzed 270-bp nucleotide sequences of the entire exon  <dig> region of the mhc dqb gene by using  <dig> samples from the japanese black bear  from  <dig> local populations.
one of the  <dig> dqb allotypes, urth-dqb* <dig>  was found to be common to all local populations.
from examination of genotype frequencies among local populations, we observed a considerably lower level of observed heterozygosity than expected.
the diversity of mhc genes may directly influence the survival of individuals against infectious disease.
however, there has been no investigation of mhc diversity in the asiatic black bear .
the major histocompatibility complex  genes are one of the most important genetic systems in the vertebrate immune response.
balancing selectionconservation geneticsdqbgenetic diversityjapanese black bearmajor histocompatibility complexursidaeursus thibetanus
