cold acclimation induced the maintenance of psaa and cyt b6/f and reduced a 41% the excitation pressure in antarctic plants, exhibiting the lowest level under pht.
the greater recovery of psii at low temperature in the antarctic ecotype was related with its ability to maintain psaa, cyt b6/f and d <dig> protein after photoinhibitory conditions.
a full recovery was observed in ca plants of both ecotypes under dark conditions, but ca antarctic plants recover faster than the andean ecotype.
na and ca plants were able to fully restore their normal photosynthesis, while ca antarctic plants reached 50% higher photosynthetic rates after recovery, which was associated to electron fluxes maintenance under photoinhibitory conditions.
the same reduction  in maximum psii efficiency  was observed in both cold-acclimated  and non-acclimated  plants under pht.
under pht, ca plants maintain their quantum yield of psii, while na plants reduced it strongly .
antarctic plantsandean plantscold-induced-photoinhibitionrecoverypsii restorationd <dig> cyclephotoprotection
therefore, the antarctic ecotype  should be less photoinhibited and have better recovery from low-temperature-induced photoinhibition than the andean ecotype.
ecotypes of colobanthus quitensis kunt bartl  from andes mountains and maritime antarctic grow under contrasting photoinhibitory conditions, reaching differential cold tolerance upon cold acclimation.
we propose that cold acclimation increases resistance to low-temperature-induced photoinhibition, limiting photodamage and promoting recovery under cold.
xcold acclimation decreased significantly npqs in both ecotypes, and reduced chlorophylls and d <dig> degradation in andean plants under pht.
cold acclimation has a greater importance on the recovery process than on limiting photodamage.
cold acclimation determined the kinetic and extent of recovery process under darkness in both c. quitensis ecotypes.
this is probably due to either a higher stability of these polypeptides or to the maintenance of their turnover upon cold acclimation.
in both cases, it is associated to the maintenance of electron drainage from the intersystem pool, which maintains qa more oxidized and may allow the synthesis of atp and nadph necessaries for the regeneration of ribulose  <dig> -bisphosphate in the calvin cycle.
both ecotypes were exposed to cold induced photoinhibitory treatment .
this could be a key factor for c. quitensis success under the harsh conditions and the short growing period in the maritime antarctic.
