the rctb protein fused to a functional peptide secreted by l. casei can bind to gm <dig> ganglioside, like rctb, and recombinant yvad secreted by l. casei may exert anti-inflammatory effects in the intestine.
recombinant fusion proteins of ctb with functional peptides have been used as carriers for the delivery of these peptides to iecs because of the high cell permeation capacity of recombinant ctb .
in this study, we constructed l. casei secreting a recombinant fusion protein of ctb with yvad .
both the culture supernatant of psctb–yvad-transformed l. casei and purified rctb–yvad bound to gm <dig> ganglioside, as did the culture supernatant of psctb-transformed l. casei and purified rctb.
we constructed the rctb–yvad secretion vector psctb–yvad by modifying the rctb secretion vector psctb.
lactobacillus species are used as bacterial vectors to deliver functional peptides to the intestine because they are delivered live to the intestine, colonize the mucosal surface, and continue to produce the desired protein.
yvad is a tetrapeptide  that specifically inhibits caspase- <dig>  which catalyzes the production of interleukin -1β, an inflammatory cytokine, from its inactive precursor.
however, there have been no reports of rctb fused with peptides expressed or secreted by lactobacillus species.
here, we examined whether rctb–yvad secreted by l. casei binds to gm <dig> ganglioside and inhibits caspase- <dig> activation in caco- <dig> cells used as a model of iecs.
l. casei secreting rctb–yvad was generated by transformation with psctb–yvad.
therefore, rctb secreted by l. casei has potential utility as a vector for the delivery of yvad to iecs.
previously, we generated a recombinant lactobacillus casei secreting the cholera toxin b subunit , which can translocate into intestinal epithelial cells  through gm <dig> ganglioside.
interestingly, although both purified rctb–yvad and rctb translocated into caco- <dig> cells, regardless of lipopolysaccharide , only purified rctb–yvad but not rctb inhibited lps-induced caspase- <dig> activation and subsequent il-1β secretion in caco- <dig> cells, without affecting cell viability.
