in view of learning in a taxonomic framework, we consider two types of trees.
fame-based bacterial species classification is successfully evaluated in a taxonomic framework.
such a taxonomy or tree is typically obtained by applying clustering algorithms on fame data or on 16s rrna gene data.
subsequently, based on 16s rrna gene sequence analysis, phylogenetic trees are inferred by the nj and upgma methods.
nonetheless, fame analysis has a limited resolution for discrimination of bacteria at the species level.
first, a fame tree is constructed with a supervised divisive clustering algorithm.
in this way, better classification results are obtained for species that are typically hard to distinguish by a single or flat multi-class classification model.
although the proposed approach does not improve the overall accuracy compared to flat multi-class classification, it has some distinct advantages.
first, it has better capabilities for distinguishing species on which flat multi-class classification fails.
we call this learning approach 'phylogenetic learning'.
summarized, by phylogenetic learning we are able to situate and evaluate fame-based bacterial species classification in a more informative context.
in this second approach, the species classification problem is based on the combination of two different types of data.
secondly, the hierarchical classification structure allows to easily evaluate and visualize the resolution of fame data for the discrimination of bacterial species.
machine learning techniques have shown to improve bacterial species classification based on fatty acid methyl ester  data.
herein, 16s rrna gene sequence data is used for phylogenetic tree inference and the corresponding binary tree splits are learned based on fame data.
the knowledge gained from the tree can then be used to evaluate fame-based classifiers, resulting in a novel framework for bacterial species classification.
supervised random forest models are developed to train the classification tasks in a stratified cross-validation setting.
