genome-wide association analyses were conducted using four analytical approaches .
four analytical approaches utilizing both single and multi-marker association methods revealed common genomic regions associated with brdc susceptibility that can be further characterized and used for genomic selection.
the objective of this study was to identify brdc susceptibility loci in pre-weaned holstein calves as a prerequisite to using genetic improvement as a tool for decreasing the prevalence of brdc.
moderate heritability estimates were observed for brdc susceptibility in pre-weaned holstein calves, thereby supporting the application of genomic selection to reduce the prevalence of brdc in u.s. holsteins.
of these,  <dig> were classified as brdc cases, and  <dig> were classified as controls, with all phenotypes assigned using the mcguirk health scoring system.
heritability estimates for brdc were 21% for both ca and nm as individual populations, but declined to 13% when the populations were combined.
high density snp genotyping with the illumina bovinehd beadchip was conducted on  <dig> male and  <dig> female holstein calves from california , and  <dig> calves identified as female from new mexico .
the heritability of susceptibility to brdc in pre-weaned holstein calves was estimated.
the four statistical approaches produced highly concordant results for  <dig> top ranked snps that defined  <dig> chromosomal regions for the ca population.
bovine respiratory disease complex  is an infectious disease of cattle that is caused by a combination of viral and/or bacterial pathogens.
selection for cattle with reduced susceptibility to respiratory disease would provide a permanent tool for reducing the prevalence of brdc.
genomicsbovine respiratory disease complexdairycalveslociissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
during the acquisition of blood for dna isolation, two deep pharyngeal and one mid-nasal diagnostic swab were obtained from each calf for the identification of bacterial and viral pathogens.
