comparison of the mating-type gene loci among aspergillus species indicated that the mode in a. cristatus differs from those in other aspergillus species.
differential gene expression analysis in a. cristatus using rna-seq demonstrated that the expression of most genes in the hog pathway was unaffected by osmotic pressure.
a phylogenetic analysis suggested a considerable phylogenetic distance between a. cristatus and a. nidulans.
no gene clusters associated with the production of carcinogens were detected.
these analyses facilitated investigation of the evolution of mating-type genes, which determine the mode of sexual reproduction, in a. cristatus, the response of the high-osmolarity glycerol  pathway to osmotic stimulation, and the detection of mycotoxins and evaluation of the relationship with the location of the encoding genes.
the a. cristatus genome comprised  <dig>  mb and included  <dig> scaffolds, from which  <dig>  protein-coding gene models were predicted.
as a fungus associated with fuzhuan tea, it is considered to be safe under low- and high-osmolarity conditions.
in this study, de novo genome sequencing and analysis of transcriptomes during culture under high- and low-osmolarity conditions were performed.
the components of the hog pathway were conserved in the genome of a. cristatus.
a model of the mating-type locus in a. cristatus is reported for the first time.
the taxon is therefore appropriate for investigating the mechanisms of asexual and sexual reproduction in fungi.
aspergillus cristatus is the dominant fungus involved in the fermentation of chinese fuzhuan brick tea.
aspergillus cristatus is a homothallic fungus that undergoes a sexual stage without asexual conidiation when cultured in hypotonic medium.
aspergillus cristatus has evolved various mechanisms to cope with high osmotic stress.
aspergillus cristatusgenomemating-typing gene locihog pathwaymycotoxinguizhou academy of agriculture science gaas-sp-2011/037liu zuoyi department of science and technology of guizhou provincegstd-lh- <cit> -7683ge yongyi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
