there was no correlation between recombinant protein expression level and the quantity of differentially expressed genes detected.
the three lines included: st <dig>  expressing human thyroglobulin protein , st <dig>  expressing human myelin basic protein , and  <dig>  expressing a mutant, nontoxic form of a staphylococcal subunit vaccine protein .
soybean  has been bred for thousands of years to produce seeds rich in protein for human and animal consumption, making them an appealing bioreactor for producing valuable recombinant proteins at high levels.
to address this, we investigated whether gene expression within transgenic soybean seed tissue is altered when large amounts of recombinant proteins are being produced and stored exclusively in the seeds.
differences detected at the transcript level may be due to t-dna insert locations, random mutations following transformation or direct effects of the recombinant protein itself, or a combination of these.
however, the effects of expressing recombinant protein at high levels on bean physiology are not well understood.
whole seed mrna was extracted and cdna libraries constructed for illumina sequencing.
we used rna-seq to survey gene expression in three transgenic soybean lines expressing recombinant protein at levels representing up to  <dig>  % of total protein in seed tissues.
following alignment to the soybean reference genome, differential gene expression analysis was conducted using edger and cufflinks.
native soybean gene expression was significantly altered in line  <dig>  with more than  <dig> genes being upregulated or downregulated.
measurable unscripted gene expression changes were detected in the seed transcriptomes of all three transgenic soybean lines analyzed, with line  <dig> being substantially altered.
transcriptomicsbiotechnologypharmaceuticalsgene expressionnext generation sequencingbiologicsglycine maxequivalenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
each transgenic soybean seed was screened for transgene presence and recombinant protein expression via pcr and western blotting.
no significant gene ontology terms were detected in st <dig>  and only a few genes involved in photosynthesis and thylakoid functions were downregulated in st <dig>  despite these differences, transgenic plants and seeds appeared phenotypically similar to non-transgenic controls.
the transcriptomes of nine seeds from each transgenic line were sequenced and compared with wild type seeds.
gene ontology enrichment analysis found that the upregulated genes in the  <dig> line were annotated with functions related to endopeptidase inhibitors and protein synthesis, but suppressed expression of genes annotated to the nuclear pore and to protein transport.
