published computational methods use linear regression to estimate cell type-specific differential expression, and a global cutoff to judge significance, such as false discovery rate .
we evaluated the effect of sample sizes, cell type-specific proportion variability, and mean squared error on sensitivity of cell type-specific differential expression detection using linear regression.
we provide the r package, lrcde, which performs linear regression-based cell type-specific differential expression  detection on a gene-by-gene basis.
the sensitivity of linear regression-based cell type-specific differential expression detection differed for each gene as a function of mean squared error, per group sample sizes, and variability of the proportions of target cell .
we demonstrate that lrcde, which uses welch’s t-test to compare per-gene cell type-specific gene expression estimates, is more sensitive in detecting cell type-specific differential expression at α <  <dig>  missed by the global false discovery rate threshold fdr <  <dig> .
in this paper we quantify the parameter space affecting the performance of linear regression  on a per-gene basis.
each parameter affected variability of cell type-specific expression estimates and, subsequently, the sensitivity of differential expression detection.
yet, they do not consider many artifacts hidden in high-dimensional gene expression data that may negatively affect linear regression.
deconvolutionlinear regressiondifferential expressioncell type-specificsensitivity analysis13th annual mcbios conference memphis, tn, usa 3- <dig> may  <dig> https://mcbios.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
combined with cell counts, heterogeneous gene expression may provide deeper insights into the gene expression differences on the cell type-specific level.
accounting for variability around cell type-specific gene expression estimates, it computes per-gene t-statistics of differential detection, p-values, t-statistic-based sensitivity, group-specific mean squared error, and several gene-specific diagnostic metrics.
