a delivery system that maintains and releases bmp biological activity in controlled fashion at the surgical site while preventing systemic diffusion  is essential.
efficacy was determined in cell culture experiments  via live-dead-assay, facs, wst-1-assay, pnpp alkaline phosphatase assay and confocal microscopy.
tissue engineering and bone substitutes are subjects of intensive ongoing research.
alginate helps to lower the local growth factor dose below the cytotoxic limit, and allows the release period to be lengthened by at least 28 days.
if the healing of bone fractures is delayed, osteoinductive materials that induce mesenchymal stem cells  to form bone are necessary.
the use of bone morphogenetic protein -  <dig> is a common means to enhance effectiveness and accelerate the healing process.
using a directional vacuum, the samples were loaded with the alginate-bmp-2-mixture and the loading success monitored by observing changes in a fluorescent dye  under a fluorescence microscope.
directional vacuum makes it possible to load nearly 100 % of the interconnected micropores with alginate mixed with rhbmp- <dig>  using alginate hardened with cacl <dig> as a carrier, bmp-2's release can be decelerated significantly longer than with other hydrogels - eg, for over 28 days.
in this study, we aimed to test a cylindrical tcp-scaffold  in comparison to bmp- <dig>  recombinant human bmp- <dig> was dissolved in different hydrogels as a carrier, namely gelatin and alginate cross-linked with cacl2-solution, or a solution of gdl and caco <dig>  fitc-labeled protein a was used as a model substance for rhbmp- <dig> in the pre-trials.
a fluorescence reader and elisa were employed to measure the release.
the effects on osteoblast-like cells were an increase of the growth rate and expression of alkaline phosphatase while triggering no toxic effect.
for loading, the samples were put in a flow chamber and sealed with silicone rings.
for statistical analysis, we calculated the mean and standard deviation and carried out an analysis of variance.
