in most cases, regardless of the original cause, hearing loss is related to the degeneration and death of hair cells and their associated spiral ganglion neurons.
in order to identify new genetic elements enabling regeneration of inner ear sensory hair cells, next-generation mirna sequencing  was used to identify the most prominent mirnas expressed in the mouse embryonic inner ear cell line ub/oc- <dig> during differentiation towards a hair cell like phenotype.
mirseq followed by ex vivo validation revealed mir- <dig> as a novel factor driving transdifferentiation of supporting epithelial cells to sensory hair cells suggesting that mir- <dig> might be a potential new factor for hearing loss therapy.
in ub/oc- <dig>  mir- <dig> silencing in vitro resulted in hair cell marker expression, whereas ectopic expression of mir- <dig> resulted in new hair cell formation in cochlear explants.
using a lineage tracing mouse model, transdifferentiation of supporting epithelial cells was identified as the likely mechanism for this new hair cell formation.
as mirnas are central players of differentiation and cell fate, identification of mirnas and their gene targets may reveal new pathways for hair cell regeneration, thereby providing new avenues for the treatment of hearing loss.
significant gaps remain in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underpinning auditory function, including the factors required for sensory cell regeneration.
based on these mirseq results eight most differentially expressed mirnas were selected for further characterization.
hearing loss is the most common sensory defect afflicting several hundred million people worldwide.
recently, the identification of transcriptional activators and repressors of hair cell fate has been augmented by the discovery of micrornas  associated with hearing loss.
in addition, identification of inner ear pathways regulated by mir- <dig> identified potential new drug targets for the treatment of hearing loss.
hearing lossnext generation sequencingmir-210transdifferentiationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
