two otus are restricted to western guinea , while two others occur in eastern guinea and the border region of guinea-liberia-côte d'ivoire.
according to the iucn red list range criteria each otu should be classified as “endangered.” if the freetown peninsula “natator” population is recognized as a distinct species it would warrant recognition as “critically endangered.” the identification of cryptic lineages highlights the urgent need to protect these frogs, all of which are endemic to small areas within the upper guinean biodiversity hotspot.
one otu, assigned to the “true” odontobatrachus natator, covers the largest distribution, ranging from the border region of western sierra leone-guinea to eastern liberia.
our analyses included mitochondrial and nuclear genes, with a concatenated alignment of  <dig> base pairs.
correct species identification is crucial in different fields of biology, and in conservation.
the endemic west african frog family odontobatrachidae currently contains a single described species, odontobatrachus natator.
the otu representing o. natator consists of two divergent subclades: one restricted to the freetown peninsula  and the other covering all populations further inland.
geographic isolation of otus and molecular differences comparable to species level differentiation in other frog families indicate that o. natator contains cryptic species diversity.
based on more than  <dig> specimens from  <dig> localities, covering the entire distribution, we investigated the molecular diversity of these frogs.
all otus occur in parapatry in the upper guinean forests.
environmental niche models indicated that the restricted freetown peninsula population is separated by unsuitable habitat from remaining populations.
the survival within forest refugia that have persisted through multiple drier periods and subsequent dispersal during wetter times may best explain the observed geographic distributions of otus.
from western guinea to western côte d'ivoire it inhabits forests around waterfalls or cascades.
