heterotrophic plants obtaining nutrients from other organisms and their plastid genomes represent model systems in which to study the effects of relaxed selective pressure on photosynthetic function.
comparison of the plastid genomes of two subspecies-level isolates of m. hypopitys revealed major structural rearrangements associated with repeat-driven recombination and the presence of isolate-specific trna genes.
transition to a non-photosynthetic lifestyle is expected also to relax the selective pressure on photosynthetic machinery in the nuclear genome, however, the corresponding changes are less known.
only  <dig> genes remained presumably intact– those encoding ribosomal proteins, ribosomal and transfer rna and housekeeping genes infa, matk, accd and clpp.
the plastome of m. hypopitys is greatly reduced in size  and lacks the typical quadripartite structure with two single-copy regions and an inverted repeat.
analysis of the m. hypopitys transcriptome by rna-seq showed the absence of expression of nuclear-encoded components of photosystem i and ii reaction center proteins, components of cytochrome b6f complex, atp synthase, ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase components, as well as chlorophyll from protoporphyrin ix biosynthesis pathway.
with the complete loss of genes related to photosynthesis, nadh dehydrogenase, plastid-encoded rna polymerase and atp synthase, the m. hypopitys plastid genome is among the most functionally reduced ones characteristic of obligate non-photosynthetic parasitic species.
analysis of the m. hypopitys transcriptome revealed coordinated evolution of the nuclear and plastome genomes and the loss of photosynthesis-related functions in both genomes.
the sets of genes for ribosomal protein and transfer rna are incomplete relative to chloroplasts of a photosynthetic plant.
here we report the complete sequence of the plastid genome of monotropa hypopitys, an achlorophyllous obligately mycoheterotrophic plant belonging to the family ericaceae.
the most evident is a reduction in the size and gene content of the plastome, which correlates with the loss of genes encoding photosynthetic machinery which become unnecessary.
the clpp and accd genes probably remain functional, although their sequences are highly diverged.
