a high-density genetic map is essential for de novo genome assembly, fine mapping qtl for important complex traits, comparative genomic studies and understanding the mechanisms of genome evolution.
to facilitate qtl mapping for marker-assisted selection and genome assembly, and to understand the genome-wide recombination rates, we constructed high density linkage maps using three families and genotyping by sequencing.
the genetic maps were then aligned and integrated with the current genome assembly of asian seabass.
evidence of assembly errors in the current genome assembly was identified.
these high-density genetic maps provide not only essential tools for facilitating de novo genome assembly and comparative genomic studies in teleosts, but also critical resources for fine mapping qtl and genome-wide association mapping for economically important traits in asian seabass.
linkage mapgenome assemblyrecombination ratesgc contentselective breedinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001381national research foundation singaporenrf-crp7-2010-01yue gen hua innovation support fund of temasek life sciences laboratory limitedissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
female maps were slightly longer than male maps using common markers.
although a number of genomic resources are available in asian seabass , a high-density linkage map is still lacking.
a high-density consensus linkage map consisting of  <dig>   <dig> markers was constructed based on sex-averaged genetic maps.
however, the distribution patterns of recombination along chromosomes were similar between sexes across the whole genome.
more than 90% of the genome contig sequences were anchored onto the consensus genetic map.
the overall recombination rates were significantly correlated with genome-wide gc content and the correlations were revealed to be stronger in females than in males.
female-to-male ratios were highly variable both across chromosomes within each family and throughout three families for each chromosome.
