haitanensis was undertaken using digital gene expression profile  approaches combined with de novo transcriptome sequencing.
dge analysis was performed on four treatments , which included moderate dehydration, severe dehydration, rehydration, and normal conditions.
between severe dehydration and normal conditions,  <dig>  unigenes showed significantly altered expression, which included both upregulated  and downregulated genes .
to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying osmotic tolerance and adaptation to intertidal environments, a comprehensive analysis of genome-wide gene expression profiles in response to dehydration and rehydration in py.
most gene expression patterns in response to dehydration differed from that of rehydration, except for the synthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, several transcription factor families, and molecular chaperones that have been collectively implicated in the processes of dehydration and rehydration in py.
a total of  <dig>  unigenes showed significant differential expression between moderate dehydration and normal conditions, in which  <dig> genes were upregulated, and  <dig> genes were downregulated.
taken together, these data provide a global high-resolution analysis of gene expression changes during osmotic stress that could potentially serve as a key resource for understanding the biology of osmotic acclimation in intertidal red seaweed.
pyropia haitanensisosmotic stressdehydrationrehydrationdgeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
rna-sequencing of the pooled rna samples from different developmental phases and stress treatments was performed, which generated a total of  <dig>  million clean reads.
in addition,  <dig>  differentially expressed genes were detected between rehydration and normal conditions, of which  <dig> genes were upregulated and  <dig> unigenes were downregulated.
pyropia haitanensis is an economically important marine crop grown in harsh intertidal habitats of southern china; it is also an excellent model system for studying mechanisms of stress tolerance.
