these two species show partial habitat segregation on the south coast of south africa, the lower and upper areas of the mussel zone are dominated by p. perna and m. galloprovincialis respectively, with overlap in the middle zone.
m. galloprovincialis keeps the shell valves closed, while p. perna periodically gapes.
valve closure exposes the invasive species to higher stress and associated energy demands, but it minimizes water loss, allowing this species to dominate the upper mussel zone, where the gaping indigenous p. perna cannot survive.
gaping affects tolerance to desiccation, thus influencing the vertical zonation of the two species.
our results show that, when air exposed, the two species adopt clearly different behaviours.
thus even very simple behaviour can influence the outcome of interactions between indigenous and invasive species.
environmental heterogeneity plays a major role in invasion and coexistence dynamics.
during emergence, intertidal mussels will either keep the valves closed, minimizing water loss and undergoing anaerobic metabolism, or will periodically open the valves maintaining a more efficient aerobic metabolism but increasing the risk of desiccation.
the indigenous species expressed significantly higher levels of stress protein  than m. galloprovincialis under field conditions and suffered significantly higher mortality rates when exposed to air in the laboratory.
gaping behaviour increased water loss in the indigenous species, and consequently the risk of desiccation.
the absence of gaping minimises water loss but exposes the invasive species to other stresses, probably related to anoxic respiration.
in general, no intra-specific differences were observed in relation to intertidal height.
however little attention has been paid to the effects of behaviour in habitat partitioning among invertebrates, partially because their behavioural repertoires, especially marine benthic taxa, are extremely limited.
habitat segregation between introduced species and their native competitors is usually described in terms of different physiological and behavioural abilities.
this study investigates the effect of gaping behaviour on habitat segregation of the two dominant mussel species living in south africa, the invasive mytilus galloprovincialis and the indigenous perna perna.
