each broiler line was separated to two groups at 21 days posthatch.
body and heart weights were measured at 42 days posthatch, and gene expression in left ventricles were compared between treatments and broiler lines through rna-seq analysis.
ingenuity pathway analysis  predicted dramatic changes in multiple cellular activities especially downregulation of cell cycle.
to improve the cardiac tolerance to heat stress in modern broilers through breeding, we need to find the important genes and pathways that contribute to imbalanced cardiac development and frequent occurrence of heat-related heart dysfunction.
rna-seq results of  <dig> genes were validated using biomark assay.
a total of  <dig> differentially expressed  genes were detected between heat stress and thermoneutral in ross  <dig> birds, but only  <dig> in illinois broilers.
body weight and normalized heart weight were significantly reduced by heat stress only in ross broilers.
the increased susceptibility of modern broilers to cardiac dysfunction under heat stress compared to slow-growing broilers could be due to diminished heart capacity related to reduction in relative heart size.
one group was subjected to heat stress treatment in the range of 35–37 °c for 8 h per day, and the other was kept in thermoneutral condition.
comparison between two lines showed that cell cycle activity is higher in ross than illinois in thermoneutral condition but is decreased under heat stress.
two broiler lines – ross  <dig> and illinois – were included in this study as a fast-growing model and a slow-growing model respectively.
the de genes in rna-seq analysis and significant pathways in ipa provides potential targets for breeding of heat-tolerant broilers with optimized heart function.
the smaller relative heart size in ross heat stress group than in ross thermoneutral group is suggested by the transcriptome analysis to be caused by decreased cell cycle activity and increased apoptosis.
modern fast-growing broilers are susceptible to heart failure under heat stress because their relatively small hearts cannot meet increased need of blood pumping.
rna-seqbroilersheartheat stressgene expressioncell cycleillinoisrosspolo-like kinasepathwayshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100005825national institute of food and agriculture2011-67003-30228hatch project number 5358schmidt carl j lamont susan j issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
among the significant pathways  listed for different comparisons, “mitotic roles of polo-like kinases” is always ranked first.
