absolute value of moderated welch test statistic, minimum significant difference, absolute value of signal-to-noise ratio and baumgartner-weiss-schindler test statistic.
in case of sensitivity, the absolute value of moderated welch test statistic and absolute value of signal-to-noise ratio gave stable results, while baumgartner-weiss-schindler and minimum significant difference showed better results for larger sample size.
the absolute value of moderated welch test has the best overall sensitivity and minimum significant difference has the best overall specificity of gene set analysis.
in this work  <dig> benchmark data sets were used to evaluate the sensitivity and false positive rate of gene set analysis for  <dig> different ranking metrics including new proposals.
using k-means clustering algorithm a group of four metrics with the highest performance in terms of overall sensitivity, overall false positive rate and computational load was established i.e.
in case of false positive rate estimation, all selected ranking metrics were robust with respect to sample size.
furthermore, the robustness of the chosen methods to sample size was tested.
among them, gene set enrichment analysis seems to be one of the most commonly used .
finally, the gene set enrichment analysis method with all tested ranking metrics was parallelised and implemented in matlab, and is available at https://github.com/zaedpolsl/mrgsea.
choosing a ranking metric in gene set enrichment analysis has critical impact on results of pathway enrichment analysis.
an important parameter, which could affect the final result, is the choice of a metric for the ranking of genes.
applying a default ranking metric may lead to poor results.
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
there exist many methods for describing the complex relation between changes of gene expression in molecular pathways or gene ontologies under different experimental conditions.
