the role that a loop, delimiting the active center of ap-b, plays in discriminating basic substrates, as well as the function of consensus motifs, such as rnp <dig> and armadillo domain are discussed.
aminopeptidase b  catalyzes the cleavage of basic residues at the n-terminus of peptides and processes glucagon into miniglucagon.
the rat ap-b cdna was expressed in e. coli and the purified recombinant enzyme was characterized.
e. coli recombinant enzyme and ap-b structural model constitute powerful tools for investigating the importance and possible roles of these conserved residues in ap-b, lta4h and m <dig> aminopeptidase catalytic sites and to gain new insight into their physiological functions.
a multiple alignment of  <dig> sequences of the m <dig> family of aminopeptidases was performed to identify  <dig> sub-families of exopeptidases and to build a structural model of ap-b using the x-ray structure of lta4h as a template.
all mutations were found to abolish the aminopeptidase activity.
analysis of ap-b structural model indicates that several interactions between ap-b and proteins can occur and suggests that endopeptidases might form a complex with ap-b during hormone processing.
examination of electrostatic potentials and hydrophobic patches revealed important differences between ap-b and lta4h and suggests that ap-b is involved in protein-protein interactions.
the enzyme exhibits, in vitro, a residual ability to hydrolyze leukotriene a <dig> into the pro-inflammatory lipid mediator leukotriene b <dig>  the potential bi-functional nature of ap-b is supported by close structural relationships with lta <dig> hydrolase .
alignment of the primary structures of the m <dig> family members clearly demonstrates the existence of different sub-families and highlights crucial residues in the enzymatic activity of the whole family.
a structure-function analysis is necessary for the detailed understanding of the enzymatic mechanisms of ap-b and to design inhibitors, which could be used to determine the complete in vivo functions of the enzyme.
