thus, determining whether conformational changes at the active site of ro-o occur by substrate and/or oxygen binding is important.
structural comparison between complex structures in each step of the catalytic mechanism provides several implications, such as the order of substrate and dioxygen bindings, the iron-dioxygen species likely being fe-peroxo, and the creation of room for dioxygen binding and the promotion of dioxygen binding in desirable fashion by preceding substrate binding.
dioxygen bound in a side-on fashion onto nonheme iron is activated by reduction to the peroxo state .
these structures revealed the conformational changes that occur in the catalytic cycle.
the ro catalytic mechanism is proposed as follows: when the rieske cluster is reduced, substrate binding induces several conformational changes  that create room for oxygen binding.
we have succeeded in determining the crystal structures of oxidized cardo-o, oxidized cardo-f, and both oxidized and reduced forms of the cardo-o: cardo-f binary complex.
in the present study, we determined the crystal structures of the reduced carbazole -bound, dioxygen-bound, and both car- and dioxygen-bound cardo-o: cardo-f binary complex structures at  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  Å resolution.
dihydroxylation of tandemly linked aromatic carbons in a cis-configuration, catalyzed by multicomponent oxygenase systems known as rieske nonheme iron oxygenase systems , often constitute the initial step of aerobic degradation pathways for various aromatic compounds.
despite substantial progress in structural and physicochemical analyses, no consensus exists on the chemical steps in the catalytic cycles of ros.
this proposed scheme describes the catalytic cycle of ros and provides important information for a better understanding of the mechanism.
because such ro reactions inherently govern whether downstream degradation processes occur, novel oxygenation mechanisms involving oxygenase components of ros  is of great interest.
carbazole  <dig> a-dioxygenase , a ro member consists of catalytic terminal oxygenase , ferredoxin , and ferredoxin reductase.
this state may react directly with the bound substrate, or o–o bond cleavage may occur to generate fe-oxo-hydroxo species prior to the reaction.
