our results provide evidence for a comprehensive multi-functional molecular interaction network orchestrating growth regulation and cold acclimation in two natural accessions of arabidopsis thaliana.
the ppin revealed the central role of carbon/nitrogen allocation and ribosomal complex formation to establish a new cold-induced metabolic homeostasis as also observed on the level of the metabolome and proteome.
finally, our study indicates naturally occurring differential patterns of c/n balance and protein synthesis during cold acclimation.
significant differences in the shoot fresh weight of cvi and rschew were detected both before and after acclimation to low temperature.
growth regulation before and after a cold acclimation period was monitored by recording fresh weight of leaf rosettes.
the differential abundance of beta-amylase  <dig> and isoamylase  <dig> indicates a central role of transitory starch degradation in the coordination of growth regulation and the development of stress tolerance.
the abundance of the cold regulated  protein cor <dig>  as well as its phosphorylation was observed to be positively correlated with the acclimation state of both accessions.
the variation of growth and cold tolerance of two natural arabidopsis accessions, cvi  and rschew , was analysed on a proteomic, phosphoproteomic and metabolomic level to derive characteristic information about genotypically distinct strategies of metabolic reprogramming and growth maintenance during cold acclimation.
during cold acclimation, starch levels were found to accumulate to a significantly higher level in cvi compared to rschew.
predicted protein-protein interaction networks  of significantly changed proteins during cold acclimation allowed for a differentiation between both accessions.
cold acclimationarabidopsis thaliananatural variationstarch metabolismamylasessystems biologymetabolomicsproteomicsphosphoproteomicsgrowth regulationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
in addition, transcription factors being involved in growth and developmental regulation were found to characteristically separate the cold sensitive from the cold tolerant accession.
