in this study, we detected soluble sra in serum from  <dig> chronic hepatitis b  patients,  <dig> chronic hbv carriers in the immune tolerant  stage,  <dig> in the hbeag-negative inactive carrier  stage, and  <dig> healthy controls , respectively.
scavenger receptor a; chronic hepatitis b; t cell activation;issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
we demonstrated that median levels of serum soluble sra in chb and it patients were significantly higher than those of ic patients and hcs.
these results not only revealed a previously unknown feature of soluble sra in chb patients but also provided broad understanding of sra in t cell activation.
our previous study reported the presence of sra in a soluble form in patients with infection of hepatitis b viruses .
sra might inhibit t cell proliferation and activation as a soluble form.
expressed sra extracellular domain suppressed hbv core peptide-stimulated interferon-γ and tumor necrosis factor-α production in cd8+ t cells, and it bound to t cells in a higher frequency in chb patients than in hcs.
scavenger receptor a  is expressed predominantly in phagocytic cells playing an essential role in the host immune defense against invading microorganisms.
we also found that serum concentration of sra was decreased during telbivudine treatment.
however, the association of soluble sra with stages of hbv infection and the immune response induced by hbv is not fully determined.
we further analyzed the correlation of detected soluble sra to inflammation and serum viral load.
in addition, we investigated the regulatory role of soluble sra in t cell activation, especially in cd8+ t cell response to hbv peptide.
additionally, the concentrations of soluble sra were negatively correlated with alanine transaminase levels in chb patients.
in summary, we determined the level of soluble sra in different stages of chb patients.
furthermore, we observed that naïve human t cells stimulated by anti-cd <dig> and cd <dig> antibodies in the presence of the recombinant sra protein had reduced activation and proliferation.
