lrp and asnc have conserved sequence signatures that allow their unambiguous annotation, at least in γ-proteobacteria.
logo analysis revealed signatures associated with globally- vs. locally- acting lrp orthologs, providing testable hypotheses for which portions of lrp are responsible for a global vs. local role.
these candidate regions include both ends of the lrp polypeptide but not, interestingly, the highly-conserved helix-turn-helix motif responsible for dna sequence specificity.
the orders studied were enterobacteriales and vibrionales, in which lrp plays a global role in tested species; pasteurellales, in which lrp is a local regulator in the tested species; and alteromonadales, an order closely related to the other three but in which lrp has not yet been studied.
bacterial global regulators each regulate the expression of several hundred genes.
in escherichia coli, the top seven global regulators together control over half of all genes.
leucine-responsive regulatory protein  is one of these top seven global regulators.
this raises questions about the evolution of lrp and, more broadly, of global regulators.
these results suggest experiments to improve our understanding of the evolution of bacterial global regulators.
surprisingly, even within the phylum γ-proteobacteria , lrp is a global regulator in some orders and a local regulator in others.
for comparison, we analyzed the lrp paralog asnc, which in all tested cases is a local regulator.
among lrp orthologs, specific residues correlated with global vs. local regulatory roles, and can now be tested to determine which are functionally relevant and which simply reflect divergence.
we examined lrp sequences from four bacterial orders of the γ-proteobacteria using phylogenetic and logo analyses.
lrp orthologs are very widely distributed, among both bacteria and archaea.
in the alteromonadales, it appears that there are different subgroups of lrp orthologs, one of which may act globally while the other may act locally.
