identifying such crms is a challenging problem due to the prohibitive number of sequence sets that need to be analyzed.
next, an optimal bayesian classifier is used to distinguish candidates found in the mixed set from their control counterparts.
the temporal and spatial patterns of gene expression are controlled by mainly non-coding elements known as cis-regulatory modules  and epigenetic factors.
researchers seeking to unlock the genetic basis of human physiology and diseases have been studying gene transcription regulation.
these results suggest that crmminer predictions are accurate and likely to be tissue-specific crms.
these signatures consist of assortments of ubiquitously expressed tfs and tissue-specific tfs.
crmminer assumes that a large percentage of the mixed set is made of background sequences that do not include crms.
crmminer precision reached 82% while mining for crms specific to the human cd4+ t cells.
our study proposes  <dig> tissue-specific regulatory signatures and putative crms for different human tissues and cell types.
we formulated the challenge as a supervised classification problem even though experimentally validated crms were not required.
the mixed and the control sets are searched for candidate sequences that include any of the selected pairs.
the system identifies pairs of closely located motifs representing vertebrate tfbss that are enriched in the training mixed set consisting of 50% of the gene loci.
in addition, crmminer selects a group of the enriched pairs to represent the tissue-specific regulatory signature.
crms modulating related genes share the regulatory signature which consists of transcription factor  binding sites .
sequences in the vicinity of the related genes comprise the mixed set, whereas the control set includes random genomic sequences.
crmminer was 21-75% more precise than a related crm predictor.
we expect that the predicted tissue-specific crms and the regulatory signatures broaden our knowledge of gene transcription regulation.
