by profiling the transcriptomes of the bursa copulatrix and bursal gland from females of two incipient species of moth, we characterize reproductive genes expressed in the primary reproductive tissues of female lepidoptera and identify candidate genes contributing to a one-way gametic incompatibility between z and e strains of the european corn borer .
using rna sequencing we identified transcripts from ~ <dig>  and ~ <dig>  loci that were expressed in the bursa copulatrix or the bursal gland respectively.
in the bursal gland, 9% of genes were differentially expressed compared to the thorax, with many showing reproduction or gamete production functions.
of up-regulated bursal gland genes, 46% contained a transmembrane region and 16% possessed secretion signal peptides.
we find that the bursal gland acts as a reproductive secretory body that might also interact with male ejaculate.
reproductive proteins often evolve rapidly and are thought to be subject to strong sexual selection, and thus may play a key role in reproductive isolation and species divergence.
of bursa copulatrix genes, 8% were significantly differentially expressed compared to the female thorax, and those that were up-regulated or specific to the bursa copulatrix showed functional biases toward muscle activity and/or organization.
divergently expressed genes in the bursa copulatrix were exclusively biased toward protease-like functions and  <dig> proteases or protease inhibitors were divergently expressed overall.
the transcriptome of the bursa copulatrix supports its role as a muscular sac that is the primary site for disruption of the male ejaculate.
in addition, differential expression of proteases between strains supports a potential role for these tissues in contributing to reproductive isolation.
our study provides new insight into how male ejaculate is processed by female lepidoptera, and paves the way for future work on interactions between post-mating sexual selection and speciation.
this is the first comprehensive characterization of female reproductive genes in any lepidopteran system.
with advances in sequencing technology, lepidoptera are emerging models for studies of sexual selection and speciation.
female reproductive genesspeciationnext-generation sequencinglepidopteraissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
however, our knowledge of reproductive proteins has been largely limited to males and model organisms with sequenced genomes.
