using a series of immunocompromised mice deficient in different components of the innate and adaptive immune responses, we show that sige plays an important role in evading the innate immune response during lethal infections of mice lacking b cells and t cells.
we demonstrate that sige encodes a functional sigma factor that mediates a cell envelope stress response.
mutants of b. bronchiseptica strain rb <dig> lacking sige are more sensitive to high temperature, ethanol, and perturbation of the envelope by sds-edta and certain β-lactam antibiotics.
bordetella species are important respiratory pathogens that possess a large number of putative transcription factors.
in addition to its role during lethal infection of mice deficient in adaptive immunity, our results indicate that sige is likely to be important for survival in the face of stresses encountered in the environment between hosts.
cell envelope stress responses preserve the integrity of this essential compartment and are often required for virulence.
however, no cell envelope stress responses have been described in these species.
among the putative bordetella transcription factors are a number of genes belonging to the extracytoplasmic function  group of alternative sigma factors, some of which are known to mediate cell envelope stress responses in other bacteria.
sige is not required, however, for colonization of the respiratory tract of immunocompetent mice.
the sige mutant is more efficiently phagocytosed and killed by peripheral blood polymorphonuclear leukocytes  than rb <dig>  and exhibits decreased cytotoxicity toward macrophages.
the cell envelope of a bacterial pathogen can be damaged by harsh conditions in the environment outside a host and by immune factors during infection.
sige is the first cell envelope stress-sensing system to be described in the bordetellae.
b. bronchisepticaextracytoplasmic function sigma factorcell envelope stresspathogenesis
here we investigate the role of one such gene, sige, in stress survival and pathogenesis of bordetella bronchiseptica.
much of the work on transcriptional regulation during infection in b. bronchiseptica has focused on the bvgas two-component system.
these altered interactions with phagocytes could contribute to the defects observed during lethal infection.
