finally, inhibition of ampk activity by the specific inhibitor compound c  resulted in the inhibition of l-arg metabolizing enzyme activity and abolished mdscs immunosuppressive activity.
a complementary experimental model that inhibited l-arginine  metabolizing enzymes in msc- <dig> cells, an immortalized cell line derived from primary mdscs, was used to study the metabolic events related to immunosuppression.
exposure of bm cells to gm-csf and il- <dig> activated, within 24 h, l-arg metabolizing enzymes which are responsible for the mdscs immunosuppressive potential.
moreover, inhibition of l-arg metabolism in msc- <dig> cells down-regulated central carbon metabolism activity, including glycolysis, glutaminolysis and tca cycle activity, and led to a deterioration of cell bioenergetic status.
moreover, amp-activated protein kinase  was activated during mdsc maturation in gm-csf and il-6–treated cultures, as revealed by the continuous increase of amp-to-atp ratios and the phosphorylation of ampk.
the up-regulation of nutrient uptake lead to the accumulation of tca cycle intermediates and lactate as well as the endogenous synthesis of l-arg and the production of energy-rich nucleotides.
likewise, ampk activity was decreased in msc- <dig> cells when l-arg metabolizing enzymes were inhibited.
the simultaneous increase of cell specific concentrations of atp and a decrease in atp-to-adp ratio in bm-derived mdscs suggested cells were metabolically active during maturation.
the tumor microenvironment contains a vast array of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines that alter myelopoiesis and lead to the maturation of immunosuppressive cells known as myeloid-derived suppressor cells .
myeloid-derived suppressor cellsgm-csfil-6msc- <dig> cellscentral carbon metabolismbioenergetics
this was accompanied by an increased uptake of l-glutamine  and glucose, the latter being metabolized by anaerobic glycolysis.
we anticipate that the inhibition of ampk and the control of metabolic fluxes may be considered as a novel therapeutic target for the recovery of the immunosurveillance process in cancer-bearing hosts.
this in vitro experimental approach was used to simulate mdsc maturation, and the cellular metabolic response was then monitored.
