unlike 5′ nfr on pol ii-transcribed genes, the tdna nfr, which facilitates tdna transcription, results from action of chromatin remodeler isw <dig>  aided by isw <dig> and rsc.
the nucleosome-free region  on all but three yeast tdnas is found bordered by an upstream  nucleosome strongly positioned at − <dig> bp position and a downstream  nucleosome at variable positions with respect to the gene terminator.
the rsc-regulated nucleosome dynamics at the 3′ gene-end serves as a novel regulatory mechanism for pol iii transcription in vivo, probably by controlling terminator-dependent facilitated recycling of pol iii.
perturbation in this nucleosomal arrangement interferes with the trna production.
pol iii levels show negative correlation with the nucleosome occupancies on different genes.
levels of trnas from different families are found to vary considerably as different pol iii levels are seen even on isogenes within a family.
using high resolution chip-chip and chip-seq methods, we found several unique features associated with nucleosome profiles on all trna genes of budding yeast, not seen on nucleosome-dense counterparts in fission yeast and resting human cd4+ t cells.
budding yeast trna genes maintain an open chromatin structure, which is not due to sequence-directed nucleosome positioning or high transcription activity of genes.
rna polymerase  iii transcribes a unique class of genes with intra-genic promoters and high transcriptional activity.
three different chromatin remodelers generate and maintain the nfr by targeting different gene regions.
in its absence, the downstream nucleosome moves towards the gene terminator.
isw <dig> localizes to the gene body and makes it nucleosome-depleted, isw <dig> maintains periodicity in the upstream nucleosomal array, while rsc targets the downstream nucleosome.
the major contributors to the pol iii transcriptome, trnas genes are found scattered on all chromosomes of yeast.
a prototype tdna of < <dig> bp length, is generally considered nucleosome-free while some pol iii-transcribed genes have been shown to have nucleosome-positioning properties.
direct communication of pol iii with rsc serves as a stress-sensory mechanism for these genes.
