molecular tools have been developed to track the emergence and the spread of resistant, hyper virulent or non-vaccine type clones, particularly dna-based methods using genetic polymorphism.
this study aims at confirming the relevance of mlva of s. pneumoniae, comparing mlst and mlva performances when discriminating subgroups of strains belonging to the same sequence type , and defining a restricted but universal set of mlva markers that has at least the same discriminatory power as mlst for s. pneumoniae by applying marker sets used by different authors on  <dig> isolates selected in uk.
a minimum spanning tree was built including the serotypes distribution and comparing mlva and mlst results.
the availability of genome sequence data from different s. pneumoniae strains facilitated the search for other class of genetic markers as polymorphic dna sequences for a multiple-locus variable-number tandem-repeat analysis .
<dig> mlva types were determined grouped in  <dig> sequence types .
mlva can discriminate relevant subgroups among strains belonging to the same st. mlva offers the possibility to deduce the st from the mlva type.
the diversity of pneumococci was first evidenced by serotyping of their capsular polysaccharides, responsible of virulence, resolving into more than  <dig> serotypes.
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis analysis  and multiple loci sequence typing  are the most frequently used genotyping techniques for s. pneumoniae.
the selection was based on mlva markers with a diversity index > <dig>  and a selection of others depending of the population tested and the aim of the study.
this set of  <dig> mlva markers yields strain clusters similar to those obtained by mlst.
streptococcus pneumoniae infections remain a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide.
mlva differentiated st <dig> in two clonal complexes.
it permits to investigate local outbreaks or to track the worldwide spread of clones and the emergence of variants.
mlst is based on sequence comparison of housekeeping genes clustering isolates within sequence types.
