we find that the constituents of non-obligate complexes possess a higher degree of structural disorder, more short linear motifs, and lower functional similarity compared to obligate interaction partners while sp and me interactions are characterized by significant differences in network topology.
pitype does not rely on atomic structures and is thus suitable for characterizing proteome-wide interaction datasets.
functional versatility of protein complexes is due to a broad range of structural adaptations that determine their binding affinity, the number of interaction sites, and the lifetime.
so far different types of interactions were distinguished based on the properties of the corresponding binding interfaces derived from known three-dimensional structures of protein complexes.
moreover, interactions within multi-protein complexes tend to be enriched in one type of interactions.
it can also be used to identify sub-modules within protein complexes.
our classifier exploits features of the binding partners predicted from amino acid sequence, their functional similarity, and network topology.
protein interactions mediate a wide spectrum of functions in various cellular contexts.
in terms of spatio-temporal control protein interactions can be either simultaneously possible  or mutually exclusive .
here we present pitype, an accurate 3d structure-independent computational method for classifying protein interactions into simultaneously possible  and mutually exclusive  as well as into obligate and non-obligate.
protein-protein interactionsbiological network analysisprotein structure predictionsystems biologysequence analysis16- <dig> december  <dig> 24th international conference on genome informatics  singapore, singapore
each interaction type is associated with a distinct set of biological functions.
in terms of stability it has become customary to distinguish between obligate and non-obligate interactions dependent on whether or not the protomers can exist independently.
