the identification of markers was based on common tags using the reference genomes of tomato and potato as well as the root/stem transcriptome of cape gooseberry.
model-based population structure and neighbor-joining analyses showed three populations comprising the cape gooseberry panel.
here we described an association mapping study in cape gooseberry with the goal to:  select promising materials for use in plant breeding and  identify snps associated with the cape gooseberry resistance response to the f. oxysporum pathogen under greenhouse conditions, as potential markers for cape gooseberry breeding.
we found a total of  <dig> accessions with different resistance responses within a diversity panel of  <dig> cape gooseberry accessions.
after correction for population structure and kinship, we identified snps markers associated with the resistance response against f. oxysporum.
by comparing their location with the tomato genome,  <dig> snps were found in genes involved in defense/resistance response to pathogens, likewise when compared with the genome of potato,  <dig> markers were related.
the work presented herein provides the first association mapping study in cape gooseberry showing both the identification of promising accessions with resistance response phenotypes and the identification of a set of snp markers mapped to defense/resistance response genes of reference genomes.
the results have important implications for conservation and breeding strategies in cape gooseberry.
vascular wilt caused by fusarium oxysporum is the most important disease in cape gooseberry  in colombia.
association mappingcape gooseberryfusarium oxysporumgenotyping by sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
thus, the work also provides new knowledge on candidate genes involved in the p. peruviana – f. oxysporum pathosystem as a foundation for further validation in marker-assisted selection.
the development of resistant cultivars is considered one of the most cost-effective means to reduce the impact of this disease.
