there are several situations in population biology research where simulating dna sequences is useful.
the use of the program is demonstrated by studying the impact of intracodon recombination on global and site-specific dn/ds estimation.
genomepop has many interesting characteristics for simulating snps or dna sequences under complex evolutionary and demographic models.
namely, the possibility of forward simulation under general time reversible  mutation or gtr×mg <dig> codon models with intra-codon recombination, arbitrary, user-defined, migration patterns, diploid or haploid models, constant or variable population sizes, etc.
such models can be combined with recombination, at inter and intra codon levels, fitness-based selection and complex demographic scenarios.
in addition, it has a scaling option to save computation time when simulating large sequences and population sizes under complex demographic and evolutionary situations.
software tools that allow efficient simulation of large dna fragments under complex evolutionary models will be very helpful when trying to better understand the trace left on the dna by the different interacting evolutionary forces.
genomepop can also manage large dna fragments.
i have developed algorithms and written software to efficiently simulate, forward in time, different markovian nucleotide or codon models of dna mutation.
under the 2-allele model it allows the simulation of recombination hot-spots, the definition of different frequencies in different populations, etc.
hence, there is an increasing interest in forward population genetic simulation and efficient new tools have been developed recently.
however, the coalescent framework imposes some limitations that forward simulation does not.
these features make it unique with respect to other simulation tools.
the reason is that they are based on the history of lineages with surviving offspring in the current population.
on the contrary, forward simulations are less efficient because the entire population is simulated from past to present.
simulation of biological populations under different evolutionary genetic models can be undertaken using backward or forward strategies.
backward simulations, also called coalescent-based simulations, are computationally efficient.
