in fact, attempts to stimulate parthenocarpic fruit development by means of external tools have failed.
as there is limited genetic and molecular information about seed-pericarp cross-talk and development in peach, a massive gene approach based on the use of the μpeach  <dig>  array platform and quantitative real time rt-pcr  was used to study this process.
further investigations relying upon the availability of whole genome platforms will allow the enrichment of a marker genes repertoire and the elucidation of players other than hormones that are involved in seed-pericarp cross-talk .
results indicated that auxin, cytokinins, and gibberellins are good candidates, acting either directly  or indirectly as signals during early development, when the cross-talk is more active and vital for fruit set, whereas abscisic acid and ethylene may be involved later on.
among differentially expressed genes some were validated as markers in two subsequent years and in three different genotypes.
mesocarp markers were a rd22-like protein, a serin-carboxypeptidase, a senescence related protein and an aux/iaa, for s <dig>  s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig>  respectively.
field observations and a few physiological studies have demonstrated that peach embryogenesis and fruit development are tightly coupled.
later in embryo development, the interactions between seed and fruit development become less strict.
the microarray data, analyzed by using the hormonometer platform, allowed the identification of hormone-responsive genes, some of them putatively involved in seed-pericarp crosstalk.
moreover, physiological disturbances during early embryo development lead to seed abortion and fruitlet abscission.
regarding the cross-talk between seed and pericarp, possible candidate signals were identified among hormones.
in this research, genes were identified marking different phases of seed and mesocarp development.
seed markers were a ltp <dig> , a pr  protein, a prunin and lea  protein, for s <dig>  s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig>  respectively.
the selected genes behaved as good seed markers, while for mesocarp their reliability appeared to be dependent upon developmental and ripening traits.
