transporter proteins are predicted to have an important role in the mycorrhizal symbiosis, due to the fact that this type of an interaction between plants and fungi requires a continuous nutrient and signalling exchange.
our results demonstrate the high diversity of abc genes in the genomes of mycorrhiza-forming fungi.
results of our inventory will facilitate the identification of fungal transporters with a role in the mycorrhiza formation.
out of those, more than  <dig> models are predicted to encode functional proteins, whereas about  <dig> models represent gene fragments or putative pseudogenes.
we also provide the first data on abc protein-coding genes for the phylum glomeromycota and for orders pezizales, atheliales, cantharellales and sebacinales, contributing to the better knowledge of the diversity of this protein family within the fungal kingdom.
to facilitate the identification of fungal abc proteins with a potential role in the establishment of the mycorrhizal symbiosis, we have performed an inventory of the abc protein-encoding genes in the genomes of  <dig> species of mycorrhiza-forming fungi.
the sets of abc proteins in the mycorrhiza-forming species were compared to the related saprotrophic or plant-pathogenic fungal species.
abc transporters are one of the large groups of transporter proteins found both in plants and in fungi.
via comparison of transcriptomics data from different species, we have identified candidate groups of abc transporters that might have a role in the process of the mycorrhiza formation.
the crucial role of plant abc transporters in the formation of the mycorrhizal symbiosis has been demonstrated recently.
however, no experimental evidences of the direct involvement of fungal abc transporters in this process are available so far.
abc transportersfungimycorrhizamembrane transportprotein family evolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
we have also performed the phylogenetic analysis of the identified sequences.
some of the fungal abc transporter-encoding genes are also induced during the mycorrhiza formation.
