a devastating pathogen of sockeye salmon is infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus .
sockeye salmoninfectious hematopoietic necrosis virus brainihnv persistencepoly injectionimmune responsetranscriptomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
nine months post ihnv exposure, despite the absence of disease and mortality, a small percentage  of the surviving population contained ihnv in brain.
it has been postulated that ihnv is maintained in salmon populations by persisting over the life of its host and/or by residing in natural reservoirs other than its susceptible hosts.
characteristic for carriers was the up-regulation of genes involved in antibody production and antigen presentation.
transcriptome analysis in brain of asymptomatic virus carriers and survivors without virus exhibited distinct transcriptional profiles in comparison to naïve fish.
moreover, following challenge with poly, survivors and carriers displayed an elevated antiviral immune response in comparison to naïve fish.
herein we demonstrate the presence of ihnv in the brain of sockeye salmon that survived an experimentally-induced outbreak, suggesting the presence of viral persistence in this susceptible species.
sockeye salmon are an iconic species widely distributed throughout the north pacific.
to understand the viral persistent state in sockeye salmon we profiled the transcriptome to evaluate the host response in asymptomatic carriers and to determine what effects  ihnv exposure may have on subsequent virus challenges.
ihn virus persistence was identified in sockeye salmon where it elicited a unique brain transcriptome profile suggesting an ongoing adaptive immune response.
in both carriers and survivors a down-regulation of genes related to cholesterol biosynthesis, resembling an antiviral mechanism observed in higher vertebrates was revealed along with differences in nervous system development.
a laboratory disease model to simulate a natural ihnv outbreak in sockeye salmon resulted in over a third of the population incurring acute ihn disease and mortality during the first four months after initial exposure.
ihnv carriers remained uncompromised in mounting efficient innate antiviral responses when exposed to a viral mimic.
