here we examined spatial patterns of diversity of the expressed mhc class ii drb gene of three sympatric neotropical bats, carollia perspicillata and desmodus rotundus , and molossus molossus , all of which use the same environments .
mhcdrb polymorphismselectioncarollia perspicillatadesmodus rotundusmolossus molossuseuropepo fse 2007-2013regpot-ct-2011-285837- strongersalmier arielle lacoste vincent http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001665agence nationale de la rechercheanr-10- labex-25-01anr-10- labex-25-01salmier arielle lavergne anne erdf/federcarollialavergne anne issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
in contrast, drb diversity of d. rotundus was shaped by environment rather than demographic history.
the drb polymorphism was high in all sampling sites and different signatures of positive selection were detected depending on the environment.
twenty-three drb alleles were identified in  <dig> c. perspicillata,  <dig> alleles in  <dig> d. rotundus and  <dig> alleles in 28 m. molossus.
the patterns of drb diversity were similar to those of neutral markers for c. perspicillata and m. molossus.
furthermore, multiple geographic origins and/or population admixtures observed in c. perspicillata and m. molossus populations acted as an additional force in shaping drb diversity.
this study of mhc diversity demonstrated the strength of the environment and contrasting pathogen pressures in shaping drb diversity.
in contrast, these patterns were different for d. rotundus for which a geographical structure was highlighted.
a heterozygote advantage was also identified for this species.
no recombination or gene conversion event was found and phylogenetic relationships showed a trans-species mode of evolution in the phyllostomids.
differences between positively selected sites identified in bat species highlighted the potential role of gut microbiota in shaping immune responses.
although bats are natural reservoirs of many pathogens, few studies have been conducted on the genetic variation and detection of selection in major histocompatibility complex  genes.
