blast analysis revealed that rpgla shared highest identity of 51% with the rhizopus oryzae glucoamylase .
soluble starch hydrolyzed by purified rpgla achieved 43% glucose and 34% maltose.
higher productivity was achieved with a final yield of 48% glucose and 47% maltose catalyzed by purified enzyme preparation produced by km71/9kgla-zαamy.
a novel fungal glucoamylase  gene encoding a putative protein of  <dig> amino acid residues was cloned from rhizomucor pusillus.
the fungal glucoamylase rpgla was expressed in pichia pastoris  with maximum activity of  <dig> u ml- <dig>  the optimum ph and temperature of rpgla were ph  <dig>  and 70°c, respectively.
a novel fungal glucoamylase and fungal α-amylase genes were cloned from rhizomucor pusillus.
besides, fungal glucoamylase and α-amylase from r. pusillus were shown as promising candidates for further application in starch hydrolysis.
fungal amylase, mainly constitute of fungal α-amylase and glucoamylase, are utilized in a broad range of industries, such as starch hydrolysis, food and brewing.
in order to maximize the efficiency of starch process, developing fungal amylases with increased thermostability and acid stability has been attracting researchers’ interest continually.
fungal α-amylase  gene was also cloned from r. pusillus and transformed into km71/9kgla, resulted in recombinant yeast km71/9kgla-zαamy harboring the rpgla and rpamy genes simultaneously.
rhizomucor pusillusglucoamylaseα-amylaseco-expressionpichia pastorisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
one of main problems exist with regard to these commercial use of amylases is relatively low thermal and acid stability.
the two enzymes showed good thermostability and acid stability, and similar biochemical properties facilitated synergetic action of the two enzymes.
a dramatic improvement was seen in amylase activity through co-expressing rpgla with rpamy in pichia pastoris.
this is the first report of improving activity through co-expression glucoamylase with α-amylase in p. pastoris.
