: the ‘main clade’ of subgenus salix s.l., with new and old world species being reciprocally monophyletic; the section triandroides clade; and the subgenus pleuradenia clade.
the reliability and evolutionary implications of two important morphological characters  used in subgeneric classification within salix remain untested, and a disjunct old–new world distribution pattern of a main clade of subgenus salix s.l., revealed by a previous study, lacks a reasonable explanation.
the results were supported by network analyses.
should be redefined by excluding section triandrae and subgenus pleuradenia from it.
extensive, statistically significant gene-tree incongruence was detected across nrdna–plastid as well as nrdna ets–its phylogenies, suggesting reticulate evolution or hybridization within the group.
salix subgenus salixphylogenybiogeographyreticulate evolutioncharacter evolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
ancestral-state reconstructions indicated that multiple stamens and free bud scales represent the plesiomorphic states within salix, and that several significant shifts in stamen number and bud scale morphology have occurred.
the evolutionary lability of bud-scale morphology and stamen number means that these characters are unreliable bases for classification.
appears to be linked to the profound climatic cooling during the tertiary, which cut off gene exchange between new and old world lineages.
the taxonomy and systematics of salix subgenus salix s.l.
to study these questions, we conducted phylogenetic analyses based on  <dig>  bp of sequence data from four plastid  and two nuclear markers  covering all subgenera of salix, and all sections of subgenus salix s.l.
the plastid phylogeny successfully resolved relationships among the major clades of salix, but resolution within subgenus salix s.l.
nevertheless, three monophyletic groups were identifiable in subgenus salix s.l.
while nrdna regions showed higher resolution within subgenus salix s.l., they failed to resolve subgeneric relationships.
the delimitation of subgenus salix s.l.
the disjunct old–new world distribution of subgenus salix s.l.
subgenus salix came out as para- or polyphyletic in both nrdna and plastid trees.
is not monophyletic, and the evolutionary history of the subgenus has involved multiple reticulation events that may mainly be due to hybridization.
