this chemokine may play an important role in the pathogenesis of srma and muo.
idiopathic epilepsy , a group with normal csf cell count, was used as a control.
migration assays were performed on seven selected csf samples using a disposable 96-well chemotaxis chamber.
additionally, dogs with intervertebral disc disease  of varying severity were analyzed.
chemokinemip-3β/ccl19steroid responsive meningitis-arteritismeningoencephalomyelitis of unknown originintervertebral disc diseasechemotaxis
selected csf samples displayed chemotactic activity for mononuclear cells in the migration assay.
the hypothesis of this study is that ccl <dig>  also known as mip-3β, is involved in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and non-inflammatory cns diseases of dogs.
ivdd patients also had elevated ccl <dig> concentration compared to controls, but values were considerably lower than in inflammatory cns diseases.
csf cell counts of untreated srma and muo patients were significantly positively correlated with the ccl <dig> csf concentration.
ccl <dig> csf concentrations were markedly elevated in patients affected with the neuroinflammatory diseases srma and muo and showed a strong correlation with the csf cell count.
chemokines such as mip-3β/ccl <dig> are important factors in the mechanism of cell migration and pathogenesis of central nervous system  inflammatory reactions.
the elevation of csf ccl <dig> in ivdd suggests that it may also be involved in the secondary wave of spinal cord injuries.
ccl <dig> was detectable in csf samples of all dogs.
experiments were performed on cerebrospinal fluid  and serum samples of dogs affected with steroid responsive meningitis-arteritis  during the acute phase as well as during treatment.
dogs with srma were compared to dogs with presumed meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown origin , and both groups sub-categorized into dogs receiving no therapy and with patients receiving prednisolone therapy.
chemokine concentrations were determined by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay.
dogs with untreated srma and muo displayed pronounced ccl <dig> elevations compared to the control group and patients receiving glucocorticosteroid treatment.
