here we have shown that in vitro infection of bovine macrophages with live s. aureus induced both alternative and classical activation pathways.
in the mammary gland, local recruitment and action of macrophages is a key immunological defence mechanism against infection.
analysis of a subset of differentially regulated genes  obtained by comparison with data from genome-wide association mapping in norwegian red cattle identified anti-inflammatory cytokines interleukin  <dig> and interleukin  <dig> as putative expression quantitative trait loci, suggesting that s. aureus infection triggers alternative activation of macrophages.
tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member  <dig>  was identified as an upstream regulator which points toward cd <dig> likely acting as a co-stimulatory receptor during toll-like receptor 2-mediated inflammatory response of bovine macrophages to s. aureus infection.
genome-wide transcript profiling of blood monocyte-derived macrophages from six norwegian red heifers infected with live s. aureus for  <dig> and 6 hours in vitro was performed.
furthermore, peptidoglycan was identified as an upstream regulator in the list eqg, which indicates that this bacterial cell-wall component might be pivotal in macrophage intracellular bacterial recognition during early inflammation.
moreover, several classical activation pathways were found, mainly cellular immune response and cytokine signaling pathways, i.e.
alternative activation of macrophages may be a mechanism contributing to intracellular persistence of s. aureus in the course of inflammation such as during mastitis in dairy cattle.
macrophages are members of the innate immune system, serve as the first line of the defence against invading pathogens and are critical effectors and regulators of inflammation.
approximately 70% of the responding genes had a known identity  and were used in the identification of overrepresented pathways and biological functions in the dataset.
we have examined the early phase response of bovine macrophages to infection with live staphylococcus aureus.
