entity coreference is common in biomedical literature and it can affect text understanding systems that rely on accurate identification of named entities, such as relation extraction and automatic summarization.
in this paper, we propose a semantically oriented, rule-based method to resolve sortal anaphora, a specific type of coreference that forms the majority of coreference instances in biomedical literature.
our results demonstrate that a heavily semantic approach to sortal anaphora resolution is largely effective for biomedical literature.
natural language processingsortal anaphora resolutionbiomedical literaturesemantic relation extractionu.s.
we estimate that anaphora resolution results in changes in about  <dig>  % of approximately  <dig> million semantic relations extracted from the entire pubmed.
the method addresses all entity types and relies on linguistic components of semrep, a broad-coverage biomedical relation extraction system.
investigating the impact of sortal anaphora resolution on relation extraction, we found that the overall effect was positive, with  <dig> % of the changes involving uninformative relations being replaced by more specific and informative ones, while  <dig> % of the changes had no effect, and only  <dig> % were negative.
it has been incorporated into semrep, extending its core semantic interpretation capability from sentence level to discourse level.
our evaluation and error analysis highlight some areas for further improvements, such as coordination processing and intra-sentential antecedent selection.
the first evaluation specifically focused on sortal anaphora relations.
our methodology achieved a f <dig> score of  <dig>  on the test portion of a manually annotated corpus of  <dig> medline abstracts, a 4-fold improvement over the baseline method.
we evaluated our sortal anaphora resolution method in several ways.
coreference resolution is a foundational yet challenging natural language processing task which, if performed successfully, is likely to enhance such systems significantly.
