notably, those genes were highly related to stress-response functions, including responses to salt stress, water and abscisic acid.
this study aimed to evaluate the occurrence and extent of metabolic and transcriptional changes induced by tetraploidization in ziyang xiangcheng , which is a special citrus germplasm native to china and widely used as an iron deficiency tolerant citrus rootstock.
doubled diploid ziyang xiangcheng has typical morphological and anatomical features such as shorter plant height, larger and thicker leaves, bigger stomata and lower stomatal density, compared to its diploid parent.
taken together, tetraploidization induced considerable changes in leaf primary and secondary metabolite accumulation in ziyang xiangcheng.
plenty of doubled diploid citrus plants were exploited from diploid species for citrus rootstock improvement.
interestingly, the transcriptional divergence could not explain the metabolic changes, probably due to post-transcriptional regulation.
gc-ms  analysis revealed that tetraploidization has an activation effect on the accumulation of primary metabolites in leaves; many stress-related metabolites such as sucrose, proline and γ-aminobutyric acid  was remarkably up-regulated in doubled diploid.
compared to diploid, higher expression level of stress related genes and higher content of stress related metabolites in doubled diploid could be beneficial for its stress tolerance.
by rna-seq analysis, only  <dig> genes  are found significantly differentially expressed between 2x and 4x leaves.
however, lc-qtof-ms  analysis demonstrated that tetraploidization has an inhibition effect on the accumulation of secondary metabolites in leaves; all the  <dig> flavones were down-regulated while all the  <dig> flavanones were up-regulated in 4x.
polyploidy has often been considered to confer plants a better adaptation to environmental stresses.
tetraploid citrus rootstocks are expected to have stronger stress tolerance than diploid.
citrusdoubled diploidstress toleranceprimary and secondary metabolismtranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
