the objectives of the present study were to establish the serum concentration–time profile for ceftiofur in lactating goats after intravenous, subcutaneous and a sc-long-acting ceftiofur formulation; to determine ceftiofur penetration into milk; to determine in vitro and ex vivo activity of ceftiofur establishing mic, mbc, mpc and time-kill profiles against field strains of m. haemolytica and finally to calculate the main surrogate markers of efficacy.
the systemic ceftiofur exposure achieved in lactating goats following iv, sc and especially with the sc-la administration is consistent with the predicted pk-pd ratios needed for a positive therapeutic outcome for m. haemolytica.
the mic, mbc and mpc data of ceftiofur against five m. haemolytica strains isolated from goats affected by pneumonia were tested showing excelent sensitivity of ceftiofur against this pathogen.
ceftiofur is a third-generation cephalosporin antimicrobial with activity against various gram-positive and gram-negative, aerobic and anaerobic bacteria encountered by domestic animals.
bacterial pneumonia in goats is usually caused by mannheimia haemolytica and pasteurella multocida.
another important infection disease in lactating goats is intramammary infection producing mastitis, usually associated with coagulase-negative staphylococcus spp.
subcutaneous administration of the long-acting formulation showed safety and tolerance for all the animals used.
ceftiofur concentrations exceeded the mic and mbc for up to 72 h and mpc for up 32 h in serum.
for pk-pd analysis, ratios were calculated suggesting a high level of bacterial kill against the five strains of m. haemolytica tested.
after ceftiofur analysis from milk samples, no concentrations were found at any sampling time.
ceftiofur was well absorbed following sc and sc-la administration, with absolute bioavailabilities  of  <dig>  and  <dig>  %, respectively.
however, treatment of bacterial pneumonia in goats not affected by mastitis problems should be restricted to antimicrobials with scant penetration to milk in order to avoid long withdrawal times.
thus, this drug could be effective in treating infectious diseases of goats caused by m. haemolytica at a dose of 6 mg/kg with the sc-la formulation.
the pharmacokinetics studies revealed an optimal pk properties for the sc-la formulation tested.
