there are about  <dig> wild species in the genus pistacia, and they have importance as rootstock seed sources for cultivated p. vera and forest trees.
the newly developed novel polymorphic ssrs in this study may help germplasm characterization, genetic diversity, and genetic linkage mapping studies in the genus pistacia.
the novel ssr loci developed from cultivated pistachio were highly transferable to wild pistacia species.
simple sequence repeat  markers are useful tools for germplasm characterization, genetic diversity analysis, and genetic linkage mapping, and may help to elucidate genetic relationships among pistachio cultivars and species.
pistachiogenome surveygenome sizessrgenetic diversitythe scientific and technological research council of turkey project no: tubitak-tovag  <dig> o 962kafkas salih cukurova university scientific research projects unit project no: fuk-2014- <dig>  fdk-2015- <dig> and fba-2015-4538kafkas salih the scientific and technological research council of turkeybideb 2215ziya motalebipour elmira issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the results from a genome survey of pistachio suggest that the genome size of pistachio is about 600 mb with a high heterozygosity rate.
the k-mer analysis indicated that pistachio has a genome that is about 600 mb in size and is highly heterozygous.
to explore the genome structure of pistachio, a genome survey was performed using the illumina platform at approximately 40× coverage depth in the p. vera cv.
a total of  <dig> ssrs were used to characterize  <dig> p. vera cultivars and  <dig> wild pistacia genotypes  belonging to p. atlantica, p. integerrima, p. chinenesis, p. terebinthus, and p. lentiscus genotypes.
published information on the pistachio genome is limited.
therefore, a genome survey is necessary to obtain knowledge on the genome structure of pistachio by next generation sequencing.
this information will help to design whole genome sequencing strategies for pistachio.
overall  <dig> ssr loci amplified in all  <dig> cultivars and genotypes,  <dig> were polymorphic in six pistacia species.
