although there are numerous examples of structural and cis-regulatory mutations that contribute to phenotypic evolution, our results suggest that trans-regulatory mutations could contribute to phenotypic divergence more commonly than previously expected, especially in systems like color vision, where compensatory changes in the expression of multiple genes are required in order to produce functional phenotypes.
our results shed light on the role that different structural, cis-, and trans-regulatory mutations play in the evolution of color vision.
combined with previous work, we demonstrate that the evolution of cichlid color vision results from the interplay of structural, cis-, and especially trans-regulatory loci.
we identified  <dig> eqtl that contribute to the divergent expression of five opsin genes.
although the evolution of color vision has historically been attributed to structural mutations within the opsin genes, recent research has shown that opsin regulatory mutations can also tune photoreceptor sensitivity and color vision.
importantly, however, the majority of the eqtl we identified  occur on linkage groups located trans to the opsin genes, suggesting that cichlid color vision has evolved primarily via trans-regulatory divergence.
by modeling the impact of just two of these trans-regulatory eqtl, we show that opsin regulatory mutations can alter cichlid photoreceptor sensitivity and color vision at least as much as opsin structural mutations can.
we crossed cichlid species that express different opsin gene sets and scanned their genome for expression quantitative trait loci  responsible for these differences.
phenotypic evolution may occur through mutations that affect either the structure or expression of protein-coding genes.
on three linkage groups, several eqtl formed regulatory “hotspots” associated with the expression of multiple opsins.
visual sensitivity in african cichlid fishes varies as a result of the differential expression of seven opsin genes.
