the european community-funded project, european crop wild relative diversity assessment and conservation forum, determined the minimum information requirements for the conservation and utilisation of crop wild relatives and created the crop wild relative information system, incorporating an extensible markup language  schema to aid data sharing and exchange.
they are valuable as potential gene donors for crop improvement and may help to ensure food security for the future.
crop wild relative markup language  was developed to represent the data necessary for crop wild relative conservation and ensure that they can be effectively utilised for crop improvement.
the schema partitions data into taxon-, site-, and population-specific elements, to allow for integration with other more general conservation biology schemata which may emerge as accepted standards in the future.
pre-existing standards for data representation in conservation biology were reviewed and incorporated into the schema as restrictions on element data contents, where appropriate.
information about the conservation status and utilisation potential of crop wild relatives is diverse and dispersed, and no single agreed standard exists for representing such information; yet, this information is vital to ensure these species are effectively conserved and utilised.
cwrml provides a flexible data communication format for representing in situ and ex situ conservation status of individual taxa as well as their utilisation potential.
the development of the schema highlights a number of instances where additional standards-development may be valuable, particularly with regard to the representation of population-specific data and utilisation potential.
crop wild relatives are wild species that are closely related to crops.
as crop wild relatives are intrinsically no different to other wild plant species there is potential for the inclusion of cwrml data elements in the emerging standards for representation of biodiversity data.
however, they are becoming increasingly threatened in the wild and are inadequately conserved, both in situ and ex situ.
