our genome-wide study was designed to investigate the response of the transcriptome of ischemized rat brain cortex tissues to the action of semax in vivo.
among the immune-response genes, the expression of which was modulated by semax, genes that encode immunoglobulins and chemokines formed the most notable groups.
semax affects several biological processes involved in the function of various systems.
the gene-expression alteration caused by the action of the peptide semax was compared with the gene expression of the “ischemia” group animals at  <dig> and 24 h after permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion .
semaxpro-gly-profocal cerebral ischemiaexpression beadchip gene arraygene expressionimmune cellsimmunoglobulins
these genes are associated with such processes as the development and migration of endothelial tissue, the migration of smooth muscle cells, hematopoiesis, and vasculogenesis.
the nootropic neuroprotective peptide semax  has proved efficient in the therapy of brain stroke; however, the molecular mechanisms underlying its action remain obscure.
the peptide predominantly enhanced the expression of genes related to the immune system.
three hours after pmcao, semax influenced the expression of some genes that affect the activity of immune cells, and, 24 h after pmcao, the action of semax on the immune response increased considerably.
semax altered the expression of genes that modulate the amount and mobility of immune cells and enhanced the expression of genes that encode chemokines and immunoglobulins.
the immune response is the process most markedly affected by the drug.
in response to semax administration,  <dig> genes related to the vascular system exhibited altered expression 3 h after pmcao, whereas  <dig> genes were changed 24 h after pmcao.
in conditions of rat brain focal ischemia, semax influenced the expression of genes that promote the formation and functioning of the vascular system.
the immunomodulating effect of the peptide discovered in our research and its impact on the vascular system during ischemia are likely to be the key mechanisms underlying the neuroprotective effects of the peptide.
