using simulated data with various degrees of noise, we studied how gasa with two model selection criteria and two search spaces performed.
an s-shape model and an optimization algorithm  were developed to infer genetic interactions/transcriptional regulation of several genes simultaneously using mged.
gasa is shown to infer both genetic interactions and transcriptional regulatory interactions well.
the predicted genetic interactions of a subnetwork of human t-cell apoptosis coincide with existing partial pathways, suggesting the potential of gasa on inferring biochemical pathways.
biochemical pathways are gradually becoming recognized as central to complex human diseases and recently genetic/transcriptional interactions have been shown to be able to predict partial pathways.
first, gasa is applied to infer a subnetwork of human t-cell apoptosis.
gasa consists of a genetic algorithm  and a simulated annealing  algorithm, which is enhanced by a steepest gradient descent algorithm to avoid being trapped in local minimum.
moreover, gasa is able to predict multiple transcription factors for certain targets, and these results coincide with experiments confirmed data in yeastract.
in particular, gasa seems able to characterize the nonlinear mechanism of transcriptional regulatory interactions  in yeast, and may be applied to infer tis in other organisms.
second, gasa was applied to infer the transcriptional factors of  <dig> cell cycle regulated targets in s. cerevisiae, and gasa performed better than one of the latest advances in nonlinear modeling, gaga and tsni.
two of the latest advances in nonlinear modeling used sigmoid models to depict transcriptional interaction of a transcription factor  for a target gene, but do not model cooperative or competitive interactions of several tfs for a target.
furthermore, gasa was shown to outperform network component analysis, the time series network inference algorithm , ga with regular ga  and ga with regular sa.
with the abundant information made available by microarray gene expression data , nonlinear modeling of these interactions is now feasible.
