evaluated by five-fold cross-validation on the training set, pslnuc attains an overall accuracy of  <dig> %, which is  <dig> % improvement over the state-of-the-art system.
experiment results demonstrate that the proposed method shows a significant improvement for nuclear localization prediction.
our results demonstrate that gapped-dipeptide signatures can better discriminate nuclear and non-nuclear proteins.
to compare our predictive performance with other approaches, we incorporate two non-redundant benchmark data sets, a training set and an independent test set.
in a eukaryotic cell, many essential biological processes take place in the nucleus.
however, given a tremendous amount of sequence data generated in the post-genomic era, determining protein localization based on biological experiments can be expensive and time-consuming.
nuclear proteins shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm based on recognition of nuclear translocation signals, including nuclear localization signals  and nuclear export signals .
currently, only a few approaches have been developed specifically to predict nuclear localization using sequence features, such as putative nlss.
in this study, first we propose pslnuc  for predicting nuclear localization in proteins.
then, we incorporate only the proposed gapped-dipeptide signatures in an svm classifier to mimic biological properties of nlss and ness for predicting nuclear localization in pslnts.
this suggests that, in addition to nlss, which have been shown important for nuclear proteins, ness can also be an effective indicator to detect non-nuclear proteins.
moreover, no predictor can generate sequence motifs to characterize features of potential ness, in which biological properties are not well understood from existing experimental studies.
in addition to pslnuc, we further identify gapped-dipeptide signatures for putative nlss and ness to develop a prediction method, pslnts .
we apply plsi to generate gapped-dipeptide signatures from both nuclear and non-nuclear proteins, and propose candidate sequence motifs for putative nlss and ness.
most notably, using only a few proposed gapped-dipeptide signatures as input features for the svm classifier, pslnts further enhances the accuracy and mcc to  <dig> % and  <dig> , respectively.
moreover, the proposed gapped-dipeptide signatures can be biologically interpreted and used in further experiment analyses of nuclear translocation signals, including nlss and ness.
first, for feature representation, a protein is represented by gapped-dipeptides and the feature values are weighted by homology information from a smoothed position-specific scoring matrix.
