fungal tcst systems are usually composed of a hybrid histidine kinase, comprising the histidine kinase  domain and a receiver domain, a histidine phosphotransfer protein and a response regulator.
among the  <dig> groups of fungal histidine kinases, group iii histidine kinases are of particular relevance as they are essential for the activity of different groups of fungicides.
in candida albicans, a fungal human pathogen, three histidine kinases were identified, of which canik1p is a group iii histidine kinase.
we have constructed mutated versions of canik1p, from which either all hamp domains were deleted  or in which the histidine kinase or the receiver domains were not-functional.
expression of proteins with non-functional histidine kinase or receiver domains resulted in complete loss of susceptibility to antifungals, such as fludioxonil.
our results show that functional histidine kinase and receiver domains of canik1p were essential for antifungal susceptibility and for activation of the hog1p.
group iii histidine kinasecanik1ppoint mutationsprotein domainsfludioxoniltransformed saccharomyces cerevisiaehamp domains
fungicide activity was associated with phosphorylation of the mitogen activated protein kinase hog1p.
moreover, for the first time we show that deletion of all hamp domains from canik1p led to activation of hog1p without an external stimulus.
normal growth could be restored by either replacing the phosphate-accepting histidine residue in canik1pΔhamp or by expressing canik1Δhamp in s. cerevisiae mutants, in which single genes encoding several components of the hog pathway were deleted.
expression of canik1Δhamp in s. cerevisiae led to severe growth inhibition.
this phenotype was similar to the effects obtained upon treatment with fungicides, as in both cases growth inhibition correlated with hog1p activation and was dependent on the functionality of the conserved phosphate-accepting histidine residue.
such systems are absent from mammalian cells and are thus of interest as drug targets.
a characteristic feature is the n-terminal amino acid repeat domain comprising multiple hamp domains, of which the function is still largely unknown.
conditions leading to growth inhibition of transformants also led to phosphorylation of the map kinase hog1p.
