the proteins extracted from ibs and ribs at 1- to 2-year old m. amblycephala were quantified  <dig>  proteins, with  <dig>  proteins annotated with go annotation in biological processes, molecular function and cellular component.
these findings could provide important clues towards further understanding of fish skeletal system and the roles of proteins playing in regulating diverse biological processes in fish.
the chemical composition of fish ibs and ribs as well as the underlying mechanism about their development have not been investigated.
a total of  <dig> and  <dig> differently expressed proteins were identified in comparison groups of 1-ib-vs-1-rib and 2-ib-vs-2-rib, which indicated the obvious differences of chemical composition between these two bone tissues.
intermuscular bones  and ribs both are a part of skeletal system in teleosts, but with different developing process.
the two proteins  related to osteoclasts differentiation were significantly up-regulated in ribs compared with ibs , which was in accordance with the results from histological structures.
in comparison groups of 1-ib-vs-2-ib and 1-rib-vs-2-rib,  <dig> and  <dig> differently expressed proteins were identified and the function annotation results showed that these proteins were involved in regulating bone development and differentiation.
megalobrama amblycephalaintermuscular bonesribsitraq proteomicsmrm validationgrowth and differentiationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31472271gao ze-xia modern agriculture industry technology system construction projects of china titled as-staple freshwater fishes industry technology systemcars-46-05wang wei-min wuhan youth science and technology plan2016070204010143gao ze-xia fundamental research funds for the central universities2662015py088gao ze-xia issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
subsequently,  <dig> and  <dig> candidate proteins in comparison group of 1-ib-vs-1-rib and 1-ib-vs-2-ib related to bone development were validated by mrm assays.
in the present study, histological structures showed that one bone cavity containing osteoclasts were existed in ribs, but not in ibs of megalobrama amblycephala.
our present study suggested the different key proteins involved in the composition of fish ribs and ibs as well as their growth development.
we constructed the first proteomics map for fish bones including ibs and ribs, and identified the differentially expressed proteins between ibs and ribs through itraq lc-ms/ms proteomic analysis.
