we report that androgens  increase th protein and increase comt, maoa and maob mrnas in the adolescent male rat substantia nigra.
we investigated whether gonadectomy and sex steroid replacement could influence dopamine levels by changing tyrosine hydroxylase  protein and mrna and/or dopamine breakdown enzyme mrna levels  in the adolescent male rat substantia nigra.
how midbrain dopamine neurons respond to sex steroids depends on the presence of sex steroid receptor and the level of steroid conversion enzymes .
we hypothesized that adolescent testosterone would regulate sex steroid signaling through regulation of er and ar mrnas and through modulation of aromatase and 5α-reductase mrna levels.
we find erα and ar in midbrain dopamine neurons in adolescent male rats, indicating that dopamine neurons are poised to respond to circulating sex steroids.
we report that all three sex steroids increase ar mrna.
we conclude that increased testosterone at adolescence can shift the balance of sex steroid signaling to favor androgenic responses through promoting conversion of t to dht and increasing ar mrna.
we show that testosterone action through both ar and ers modulates synthesis of sex steroid receptor by altering ar and er mrna levels in normal adolescent male substantia nigra.
increased sex steroids in the brain at adolescence may alter substantia nigra dopamine pathways, increasing vulnerability for the development of psychopathology.
further, testosterone may increase local dopamine synthesis and metabolism, thereby changing dopamine regulation within the substantia nigra.
5α reductase- <dig> mrna was increased by ar activation, and aromatase mrna was decreased by gonadectomy.
testosterone-dependent actions in neurons are direct via activation of androgen receptors  or indirect by conversion to 17β-estradiol and activation of estrogen receptors .
however, contradictions as to whether testosterone increases or decreases dopamine neurotransmission are found and most studies address this in adult animals.
