in this context, we analysed the effect of temperature on growth of young r. communis seedlings and we measured primary and secondary metabolites in roots and cotyledons.
the response in terms of biomass production for the genotype mpa <dig> was clearly different from the other two genotypes: genotype mpa <dig> produced heavier seedlings at all temperatures but the root biomass of this genotype decreased with increasing temperature, reaching the lowest value at 35°c.
our results show that a specific balance between amino acids, carbohydrates and organic acids in the cotyledons and roots seems to be an important trait for faster and more efficient growth of genotype mpa <dig>
in contrast, root biomass of genotypes mpb <dig> and iac <dig> was not affected by temperature, suggesting that the roots of these genotypes are less sensitive to changes in temperature.
carbohydrate contents were reduced in response to increasing temperature in both roots and cotyledons, whereas amino acids accumulated to higher contents.
three genotypes, recommended to small family farms as cash crop, were used in this study.
an increase in temperature triggers the mobilization of carbohydrates to support the preferred growth of the aerial parts, at the expense of the roots.
a shift in the carbon-nitrogen metabolism towards the accumulation of nitrogen-containing compounds seems to be the main biochemical response to support growth at higher temperatures.
the biochemical changes observed in response to the increasing temperature provide leads into understanding plant adaptation to harsh environmental conditions, which will be very helpful in developing strategies for r. communis crop improvement research.
in addition, an increasing temperature decreased the root to shoot ratio, which suggests that biomass allocation between below- and above ground parts of the plants was strongly affected by the temperature.
a better understanding of the biochemical and physiological aspects of germination and seedling growth is crucial for the breeding of high yielding varieties adapted to various growing environments.
seedling biomass was strongly affected by the temperature, with the lowest total biomass observed at 20°c.
compared with major crops, growth and development of ricinus communis is still poorly understood.
