in t. pratense, m. truncatula, and c. arietinum we identify s-rnase lineage genes that in phylogenetic analyses cluster with pyrinae s-rnases.
to address if other t2-rnases could be determining fabaceae gsi, here we obtained a style with stigma transcriptome of cytisus striatus, a species that shows significant difference on the percentage of pollen growth in self and cross-pollinations.
in m. truncatula and c. arietinum genomes, where large scaffolds are available, these sequences are surrounded by f-box genes that in phylogenetic analyses also cluster with s-pollen genes.
therefore, to characterize the fabaceae s-pistil gene, expression analyses, levels of diversity, and segregation analyses in controlled crosses are needed for those genes showing high expression levels in the tissues where gsi occurs.
the m. truncatula and c. arietinum s-rnase and s-pollen like genes phylogenetically related to pyrinae s-genes, are also expressed in tissues other than those involved in gsi.
moreover, levels of diversity are lower than those observed for other s-rnase genes.
we first identify ssk <dig> like genes , in the trifolium pratense, medicago truncatula, cicer arietinum, glycine max, and lupinus angustifolius genomes.
gametophytic self-incompatibilitymolecular evolutions-rnase like genestrifolium pratensemedicago truncatulacicer arietinumcytisus striatusissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
we find no evidence for fabaceae gsi being determined by rosaceae, solanaceae, and plantaginaceae s-rnase lineage genes.
expression and polymorphism analyses of the c. striatus s-rnase like genes revealed that none of these genes, is the s-pistil gene.
then, we characterize the s-lineage t2-rnase genes in these genomes.
fabaceae species are important in agronomy and livestock nourishment.
there is no evidence that t2-rnase lineage genes could be determining gsi in c. striatus.
in t. pratense the s-rnase lineage genes show, however, expression in tissues not involved in gsi.
we address the hypothesis of fabaceae gametophytic si being rnase based, by recruiting the same s-rnase lineage gene of rosaceae, solanaceae or plantaginaceae si species.
