the s. solea transcriptome was generated from whole larvae and adult tissues using the roche  <dig> platform.
the common sole  is a promising candidate for european aquaculture; however, the limited knowledge of the physiological mechanisms underlying larval development in this species has hampered the establishment of successful flatfish aquaculture.
the assembly process produced a set of  <dig>  isotigs with an average size of  <dig> nt,  <dig> contigs and a total of  <dig>  singletons.
the microarray platform was used to investigate the gene expression profiles of sole larvae from hatching to the juvenile form.
the construction of a microarray platform for the characterisation of the larval sole transcriptome permitted the definition of the main processes involved in organogenesis and larval growth.
our findings highlighted the up-regulation of gene pathways involved in the development of the gastrointestinal system as well as biological processes related to folic acid and retinol metabolism.
the gene expression profiles of key transcripts of the thyroid hormones  cascade and the temporal regulation of the gh/igf <dig>  system suggest a pivotal role of these pathways in fish growth and initiation of metamorphosis.
although the fact that genomic tools and resources are available for some flatfish species, common sole genomics remains a mostly unexplored field.
additional evidence led to the formation of the hypothesis that molecular mechanisms of cell motility and ecm adhesion may play a role in tissue rearrangement during common sole metamorphosis.
here, we report, for the first time, the sequencing and characterisation of the transcriptome of s. solea and its application for the study of molecular mechanisms underlying physiological and morphological changes during larval-to-juvenile transition.
genes involved in the ontogenesis of the visual system are up-regulated during the early stages of larval development, while muscle development and anaerobic energy pathways increase in expression over time.
