the extension rate of hesperornis tooth dentine appears relatively high compared to non-avian dinosaurs.
both taxa exhibit extremely thin and simple enamel.
among other characteristics of tooth shape, growth, attachment, implantation, replacement, and dental tissue microstructures, revealed by these analyses, we find that tooth morphology and ornamentation differ greatly between the hesperornithiformes and ichthyornithiformes.
finally, new hypotheses emerge that will possibly be tested by further analyses of avian teeth, for instance regarding dental replacement rates, or simplification and thinning of enamel throughout the course of early avian evolution.
root attachment is found for the first time to be fully thecodont via gomphosis in both taxa, but in hesperornis secondary evolution led to teeth implantation in a groove, at least locally without a periodontal ligament.
our results allow comparison with other archosaurs and also mammals, with implications regarding dental character evolution across amniotes.
these observations highlight complexity in the evolutionary history of tooth reduction in the avian lineage and also clarify alleged avian dental characteristics in the frame of a long-standing debate on bird origins.
some dental features of the ‘last’ toothed birds can be interpreted as functional adaptations related to diet and mode of predation, while others appear to be products of their peculiar phylogenetic heritage.
dental replacement is shown to be lingual via a resorption pit in the root, in both taxa.
we also highlight the first old world, and youngest record of the major mesozoic clade ichthyornithiformes.
the dentitions of extinct organisms can provide pivotal information regarding their phylogenetic position, as well as paleobiology, diet, development, and growth.
despite their significant phylogenetic position immediately outside the avian crown group, the dentitions of these taxa have never been studied in detail.
the autapomorphic hesperornis groove might have favoured firmer root attachment.
extant birds are edentulous , but their closest relatives among stem birds, the cretaceous hesperornithiformes and ichthyornithiformes, retained teeth.
dental attachmentdental replacementdinosaursfossil birdsgrowthhistologymicrostructurepaleobiologyteethhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001665agence nationale de la rechercheanr-11-jsv7-004-01louchart antoine http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001671european synchrotron radiation facilityec-944louchart antoine national science foundation division of environmental biologyddig deb-1500798field daniel evolving earth foundationfasgg 625001field daniel issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
