however, the relative contributions of climatic oscillations and geographical events to the genetic variation of these species remain undetermined.
the analysis of genetic variation in populations of r. omeimontis contributes to the understanding of the effects of changes in climate and of geographical events on the dynamic development of contemporary patterns of genetic variation in the species of southern china.
significant expansion signals were not detected in mismatch analyses or neutrality tests.
the genetic diversity in the populations of r. omeimontis was high.
to investigate patterns of genetic variation and to test the hypotheses about the factors that shaped the distribution of this genetic variation in species of southern china, mitochondrial genes  and nine microsatellite loci of the omei tree frog  were amplified in this study.
based on the results of this study, complex geological events  and the pleistocene glaciations were apparent drivers of the rapid divergence of the r. omeimontis lineages.
the phylogenetic trees reconstructed from the mitochondrial dna  haplotypes and the bayesian genetic clustering analysis based on microsatellite data both revealed that all populations were divided into three lineages .
pleistocene climatic oscillations and historical geological events may both influence current patterns of genetic variation, and the species in southern china that faced unique climatic and topographical events have complex evolutionary histories.
population genetic structuredemographic historytectonic eventspleistocene glaciationsrhacophorus omeimontissouthern chinahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china <dig> zhao mian wu hua issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
each diverged lineages survived in situ with limited gene exchanges, and the stable demographics of lineages indicate that the pleistocene climatic oscillations were inconsequential for this species.
and the effective population size of each lineage was stable during the pleistocene.
the two most recent splitting events among the lineages coincided with recent geological events  and the pleistocene glaciations.
