more recently, the affymetrix genechip human gene  <dig>  st array  has been released for measuring gene expression and interestingly contains a large subset of probes from the exon array.
utilizing datasets of the high quality microarray quality control  rna samples previously assayed on the exon array and gene array, we compare the expression measurements of the two platforms to determine the performance of the gene array in detecting isoform variations.
overall, we show that the gene array is comparable to the exon array in making gene expression calls.
as the gene array contains a significant subset of probes from the exon array, we note that, in comparison, the gene array overlaps with fewer but still a high proportion of splicing events annotated in the known alt events ucsc track, with abundant coverage of cassette exons.
as expected, in comparison to the exon array, it is limited by reduced gene content coverage and is not able to detect as wide a range of alternative splicing events.
however, we do not suggest it to be an equivalent substitute to the more comprehensive exon array.
here, we explore the potential of using gene array probes to assess expression variation at the sub-transcript level.
moreover, to examine expression of different isoforms, we modify the gene array probe set definition file to enable summarization of probe intensity values at the exon level and show that the expression profiles between the two platforms are also highly correlated.
we discuss the ability of the gene array to detect alternative splicing and isoform variation and address its limitations.
the gene array is an effective expression profiling tool at gene and exon expression level, the latter made possible by probe set annotation modifications.
we demonstrate that the gene array is capable of detecting alternative splicing and isoform variation.
we hope our findings will shed light on the potential extension of the gene array to detect alternative splicing.
splicing index analysis, representing estimates of exon inclusion levels, shows a lower but good correlation between platforms.
next, expression calls of previously known differentially spliced genes were compared and also show concordant results.
the affymetrix genechip human exon  <dig>  st array  has been previously shown to be effective in profiling gene expression at the isoform level.
it should be particularly suitable for researchers primarily interested in gene expression analysis, but who may be willing to look for splicing and isoform differences within their dataset.
