enriched go-slim terms from b. rapa homomoelogues imply that a major effect of the b. rapa wgt may have been to acquire environmental adaptability or to change the course of development.
three chronological b. rapa genomes  were reconstructed with sequence divergences, revealing a trace of recursive wgd events.
representative functions of the categorized genes were elucidated, providing better understanding of b. rapa evolution and the brassica genus.
the brassicaceae family is an exemplary model for studying plant polyploidy.
the recently released brassica rapa draft genome provides an ideal opportunity to update our knowledge of the conserved genomic structures in brassica, and to study evolutionary innovations of the mesohexaploid plant, b. rapa.
we refined brassicaceae gb information using the latest genomic resources, and distinguished three chronologically ordered b. rapa genomes.
go enrichments indicated that single retention genes mainly function in the interpretation of genetic information, whereas, multi-retention genes were biased toward signal response, especially regarding development and defense.
in the recent genome,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> gene pairs were multi-retained following brassica whole genome triplication  events with  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> homoeologous copies, respectively.
in retention patterns analysis, 98% of b. rapa genes were retained as collinear gene pairs; 77% of those were singly-retained in recent or young genomes resulting from death of the ancestral copies, while others were multi-retained as long retention genes.
b. rapa genes were categorized into fast evolving, single- and multi-retention genes, and long retention genes by their substitution rates and retention patterns.
the brassicaceae knowledge-base includes the well-annotated arabidopsis thaliana reference sequence; well-established evidence for three rounds of whole genome duplication ; and the conservation of genomic structure, with  <dig> conserved genomic blocks .
a total of  <dig> fast evolving genes were unevenly distributed throughout the recent and young genomes.
brassica rapachronological genomesfast-evolving genessingle-retention genesmulti-retention genesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
