resphera insight and cosmosid analysis tools were employed for high-resolution profiling of 16s rrna amplicons and whole genome shotgun data, respectively.
dna sequences obtained from shotgun metagenomic data of listeria monocytogenes at 48 h were assembled to produce a consensus draft genome which appeared to have a similar tracking utility to pure culture isolates of l. monocytogenes.
moreover, the draft assembly of a consensus genome of l. monocytogenes from shotgun metagenomic data demonstrated the potential utility of this approach to expedite trace-back of outbreak-associated strains, although further validation will be needed to confirm this utility.
surprisingly, incidence of l. monocytogenes was proportionally greater at hour  <dig> than when tested  <dig>   <dig>  and 12 h later with all three enrichment schemes.
the corresponding increase in anoxybacillus and geobacillus spp.indicated these taxa co-enriched in competition with l. monocytogenes during early enrichment hours.
l. monocytogenes became dominant after 24 h in all three enrichments.
application of resphera insight for high-resolution analysis of 16s amplicon sequences accurately identified l. monocytogenes.
both shotgun and 16s rrna data supported the presence of three slightly variable genomes of l. monocytogenes.
here, dynamics of co-enriching microbiota during recovery of listeria monocytogenes from naturally contaminated ice cream samples linked to an outbreak are described for three different initial enrichment formulations used by the food and drug administration , the international organization of standardization , and the united states department of agriculture .
all three methods performed equally well for enrichment of listeria monocytogenes.
listeria monocytogenesenrichmentice creammicrobiotaco-enriching bacteria16s rrnashotgun metagenomicsnext-generation sequencingngsisofdausdabuffered listeria enrichment broth half-fraser broth fraser broth university of vermont modified broth http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000038u.s.
during enrichment, other bacterial taxa were identified, including anoxybacillus, geobacillus, serratia, pseudomonas, erwinia, and streptococcus spp.
