efficient division of reproductive labor is a crucial characteristic of social insects and underlies their ecological and evolutionary success.
despite of the harmonious appearance of insect societies, nestmates may have different interests concerning the partitioning of reproduction among group members.
while reproduction is quite equally shared among nestmate queens in most populations from boreal eurasia , colonies from populations at the edge of the species' range are characterized by "functional monogyny," i.e., high skew.
in central spain, l. acervorum is restricted to small patches at higher elevations, which presumably makes dispersal and colony founding difficult.
we investigated the behavior of queens and workers in functionally monogynous colonies of l. acervorum from two mountain ranges in central spain.
we provide evidence for both queen and worker influence on the outcome of conflict over reproduction in colonies of l. acervorum from spain.
we conclude that queens of l. acervorum from spain establish rank orders by ritualized dominance interactions, such as antennal boxing.
because of the ecological requirements of l. acervorum and the predicted large impact of global change on central spain, the functionally monogynous populations of this ant must be considered as threatened.
aggressive worker policing may thus stabilize functional monogyny.
in contrast, worker aggression towards queens was not clearly associated with a queen's future reproductive success.
in several cases, overt worker aggression led to the expulsion of queens from the nest or their death.
this may lead to conflict about reproductive rights.
the patterns of queen - queen aggression and worker - queen grooming and feeding after hibernation allowed predicting, which queen later began to lay eggs.
queen - queen and worker - queen aggression differed in quality: queens typically engaged in ritualized dominance behavior, such as antennal boxing, while workers also attacked queens by biting and prolonged pulling on their legs and antennae.
