lack of resolution is potentially due to incomplete lineage sorting of ancestral polymorphisms among recently diverged species; however the gene regions examined did distinguish among almost all other species in the genus.
the north american agalinis species sampled form a well supported, monophyletic group within the family orobanchaceae relative to the outgroups sampled.
most hypotheses regarding section- and subsection-level relationships based on morphology were not supported and taxonomic revisions are warranted.
the genus contains many rare species, including the federally listed endangered species agalinis acuta.
our results suggest that north american members of the genus comprise six major lineages, however we were not able to resolve branching order among many of these lineages.
due to the important policy implications of this finding we are further evaluating the evolutionary distinctiveness of a. acuta using morphological data and loci with higher mutation rates.
in addition to evaluating the degree to which historical classifications at the section and subsection levels are supported by molecular data sampled from  <dig> individuals representing  <dig> agalinis species, we assessed the monophyly of  <dig> species by sampling multiple individuals representing different populations of those species.
however, there was no statistical support for the monophyly of a. acuta with respect to agalinis tenella and agalinis decemloba.
phylogenetic relationships estimated using maximum likelihood analyses of seven chloroplast dna loci  and the nuclear ribosomal dna its  locus ; indicated no support for the historically recognized sections except for section erectae.
lack of support for monophyly of agalinis acuta leaves the important question regarding its taxonomic status unanswered.
monophyly of  <dig> of the  <dig> sampled species was supported based on significant branch lengths of and high bootstrap support for subtending branches.
twenty-one of these species are of conservation concern in at least some part of their range.
