categorization of conserved mirnas indicated that mirnas of c. sinensis were still innovated and concentrated along three branches of the phylogenetic tree leading to bilaterians, insects and coelomates.
there was strong bias on families, family members and sequence nucleotides in c. sinensis.
micrornas  are non-coding, regulating small rna molecules which are essential for the complex life cycles of parasites and are involved in parasitic infections.
there were two mirna strategies in c. sinensis for its parasitic life: keeping a large category of mirna families of different animals and keeping stringent conserved seed regions with high active innovation in other places of mirnas mainly in the middle and the end, which were perfect for the parasite to perform its complex life style and for host changes.
there was no significant "seed region" at the first and ninth positions which were commonly found in human, animals and plants.
to identify and characterize mirnas expressed in adult c. sinensis residing chronically in the biliary tract, we developed an integrative approach combining deep sequencing and bioinformatic predictions with stem-loop real-time pcr analysis.
uracil was the dominant nucleotide, particularly at positions  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  which were located approximately at the beginning, middle and end of conserved mirnas.
clonorchis sinensis is a zoonotic parasite causing clonorchiasis-associated human disease such as biliary calculi, cholecystitis, liver cirrhosis, and it is currently classified as carcinogenic to humans for cholangiocarcinoma.
the present study represented the first large scale characterization of c. sinensis mirnas, which have implications for understanding the complex biology of this zoonotic parasite, as well as mirna studies of other related species such as opisthorchis viverrini and opisthorchis felineus of human and animal health significance.
here we report the use of this approach to identify and clone  <dig> new and  <dig>  conserved c. sinensis mirnas which belonged to  <dig> families.
