pinus flexilis e. james  is a keystone five-needle pine species in mountain-top ecosystems of north america.
a total of  <dig>  in silico snps and  <dig>  indels were identified with an average of  <dig>  snps per kb.
snp discovery through transcriptome comparison was integrated with high-throughput genotyping of a small set of in silico snps.
the genic snp map for the consensus cr4-lg may help future molecular breeding efforts by enabling both cr <dig> positional characterization and selection of this gene against wpbr.
the objective of this research was to develop p. flexilis transcriptome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism  markers using rna-seq analysis for genetic mapping of the major gene  that confers complete resistance to c. ribicola.
needle tissues of one resistant and two susceptible seedling families were subjected to rna-seq analysis.
linkage of dna markers with phenotypic traits provides essential information to dissect clustered genes with potential phenotypic contributions in a target genome region.
we demonstrated a very effective, low-cost strategy for developing a snp genetic map of a phenotypic trait of interest.
functional genes close to cr <dig> were annotated and their potential roles in cr4-mediated resistance were further discussed.
syntenic relationships of this cr4-lg map with the model conifer species p. taeda anchored cr <dig> on pinus consensus lg <dig>  indicating that r genes against c. ribicola have evolved independently in different five-needle pines.
high-throughput genotyping arrays were designed and were used to search for cr4-linked genic snps in megagametophyte populations of four maternal trees by haploid-segregation analysis.
white pine blister rust , caused by a non-native fungal pathogen cronartium ribicola , has resulted in mortality in this conifer species and is still spreading through the distribution.
disease resistancegenetic maplimber pinetranscriptome de novo assemblywhite pine blister rustus-fs special technology development program r2-2014-01schoettle anna w. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
this strategy may be applied to mapping any trait in non-model plant species that have complex genomes.
whole transcriptome sequencing provides a powerful tool for snp discovery in conifers and other species with complex genomes, for which sequencing and annotation of complex genomes is still challenging.
