in the overexpression study, the gene that was overexpressed  was highlighted as the most important epicenter specific to the perturbation.
sensitivity analysis showed that the genes identified as epicenters remain largely unaffected by small changes.
identifying the key players involved in either spreading the perturbation or responding to it can give us important insights.
in the second dataset , alternative regulators of sp <dig> targets were highlighted as epicenters.
we develop an algorithm, epitracer, which identifies the key proteins, or epicenters, from which a large number of changes in the protein-protein interaction  network ripple out.
we demonstrate its efficacy on two datasets with differing characteristics, highlighting its general applicability.
we develop an algorithm, epitracer, to find epicenters in condition-specific biological networks, given the ppi network and gene expression levels.
we propose a new centrality measure, ripple centrality, which measures how effectively a change at a particular node can ripple across the network by identifying highest activity paths specific to the condition of interest, obtained by mapping gene expression profiles to the ppi network.
also,  <dig> of the identified epicenters showed no significant differential expression, showing that our method can find information which simple differential expression analysis cannot.
network mininginfluential nodesripple centralityperturbation analysiscondition-specific networkieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine  <dig> washington, dc, usa 9- <dig> november  <dig> http://cci.drexel.edu/ieeebibm/bibm2015/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
perturbations typically affect only a small number of proteins, which go on to disturb a larger part of the network.
also, the gene that was knocked down  was picked up as an epicenter specific to the control condition.
epitracer includes programs which can extract the immediate influence zone of epicenters and provide a summary of dysregulated genes, facilitating quick biological analysis.
