a chado instance was initialized using a relational database management system.
open-source computational solutions currently available for translational science does not have a model to represent biomolecular information and also are not integrated with the existing bioinformatics tools.
a framework was developed to support translational research by integrating biomolecular information coming from different “omics” technologies with patient’s clinical and socio-demographic data.
the design of this framework has four levels: data level, to store the data; semantic level, to integrate and standardize the data by the use of ontologies; application level, to manage clinical databases, ontologies and data integration process; and web interface level, to allow interaction between the user and the system.
we also proposed a methodology to migrate data from legacy clinical databases to the integrative framework.
we have implemented an extension of chado – the clinical module - to allow the representation of this kind of information.
the clinical module was built based on the entity-attribute-value  model.
the clinical module was implemented and the framework was loaded using data from a factual clinical research database.
we implemented the iptrans tool that is a complete environment for data migration, which comprises: the construction of a model to describe the legacy clinical data, based on an ontology; the extraction, transformation and load  process to extract the data from the source clinical database and load it in the clinical module of chado; the development of a web tool and a bridge layer to adapt the web tool to chado, as well as other applications.
the clinical module can be accessed in http://dcm.ffclrp.usp.br/caib/pg=iptrans.
chado is a modular ontology-oriented database model that gained popularity due to its robustness and flexibility as a generic platform to store biological data; however it lacks supporting representation of clinical and socio-demographic information.
clinical and demographic data as well as biomaterial data were obtained from patients with tumors of head and neck.
a computational challenge that must be faced is to promote the integration of clinical, socio-demographic and biological data.
the use of the knowledge produced by sciences to promote human health is the main goal of translational medicine.
the experiments accomplished from a use case demonstrated that the proposed system meets requirements of flexibility and robustness, leading to the desired integration.
our approach consists of a framework for data integration through the use of a common reference ontology.
