in our results, we identified  <dig> novel lncrna transcripts, which we combined with  <dig> previously published lncrna transcripts into a curated dataset.
however, only limited information is available for lncrnas in drosophila melanogaster, an important model organism.
long non-coding rnaactive transcriptionchip-seqrna-seqdrosophila melanogasterhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006477national taiwan university ntu-erp-103r8600chen chien-yu national science council of republic of china 102-2221-e-002-074-my2chen chien-yu issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
to clarify this issue, we conducted rt-qpcr experiments and found that ~ <dig>  % of the selected lncrnas were truly transcribed, regardless of whether they were associated with active chromatin signatures or not.
the results showed that more than half of the reported lncrnas did not have chromatin signatures related to active transcription.
in this study, we discovered a large number of novel lncrnas, which suggests that many remain to be identified in d. melanogaster.
for the lncrnas that are known, we improved their characterization by integrating a large number of sequencing datasets  from multiple sources .
therefore, the characterization of lncrnas and identification of new lncrnas in d. melanogaster is an important area of research.
this set of curated lncrnas with improved annotations can serve as an important resource for investigating the function of lncrnas in d. melanogaster.
we then utilized  <dig> rna-seq and  <dig> chip-seq datasets to improve the annotation of the curated lncrnas with regards to transcriptional direction, exon regions, classification, expression in the brain, possession of a poly tail, and presence of conventional chromatin signatures.
we have developed a computational approach to identify new lncrnas from two tissue-specific rna-seq datasets using the poly-enriched and the ribo-zero method, respectively.
the rt-qpcr experiments demonstrated that rna-seq is a reliable platform to discover lncrnas.
moreover, there is an increasing interest in the use of chip-seq data  to detect signatures of active transcription for reported lncrnas.
furthermore, we used  <dig> time-course rna-seq datasets and  <dig> chip-seq datasets to investigate whether the lncrnas reported by rna-seq have active transcription signatures.
