our approach, unlike experimental methods, is not limited to specific aspects of cellular response.
we propose a novel statistical framework for integrating information flow scores, the set of differentially expressed genes in response to rapamycin treatment, and the transcriptional regulatory network.
by constructing a high-level functional map of tor downstream effectors, we show that our approach is not only capable of recapturing previously known pathways, but also suggests potential targets for future studies.
this network is hypothesized to mediate life-span extension in response to tor inhibition.
rather, it predicts transcriptional changes and post-translational modifications in response to tor inhibition.
the target of rapamycin  has been shown to play a key role in mediating healthspan extension in response to cr by integrating different signals that monitor nutrient-availability and orchestrating various components of cellular machinery in response.
calorie restriction  is one of the most conserved non-genetic interventions that extends healthspan in evolutionarily distant species, ranging from yeast to mammals.
we use this framework to identify the most relevant transcription factors in mediating the observed transcriptional response, and to construct the effective response network of the tor pathway.
information flow scores provide an aggregate ranking of relevance of proteins with respect to the tor signaling pathway.
we adopt a systematic approach for tracing information flow from the tor complex and use it to identify relevant signaling elements.
the constructed effective response network greatly enhances understanding of the mechanisms underlying the aging process and helps in identifying new targets for further investigation of anti-aging regimes.
target of rapamycin yeast aginginteractomeinformation flow analysiseffective response network
both genetic and pharmacological interventions that inhibit the tor pathway exhibit a similar phenotype, which is not further amplified by cr.
these rankings must be normalized for degree bias, appropriately interpreted, and mapped to associated roles in pathways.
