gene ontology and kegg pathway analyses revealed predominant metabolic processes and catalytic activities, important for fruit development.
in this study, we developed a small rna library from pooled rna samples from young seedlings to mature fruits and identified both conserved and pomegranate-specific mirna from  <dig> , <dig> high-quality reads.
in addition, for all 24-nt srnas, the nucleotide u was preferred  in the first position.
knowledge and roles of mirnas in pomegranate fruit development have not been explored.
stem-loop rt-qpcr was used to validate the expression of the predominant mirnas and novel mirnas in leaves, male and female flowers, and multiple fruit developmental stages; mir <dig>  mir156a, mir159a, mir159b, and mir319b were upregulated during the later stages of fruit development.
higher expression of mir <dig> in later fruit developmental may positively regulate anthocyanin biosynthesis by reducing spl transcription factor.
pomegranatemicrornastem-loop rt-qpcrfruit developmenthigh-throughput sequencinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100005825national institute of food and agriculture2013-04023reddy umesh k. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001503indian council of agricultural researchnational agricultural innovation projectnational agricultural innovation projectsingh nripendra v. devarajan ramajayam issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
pomegranate, which accumulates a large amount of anthocyanins in skin and arils, is valuable to human health, mainly because of its antioxidant properties.
for the pool of 15- to 30-nt small rnas, ~50 % were 24 nt.
the base bias at the first position from the 5’ end had a strong preference for u for most 18- to 26-nt srnas but a preference for a for 18-nt srnas.
in addition, kegg pathway analyses revealed the involvement of mirnas in ascorbate and linolenic acid, starch and sucrose metabolism; rna transport; plant hormone signaling pathways; and circadian clock.
novel mirnas showed variation in expression among different tissues.
these novel mirnas targeted different transcription factors and hormone related regulators.
the functions of the targets of the novel mirnas need further investigation.
