diversification analyses found the speciation rate to be low across anomura, and we identify  <dig> major changes in the tempo of diversification; the most significant at the base of a clade that includes the squat-lobster family chirostylidae.
here, we reconstruct the evolutionary history—phylogeny, divergence times, character evolution and diversification—of this speciose clade.
for this purpose, we sequenced two mitochondrial  and three nuclear  markers for  <dig> of the  <dig> extant families, using traditional sanger and next-generation  <dig> sequencing methods.
our findings are compared against current classifications and previous hypotheses of anomuran relationships.
many families and genera appear to be poly- or paraphyletic suggesting a need for further taxonomic revisions at these levels.
molecular data were combined with  <dig> morphological characters in order to estimate the largest anomuran phylogeny to date.
living anomuran biodiversity is the product of  <dig> major changes in the tempo of diversification; our initial insights suggest that the acquisition of a crab-like form did not act as a key innovation.
to date,  <dig> extant species have been described but phylogenetic relationships at high taxonomic levels remain unresolved.
the invasion of freshwater and terrestrial environments both occurred between the late cretaceous and tertiary.
the infraorder anomura has long captivated the attention of evolutionary biologists due to its impressive morphological diversity and ecological adaptations.
the anomuran fossil record allowed us to incorporate  <dig> fossils for divergence time analyses.
divergence time analysis dates the origin of anomura to the late permian ~ <dig>  mya with many of the present day families radiating during the jurassic and early cretaceous.
a divergence time analysis provides key insights into the origins of major lineages and events and the timing of morphological  and ecological  transitions.
our best phylogenetic hypothesis  supports most anomuran superfamilies and families as monophyletic.
