when genes are activated, they become associated with the nuclear pore complex  at the nuclear envelope.
the relationship of chromosome motion with transcriptional activation and active-gene recruitment to the nuclear periphery has not yet been investigated.
transcriptional activation of the gal genes is associated with their tethering and motion constraint at the nuclear periphery.
using segmented geometric particle tracking, we show that the repressed gal locus undergoes constrained diffusive movement, and that transcriptional induction with galactose is associated with an enrichment in cells with gal loci that are both associated with the nuclear periphery and much more constrained in their movement.
furthermore, we report that the mrna export factor sac <dig> is involved in this galactose-induced enrichment of gal loci at the nuclear periphery.
in parallel, using a novel machine visual screening technique, we find that the motion of constrained gal loci correlates with the motion of the cognate nuclei in galactose-induced cells.
in addition, we applied to the analysis of chromosome motion a machine visual screening approach that used unbiased visual data rather than segmented geometric data.
recently however, actively transcribed genes have also been found localized to the nuclear periphery in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae.
gene transcriptional activity is well correlated with intra-nuclear position, especially relative to the nuclear periphery, which is a region classically associated with gene silencing.
we have generated a yeast strain that enables us to observe the motion of the galactose-inducible gal gene locus relative to the nuclear periphery in real-time under transcriptionally active and repressed conditions.
we describe a model of gene recruitment to the nuclear periphery involving gene diffusion and the mrna export factor sac <dig> that can be used as a framework for further experimentation.
this novel analytical approach will allow for high-throughput study of processes that can be monitored via alterations in chromosome motion and connectivity with the nuclear periphery.
