the construction of robust and well resolved phylogenetic trees is important for our understanding of many, if not all biological processes, including speciation and origin of higher taxa, genome evolution, metabolic diversification, multicellularity, origin of life styles, pathogenicity and so on.
after concatenation of  <dig> proteins the topology of the phylogenetic tree remained stable, but after concatenation of  <dig> or more proteins the bootstrap support values of some branches decreased, most likely due to the inclusion of proteins with lowers ccc values.
the robust phylogenetic trees resulting from this method may contribute to our understanding of organismal diversification processes.
proteins belonging to the cellular processes and signaling kog category seem more informative than those belonging to the other three categories: information storage and processing; metabolism; and the poorly characterized category.
unfortunately, concatenation of many genes does not take into consideration the evolutionary history of each individual gene.
approximately 40– <dig> concatenated proteins seem needed to resolve fungal tol.
this study provides candidate protein sequences to be considered as phylogenetic markers in different branches of fungal tol.
here, we describe an approach to select informative phylogenetic proteins to be used in the tree of life  and barcoding projects by comparing the cophenetic correlation coefficients  among individual protein distance matrices of proteins, using the fungi as an example.
the individual protein distance matrices based on  <dig> concatenated proteins that has been used for phylogeny reconstruction before  <cit>  were compared one with another in order to select those with the highest ccc, which then was used as a reference.
the phylogenetic signal may, therefore, be increased by enlarging the number of genes included in phylogenetic studies.
this reference distance matrix was compared with those of the  <dig> single copy proteins selected and their ccc values were calculated.
in total  <dig> orthologous proteins  were assigned among  <dig> fungal genomes from the asco- and basidiomycota and  <dig> of these represented single copy proteins.
many older phylogenies were not well supported due to insufficient phylogenetic signal present in the single or few genes used in phylogenetic reconstructions.
