2-apb is a molecule known to both potentiate and inhibit t cell soce, but it is also an effector of trp channels and endoplasmic reticulum ca2+-atpase.
indeed, a 2-apb analogue where the boron-oxygen core is replaced by a carbon-phosphorus core is devoid of potentiating capacity , highlighting the key role of the boron-oxygen core present in borinate esters for the potentiation function.
the removal or addition of phenyl groups respectively decrease or increase the efficiency of the borinate esters to potentiate and inhibit the soce.
it has recently been observed or highlighted in other cell types such as myoblasts and neurons, suggesting a wider physiological role of this pathway.
whereas orai <dig> protein is considered to be the channel allowing the soce in t cells, it is hypothesized that other proteins like trpc could associate with orai <dig> to form soce with different pharmacology and kinetics in other cell types.
mrna expression revealed that jurkat t cells mainly expressed orai <dig>  and were the more sensitive to 2-apb modulation of soce.
however, dimesityl borinate ester, a 2-apb analogue with a terminal b-oh group showed an efficient inhibitory ability, without any potentiating capacity.
store-operated calcium entry  is the major ca2+ ion entry pathway in lymphocytes and is responsible of a severe combined immunodeficiency  when deficient.
these compounds could represent new tools to characterize the different types of soce and the first step in the development of new immunomodulators.
to identify novel soce effectors, we analyzed the effects of 2-aminoethyl diphenylborinate  and its analogues.
a structure-function analysis allowed to discover that the boron-oxygen core present in 2-apb and in the borinate ester analogues is absolutely required for the dual effects on soce.
this study allows the discovery of new boron-oxygen core containing compounds with the same ability as 2-apb to both potentiate and inhibit the soce of different leukocyte cell lines.
