invasive colorado potato beetle  populations have experienced a rapid range expansion and intense selection by insecticides.
invasive pest species offers a unique opportunity to study the effects of genetic architecture, demography and selection on patterns of genetic variability.
our results suggest that despite the long history of insecticide use in this species, demographic events together with pre-invasion history have been strongly influential in shaping the genetic diversity of the ache <dig> gene in the invasive beetle populations.
the genetic diversity in the ache <dig> locus of the european beetles, in turn, strongly reflects founder effects followed by rapid invasion.
the high frequency of the s291g mutation in the ache <dig> gene among native populations suggests this mutation is the ancestral state and thus, either a pre-adaptation of the beetle for op resistance or the ache <dig> is not the major gene conferring op resistance.
the genetic variability at the ache <dig> gene was compared with two other genes not directly affected by insecticide selection, diapause protein  <dig> and juvenile hormone esterase.
only two susceptible haplotypes, genetically very differentiated, were found, one in us and one in europe.
analysis of three mexican, two us and five european populations yielded a total of  <dig> haplotypes.
by comparing native and invasive beetle populations, we studied the origins of organophosphate  resistance-associated mutations in the acetylcholinesterase  <dig>  gene, and the role of selection and demography on its genetic variability.
the long historical association with host plant alkaloids together with recombination may have contributed to the high genetic variation at this locus.
contrary to the expectations all genetic variability was associated with a point mutation linked to insecticide resistance , this mutation was found in 100% of mexican, 95% of us and 71% of european beetle sequences analysed.
all three genes showed reduction in genetic variability indicative of a population bottleneck associated with the invasion.
stochastic effects during invasion explain most of the observed patterns of genetic variability at the three genes investigated.
