surprisingly, we found that two simple factors—overall acceleration of postural movement and elimination of inactivity periods—explained the behavioral characteristics of strains with very atypical transition patterns; therefore, computational analysis of animal behavior must be accompanied by evaluation of the effects of these simple factors.
our methods and results constitute guidelines for effectively finding strains that show “truly” interesting behaviors and systematically uncovering novel gene functions by bioimage-informatic approaches.
we revealed that the occurrence patterns of the postural states and the transition patterns among these states have a relationship as expected, and such a relationship must be taken into account to identify strains with atypical behaviors that are different from those of wild type.
based on this observation, we identified several strains that exhibit atypical transition patterns that cannot be fully explained by their occurrence patterns of postural states.
we propose that elimination of inactivity periods and overall acceleration of postural change speed can explain behavioral phenotypes of strains with very atypical postural transition patterns.
computational ethologyeigenwormsworm posture analysistransition patterns of postureshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of science15j <dig>  16j00129fukunaga tsukasa http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of science16h06154iwasaki wataru http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003382core research for evolutional science and technologycanon foundationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
with rapid advances in genome sequencing and editing technologies, systematic and quantitative analysis of animal behavior is expected to be another key to facilitating data-driven behavioral genetics.
in this study, we applied the gaussian mixture model-based binning method to time-series postural data for  <dig> c. elegans strains.
several video-tracking systems are available for automatically recording behavioral data for the nematode, but computational methods for analyzing these data are still under development.
the nematode caenorhabditis elegans is a model organism in this field.
finally, we found that the npr- <dig> and npr- <dig> mutants have similar behavioral patterns that were not predictable by sequence homology, proving that our data-driven approach can reveal the functions of genes that have not yet been characterized.
