we identified two distinct sets of parameter values, with different biological interpretations, that fit and explain the experimental data.
the archetypal incp- <dig> plasmid rk <dig> is a well-characterized biological system, with a fully sequenced and annotated genome and wide range of experimental measurements.
to increase our understanding of the regulation of this operon, we have constructed a dynamical mathematical model using ordinary differential equations, and employed a bayesian inference scheme, markov chain monte carlo  using the metropolis-hastings algorithm, as a way of integrating experimental measurements and a priori knowledge.
this allowed us to highlight the proportion of repressor protein as dimers as a key experimental measurement defining the dynamics of the system.
we also compared mcmc and metabolic control analysis  as approaches for determining the sensitivity of model parameters.
its central control operon, encoding two global regulators kora and korb, is a natural example of a negatively self-regulated operon.
analysis of joint posterior distributions led to the identification of correlations between parameters for protein synthesis and partial repression by kora or korb dimers, indicating the necessary use of joint posteriors for correct parameter estimation.
finally, by examining a series of different model refinements for partial repression by kora or korb dimers alone, we showed that a model including partial repression by kora and korb was most compatible with existing experimental data.
using mca, we demonstrated that the system is highly sensitive to the growth rate but insensitive to repressor monomerization rates in their selected value regions; the latter outcome was also confirmed by mcmc.
we have demonstrated that the combination of dynamical mathematical models with bayesian inference is valuable in integrating diverse experimental data and identifying key determinants and parameters for the incp- <dig> central control operon.
moreover, we have shown that bayesian inference and mca are complementary methods for identification of sensitive parameters.
