two distinct haplotypes, containing a cluster of six single nucleotide polymorphisms , were associated with resistance or susceptibility to bcmv.
this locus, in the distal arm of chromosome pv <dig>  contains seven putative nbs-lrr-type disease resistance genes.
here we applied in silico bulked segregant analysis  to the beancap diversity panel, composed of over  <dig> lines and genotyped with the barcbean_ <dig> 6k snp beadchip, to develop codominant and tightly linked markers to the i gene controlling resistance to bean common mosaic virus .
we demonstrated the utility of the in silico bsa approach using genetically diverse germplasm, genotyped with a high-density snp chip array, to discover snp variation at a specific targeted genomic region.
we physically mapped the genomic region underlying the i gene.
one-hundred and twenty-two lines, including  <dig> of the beancap panel, were screened for bcmv resistance in the greenhouse, and all of the resistant or susceptible plants displayed distinct snp haplotypes as those found in the two bulks.
two contrasting bulks, containing bcmv host differentials and ten beancap lines with known disease reaction to bcmv, were subjected to in silico bsa for targeting the i gene and flanking sequences.
the closest snp  to the distal nbs-lrr gene model for the i gene locus was targeted for conversion to codominant kasp  and caps  markers.
both marker systems accurately predicted the disease reaction to bcmv conferred by the i gene in all screened lines of this study.
common bean was one of the first crops that benefited from the development and utilization of molecular marker-assisted selection  for major disease resistance genes.
efficiency of mas for breeding common bean is still hampered, however, due to the dominance, linkage phase, and loose linkage of previously developed markers.
in common bean, many disease resistance genes are mapped and their physical genomic position can now be determined, thus the application of this approach will facilitate further development of codominant and tightly linked markers for use in mas.
the resistant/susceptible haplotypes were validated in  <dig> recombinant inbred lines segregating for bcmv resistance.
