interestingly, when the aeadsx gene is compared to the anopheles dsx ortholog, there are differences in the in silico predicted default and regulated sex-specific splicing events, which suggests that the upstream regulators either are different or act in a slightly different manner.
in the model system drosophila melanogaster, doublesex  is the double-switch gene at the bottom of the somatic sex determination cascade that determines the differentiation of sexually dimorphic traits.
they show a striking conservation of sex-specific regulation, based on alternative splicing, and of the encoded sex-specific proteins, which are transcriptional regulators of downstream terminal genes that influence sexual differentiation of cells, tissues and organs.
an expression analysis showed that aeadsx transcripts were present from early stages of development and that sex-specific regulation starts at least from late larval stages.
the sex-specific regulation is based on a combination of exon skipping, 5' alternative splice site choice and, most likely, alternative polyadenylation.
this study led to uncover the molecular evolution of aedes aegypti dsx splicing regulation with the respect of the more closely related culicidae anopheles gambiae orthologue.
homologues of dsx are functionally conserved in various dipteran species, including the malaria vector anopheles gambiae.
the aedes dsx sex-specific splicing regulation seems to be more complex with the respect of other dipteran species, suggesting slightly novel evolutionary trajectories for its regulation and hence for the recruitment of upstream splicing regulators.
aeadsx produces sex-specific transcripts by alternative splicing, which encode isoforms with a high degree of identity to anopheles gambiae and drosophila melanogaster homologues.
genomic comparative analyses between the aedes and anopheles dsx genes revealed a partial conservation of the exon organization and extensive divergence in the intron lengths.
in aedes aegypti, the dsx gene is sex-specifically regulated and encodes two female-specific and one male-specific isoforms, all sharing a doublesex/mab- <dig>  domain-containing n-terminus and different c-termini.
in this work, we report on the molecular characterization of the dsx homologue in the dengue and yellow fever vector aedes aegypti .
