in this paper, we present a comprehensive transcriptome resource for the sand fly species p. perniciosus built from short-read rna-seq and we provide insights into sex-specific gene expression at adult stage.
nematocerasand flytranscriptome de novo assemblyrna-seqdifferential expression analysissex-specific gene expressionsex-biased genesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
<dig>  transcripts had at least one functional annotation, including full-length low abundance salivary transcripts,  <dig> transcripts were classified as putative long non-coding rnas and  <dig> transcripts encoded for putative novel proteins specific of the phlebotominae sub-family.
the phlebotomine sand fly phlebotomus perniciosus  is a major old world vector of the protozoan leishmania infantum, the etiological agent of visceral and cutaneous leishmaniases in humans and dogs, a worldwide re-emerging diseases of great public health concern, affecting  <dig> countries.
to increase the available sequence data for p. perniciosus and to start studying the molecular basis of the sexual differentiation in sand flies, we performed whole transcriptome illumina rna sequencing  of adult males and females and de novo transcriptome assembly.
we assembled  <dig>  high quality transcripts, of which  <dig>  were unique, starting from adult whole body male and female pools.
despite the growing interest in the study of this sand fly species in the last years, the development of genomic resources has been limited so far.
among them, some show relaxation of selective constraints when compared to their orthologs of the new world sand fly species lutzomyia longipalpis.
differential expression analysis identified  <dig> transcripts significantly biased between sexes.
our analysis represents a first step towards the identification of sex-specific genes and pathways and a foundation for forthcoming investigations into this important vector species, including the study of the evolution of sex-biased genes and of the sexual differentiation in phlebotomine sand flies.
