although there was heavy ship traffic for over a hundred years to the kerguelen archipelago, it appears that the mice that have arrived first have colonized the main island  and most of the associated small islands.
two small islands  within the archipelago show a different mitochondrial haplotype, are genetically distinct for autosomal loci, but share the major y-chromosomal haplotype.
in the mitochondrial d-loop sequences, we find several single step mutational derivatives of one of the major mitochondrial haplotypes, suggesting an unusually high mutation rate, or the occurrence of selective sweeps in mitochondria.
we find that most of the mice on the kerguelen archipelago have the same mitochondrial haplotype and all share the same major y-chromosomal haplotype.
this makes them an excellent model for studying the evolutionary processes during early stages of new colonization.
however, most oceanic islands were colonized by mice only within the past  <dig> years.
we have typed  <dig> autosomal and six y-chromosomal microsatellite loci and obtained mitochondrial d-loop sequences for a total of  <dig> samples, mainly from the kerguelen archipelago, but also from the falkland islands, marion island, amsterdam island, antipodes island, macquarie island, auckland islands and one sample from south georgia.
starting from western europe, the house mouse  has spread across the globe in historic times.
the genetic data suggest that the mice of both primary invasions originated from related source populations.
we have focused here on the kerguelen archipelago, located within the sub-antarctic area and compare the patterns with samples from other southern ocean islands.
the second invasion that we see in our data has occurred on islands that are detached from grande terre and were likely to have had no resident mice prior to their arrival.
our data suggest that an area colonized by mice is refractory to further introgression, possibly due to fast adaptations of the resident mice to local conditions.
