eight samples comprising of shoot and root tissues of two horse gram genotypes  were used for comparison under control and polyethylene glycol-induced drought stress conditions.
under gene ontology response to stimulus, dna binding and catalytic activity was highly expressed during drought stress conditions.
the knowledge generated can be further utilized for exploring other underexploited plants for stress responsive genes and improving plant tolerance.
significant blast hits were obtained for  <dig>  transcripts while,  <dig>  transcripts had no hits but contained important conserved domains.
independent search on plant metabolic network pathways suggested valine degradation, gluconeogenesis and purine nucleotide degradation to be highly influenced under drought stress in horse gram.
transcription factors belonging to nac, myb-related, and wrky families were found highly represented under drought stress.
qrt-pcr validated the expression profile for  <dig> out of  <dig> genes analyzed in response to drought stress.
the genes and pathways identified suggest efficient regulation leading to active adaptation as a basal defense response against drought stress by horse gram.
serine/threonine protein kinase was found to dominate in enzyme classification while pathways belonging to ribosome metabolism followed by plant pathogen interaction and plant hormone signal transduction were predominant in kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes analysis.
drought tolerance is an attribute maintained in plants by cross-talk between multiple and cascading metabolic pathways.
without a sequenced genome available for horse gram, it is difficult to comprehend such complex networks and intercalated genes associated with drought tolerance of horse gram .
using illumina sequencing technology, a total of  <dig> , <dig> paired end read pairs were generated and utilized for de novo assembly of horse gram.
de novo transcriptome discovery and analysis has generated enormous information over horse gram genomics.
horse gramillumina sequencingde novo assemblydrought responsive genes
therefore, de novo transcriptome discovery and associated analyses was done for this highly drought tolerant yet under exploited legume to decipher its genetic makeup.
