therefore, a study was conducted in broiler chickens to assess the effect of route of administration  and dose escalation  on plasma and intestinal concentrations of enrofloxacin and its main metabolite ciprofloxacin after treatment with enrofloxacin once daily for five consecutive days.
the results in plasma and intestinal content demonstrated that biotransformation of enro- to ciprofloxacin in broiler chickens is limited.
a clear increase of intestinal concentrations was demonstrated after administration of a five-fold higher dose .
after intramuscular administration, intestinal concentrations were comparable, except for the higher levels in cloaca due to the complete bioavailability and urinary excretion.
a first step in order to limit antimicrobial resistance is to assess the exposure of the intestinal microbiota to enrofloxacin after different treatment strategies.
in general, the intestinal microbiota in cecum and colon is exposed to significant levels of enrofloxacin after conventional treatment .
the intestinal microbiota is exposed to high levels of the antimicrobial, after oral as well as parenteral therapy.
the impact of the detected intestinal levels on resistance selection in the intestinal microbiota has to be further investigated.
next to simply reducing antimicrobial consumption, optimizing dosage regimens can be regarded as a suitable strategy to reduce antimicrobial resistance development without jeopardizing therapy efficacy and outcome.
sample preparation prior to lc-ms/ms analysis consisted of extraction with ethyl acetate.
the use of fluoroquinolones in the fowl industry has led to an alarming incidence of fluoroquinolone resistance in pathogenic as well as commensal bacteria.
enrofloxacinbroiler chickendose escalationroute of administrationplasmaintestinal contentissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
furthermore, a dose and time dependent correlation was observed.
a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry  method was developed to quantify both analytes in plasma and intestinal content.
for intestinal content samples pbs buffer was added before extraction.
four different parts of the intestinal tract were sampled: ileum, cecum, colon and cloaca.
