in mammals, akt is ubiquitously expressed and is associated with regulation of cellular proliferation, metabolism, cell growth and cell death.
we demonstrate akt signaling is essential for organismal physiology and in late stages of the akt phenotype the reduction in neoblast numbers may impair regeneration in planarians.
the planarian ortholog smed-akt is molecularly conserved providing unique opportunities to analyze the function of akt during cellular turnover and repair of adult tissues.
our results also reveal novel roles for akt signaling during regeneration, specifically for the timely localization of cell death near the injury site.
the reduced neoblast numbers largely affected the maintenance of adult tissues including the nervous and excretory systems and ciliated structures in the ventral epithelia, which impaired planarian locomotion.
functional disruption of smed-akt alters the balance between cell proliferation and cell death leading to systemic impairment of adult tissue renewal.
however, in response to amputation, levels of cell death were decreased and failed to localize near the injury site.
however, the mechanisms by which akt signaling regulates stem cell behavior in the complexity of the whole body are poorly understood.
interestingly, the neoblast mitotic response was increased around the amputation area but the regenerative blastema failed to form.
downregulation of smed-akt function also resulted in an increase of cell death throughout the animal.
thus, akt signaling regulates neoblast biology and mediates in the distribution of injury-mediated cell death during tissue repair in planarians.
planarians are flatworms with large populations of stem cells capable of dividing to support adult tissue renewal and regeneration.
planariansregenerationaktstem cellshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000054national cancer instituteca176114oviedo néstor j. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000057national institute of general medical sciencesgm109372oviedo néstor j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
