a key element in favor of mass spectrometric analysis of rna fragmentation patterns is that a reference database for analysis of the results can be generated from sequence information.
trees constructed using this function are consistent with those produced by direct comparison of primary sequences, demonstrating that the inherent degeneracy in mass spectrometric analysis of rna fragments does not preclude correct organism identification.
it has recently been demonstrated that organism identifications can be recovered from mass spectra using various methods including base-specific fragmentation of nucleic acids.
neighbor-joining trees for important bacterial pathogens were generated using distances based on mass spectrometric observables and the spectral coincidence function.
cluster analysis based on comparison of mass spectrometric observables using the spectral coincidence function is an extremely useful tool for determining the genetic affinity of an unknown bacterium.
hence, it is possible that organisms that are not closely related  might be falsely identified by mass spectral coincidence.
because mass spectrometry is extremely rapid and widely available such techniques offer significant advantages in some applications.
in contrast to the original rnase t <dig> cataloging method, when digestion products are analyzed by mass spectrometry, products with the same base composition cannot be distinguished.
finally, typical values of the coincidence between organisms were also examined with regard to phylogenetic level and sequence variability.
in contrast to hybridization approaches, the genetic affinity of any unknown isolate can in principle be determined within the context of all previously sequenced 16s rrnas without prior knowledge of what the organism is.
a more detailed, genus-level analysis of pathogens and near relatives was also performed, and it was found that assignments of genetic affinity were consistent with those obtained by direct sequence comparisons.
