plants and their heterotrophic bacterial biofilm communities possibly strongly interact, especially in aquatic systems.
the organic content of freshwater plants was lower than that of brackish water plants , and lower in c. aspera than in m. spicatum .
especially the content of total phenolic compounds and anthocyanin was higher in m. spicatum, and in general higher in the freshwater than in the brackish water habitat.
members of the cytophaga-flavobacteria-bacteroidetes group were abundant in all samples  and were especially dominant in m. spicatum samples.
planctomycetes were almost absent on m. spicatum in freshwater, but present on c. aspera in freshwater and on both plants in brackish water.
the presence of polyphenols might explain the distinct bacterial community on freshwater m. spicatum compared to that of m. spicatum in brackish water and of c. aspera in both habitats.
we aimed to ascertain whether different macrophytes or their habitats determine bacterial community composition.
the bacterial community composition was analysed based on habitat, plant species, and plant part.
distinct plant species, plant part and habitat specific differences in total cell counts and two bacterial groups  support the combined impact of substrate  and habitat on epiphytic bacterial community composition.
the content of nutrients, chlorophyll, total phenolic compounds, and anthocyanin differed in the plants and habitats.
and the angiosperm myriophyllum spicatum l., in two habitats, freshwater  and brackish water , using fluorescence in situ hybridization.
the bacterial abundance was higher on plants from brackish water  than on plants from freshwater , with older shoots having a higher abundance.
we compared the composition of epiphytic bacteria on two common aquatic macrophytes, the macroalga chara aspera willd.
alphaproteobacteria were the second major group .
bacterial biofilm communities on the surface of aquatic plants might be influenced by the host plant and environmental factors.
