many soybean genes were differentially expressed between drought-tolerant and drought-sensitive genotypes.
because soybean growth and development is extremely sensitive to water deficit, quality and crop yields are severely impacted by drought stress.
the expression patterns of eight randomly-selected genes were confirmed by quantitative rt-pcr; the results of qrt-pcr analysis agreed with transcriptional profile data for  <dig> out of  <dig>  data points.
sequencing of the  <dig> libraries produced  <dig> – <dig>  unambiguous tags, which were mapped to reference sequences for annotation of expressed genes.
the seven most significant degs are candidates for improving soybean drought tolerance.
the seven most significantly expressed  genes— glyma15g <dig>  glyma05g <dig>  glyma15g <dig>  glyma05g <dig>  glyma06g <dig>  glyma08g <dig>  and glyma11g16000—are more likely to determine drought stress tolerance.
two soybean genotypes—drought-tolerant jindou <dig> and drought-sensitive zhongdou33—were subjected to dehydration and rehydration conditions.
we also generated eight libraries for analysis under rehydration conditions.
based on go functional annotation and pathway enrichment analysis, some of these genes encoded transcription factors, protein kinases, and other regulatory proteins.
the main functional categories enriched in these degs were metabolic process, response to stresses, plant hormone signal transduction, protein processing, and plant-pathogen interaction pathway; the associated genes primarily encoded transcription factors, protein kinases, and other regulatory proteins.
soybeandehydrationdigital gene expression tag profilerehydrationdifferentially expressed genesquantitative rt-pcrtranscription factorsprotein kinasesregulatory proteins
identification and analysis of dehydration- and rehydration-inducible differentially expressed genes  would not only aid elucidation of molecular mechanisms of stress response, but also enable improvement of crop stress tolerance via gene transfer.
these findings will be helpful for analysis and elucidation of molecular mechanisms of drought tolerance; they also provide a basis for cultivating new varieties of drought-tolerant soybean.
for analysis of degs under dehydration conditions,  <dig> cdna libraries were generated from roots and leaves at two different time points under well-watered and dehydration conditions.
using digital gene expression tag profiling , a new technique based on illumina sequencing, we analyzed expression profiles between two soybean genotypes to identify drought-responsive genes.
in the face of limited water resources, drought-responsive genes are therefore of interest.
degs in the drought-tolerant genotype were identified by comparison of degs among treatments and genotypes.
