these findings will enable more accurate and reliable normalization of qpcr results for gene expression studies in this economically important woody plant, particularly related to rooting and clonal propagation.
to validate these results and select the most suitable reference genes, the expression profile of the argonaute <dig> gene was evaluated in relation to the most stable candidate genes indicated by each algorithm.
both programs indentified ubi and 18s as the most variable genes.
the present study aimed at identifying suitable control genes for normalization of gene expression associated with adventitious rooting in e. globulus microcuttings.
by the use of two distinct algorithms, genorm and normfinder, we have assessed gene expression stability of eleven candidate reference genes in e. globulus: 18s, act <dig>  ef <dig>  euc <dig>  h2b, idh, sand, tip <dig>  tua, ubi and  <dig>  the candidate reference genes were evaluated in microccuttings rooted in vitro, in presence or absence of auxin, along six time-points spanning the process of adventitious rooting.
our study showed that expression stability varied between putative reference genes tested in e. globulus.
based on the ago <dig> relative expression profile obtained using the genes suggested by the algorithms, h2b and tua were considered as the most suitable reference genes for expression studies in e. globulus adventitious rooting.
eucalyptus globulus and its hybrids are very important for the cellulose and paper industry mainly due to their low lignin content and frost resistance.
to date one of the most accurate methods available for gene expression analysis is quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction ; however, reliable use of this technique requires reference genes for normalization.
thus, the identification of reliable reference genes must be done for every species and experimental approach.
slight differences were observed in the most stable pair of genes indicated by each program: idh and sand for genorm, and h2b and tua for normfinder.
there is no single reference gene that can be regarded as universal for all experiments and biological materials.
