an elementary requirement for a successful energy function is to rank the native structure above any threaded structure.
thus, discrimination of the native structure is good but not perfect.
the discrimination of near-native structures is fair.
the results suggest that the simple modelling procedure applied here could help identify and characterize protein-protein complexes.
finally, we compare near-native models to distinctly non-native models.
compared to earlier studies, a simpler dataset, a simpler structural alignment procedure, and an additional energy criterion are used.
on average, the experimental structure is ranked above 92% of the alternate structures.
typically, a single, alternate, non-native binding mode exists that has a native-like energy.
structure-based computational methods are needed to help identify and characterize protein-protein complexes and their function.
we investigate a simple extension of this technique to protein-protein complexes.
for individual proteins, the most successful technique is homology modelling.
we consider a large set of complexes of known structures, involving pairs of single-domain proteins.
if weakly stable complexes are excluded , as well as a few unusual complexes, a simple homology principle holds: complexes that share more than 35% sequence identity share similar structures and interaction modes; this principle was less clearcut in earlier studies.
we use the dfireβ energy function, whose quality and complexity are typical of the models used today.
the energy function was then tested for its ability to identify experimental structures among sets of decoys, produced by a simple threading procedure.
some of the associated failures may correspond to genuine, alternate binding modes and/or native complexes that are artefacts of the crystal environment.
the complexes are compared with each other to establish their sequence and structural similarities and the relation between the two.
next, we compare the xray structures to models obtained by threading the native sequence onto other, homologous complexes.
