non-long terminal repeat  retrotransposons are mobile genetic elements that propagate themselves by reverse transcription of an rna intermediate.
non-ltr retrotransposons are known to evolve mainly via vertical transmission and random loss.
the degree of coding sequence similarity of the studied elements, their discontinuous distribution, and results of divergence-versus-age analysis make it highly unlikely that these sequences diverged at the same time as their host taxa.
in contrast, maccr1b lineage clones were extremely similar to cr1b non-ltr retrotransposons from bombycidae moths: silkworm bombyx mori and oberthueria caeca.
horizontal transmission is believed to be a very rare event in non-ltr retrotransposons.
the lycaenid genus maculinea, the object of interest for evolutionary biologists and also a model group for european biodiversity studies, possesses a unique, specialized myrmecophilous lifestyle at larval stage.
in addition, phylogenetic markers for population analysis of maculinea could be developed based on the described non-ltr retrotransposons.
cr1a-like elements were found only in family lycaenidae.
the only reasonable alternative explanation is horizontal transfer.
their caterpillars, after three weeks of phytophagous life on specific food plants drop to the ground where they are adopted to the ant nest by myrmica foraging workers.
the present study extends the analysis of non-ltr retroelements to cr <dig> clade from four butterfly species of genus maculinea .
a comparative analysis of rt nucleotide sequences demonstrated an extremely high similarity among elements both in interspecific and intraspecific comparisons.
our knowledge of distribution and diversity of insect non-ltr retrotransposons is limited to a few species – mainly model organisms such as dipteran genera drosophila, anopheles, and aedes.
we found that the genome of maculinea butterflies contains multiple cr <dig> lineages of non-ltr retrotransposons, including those from maccr1a, maccr1b and t1q families.
