and subrugosa, which were long regarded as different species due to marked differences in morphological, ecological and behavioral traits.
the widespread squat lobster munida gregaria comprises two discrete ecotypes, gregaria s. str.
a total number of  <dig> gregaria s. str.
despite their pronounced bimodal morphologies and different lifestyles, the gregaria s. str.
the mitochondrial data showed a shallow, star-like haplotype network and complete overlap of genetic distances within and among ecotypes.
this alternative explanation to cryptic speciation often remains untested because it requires considerable effort to reject the hypothesis that the observed underlying genetic homogeneity of the different phenotypes may be trivially caused by too slowly evolving molecular markers.
phenotypic plasticitygenetic homogeneitysquat lobstermicrosatellitesgene flowchinese scholarship council2009633009wang chen http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationopp 01-32032held christoph issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
results from the pca and using discriminant functions demonstrated that the morphology of the two forms remains discrete.
genetically identical, isogenic individuals, however, can also express similarly different phenotypes in response to a trigger condition, e.g.
we studied the morphometry and genetics of m. gregaria s. l. and tested  whether the phenotypic differences remain stable after continental-scale sampling and inclusion of different life stages,  and whether each phenotype is underpinned by a specific genotype.
and subrugosa ecotypes form a single, dimorphic species m. gregaria s. l.. based on adequate geographic coverage and multiple independent polymorphic loci, there is no indication that each phenotype may have a unique genetic basis, leaving phenotypic plasticity or localized genomic islands of speciation as possible explanations.
and subrugosa individuals from  <dig> stations encompassing almost entire range in south america were included in morphological and genetic analyses using nine unlinked hypervariable microsatellites and new coi sequences.
dna barcoding has demonstrated that many discrete phenotypes are in fact genetically distinct cryptic species.
