infection with heat-inactivated bacteria or bacteria-free culture supernatants showed that in most cases live bacteria are needed to cause mortality in g. mellonella.
s. suis is considered an emerging zoonotic agent with increasing numbers of human cases over the last years.
the results reported here, indicate that the g. mellonella model may aid our understanding of veterinary microbial pathogens such as the emerging zoonotic pathogen s. suis and generate hypotheses for testing in the target animal host.
streptococcus suis is an encapsulated gram-positive bacterium and the leading cause of sepsis and meningitis in young pigs, resulting in considerable economic losses in the porcine industry.
streptococcus suisgalleria mellonellavirulencereduction and refinement infection modelh2020and-659-121velikova nadya issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
currently, there is an urgent need for a convenient, reliable and standardised animal model to rapidly assess s. suis virulence.
here, we developed g. mellonella larvae as a model to assess virulence of s. suis strains.
fourteen isolates of s. suis belonging to different serotypes killed g. mellonella larvae in a dose-dependent manner.
larvae infected with the virulent serotype  <dig> strain, s. suis s3881/s <dig>  were rescued by antibiotic therapy.
last but not least, use of the g. mellonella infection model to study s. suis virulence adheres to the principles of replacement, reduction and refinement  and can potentially reduce the number of vertebrates used for experimental infection studies.
the g. mellonella model is simple, cost-efficient, and raises less ethical issues than experiments on vertebrates and reduces infrastructure requirements.
crucially, the observed virulence of the different serotypes and mutants was in agreement with virulence observed in piglets  and the zebrafish larval infection model.
in the environment, both avirulent and virulent strains occur in pigs, with no evidence for consistent adapatation of virulent strains to the human host.
