the 6-thioguanine, but not other purine analogs, strongly inhibited hprt, which may in part explain the observed growth inhibition.
our results suggest that enzymes in mycoplasma nucleotide biosynthesis are potential targets for future design of antibiotics against mycoplasma infection.
the anticancer drug 6-thioguanine had a mic  value of  <dig>  μg ml- <dig>  whereas trifluorothymidine, gemcitabine and dipyridamole had mic values of approximately  <dig> μg ml- <dig>  in wild type mpn culture the presence of 6-thioguanine and dipyridamole strongly inhibited the uptake and metabolism of hypoxanthine and guanine while gemcitabine inhibited the uptake and metabolism of all nucleobases and thymidine.
trifluorothymidine and 5-fluorodeoxyuridine, however, stimulated the uptake and incorporation of radiolabeled thymidine and this stimulation was due to induction of thymidine kinase activity.
trifluorothymidine and 5-fluorodeoxyuridine were shown to be good substrates and inhibitors for thymidine kinase from human and mycoplasma sources.
mycoplasma pneumoniaegrowth inhibition6-thioguaninetrifluorothymidinehypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferasethymidine kinase
sixteen drugs showed varying inhibitory effects and seven showed strong inhibition of mpn growth.
during the last  <dig> years macrolide-resistant mpn strains have been frequently reported in asian countries and have been spreading to europe and the united states.
due to the lack of cell wall, mpn is resistant to antibiotics targeting cell wall synthesis such as penicillin.
in this study,  <dig> fda-approved anticancer or antiviral drugs were screened for inhibitory effects on mpn growth and selected analogs were further characterized by inhibition of target enzymes and metabolism of radiolabeled substrates.
mycoplasma pneumoniae  is a human pathogen that causes acute and chronic respiratory diseases and has been linked to many extrapulmonary diseases.
we have shown that several anticancer and antiviral nucleoside and nucleobase analogs are potent inhibitors of mpn growth and that the mechanism of inhibition are most likely due to inhibition of enzymes in the nucleotide biosynthesis pathway and nucleoside transporter.
