the structural behavior of hydrophobic cluster species, which are typical of protein globular domains, was investigated within banks of experimental structures, considered at different levels of sequence redundancy.
in order to help the analysis of hca plots, we report here the structural preferences of hydrophobic cluster species, which are frequently encountered in globular domains of proteins.
the dictionary of hydrophobic clusters described here can help the hca user to interpret and compare the hca plots of globular protein sequences, as well as provides an original fundamental insight into the structural bricks of protein folds.
however, its efficiency and application are currently limited by the need of user expertise.
hydrophobic cluster species are predominantly associated with regular secondary structures, and a large part  reveals preferences for α-helices or β-strands.
moreover, the analysis of the hydrophobic cluster amino acid composition generally allows for finer prediction of the regular secondary structure associated with the considered cluster within a cluster species.
moreover, the novel loop cluster analysis brings additional information for secondary structure prediction on the whole sequence through a generalized cluster analysis , and not only on regular secondary structures.
hydrophobic cluster analysis  is an efficient way to compare highly divergent sequences through the implicit secondary structure information directly derived from hydrophobic clusters.
the  <dig> more frequent hydrophobic cluster species were analyzed with regard to their association with the different secondary structures .
such information lays the foundations for developing a new and original tool for secondary structure prediction.
finally, the structural information contained in the hydrophobic structural words, as deduced from experimental structures, was compared to the psi-pred predictions, revealing that β-strands and especially α-helices are generally over-predicted within the limits of typical β and α hydrophobic clusters.
these loop clusters do not overlap with hydrophobic clusters and are highly associated with coils.
this analysis has been extended to loop-forming clusters, using an appropriate loop alphabet.
