in this study, based on the microarray data comparing global gene expression patterns in the prostate tissue between androgen-dependent and -independent prostate cancer patients, we indentify a set of transcription factors and micrornas that potentially cause such difference, using a model-based computational approach.
the proposed model-based approach indicates that considering combinatorial effects of transcription factors and micrornas in a unified model provides additional transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms on global gene expression in the prostate cancer with different hormone-dependency.
prostate cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer death in men.
androgen ablation, the most commonly-used therapy for progressive prostate cancer, is ineffective once the cancer cells become androgen-independent.
in addition, microrna microarray data from other studies confirm that several predicted micrornas, including mir- <dig>  mir-135a, and mir-135b, demonstrate differential expression in prostate cancer cells, comparing with normal tissues.
we present a model-based computational approach to identify transcription factors and micrornas influencing the progression of androgen-dependent prostate cancer to androgen-independent prostate cancer.
this result suggests that the capability of transcription factors to initiate transcription and micrornas to facilitate mrna degradation are both decreased in androgen-independent prostate cancer.
from  <dig> position weight matrices in the transfac database and  <dig> micrornas in the microrna registry, our model identify  <dig> transcription factors and  <dig> micrornas to be potentially responsible for the level of androgen dependency.
we also find that the expression levels of three predicted transcription factors, including ap- <dig>  stat <dig> , and dbp  are significantly different between androgen-dependent and -independent patients.
of these transcription factors and micrornas, the estimated function of all the  <dig> transcription factors are predicted to be inhibiting transcription in androgen-independent samples comparing with the dependent ones.
