kinetic characterization of urea uptake  demonstrated the presence in maize roots of a high-affinity and saturable transport system; this system is inducible by urea itself showing higher vmax and km upon induction.
the expression of the isolated sequence, zmdur3-orf, in dur <dig> yeast mutant demonstrated the ability of the encoded protein to mediate urea uptake into cells.
at molecular level, the orf sequence coding for the urea transporter, zmdur <dig>  was isolated and functionally characterized using different heterologous systems: a dur <dig> yeast mutant strain, tobacco protoplasts and a dur <dig> arabidopsis mutant.
the subcellular targeting of dur3/gfp fusion proteins in tobacco protoplasts gave results comparable to the localization of the orthologous transporters of arabidopsis and rice, suggesting a partial localization at the plasma membrane.
with respect to maize, a worldwide-cultivated crop requiring high amounts of nitrogen fertilizer, the mechanisms involved in the transport of urea have not yet been identified.
the aim of the present work was to characterize the high-affinity urea transport system in maize roots and to identify the high affinity urea transporter.
despite its extensive use as a nitrogen fertilizer, the role of urea as a directly accessible nitrogen source for crop plants is still poorly understood.
data may provide a key to better understand the mechanisms involved in urea acquisition and contribute to deepen the knowledge on the overall nitrogen-use efficiency in crop plants.
so far, the physiological and molecular aspects of urea acquisition have been investigated only in few plant species highlighting the importance of a high-affinity transport system.
these data provide a clear evidence in planta for a role of zmdur <dig> in urea acquisition from an extra-radical solution.
this work highlights the capability of maize plants to take up urea via an inducible and high-affinity transport system.
zmdur <dig> is a high-affinity urea transporter mediating the uptake of this molecule into roots.
