extinct diversity and extensive reticulation are thought to have largely obscured the species relationships.
despite relatively low interspecific variation, the nuclear data revealed the existence of two major groups roughly corresponding to species with a western or eastern european origin.
intra-individual ets sequence polymorphism generally exceeded interspecific variation and was either independent of, or additional to, additive patterns accounted for by hybrid origin.
consequently, its species relationships have not previously been addressed by molecular methods.
the basic division of the genus into two major clades had not previously been intimated on morphological grounds.
surprisingly, many diploid species were of hybrid origin whilst several polyploid taxa showed no evidence of reticulation.
concentrating on the supposed major evolutionary units, we used nuclear ribosomal  and chloroplast  sequences in order to disentangle the phylogenetic relationships and to infer the origins of the polyploids.
extensive reticulation was mainly inferred from the character additivity of parental ets variants.
the existence of reticulation and the near-continuity of morphological characters across taxa seriously affect species determination, making hieracium one of the best examples of a 'botanist's nightmare'.
our study illustrates how multigene sequences can be used to disentangle the evolutionary history of agamic complexes or similarly difficult datasets.
is a complex species-rich group of perennial herbs composed of few sexual diploids and numerous apomictic polyploids.
several ets ribotypes occurred in different hybrid taxa, but never as the only variant in any species analyzed.
characterization of this variation as additive, shared informative, homoplasious, or unique made it possible to uncover the phylogenetic signal and to reveal the hybrid origin of  <dig> out of  <dig> accessions.
the high level of intra-individual ets polymorphism prevented straightforward phylogenetic analysis.
both major groups are thought to have survived in different glacial refugia and to have hybridized as a result of secondary contact.
