this work contributes to qualitative modelling and to the analysis of large biological networks by their fully automatic decomposition into biologically meaningful modules.
petri net theory provides a variety of established analysis techniques, which are also applicable to signal transduction models.
we apply petri net theory to model and analyse signal transduction pathways first qualitatively before continuing with quantitative analyses.
we propose an approach for model validation of signal transduction pathways based on the network structure only.
the new concepts of feasible t-invariants and mct-sets have been proven to be useful for model validation and the interpretation of the biological system behaviour.
in this context special properties have to be considered and new dedicated techniques have to be designed.
on the one hand, the kinetic parameters involved are often unknown and have to be estimated.
this paper demonstrates how to build systematically a discrete model, which reflects provably the qualitative biological behaviour without any knowledge of kinetic parameters.
for this purpose, we introduce the new notion of feasible t-invariants, which represent minimal self-contained subnets being active under a given input situation.
whereas mct-sets provide a decomposition of the net into disjunctive subnets, feasible t-invariants describe subnets, which generally overlap.
we define maximal common transition sets , which can be used for t-invariant examination and net decomposition into smallest biologically meaningful functional units.
applications of the known qualitative analysis methods concern mainly metabolic networks.
the mating pheromone response pathway in saccharomyces cerevisiae serves as case study.
signal transduction pathways are usually modelled using classical quantitative methods, which are based on ordinary differential equations .
each of these subnets stands for a signal flow in the system.
with increasing size and complexity of signal transduction pathways, the estimation of missing kinetic data is not possible.
the paper demonstrates how petri net analysis techniques can promote a deeper understanding of signal transduction pathways.
in order to get information on the systems behaviour, qualitative analysis techniques have been developed.
