as the results of quantitative analysis can imply severe legal and financial consequences for producers or distributors of feed, the quantification results need to be utterly reliable.
one application of it is the simulation of the consequences of varying parameters on measurement results.
parameters could be for example replicate numbers or baseline and threshold settings, measurement results could be for example median  and relative standard deviation .
tolerable traces must not exceed the so-called ‘minimum required performance limit’ , which was defined according to the mentioned regulation to correspond to  <dig> % mass fraction per ingredient.
in most cases, the combination of four pcr replicates for each of the two dna isolations already resulted in a relative standard deviation of 15% or less.
four pcr replicates for each of the two dna isolations seem to be a reasonable minimum number to narrow down the possible spread of results.
we developed a statistical approach to investigate the experimental measurement variability within one 96-well pcr plate.
this approach visualises the frequency distribution as zygosity-corrected relative content of genetically modified material resulting from different combinations of transgene and reference gene cq values.
the aims of the study are scientifically based suggestions for minimisation of uncertainty of measurement especially in —but not limited to— the field of gmo quantification at low concentration levels.
according to regulation  no 619/ <dig>  trace amounts of non-authorised genetically modified organisms  in feed are tolerated within the eu if certain prerequisites are met.
therefore, not yet authorised gmo  have to be quantified at very low level following the qualitative detection in genomic dna extracted from feed samples.
all calculations can be done using the built-in functions of excel without any need for programming.
genetically modified organism real-time pcr quantificationlow-level presence  no 619/2011)feed analysissimulation of frequency distributionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
the developed excel spreadsheets are available .
