all family members are hybrid genes with a conserved c-terminal protein kinase domain of a novel type, recently called fikk kinase, associated with a non conserved n-terminal region without any known functional signature.
malaria caused by protozoan parasites of the genus plasmodium spp.
orthologs to the p. falciparum trophozoite protein r <dig> were detected exclusively in protozoan parasites of the phylum apicomplexa, including several plasmodium spp., toxoplasma gondii and cryptosporidium parvum.
this is consistent with the reported association of the trophozoite protein r <dig>  the only paralog characterised to date, with the infected red blood cell membrane.
interestingly, most genes are located in the subtelomeric region of chromosomes, in association with other multigene families contributing to the remodelling of the infected red blood cell membrane, in particular the ring erythrocyte surface antigen multigene family.
while a single copy gene was detected in most species, considerable gene expansion was observed in p. falciparum and its closest phylogenic relative p. reichenowi, with  <dig> and six copies, respectively, each with a distinct n-terminal domain.
based on full length protein sequence, pairs of orthologs were observed in closely related species, such as p. berghei and p.y.
all  <dig> p. falciparum paralogs possess a canonical plasmodium export element downstream of a signal / anchor sequence required for exportation outside the parasitophorous vacuole.
yoelii, p. vivax and p. knowlesi, or p. reichenowi and p. falciparum.
the family hallmark is a kinase domain with unusual characteristics, raising the possibility of designing drug or vaccine strategies targeting this domain.
the availability of genome sequences from several malaria parasite species provides a basis on which to identify new potential intervention targets.
the characteristics of the p. falciparum family suggest a role in remodelling the infected cell and as such possibly contribute to the particular virulence of this species.
