network topological parameters identified a number of central nodes  including those with significant homology  to 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase, zeatin o-glucosyltransferase, and aba-responsive protein.
ptgen <dig> was used to evaluate transcriptome responses in loblolly pine and was leveraged to identify  <dig> differentially expressed genes responding to severe drought stress in roots.
statistical analysis of differential expression and weighted gene correlation network analysis were used to identify drought-responsive genes and further characterize the molecular basis of drought tolerance in loblolly pine.
genes commonly associated with drought response in pine and other plant species, as well as a number of abiotic and biotic stress-related genes, were up-regulated in drought-stressed roots.
many of the genes identified are known to be up-regulated in response to osmotic stress in pine and other plant species and encode proteins involved in both signal transduction and stress tolerance.
correlation network analysis indicates a scale-free network topology for the pine root transcriptome and identifies central nodes that may serve as drivers of drought-responsive transcriptome dynamics in the roots of loblolly pine.
gene correlation analysis predicts a scale-free network topology and identifies eleven co-expression modules that ranged in size from  <dig> to  <dig> members.
identified hubs also include genes that have been associated previously with osmotic stress, phytohormones, enzymes that detoxify reactive oxygen species, and several genes of unknown function.
ptgen <dig>  a  <dig>  feature cdna microarray, was fabricated and used to assess drought-induced gene expression in loblolly pine propagule roots.
gene expression levels returned to control values within a 48-hour recovery period in all but  <dig> transcripts.
only  <dig> genes were identified as differentially expressed in drought-recovered roots, indicating that the transcript population can return to the pre-drought state within  <dig> hours.
