sequence polymorphism was found in transcripts encoding a known phosphine resistance gene, dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase, in both susceptible and resistant insects.
pairwise analysis indicated there were eight genes differentially expressed between susceptible and resistant insects not exposed to phosphine  or those exposed to phopshine .
however, recent studies indicate a substantial increase in phosphine resistance in stored product pests worldwide.
to understand the molecular bases of phosphine resistance in insects, we used rna-seq to compare gene expression in phosphine-resistant and susceptible laboratory populations of the red flour beetle, tribolium castaneum.
anti-diuretic peptidecytochrome p450deltamethrindihydrolipoamide dehydrogenasefumigantsinsecticide resistancegene expressionphosphine resistancered flour beetlerna-seqstored product peststribolium castaneumissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
gene ontology terms associated with mitochondrial functions  were enriched in the significantly differentially expressed dataset.
expression of two genes encoding anti-diruetic peptide was 2- to 8-fold reduced in phosphine-resistant insects, and when exposed to phosphine, expression was further reduced 36- to 500-fold compared to susceptible.
phosphine-resistant insects also displayed differential expression of cuticle, carbohydrate, protease, transporter, and many mitochondrial genes, among others.
increased expression of  <dig> cytochrome p <dig> genes was found in resistant vs. susceptible insects, and phosphine exposure resulted in additional increases of  <dig> of these genes, five of which were significant among all treatment groups .
these data provide the first gene expression data on the response of phosphine-resistant and -susceptible insects to phosphine exposure, and demonstrate that rna-seq is a valuable tool to examine differences in insects that respond differentially to environmental stimuli.
phosphine is a valuable fumigant to control pest populations in stored grains and grain products.
overall, genes associated with the mitochondria were differentially expressed in resistant insects, and these differences may contribute to a reduction in overall metabolism and energy production and/or compensation in resistant insects.
however,  <dig> genes were differentially expressed among all four treatment groups at a statistically significant level .
