bouin's fixation reduced average centroid sizes of embryonic mouse crania by approximately 30% and substantially altered the morphometric shape, as measured by the shift in procrustes distance, from the unfixed state, after the data were normalized for naturally occurring shape variation.
in general, to the degree that embryonic organ size and shape factor into μct-based phenotypic assessments, procedurally induced artifacts associated with fixation and scanning will influence results.
fixation methods that better maintain original craniofacial dimensions at reduced levels of dehydration and tissue shrinkage lead to the progressive accumulation of random shape variation during handling and data acquisition.
subsequent μct scanning produced negligible changes in size but did appear to reduce or even reverse fixation-induced random shape changes.
experimental designs will need to address these significant effects, either by employing alternative methods that minimize artifacts in the region of focus or in the interpretation of statistical patterns.
the degree to which artifacts are introduced in the generation of random craniofacial shape variation relates to the degree of specimen dehydration during the initial fixation.
growing demand for three dimensional  digital images of embryos for purposes of phenotypic assessment drives implementation of new histological and imaging techniques.
establishing normative expectations for experimentally induced changes in size and shape will be an important feature of 3d μct-based phenotypic assessments, especially if quantifying differences in the values of those parameters between comparison sets of developing embryos is a primary aim.
changes in craniofacial shape progressively increased post-fixation.
toward that end, we assessed the nature and degree of morphological artifacts attending μct scanning following use of common fixatives, using a two dimensional  landmark geometric morphometric approach to track the accumulation of distortions affecting the embryonic head from the native, uterine state through to fixation and subsequent scanning.
mixtures of paraformaldehyde + glutaraldehyde reduced average centroid sizes by 2-3%.
