with the increasing contents of sugars and starch, the expression of genes involved in metabolism of sugars increased dramatically after low temperature induction.
lcft <dig> exhibited an apparent specific tissue and its expression was highly increased after low temperature induction, gus staining results also showed gus activity driven by lcft <dig> gene promoter can be induced by low temperature, which indicated lcft <dig> probably played a pivotal role in the floral induction of litchi under low temperature.
our study provides a global survey of transcriptomes to better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying changes of leaves in response to low temperature induction in litchi.
one ft gene  which produces a protein called ‘florigen’ was also detected among degs of litchi.
low temperature is absolutely required for floral induction of litchi, but its molecular mechanism is not fully understood.
leaves of litchi played a key role during floral induction and could be the site of low temperature perception.
therefore, leaves were treated under different temperature , and high-throughput rna sequencing  performed with leaf samples for the de novo assembly and digital gene expression  profiling analyses to investigate low temperature-induced gene expression changes.
differentially-expressed genes  under low temperature treatment in comparison with the control group were the main focus of our study.
litchi floral inductiontranscriptomedifferentially expressed gene low temperatureleafchina agricultural research service fundcars-33chen houbin guangdong natural science foundation2016a030310458shen jiyuan http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of chinano.
hierarchical clustering analysis arranged  <dig> degs into eight groups with three significant expression clusters  during floral induction.
the analyses of transcriptome profiles and physiological indicators will help us study the complicated metabolism of floral induction in the subtropic evergreen plants.
