national veterinary antimicrobial consumption monitoring programs are therefore in place in a number of countries in the european union.
however, due to differences in methodology, results on veterinary antimicrobial consumption from these national monitoring programs cannot be compared internationally.
the aim of this study was to assess differences in the outcomes on veterinary antimicrobial consumption by applying three different sets of nationally established animal defined daily dosages to the same antimicrobial drug delivery dataset of dutch pigs in  <dig>
differences between nationally established animal defined daily dosages caused by different correction factors for long-acting products and national differences in authorized dosages, have a substantial influence on the results of antimicrobial consumption in pigs.
to enable international comparison of veterinary antimicrobial consumption data, harmonized units of measurement, animal weights and animal  categories are needed.
methodologyinternationalantimicrobial consumption monitoringlivestockdaily dosagesveterinary medicineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
delivery information for the complete dutch pig sector for the year  <dig> reported to the netherlands veterinary medicines authority  was analysed with three differently and nationally established animal defined daily dosages from the netherlands and denmark: the defined daily dosage animalnl , the animal daily dosagedk  and defined animal daily dosagedk .
antimicrobial use in livestock is one of the factors contributing to selection and spread of resistant microorganisms in the environment.
international comparison is highly needed to establish regulations on veterinary antimicrobial use and reducing antimicrobial resistance.
consumption in number of adddk/y was lower than in number of dddanl/y for sows/piglets and finisher pigs, with proportions of  <dig>  % and  <dig>  %.
use in number of dadddk/y was even lower,  <dig>  % for sows/piglets and  <dig>  % for finisher pigs compared to number of dddanl/y.
for each applied dutch product equivalent, danish products were identified based on authorization for pigs, active substance , administration route, concentration and dosage regimen.
