jatropha curcas, whose seed content is approximately 30–40% oil, is an ideal feedstock for producing biodiesel and bio-jet fuels.
this study examined the transcriptional levels of genes involved in the response to cytokinin in jatropha inflorescence meristems at different time points after cytokinin treatment by  <dig> sequencing, which gave rise to a total of  <dig>  mb of transcript sequences.
the mechanisms underlying the influence of cytokinin on jatropha flower development and sex determination, however, have not been clarified.
the identified transcripts include those encoding genes involved in the biosynthesis, metabolism, and signaling of cytokinin and other plant hormones, flower development and cell division, which may be related to phenotypic changes of jatropha in response to cytokinin treatment.
several cell division-related genes, including jccyca3; <dig>  jccycd3; <dig>  jccycd3; <dig> and jctso <dig>  were up-regulated, which may contribute to the increased flower number after cytokinin treatment.
biofuelphysic nutcytokinin <dig> sequencingflowercell divisionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
thus, increasing the number of female flowers is critical for the improvement of jatropha seed yield.
this study presents the first report of global expression patterns of cytokinin-regulated transcripts in jatropha inflorescence meristems.
our analysis indicated that jatropha orthologs of the floral organ identity genes known as abce model genes, jcap <dig> , jcpi, jcag, and jcsep <dig> , <dig>  were all significantly repressed, with an exception of one b-function gene jcap <dig> that was shown to be up-regulated by ba treatment, indicating different mechanisms to be involved in the floral organ development of unisexual flowers of jatropha and bisexual flowers of arabidopsis.
however, jatropha plants have a low number of female flowers, which results in low seed yield that cannot meet the needs of the biofuel industry.
our previous findings showed that cytokinin treatment can increase the flower number and female to male ratio and also induce bisexual flowers in jatropha.
up-regulated and down-regulated annotated and novel genes were identified, and the expression levels of the genes of interest were confirmed by qrt-pcr.
this report laid the foundation for further mechanistic studies on jatropha and other non-model plants responding to cytokinin.
