the performance of the ssh procedure was assessed through the large-scale screening of thousands of clones from each library for exogenous reporter transcripts mimicking either tester specific or tester/driver common transcripts.
despite some cases of irregular normalisation and subtraction failure, we have shown that ssh repeatedly enriches the libraries in very rare, tester-specific transcripts, and can thus be considered as a powerful tool to investigate situations where small amounts of biological material are available, such as during early mammalian development.
ssh has emerged as a widely used technology to identify genes that are differentially regulated between two biological situations.
it is thus particularly well suited to biological situations where specific genes are expressed and tiny amounts of rna are available.
nonetheless, the four libraries were greatly enriched in clones encoding for very rare  tester-specific transcripts.
our results show that abundant transcripts escape normalisation which is only efficient for rare and moderately abundant transcripts.
sequencing  <dig> clones from one of the libraries confirmed and extended our results to endogenous transcripts and demonstrated that some very abundant transcripts common to tester and driver escaped subtraction.
this is the case during early mammalian embryo development.
the close agreement between our hybridization and sequencing results shows that the addition and follow-up of exogenous reporter transcripts provides an easy and reliable means to check ssh performance.
because we are interested in the more systematic establishment of ssh libraries from early embryos, we have developed a simple and reliable strategy based on reporter transcript follow-up to check ssh library quality and repeatability when starting with small amounts of rna.
in this field, few differentially expressed genes have been characterized from ssh libraries, but an overall assessment of the quality of ssh libraries is still required.
