dispersal ability, population genetic structure and species divergence in marine nematodes are still poorly understood, especially in remote areas such as the southern ocean.
a combination of phylogenetic  and population genetic  analyses were used for species delimitation and assessment of gene flow between sampling locations.
our results indicate that gene flow is restricted at large geographic distance in the southern ocean, which casts doubt on the efficiency of the weddell gyre and antarctic circumpolar current in facilitating circum-antarctic nematode species distributions.
specimens were collected at continental shelf depths  near the antarctic peninsula, scotia arc and eastern side of the weddell sea.
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
we investigated genetic differentiation of species and populations of the free-living endobenthic nematode genera sabatieria and desmodora using nuclear 18s rdna, internal transcribed spacer  rdna, and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase i  gene sequences.
population genetic structuring was highly significant and more pronounced in the deeper sediment-dwelling sabatieria species, which are generally less prone to resuspension and passive dispersal in the water column than surface desmodora species.
antarcticacontinental shelfcryptic speciesdesmodoradispersalnematodaphylogenypopulation geneticssabatieriahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003130fonds wetenschappelijk onderzoekfwo11/asp/256hauquier freija http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002749federaal wetenschapsbeleidbr/132/a1/versoissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
the two nematode genera co-occurred at all sampled locations, but with different vertical distribution in the sediment.
we also show that genetic structuring and cryptic speciation can be very different in nematode species isolated from the same geographic area, but with different habitat preferences .
both genera comprised species that were restricted to one side of the weddell sea and species that were widely spread across it.
