our work provides the basis for future structural and functional studies aimed at unraveling intracellular regulatory networks.
in gnathostomes, four dact genes were generated by the two rounds of whole genome duplication in the vertebrate ancestor, with dact1/ <dig> and dact2/ <dig>  respectively, arising from the two genes generated during the first genome duplication.
the third genome duplication in the teleost ancestor, and subsequent gene loss in most gnathostome lineages left extant species with a subset of dact genes.
the ability to control wnt signaling seems to be part of the ancestral repertoire of dact functions, while the ability to inhibit tgfβ signaling and to carry out specialized, ortholog-specific roles may have evolved later.
dact genes have so far only been identified in bony vertebrates.
also, the number of dact genes in a given species, the number and roles of protein motifs and functional domains, and the overlap of gene expression domains are all not clear.
to address these problems, we have taken an evolutionary approach, screening for dact genes in the animal kingdom and establishing their phylogeny and the synteny of dact loci.
our study identified previously not recognized dact genes and showed that they evolved late in the deuterostome lineage.
dact genes were expressed in both distinct and overlapping domains, suggesting possible combinatorial function.
the complement of dact genes coexpressed in a tissue provides a complex way to fine-tune wnt and tgfβ signaling.
the distribution of functional domains suggests that the ancestral dact function lied with wnt signaling, and a role in tgfβ signaling may have emerged with the dact2/ <dig> ancestor.
furthermore, we performed a deep analysis of the various dact protein motifs and compared the expression patterns of different dacts.
in actinopterygians, a further dact4r gene arose from retrotranscription.
motif reduction, in particular in dact <dig>  suggests that this protein may counteract the function of the other dacts.
