nrp1a and nrp1b antibodies, known to reduce bcg-induced inflammation, failed to block bcg-induced increase in nerve fibers.
the present results implicate the vegf pathway as a key modulator of inflammation and nerve plasticity, introduces a new animal model for investigation of vegf-induced nerve plasticity, and suggests putative mechanisms underlying this phenomenon.
however, the nrp2b antibody dramatically potentiated the effects of bcg in increasing pgp <dig> -, trpv1-, substance p -, and calcitonin gene-related peptide -immunoreactivity .
this work tests the hypothesis that increased levels of vascular endothelial growth factor  observed during bladder inflammation modulates nerve plasticity.
chronic inflammation was induced by intravesical instillations of bacillus calmette-guérin  into the urinary bladder and the density of nerves expressing the transient receptor potential vanilloid subfamily  <dig>  or pan-neuronal marker pgp <dig>  was used to quantify alterations in peripheral nerve plasticity.
finally, instillation of vegf <dig> or vegf <dig> into the mouse bladder recapitulated the effects of bcg and resulted in a significant inflammation and increase in nerve density.
for the first time, evidence is being presented supporting that chronic bcg instillation into the mouse bladder promotes a significant increase in peripheral nerve density that was mimicked by vegf instillation.
treatment of mice with anti-vegf neutralizing antibody  abolished the effect of bcg on inflammation and nerve density.
to confirm that vegf is capable of inducing inflammation and neuronal plasticity, another group of mice was instilled with recombinant vegf <dig> or vegf <dig> into the urinary bladder.
the major finding of this work was that chronic bcg instillation resulted in inflammation and an overwhelming increase in both pgp <dig>  and trpv <dig> immunoreactivity, primarily in the sub-urothelium of the urinary bladder.
effects of bcg were abolished by pre-treatment with neutralizing vegf antibody.
