calcium ion is tightly regulated in body fluids and for euryhaline fish, which are exposed to rapid changes in environmental , homeostasis is especially challenging.
the gill is the main organ of active calcium uptake and therefore plays a crucial role in the maintenance of calcium ion homeostasis.
thirteen percent of the genes matched multiple tags indicating alternative rna transcripts.
this molecular response entails initial perception of alterations, activation of signaling networks and effectors and suggests active remodeling of cytoskeletal proteins during the initial acclimation process.
the generated transcript expression patterns provide a framework of novel water calcium-responsive genes in the gill during the initial response after transfer to different .
k-means clustering identified co-expressed transcripts with distinct patterns in response to water  and exposure time.
genes related to energy production and energy homeostasis are also up-regulated, probably reflecting the increased energetic needs of the acclimation response.
the main enriched gene ontology groups belong to ca2+ signaling/homeostasis but also muscle contraction, cytoskeleton, energy production/homeostasis and tissue remodeling.
this study is the first genome-wide transcriptome analysis of fish gills and is an important resource for future research on the short-term mechanisms involved in the gill acclimation responses to environmental ca2+ changes and osmoregulation.
to study the molecular basis of the short-term responses to changing calcium availability, the whole gill transcriptome obtained by super serial analysis of gene expression  of the euryhaline teleost green spotted puffer fish, tetraodon nigroviridis, exposed to water with altered  was analysed.
transfer of t. nigroviridis from  <dig> ppt water salinity containing  <dig>  mm ca2+ to high  and low  calcium water of similar salinity for 2- <dig> h resulted in  <dig>  differentially expressed supersage tags  in gills.
of these  <dig> tags  were mapped to t. nigroviridis cdnas or genomic dna and  <dig>  were assigned to known proteins.
