notably, the cyp <dig> family is highly expanded with  <dig> complete and  <dig> nearly complete members - over twice as many compared to other ants.
sequences from 272 m illumina reads were assembled into  <dig>  contigs with total length of 245 mb, and n <dig> of  <dig>  bp, similar to other ant genome assemblies enabling comparative genomic analysis.
here, we present the draft genome assembly of the black garden ant lasius niger – the most successful urban inhabitant of all ants – and we compare it with the genomes of other ant species, including the closely related camponotus floridanus.
remarkably, the predicted proteome of l. niger is significantly enriched relative to other ant genomes in terms of abundance of domains involved in nucleic acid binding, dna repair, and nucleotidyl transferase activity, reflecting transposable element proliferation and a likely genomic response.
our results suggest that the success of l. niger in urbanized areas may be the result of fortuitous coincidence of several factors, including the expansion of the cyp <dig> cytochrome family due to coevolution with parasitic fungi, the diversification of dna repair systems as an answer to proliferation of retroelements, and the reduction of olfactory system and behavioral preadaptations from non-territorial subdominant life strategies found in natural environments.
this family exhibits the signatures of strong directional selection, with eleven positively selected positions in ligand-binding pockets of enzymes.
gene family contraction was detected for several components of the olfactory system, accompanied by instances of both directional selection and relaxation.
lasius nigerurban environmentdraft genometransposable elementdetoxificationdirectional selectionthe international conference on bioinformatics of genome regulation and structure\systems biology  novosibirsk, russia  <dig> august- <dig> september  <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
diversification of cytochromes and dna repair systems along with reduced odorant communication are the basis of l. niger pollutant resistance and polyphagy, while non-territorial and mobilization strategies allows more efficient exploitation of large but patchy food sources.
