moreover, aba induced the expression of this gene in arabidopsis seedlings.
the current study extends these findings by examining the sub-cellular localization, expression profiling, and physiological functions of icme and two other icme-like proteins, icme-like <dig> and icme-like <dig>  which were encoded by two related genes at1g <dig> and at3g <dig>  respectively.
sub-cellular localization of gfp tagged icme and its homologs showed that the icme and icme-like proteins are intramembrane proteins predominantly localizing in the endoplasmic reticulum  and golgi apparatus.
semi-quantitative and real-time quantitative pcr revealed that the icme and icme-like genes are expressed in all examined tissues, including roots, rosette leaves, cauline leaves, stems, flowers, and siliques, with differential expression levels.
identification of these prenylated proteins will help to better understand the significance of protein prenylation in planta.
over-expression of at5g <dig> caused an aba hypersensitive phenotype in transgenic arabidopsis plants, indicating that it functions as a positive regulator of aba signaling.
it is concluded that the icme family is involved in stress and aba signaling in arabidopsis, probably through mediating the process of demethylating prenylated proteins.
heat stress resulted in up-regulation of the icme gene significantly but down-regulation of the icme-like <dig> and icme-like <dig> genes.
within the gene family, the base transcript abundance of icme-like <dig> gene is very low with higher expression in reproductive organs .
until now, knowledge about their molecular information, localization and expression pattern is largely unavailable in plant species.
mutant icme-like2- <dig> showed increased sensitivity to aba but slightly decreased sensitivity to salt and osmotic stresses during seed germination.
time-course analysis uncovered that both icme and icme-like genes are up-regulated by mannitol, nacl and aba treatment, with icme showing the highest level of up-regulation by these treatments.
