subtilisin-like serine proteases or subtilases in fungi are important for penetration and colonization of host.
our study provided new insights into the evolution of subtilisin like serine proteases in hypocreales, a fungal order largely consisting of biological control species.
p. lilacinumsubtilisin like serine proteasesphylogenetic analysisgene treespecies treeconserved motif analysisnatural selectiontype i functional divergencetype ii functional divergenceprotein structure modelingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
our evolutionary genetics analysis revealed evidence of positive selection on the subtilisin  and proteinase k  protein sequences of the entomopathogenic and nematophagous species belonging to cordycipitaceae, clavicipitaceae and ophiocordycipitaceae families of hypocreales.
we conducted phylogenetic and diverge analyses and identified important protein residues that putatively assign functional specificity to subtilases in fungal families/species under the order hypocreales.
these subfamilies were investigated for phylogenetic associations, protein residues under positive selection and functional divergence among paralogous clades.
protein residues found significant in functional divergence analysis in the present study may provide support for protein engineering in future.
phylogenetic and divergence analyses of subtilisin  and proteinase k  families of proteins revealed that the paralogous clades were clear-cut representation of familial origin of the protein sequences.
a total of  <dig> subtilases coded by  <dig> species from five different families under the fungal order hypocreales was included in the analysis.
based on the presence of conserved domains, the subtilase genes were divided into three subfamilies, subtilisin , proteinase k  and serine-carboxyl peptidases .
in addition, subtilase genes from the nematode-parasitic fungus purpureocillium lilacinum made a unique cluster which putatively indicated that the fungus might have developed distinctive mechanisms for nematode-pathogenesis.
we observed divergence between the paralogous clades of plant-pathogenic fungi , insect-pathogenic fungi  and nematophagous fungi .
subtilisin  and proteinase k  proteins seemed to play important roles during life style modifications among different families and species of hypocreales.
