our phylogenetic analysis confirmed the important role of gene duplication events in the evolution of hydrophobins in basidiomycetes.
a significant expansion of hydrophobin-encoding genes in other analyzed basidiomycetes was also documented , whereas contraction through gene loss was observed among the analyzed ascomycetes .
hydrophobins are small secreted cysteine-rich proteins that play diverse roles during different phases of fungal life cycle.
although a high number of hydrophobin-encoding genes were observed in h. irregulare , a remarkable expansion of these genes was recorded in p. brevispora .
here, we present results of our survey of hydrophobin gene families in two species of wood-degrading basidiomycetes, phlebia brevispora and heterobasidion annosum s.l.
these data are supplemented by results of the protein structure modeling for a representative set of hydrophobins.
furthermore, our results revealed significant differences in the expression levels of the 16 h. annosum s.s. hydrophobin-encoding genes which suggest possible differences in their regulatory patterns.
results of our analysis also have shown that h. annosum s.l.
however, there was no significant relationship between the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes and genome size.
we have also investigated the regulatory pattern of hydrophobin-encoding genes from h. annosum s.s. during saprotrophic growth on pine wood as well as on culture filtrate from phlebiopsis gigantea using micro-arrays.
our gene expression analysis revealed differential expression of h. annosum s.s. hydrophobin genes under different growth conditions, indicating their possible functional diversification.
the evolutionary forces driving hydrophobin gene expansion and diversification in basidiomycetes are poorly understood.
increased number of hydrophobin-encoding genes appears to have been linked to the species’ ecological strategy, with the non-pathogenic fungi having increased numbers of hydrophobins compared with their pathogenic counterparts.
we have identified hydrophobin genes from the genomes of two wood-degrading species of basidiomycetes, heterobasidion irregulare, representing one of the microspecies within the aggregate h. annosum s.l., and phlebia brevispora.
the relationship between the hydrophobin gene number, the genome size and the lifestyle of respective fungal species has not yet been thoroughly investigated.
hydrophobin-encoding genes may be under positive selection.
a considerable expansion of the hydrophobin-encoding genes in basidiomycetes has been observed.
