their roles in vascular cambium have highlighted their potential function in wood formation.
particularly, ptcle <dig>  ptcle <dig>  ptcle <dig> and ptcle <dig> comprised an identical cle motif to atcle41/tdif, which is known as a regulator of vascular cambium homeostasis, strongly supporting the idea that similar signaling pathways exist in both species to regulate wood formation and secondary growth.
the cle  gene family encodes small signaling peptides that are primarily involved in coordinating stem cell fate in different types of plant meristems.
a comparison with functionally characterized arabidopsis cle protein sequences showed that many ptcle proteins are closely related to their predicted arabidopsis counterparts.
moreover, compared to their arabidopsis counterparts, ptcle genes showed either similar or distinct expression patterns, implying functional conservation in some cases and functional divergence in others.
fifty ptcle genes were identified from the populus trichocarpa genome and were classified into four major groups based on sequence similarity.
analysis of the genomic organization of ptcle genes indicates that genome duplication, as well as the diversity in the cle motif, have contributed to the expansion of cle gene family in poplar.
transcriptome profiling revealed that ptcle genes generally were differentially expressed while some ptcle genes exhibited tissue-specific expression patterns.
our study provides a genome-wide analysis of the cle gene family in poplar, and highlights the potential roles of key ptcle genes in the regulation of secondary growth and wood formation.
transcriptional profiling provided further insights into possible functional divergence, evidenced by differential expression patterns of various ptcle genes.
apart from recent advances on identification and characterization of cle genes, little is known about this gene family in a tree species.
the comparative analysis revealed that functional conservation may exist between ptcles and their atcle orthologues, which was further supported by transcriptomic analysis.
