the expansion of these three gene families was mainly contributed by segmental duplication events.
exposure to abscisic acid and jasmonic acid markedly affected the expression levels of these genes, thereby implying that they may play important roles in the plant hormone network.
furthermore, the ratios of non-synonymous substitution rates  and synonymous substitution rates  implied that the duplicated gene pairs had experienced strong purifying selection.
a comprehensive genome-wide analysis of gene structure, chromosomal distribution, and evolutionary relationship of mapk cascade genes in cucumber are present here.
phylogenetic analyses classified all the csmapk and csmapkk genes into four groups, whereas the csmapkkk genes were grouped into the mekk, raf, and zik subfamilies.
a genome-wide analysis revealed the presence of at least  <dig> mapks,  <dig> mapkks, and  <dig> mapkkks in the cucumber genome.
real-time pcr analysis demonstrated that some mapk, mapkk and mapkkk genes are preferentially expressed in specific organs or tissues.
the mapk cascade genes have been investigated in detail in model plants, including arabidopsis, rice, and tomato, but poorly characterized in cucumber , a major popular vegetable in cucurbitaceae crops, which is highly susceptible to environmental stress and pathogen attack.
the mitogen-activated protein kinase  cascade consists of three types of reversibly phosphorylated kinases, namely, mapk, mapk kinase , and mapk kinase kinase , playing important roles in plant growth, development, and defense response.
our first systematic description of the mapk, mapkk, and mapkkk families in cucumber will help to elucidate their biological roles in plant.
further expression analysis revealed that these genes were involved in important signaling pathways for biotic and abiotic stress responses in cucumber, as well as the response to plant hormones.
moreover, the expression levels of most of these genes significantly changed under heat, cold, drought, and pseudoperonospora cubensis treatments.
