genomic analysis of  <dig> dnd operons from genome sequences of enterobacteriaceae revealed that the dnd operons of the same bacterial species were generally clustered together in the phylogenetic tree.
the dna degradation phenotype  is mediated by the dnd operon that encode enzymes catalyzing the phosphorothioation of dna, rendering the modified dna susceptible to oxidative cleavage during a pfge run.
coli strains to 100% using pfge and the dnd+ phenotype can be observed in both clonal and genetically diverse e. coli strains.
genomic islands likely play an important role in facilitating the horizontal gene transfer of the dnd operons in e. coli with  <dig> different types of islands discovered so far.
investigations into the genetic environments of the dnd operon in various e. coli strains led to the discovery that the dnd operon is harboured in various diverse genomic islands.
further analysis of dnd operons of  <dig> e. coli genomes together with their respective immediate genetic environments revealed a total of  <dig> types of genetic organizations, all of which were found to be associated with genomic islands designated dnd-encoding gis.
surprisingly, dnd operons were frequently found in pathogenic e. coli although their link with virulence has not been explored.
coli strains and to improve their typeability.
the dnd-encoding gis displayed mosaic structure and the genomic context of the  <dig> islands  were also highly variable, suggesting multiple recombination events.
this is also the first report where two dnd operons were found within a strain although the biological implication is unknown.
dna degradationdndescherichia colipfgethioureagenetic environmentgenomic islandsdnd-encoding genomic islandissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
strains of escherichia coli that are non-typeable by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis  due to in-gel degradation can influence their molecular epidemiological data.
in this study, a pcr assay was developed to detect the presence of the dnd operon in dnd+e.
