here, we describe the wrky tf families in response to jasmonate in arabidopsis and catharanthus.
to combat infection to biotic stress plants elicit the biosynthesis of numerous natural products, many of which are valuable pharmaceutical compounds.
microarray analysis identified at least six jasmonate responsive arabidopsis wrky genes  that have not been previously reported.
furthermore, we found that at least 25%  were jasmonate responsive, and 75%  of the jasmonate responsive crwrkys are orthologs of atwrkys known to be regulated by jasmonate.
this study provides a foundation for further characterization of wrky tfs in jasmonate responses and regulation of natural product biosynthesis.
in arabidopsis and other plants, the wrky tf family is also shown to play important role in controlling tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses, as well as secondary metabolism.
profiling of crwrky expression in response to jasmonate treatment revealed potential associations with secondary metabolism.
catharanthus roseusterpenoid indole alkaloidtranscriptomesecondary metabolismwrky transcription factorsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
the catharanthus wrky tf family is comprised of at least  <dig> members.
overall, the crwrky family, ascertained from transcriptome sequences, contains approximately 75% of the number of wrkys found in other sequenced asterid species .
publically available arabidopsis microarrays revealed at least 30%  of wrky tfs respond to jasmonate treatments.
phylogenetic clustering reveals  <dig> group i,  <dig> group ii, and  <dig> group iii wrky tfs.
microarray and transcriptomic data indicate that expression of wrky tfs in arabidopsis and catharanthus are under tight spatio-temporal and developmental control, and potentially have a significant role in jasmonate signaling.
recent work illustrates a possible role for the catharanthus wrky transcription factors  in regulating tia biosynthesis.
jasmonate is a central regulator of defense response to pathogens and accumulation of specialized metabolites.
