the  <dig> simple sequence repeat ,  <dig> insertion-deletion ,  <dig> structure variation  and  <dig> snp markers from the four maps were used to construct an integrated map.
the application of marker assisted selection  in watermelon is yet to be realized, mainly due to the past lack of high quality genetic maps.
the objective of this research was to use single-nucleotide polymorphism  anchor markers to construct an integrated genetic map for c. lanatus.
under the framework of the high density genetic map, an integrated genetic map was constructed by merging data from four independent mapping experiments using a genetically diverse array of parental lines, which included three subspecies of watermelon.
the integrated map described herein enhances the utility of genomic tools over previous watermelon genetic maps.
modern watermelon  cultivars share a narrow genetic base due to many years of selection for desirable horticultural qualities.
fifty-eight previously reported quantitative trait loci  for  <dig> traits in these populations were also integrated into the map.
in addition, new qtl identified for brix, fructose, glucose and sucrose were added.
recently, a number of useful maps have become available, however these maps have few common markers, and were constructed using different marker sets, thus, making integration and comparative analysis among maps difficult.
a large proportion of the markers in the integrated map are ssrs, indels and snps, which are easily transferable across laboratories.
some qtl associated with economically important traits detected in different genetic backgrounds mapped to similar genomic regions of the integrated map, suggesting that such qtl are responsible for the phenotypic variability observed in a broad array of watermelon germplasm.
wild subspecies within c. lanatus are important potential sources of novel alleles for watermelon breeding, but successful trait introgression into elite cultivars has had limited success.
this integrated map contained  <dig> markers, spanning 798 cm with an average marker interval of  <dig>  cm.
