our network analysis of proteases from p. falciparum uses a so-called guilt-by-association approach to extract sets of proteins from the proteome that are candidates for further study.
previously, combining a comparative genomics approach and a machine learning approach, we identified the complement of proteases  in the malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum and its sibling species  <cit> , providing a catalog of targets for functional characterization and rational inhibitor design.
these proteases appear to play diverse roles in metabolism, cell cycle regulation, invasion and infection.
their degrees of connectivity , range from one to  <dig>  the largest protease-associated sub-network is the ubiquitin-proteasome system which is crucial for protein recycling and stress response.
novel protease targets and previously unrecognized members of the protease-associated sub-systems provide new insights into the mechanisms underlying parasitism, pathogenesis and virulence.
we investigated the roles of proteases in the parasite life cycle by constructing a network using protein-protein association data from the string database  <cit> , and analyzing these data, in conjunction with the data from protein-protein interaction assays using the yeast 2-hybrid  system  <cit> , blood stage microarray experiments  <cit> , proteomics  <cit> , literature text mining, and sequence homology analysis.
proteases are also implicated in heat shock response, signal peptide processing, cell cycle progression, transcriptional regulation, and signal transduction networks.
proteases are a group of enzymes that play essential roles in parasite growth and invasion.
network analysis represents another route to revealing the role of proteins in the biology of parasites and we use this approach here to expand our understanding of the systems involving the proteases of p. falciparum.
the rapid evolution and spread of drug resistance in parasites has led to an urgent need for the development of novel antimalarial targets.
