two measures were used to assess the translational status of each individual mrna: the fraction engaged in translation  and ribosome density .
under isoleucine starvation, half of the mrnas considered were translationally down-regulated mainly due to decreased ribosome density.
ribosome occupancy increased significantly for all the genes involved in the biosynthesis of isoleucine, although their ribosome density had decreased.
to elucidate the regulation of global gene expression more generally, translational regulation was compared to transcriptional regulation under isoleucine starvation and to other post-transcriptional regulations related to mrna degradation and mrna dilution by growth.
to identify the translational response of bacteria in stress conditions and assess its contribution to the regulation of gene expression, the translational states of all mrnas were compared under optimal growth condition and during nutrient  starvation.
a genome-scale study of the translational response to nutritional limitation was performed in the model bacterium lactococcus lactis.
the results revealed complex translational regulation of this pathway, essential to cope with isoleucine starvation.
the stress response in bacteria involves the multistage control of gene expression but is not entirely understood.
we show that the contribution of translational regulation to the control of gene expression is significant in the stress response.
translational regulation appeared to accentuate the effects of transcriptional changes for down-regulated growth-related functions under isoleucine starvation although mrna stabilization and lower dilution by growth counterbalanced this effect.
the remaining genes exhibited antagonistic regulations of the two markers of translation.
post-transcriptional regulation is important to the understanding of gene expression control.
translational regulationstressbacterial adaptationgene expression regulationpost-transcriptional regulationlactococcus lactis
post-transcriptional regulation is complex and not systematically co-directional with transcription regulation.
