pluripotent cells are present in early embryos until the levels of the pluripotency regulator oct <dig> drop at the beginning of somitogenesis.
elevating oct <dig> levels in explanted post-pluripotent cells in vitro restores their pluripotency.
cultured pluripotent cells can participate in normal development when introduced into host embryos up to the end of gastrulation.
in contrast, pluripotent cells efficiently seed malignant teratocarcinomas in adult animals.
we manually injected embryonic stem cells into conceptuses at e <dig>  to test whether the presence of pluripotent cells at this stage correlates with teratocarcinoma formation.
here, we show that pluripotent cells seed teratomas in post-gastrulation embryos.
our findings show that although pluripotent cells with teratocarcinogenic potential can be produced in vitro by the overexpression of pluripotency regulators in explanted somitogenesis-stage somatic cells, the in vivo induction of these genes does not yield tumours.
however, at these stages, induced ubiquitous expression of oct <dig> does not lead to restoration of pluripotency  and tumour formation in utero, but instead causes a severe phenotype in the extending anteroposterior axis.
these cells underwent induction of pluripotency marker expression in epiblast stem cell  explants derived from somitogenesis-stage embryos, but no teratocarcinoma formation was observed in vivo.
we then examined the effects of reactivating embryonic oct <dig> expression ubiquitously or in combination with nanog within the primitive streak /tail bud  using a transgenic mouse line and embryo chimeras carrying a ps/tb-specific heterologous gene expression cassette respectively.
use of a more restricted t promoter transgenic system enabling inducible ectopic expression of oct <dig> and nanog specifically in the posteriorly-located primitive streak  and tail bud  led to similar axial malformations to those induced by oct <dig> alone.
in humans, extragonadal teratomas and teratocarcinomas are most frequently found in the sacrococcygeal region of neonates, suggesting that these tumours originate from cells in the posterior of the embryo that either reactivate or fail to switch off their pluripotent status.
