to understand the molecular mechanism for this fat reduction, cdna microarray, real-time pcr, two-dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectra were used to study the differential gene expression profiles of pig adipose tissues treated with/without clenbuterol.
eleven of the  <dig> genes  were chosen for real-time pcr analysis, with eight genes showing similar induction magnitude as that seen in the microarray data.
apolipoprotein r was also found to be up-regulated by the proteomic analysis.
among these genes, five lipid metabolism related genes were of special interest for further study, including apod and apor.
the apor expression was increased at both the rna and protein levels.
clenbuterol, a beta-agonist, can dramatically reduce pig adipose accumulation at high dosages.
the objective of this research is to identify novel genes and physiological pathways that potentially facilitate clenbuterol induced reduction of adipose accumulation.
<dig> genes were cellular metabolism related genes ,  <dig> were signal transduction related genes,  <dig> were expressed sequence tags  and  <dig> others were of various categories.
with clenbuterol stimulation, adipose cell volumes decreased and their gene expression profile changed, which indicate some metabolism processes have been also altered.
the adipose cells became smaller and the muscle fibers became thicker with the administration of clenbuterol.
histological sections and global evaluation of gene expression after administration of clenbuterol in pigs identified profound changes in adipose cells.
pig fat accumulation was reduced dramatically with clenbuterol treatment.
although the biological functions of the differentially expressed genes are not completely known, higher expressions of these molecules in adipose tissue might contribute to the reduction of fat accumulation.
the apor may be one of the critical molecules through which clenbuterol reduces fat accumulation.
these  <dig> genes  were divided into four groups according to their gene ontology biological process descriptions.
clenbuterol was found to improve the lean meat percentage about  <dig> percent .
