the modeling protocol described in this communication can be applied to detect protein-protein interactions in other organisms and pathways as well as to construct dimer structures and estimate the confidence of protein interactions experimentally identified with high-throughput techniques.
encouragingly, the success rates for dimer modeling is  <dig>  and  <dig> % when experimental and computer-generated monomer structures are employed, respectively.
in this study, we developed a new method to discover and model protein interactions employing an exhaustive all-to-all docking strategy.
further, our protocol correctly identifies 81% of protein-protein interactions at the expense of only 19% false positive rate.
as a proof of concept,  <dig>  protein-protein interactions were confidently predicted and modeled for the proteome of e. coli.
moreover, the accuracy of the identification of protein-protein interactions is improved by considering only those protein pairs co-localized in the same cellular compartment and involved in the same biological process.
protein-protein interactionsprotein dockingstructural bioinformaticsmachine learninggene ontology filtersefindsiteppierankppinational institute of general medical sciences r35gm119524brylinski michal issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
protein docking supported by evolutionary restraints and machine learning can be used to reliably identify and model biologically relevant protein assemblies at the proteome scale.
this approach integrates molecular modeling, structural bioinformatics, machine learning, and functional annotation filters in order to provide interaction data for the bottom-up assembly of protein interaction networks.
although a growing body of research shows that protein docking can, in principle, be used to predict biologically relevant interactions, the accuracy of the across-proteome identification of interacting partners and the selection of near-native complex structures still need to be improved.
finally, we validated our method against the human immune disease pathway.
