we determined the gene expression profile of  <dig> neuroblastoma cell lines cultured under normoxic and hypoxic conditions.
different results were obtained when we applied the l1-l <dig> regularization framework.
the algorithm distinguished the normoxic and hypoxic statuses defining signatures comprising  <dig> to  <dig> probesets, with a leave-one-out error of 17%.
analysis by hierarchical, spectral, and k-means clustering or supervised approach based on t-test analysis divided the cell lines on the bases of genetic differences.
the identification of a gene signature is complicated by the high dimensional nature of the data and by the genetic heterogeneity of the responding cells.
the l1-l <dig> regularization is an embedded feature selection technique that fulfills all the desirable properties of a variable selection algorithm and has the potential to generate a specific signature even in biologically complex settings.
a consensus hypoxia signature was established setting the frequency score at 50% and the correlation parameter ε equal to  <dig>  this signature is composed by  <dig> probesets representing  <dig> well characterized genes known to be modulated by hypoxia.
we studied a heterogeneous set of neuroblastoma cell lines to mimic the in vivo situation and to test the robustness and validity of the l1-l <dig> regularization with double optimization.
we feel that the application of this algorithm to tumor biology will be instrumental to analyze gene expression signatures hidden in the transcriptome that, like hypoxia, may be major determinant of the course of the disease.
we studied the application of this algorithm to detect the signature characterizing the transcriptional response of neuroblastoma tumor cell lines to hypoxia, a condition of low oxygen tension that occurs in the tumor microenvironment.
gene expression signatures are clusters of genes discriminating different statuses of the cells and their definition is critical for understanding the molecular bases of diseases.
