defense responses of conifer stems against insects and pathogens involve increased accumulation of terpenoids in cortical resin ducts  and de novo formation of traumatic resin ducts from cz initials.
a differential induction pattern was observed for 1-deoxyxyulose-5-phosphate synthase, which was up-regulated in crds and down-regulated in cz.
combined analysis of transcripts, proteins and metabolites of individual tissues will facilitate future characterization of complex processes of woody plant development, including periodic stem growth and dormancy, cell specialization, and defense and may be applied widely to other plant species.
laser microdissection  has been established for isolation of individual tissue types from herbaceous plants.
however, there are few reports of cell- and tissue-specific analysis in woody perennials.
we report differential expression of genes involved in terpenoid metabolism between crd and cz tissues and in response to methyl jasmonate .
while microdissected tissues are commonly analyzed for gene expression, reports of protein, enzyme activity and metabolite analysis are limited due in part to an inability to amplify these molecules.
patterns of gene expression are demonstrated in specific tissues that may be masked in analysis of heterogenous samples.
a tangential cryosectioning approach was important for obtaining large quantities of crd and cz tissues using lmd.
we identified terpene synthase enzyme activity in cz protein extracts and terpenoid metabolites in both crd and cz tissues.
transcript levels of β-pinene synthase and levopimaradiene/abietadiene synthase were constitutively higher in crds, but induction was stronger in cz in response to meja.
we describe robust methods for isolation of individual tissue-types from white spruce  stems for analysis of rna, enzyme activity and metabolites.
methods are described that allow for analysis of rna, enzyme activity and terpenoid metabolites in individual tissues isolated by lmd from woody conifer stems.
3-carene synthase was more strongly induced in crds compared to cz.
