revealing the protein structure motifs for rna-binding will provide valuable information for deciphering protein-rna recognition mechanisms and benefit complementary structural design in bioengineering.
the structural classification of local binding pockets determines the major patterns of rna recognition.
large-scale rna-binding pockets on protein surfaces are grouped by measuring their structural similarities.
we first construct a similarity network of rna-binding pockets based on a non-sequential-order structure alignment method for local structure alignment.
this similarity network-based framework provides a convenient method for modeling the structural relationships of functional pockets.
many critical biological processes are strongly related to protein-rna interactions.
with a multiple structure alignment strategy, the consensus rna-binding pockets in each group are identified.
in this work, we provide a novel framework for systematically identifying the structure motifs of protein-rna binding sites in the form of pockets on regional protein surfaces via a structure alignment-based method.
the local structural patterns identified serve as structure motifs for the recognition with rna on protein surfaces.
rna-binding pocketlocal structure classificationstructural alignmentnetwork clusteringstructure motifstrategic priority research program of the chinese academy of sciencesxdb13040600wu ling-yun national center for mathematics and interdisciplinary sciences, chinese academy of scienceshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china <dig>   <dig>  91330114liu shutang wu ling-yun natural science foundation of shandong province zr2015fq001liu zhi-ping fundamental research funds of shandong university2014tb <dig>  2015qy <dig>  2016jc007liu zhi-ping scientific research foundation for the returned overseas chinese scholars, ministry of education of chinaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
rna-binding events often take place at pockets on protein surfaces.
by using network community decomposition, the rna-binding pockets on protein surfaces are clustered into groups with structural similarity.
