this optimized data set is amenable to the most appropriate and computationally intensive analyses using site-heterogeneous models of sequence evolution.
future studies of metazoan phylogeny will benefit from ongoing efforts to sequence the genomes of additional invertebrate taxa that will continue to inform our view of the relationships among the major lineages of animals.
our findings are supported by bayesian comparisons of topological hypotheses and we find no evidence that they are biased by long-branch attraction.
we also employed several strategies to examine the potential for long-branch attraction to bias our inferences.
metazoactenophoraphylogenetic conflictphylogenomicslocus selectionlong-branch attractionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
recent analyses have suggested that the comb jellies are sister to all remaining metazoan phyla including sponges.
this study also provides a workflow and computational tools for minimizing systematic bias in genome-based phylogenetic analyses.
understanding the phylogenetic relationships among major lineages of multicellular animals  is a prerequisite for studying the evolution of complex traits such as nervous systems, muscle tissue, or sensory organs.
this finding is surprising because it suggests that neurons and other complex traits, present in ctenophores and eumetazoans but absent in sponges or placozoans, either evolved twice in metazoa or were independently, secondarily lost in the lineages leading to sponges and placozoans.
our analyses strongly support the ctenophora as the sister lineage to other metazoa.
transcriptome-based phylogenies have dramatically improved our understanding of metazoan relationships in recent years, although several important questions remain.
to address the question of basal metazoan relationships we assembled a novel dataset comprised of  <dig> orthologous loci derived from  <dig> publicly available genomes representing major lineages of animals.
from this large dataset we procured an optimized set of partitions with high phylogenetic signal for resolving metazoan relationships.
