spider mites also preferred to feed on low-se a. bisulcatus and s. pinnata plants rather than high-se plants.
interestingly, spider mites could colonize a. bisulcatus plants containing up to  <dig> mg se kg- <dig> dry weight, concentrations which are toxic to many other herbivores.
selenium distribution and speciation studies using micro-focused x-ray fluorescence  mapping and se k-edge x-ray absorption spectroscopy revealed that the spider mites accumulated primarily methylselenocysteine, the relatively non-toxic form of se that is also the predominant form of se in hyperaccumulators.
because western flower thrips and two-spotted spider mites are widespread and economically important herbivores, the results from this study also have potential applications in agriculture or horticulture, and implications for the management of se-rich crops.
astragalus bisulcatus and s. pinnata with high se concentrations  were less subject to thrips herbivory than plants with low se levels .
in this study we investigate the protective function of se in the se hyperaccumulators stanleya pinnata and astragalus bisulcatus against two cell disrupting herbivores, the western flower thrips  and the two-spotted spider mite .
spider mite populations on a. bisulcatus decreased after plants were given a higher concentration of se.
selenium hyperaccumulating plants sequester se in discrete locations in the leaf periphery, making them potentially more susceptible to some herbivore feeding modes than others.
this is the first reported study investigating the protective effect of hyperaccumulated se against cell-disrupting herbivores.
the finding that se protected the two hyperaccumulator species from both cell disruptors lends further support to the elemental defense hypothesis and increases the number of herbivores and feeding modes against which se has shown a protective effect.
furthermore, in plants containing elevated se levels, leaves with higher concentrations of se suffered less herbivory than leaves with less se.
