after genome-wide association analysis of imputed data with information from > <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms, two regions on equine chromosome  <dig> were associated with oc in the discovery cohort.
evaluation of these loci in other populations will help determine if they are specific to the standardbred breed, or to tarsal oc or are universal risk loci for oc.
osteochondrosis , simply defined as a failure of endochondral ossification, is a complex disease with both genetic and environmental risk factors that is commonly diagnosed in young horses, as well as other domestic species.
subsequently, putative risk variants within these regions were evaluated in both the discovery population and an independently sampled validation population of norwegian standardbreds  with tarsal oc.
the association of putative risk alleles from within the same regions with disease status in two independent populations of standardbreds suggest that these are true risk loci in this breed, although population-specific risk factors may still exist.
variant discovery in these and  <dig> additional regions of interest  was performed via whole-genome sequencing.
in this study, we used a cohort of standardbred horses from the u.s.  specifically selected for a shared early environment  to identify regions of the genome associated with tarsal oc.
after correction for population structure, gait  and sex, the variants most highly associated with oc status in both populations were located within the chromosome  <dig> regions of association.
further work is needed to identify the specific variants underlying oc risk within these loci.
although up to 50 % of the risk for developing oc is reportedly inherited, specific genes and alleles underlying risk are thus far completely unknown.
this is the first step towards the long-term goal of constructing a genetic risk model for oc that allows for genetic testing and quantification of risk in individuals.
<dig> putative risk variants from  <dig> chromosomes were subsequently genotyped in both the discovery and validation cohorts.
