the results delineated the framework of post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in the susceptible poplar, which was infected by the virulent rust.
the results indicated that pathogen-associated molecular patterns  and pamp-triggered immunity were induced by the infection of virulent rust e <dig> and that mirnas still functioned at this stage.
the poplar ‘robusta’, whose general rust resistance is defeated by virulent rust e <dig>  provides suitable host material for studies of the gene regulation involved in rust resistance/susceptibility.
in this study, we investigated the microrna-mediated susceptible poplar gene expression regulation associated with the infection of virulent rust.
more importantly, the mirna-mediated post-transcriptional regulation of defense signal pathway genes were inactivated by the infection of virulent rust at the stage of effector-triggered susceptibility and during the following stages of salicylic acid and hypersensitive responses.
rust caused by melampsora larici-populina is one of the most damaging diseases of poplars.
melampsora larici-populinapopulussusceptibilitymicrornasdegradomedgehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3150052431300571li danlei wang chao fundamental research funds for the central universities2572015ca092572015ey02wang feng national high technology research and development program of china issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
to study the susceptibility of poplar to m. larici-populina, small rna  libraries, a degradome cdna library and digital gene expression libraries were constructed for rust-inoculated and rust-free susceptible poplar ‘robusta’ leaves through high-throughput sequencing.
we found that the defense-related post-transcriptional regulation of the susceptible poplar ‘robusta’ functions normally only at the stage of pamps and pamp-triggered immunity .
additionally, the rust-responsive mirnas did not regulate the signaling component genes related to the salicylic acid pathway or the hypersensitive response.
after this stage, mirna-regulated r genes, such as tir-nbs-lrr and cc-nbs-lrr, were not fully functional.
this inactivation was the major characteristic of ‘robusta’ susceptibility.
