these included genes that were involved in amino acid degradation, secretion systems, sulphur metabolism and glycerophospholipid metabolism along with atp-binding cassette transporters.
in this study, we determined the complete genome sequence of v. parahaemolyticus chn <dig> .
this study is the first to describe the complete genome sequence of v. parahaemolyticus .
vibrio parahaemolyticuscomplete genome sequencecold shock proteingene deletiontranscriptomelow-temperature adaptationshanghai municipal science and technology commissionno.09320503600no.13yz098no.zzhy12028liu taigang http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003395shanghai municipal education commissionno.b-9500-10-0004chen lanming http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of chinano.31271830no.31671946chen lanming issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
the two main csp-encoding genes  were deleted from the bacterial genome, and comparative transcriptomic analysis between the mutant and wild-type strains was performed to dissect the possible molecular mechanisms that underlie low-temperature adaptation by v. parahaemolyticus.
the  <dig> ,401-bp v. parahaemolyticus chn <dig> genome  consisted of two circular chromosomes and three plasmids with  <dig>  predicted protein-encoding genes.
the transcriptome data revealed that  <dig> % of the expressed genes in v. parahaemolyticus chn <dig> were significantly altered in the Δvpacspa mutant when it was grown at 10 °c.
these results have improved our understanding of the genetic basis for low-temperature survival by the most common seafood-borne pathogen worldwide.
vibrio parahaemolyticus causes serious seafood-borne gastroenteritis and death in humans.
the complementary phenotypes were observed in the reverse mutants .
to date, very little information is available regarding the biological functions of cold shock proteins  in the low-temperature survival of the bacterium.
the gene deletions, complementary insertions, and comparative transcriptomics demonstrate that vpacspa is a primary csp in the bacterium, while vpacspd functions as a growth inhibitor at 10 °c.
the major metabolic pathways that were altered by the dual-gene deletion mutant  radically differed from those that were altered by single-gene mutants.
the growth of the Δvpacspa mutant was strongly inhibited at 10 °c, whereas the vpacspd gene deletion strongly stimulated bacterial growth at this low temperature compared with the wild-type strain.
raw seafood is often subjected to post-harvest processing and low-temperature storage.
one dual-gene and two single-gene deletion mutants were generated for vpacspa and vpacspd by homologous recombination.
however, a low temperature elicited significant expression changes for  <dig> % of the genes in the Δvpacspd mutant, including those involved in the phosphotransferase system and in the metabolism of nitrogen and amino acids.
our data also revealed several possible molecular coping strategies for low-temperature adaptation by the bacterium.
