the observed gene expression profile could help to screen the potential host agents for reducing the prevalence of swine influenza virus and further understand the molecular pathogenesis associated with h1n <dig> infection in pigs.
through the pathway analysis, the significant pathways mainly concerned with cell adhesion molecules, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, toll-like receptor signaling pathway and mapk signaling pathway, suggesting that the host took different strategies to activate these pathways so as to prevent virus infections at the early stage.
as a mild, highly contagious, respiratory disease, swine influenza always damages the innate immune systems, and increases susceptibility to secondary infections which results in considerable morbidity and mortality in pigs.
these results on pid  <dig> demonstrated beneficial turnover for host to prevent excessive inflammatory damage and recover the normal state by activating these clusters of genes.
nevertheless, the systematical host response of pigs to swine influenza virus infection remains largely unknown.
to explore it, a time-course gene expression profiling was performed for comprehensive analysis of the global host response induced by h1n <dig> swine influenza virus in pigs.
this study shows how the target organ responds to h1n <dig> swine influenza virus infection in pigs.
the de genes were involved in many vital functional classes, mainly including signal transduction, immune response, inflammatory response, cell adhesion and cell-cell signalling.
furthermore, the most significant pathways switched to ppar signaling pathway and complement and coagulation cascades, showing that the host might start to repair excessive tissue damage by anti-inflammatory functions.
at the early stage of h1n <dig> swine virus infection, pigs were suffering mild respiratory symptoms and pathological changes.
noticeably, the genes associated with immune and inflammatory response showed highly overexpressed.
however, on pid  <dig>  the predominant function classes of de genes included signal transduction, metabolism, transcription, development and transport.
a total of  <dig> porcine genes showing differential expression  after inoculation were identified to compare with the controls on day  <dig> post infection  .
