additionally, we found that somatic embryogenesis receptor kinase , arabinogalactan proteins, and members of the wus-related homeobox protein family may play important roles and could act as molecular markers in the early stage of somatic embryogenesis, as reported previously.
we found that the initiation of embryogenic tissues affected gene expression in many kegg pathways, but predominantly in plant hormone signal transduction, plant-pathogen interaction, and starch and sucrose metabolism.
under suboptimal conditions, p. balfouriana grows slowly, which restricts its cultivation.
to understand the molecular mechanisms regulating somatic embryogenesis in p. balfouriana, high-throughput rna-seq technology was used to investigate the transcriptomes of embryogenic and non-embryogenic tissues from three p. balfouriana genotypes.
a total of  <dig> , <dig> nucleotide sequence reads were obtained for the embryogenic and non-embryogenic tissues of p. balfouriana, and  <dig> % of them uniquely matched  <dig>   of the  <dig>  genes in the picea abies genome database .
the changes in multiple pathways related to induction in the p. balfouriana embryogenic tissues described here, will contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms involved in the initiation of somatic embryogenesis.
however, low initiation rates are a common problem and the mechanisms involved in the induction of somatic embryogenesis are not fully understood.
differential gene expression analysis identified  <dig>  differentially expressed genes  in the embryogenic tissues relative to the non-embryogenic tissues, including  <dig> significantly upregulated and  <dig> significantly downregulated genes.
balfouriana  hillier ex slavin  is an ecologically and economically important conifer that grows rapidly under optimum conditions and produces high-quality wood.
kegg  pathway analysis revealed that the most significantly altered genes were involved in plant hormone signal transduction, metabolic pathways , and phenylalanine metabolism.
we compared the genes expressed in these tissues to identify molecular markers with embryogenic potential.
somatic embryogenesis has been used in the mass propagation of commercial species.
picea balfourianasomatic embryogenesisembryogenic tissuenon-embryogenic tissueissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
