several previous studies have shown that some morphologically distinctive, small genera of vascular plants that are endemic to the qinghai-tibetan plateau and adjacent hengduan mountains appear to have unexpected and complex phylogenetic relationships with their putative sisters, which are typically more widespread and more species rich.
the timing of speciation and ecological and morphological evolutionary events in nomocharis are temporally consistent with uplift in the qinghai-tibetan plateau and of the hengduan mountains  <dig> and 3– <dig> million years ago, respectively.
ancestral state reconstruction, biogeographydivergence timeliliumnomocharishengduan mountainsqinghai-tibetan plateauissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
one genus consistent with this pattern is nomocharis franchet.
our phylogenetic reconstruction revealed several lilium species nested within a clade of nomocharis, which evolved ca.
nomocharis and the nested lilium species had relatively low elevation ancestors  and underwent diversification into new, higher elevational habitats  <dig>  and  <dig>  million years ago, respectively.
plausible explanations for this evolutionary and biogeographic pattern include extreme habitat specialization and hybridization.
both the habitat specialization and hybridization have probably played a role in generating the striking morphological differences between lilium and nomocharis.
nomocharis comprises 7– <dig> species bearing showy-flowers that are endemic to the h-d mountains.
our phylogeny reveals signatures of hybridization including incongruence between the plastid and nuclear gene trees, geographic clustering of the maternal  lineages, and divergence ages of the nuclear gene trees consistent with speciation and secondary contact, respectively.
additionally, we suspect that the mountain building may have led to secondary contact events that enabled hybridization in lilium-nomocharis.
in this study, we have used a dated molecular phylogenetic framework to gain insight into the timing of morphological and ecological divergence in lilium-nomocharis and to preliminarily explore possible hybridization events.
in particular, the endemic genera may form one or more poorly resolved paraphyletic clades within the sister group despite distinctive morphology.
