we hypothesize that sequence-level aggregation of input information may provide more accurate content prediction when compared with the content extracted from the local window-based residue-level disorder predictors.
the above investigations currently utilize the disorder content derived from the per-residue disorder predictions.
we propose a novel predictor, discon, that takes advantage of a small set of  <dig> custom-designed descriptors that aggregate and hybridize information concerning sequence, evolutionary profiles, and predicted secondary structure, solvent accessibility, flexibility, and annotation of globular domains.
we also empirically demonstrate that the discon's predictions can be used to improve binary annotations of the disordered residues from the real-value disorder propensities generated by current residue-level disorder predictors.
this is a statistically significant improvement over the content computed from outputs of ten modern disorder predictors on a test dataset with proteins that share low sequence identity with the training sequences.
we show that these predictions may over-or under-predict the overall amount of disorder, which motivates development of novel tools for direct and accurate sequence-based prediction of the disorder content.
the proposed predictive model is analyzed to discuss factors related to the prediction of the disorder content.
discon is a high-quality alternative for high-throughput annotation of the disorder content.
the knowledge of the content of the intrinsic disorder in proteins is useful for a variety of studies including estimation of the abundance of disorder in protein families, classes, and complete proteomes, and for the analysis of disorder-related protein functions.
the web server that implements the discon is available at http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/discon/.
using these descriptors and a ridge regression model, discon predicts the content with low,  <dig> , mean squared error and high,  <dig> , pearson correlation.
