benin, cameroon, gabon, ivory coast and liberia appear as the botanically best-explored countries, but none are optimally explored.
the central african forests have the highest endemism rate across africa, with approximately 30% of species being endemic.
we propose priority target areas for future sampling efforts, mainly focused on tanzania, atlantic central africa and west africa.
the observed number of tree species for african forests is smaller than those estimated from global tree data, suggesting that a significant number of species are yet to be discovered.
when using sampling units  of  <dig> °, just  <dig> reach appropriate collection density and sampling completeness, and the average number of records per species per su is only  <dig> .
understanding the patterns of biodiversity distribution and what influences them is a fundamental pre-requisite for effective conservation and sustainable utilisation of biodiversity.
the botanical exploration of tropical africa is far from complete, underlining the need for intensified inventories and digitization.
herbarium specimensdigitizationtropical forestsbotanical explorationplant growth formspecies richnessfloristic patternshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003137fondation pour la recherche sur la biodiversiterainbiocouvreur thomas l. p. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
nowhere is this more acute than in species-rich tropical africa, where so little is known about plant diversity and its distribution.
in this paper, we use rainbio – one of the largest mega-databases of tropical african vascular plant species distributions ever compiled – to address questions about plant and growth form diversity across tropical africa.
overall, tropical africa remains poorly sampled.
our data provide a solid basis for a more sustainable management and improved conservation of tropical africa’s unique flora, and is important for achieving objective  <dig> of the global strategy for plant conservation 2011– <dig>  in turn, rainbio provides a solid basis for a more sustainable management and improved conservation of tropical africa’s unique flora.
species richness  and endemism figures per country are provided.
