to evaluate if data generated from ffpe material can be reliably produced and potentially used in routine clinical settings, we performed whole exome sequencing  from tumor samples of gastrointestinal stromal tumors , either extracted ff or ffpe, and from matched normal dna.
gastrointestinal stromal tumors formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded fresh frozen tissuenext generation sequencing issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
the integrity of dna extracted from ffpe was evaluated by a modified rapd pcr method, thus identifying high quality  and low quality  ffpe.
false positive and false negative calls were present almost exclusively in the analysis of ffpe of low quality.
on the whole this study showed that wes is feasible also on ffpe specimens and that it is possible to easily select ffpe samples of high quality that yield sequencing results comparable to the ff counterpart.
next generation sequencing  technology has been rapidly introduced into basic and translational research in oncology, but the reduced availability of fresh frozen  tumor tissues and the poor quality of dna extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded  has significantly impaired this process in the field of solid tumors.
we performed whole exome enrichment and sequencing at 100bp in paired end on four gist samples, either from ffpe or fresh-frozen tissue, and from matched normal dna.
focusing on potential disease-related variants allowed the discovery of additional somatic variants in gist samples, apart from the known oncogenic driver mutation, both from sequencing of ff and ffpe material.
classification of somatic variants by nucleotide substitution type showed that hq-ffpe and ff had similar mutational profiles, while lq-ffpe samples carried a much higher number of mutations than the ff counterpart, with a significant enrichment of c > t/g > a substitutions.
wes on ffpe material may represent an important and innovative source for gist research and for other solid tumors, amenable of possible application in clinical practice.
bioinformatic analysis showed that the percentage of variants called both in ff and ffpe samples was very high in hq-ffpe, reaching 94-96 % of the total number of called variants.
wes produced data of equal quality from ff and ffpe, while only hq-ffpe yielded an amount of data comparable to ff samples.
