transpositional activity was tested for eight tes endogenous to the rice genome in both the s <dig> plants and their selfed progenies  of one of the cultivars, rz <dig>  which manifested heritable phenotypic variations.
dna methylation changes in the etoposide-treated s <dig> rice plants were validated by bisulfite sequencing at both of two analyzed loci .
based on the methylation-sensitive gel-blotting results, epigenetic changes in dna methylation of three tes  and two protein-encoding genes  were detected in the etoposide-treated plants  in four of the six studied japonica cultivars, nipponbare, rz <dig>  rz <dig>  and rz <dig>  but not in the rest japonica cultivar  and the indica cultivar .
results indicated that no transposition occurred in the etoposide-treated s <dig> plants for any of the tes.
our results demonstrate that etoposide imposes a similar genotoxic stress on plant cells as it does on animal and human cells, which may induce transgenerational genomic instability by instigating transpositional activation of otherwise dormant tes.
previous studies in animal cells have demonstrated that etoposide constitutes a genotoxic stress which may induce genomic instability including mobilization of normally quiescent transposable elements .
etoposide  is a chemical commonly used as an anti-cancer drug which inhibits dna synthesis by blocking topoisomerase ii activity.
however, it remained unknown whether similar genetically mutagenic effects could be imposed by etoposide in plant cells.
to investigate whether etoposide could generate genetic and/or epigenetic instability in plant cells, we applied etoposide to germinating seeds of six cultivated rice  genotypes including both subspecies, japonica and indica.
however, penetrance of the genotoxic effects of etoposide on plant cells, as being reflected as genetic and epigenetic instability, appears to be in a strictly genotype- and/or generation-dependent manner.
nonetheless, a mite transposon, mping, showed rampant mobilization in the s <dig> and s <dig> progenies descended from the drug-treated s <dig> plants.
in addition, we show for the first time that etoposide may induce epigenetic instability in the form of altered dna methylation patterns in eukaryotes.
