using this sensor, we robustly detected emt and mesenchymal to epithelial transition  in breast cancer cells by flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy.
the ability of this stably integrating dual sensor system to detect dynamic fluctuations between these two states through live cell imaging offers a significant improvement over existing methods and helps facilitate the study of emt/met plasticity in response to different stimuli and in cancer pathogenesis.
the epithelial to mesenchymal transition  has been implicated in metastasis and therapy resistance of carcinomas and can endow cancer cells with cancer stem cell  properties.
the z-cad dual sensor effectively reports the activities of two factors critical in determining the epithelial/mesenchymal state of carcinoma cells.
additionally, we used the z-cad sensor to identify and isolate minor subpopulations of cells displaying mesenchymal properties within a population comprising predominately epithelial-like cells.
finally, the versatile z-cad sensor can be adapted to a variety of in vitro or in vivo systems to elucidate whether emt/met contributes to normal and disease phenotypes.
the ability to detect cancer cells that are undergoing or have completed emt has typically relied on the expression of cell surface antigens that correlate with an emt/csc phenotype.
the development of fluorescent sensors that mirror the dynamic emt state by following the expression of bona fide emt regulators in live cells would provide a valuable new tool for characterizing emt.
the emt process is dynamic, and these existing methods cannot reveal such changes within live cells.
we generated a lentiviral-based, dual fluorescent reporter system, designated as the z-cad dual sensor, comprising destabilized green fluorescent protein containing the zeb <dig> 3′ utr and red fluorescent protein driven by the e-cadherin  promoter.
the z-cad dual sensor identified cells with csc-like properties more effectively than either the zeb <dig> 3′ utr or e-cadherin sensor alone.
importantly, we observed dynamic changes in cellular populations undergoing met.
