the plant pathogenic basidiomycete sclerotium rolfsii produces the industrially exploited exopolysaccharide scleroglucan, a polymer that consists of -β-linked glucose with a -β-glycosyl branch on every third unit.
similarly, the biosynthetic pathway of oxalate, the main by-product during scleroglucan production, has not been elucidated yet.
from these, candidate genes were identified which could represent potential leads for targeted modification of the s. rolfsii metabolism for increased scleroglucan yields.
the data obtained allowed us to predict the biosynthetic pathways of scleroglucan and oxalate synthesis and to identify important genes putatively involved in determining scleroglucan yields.
sequence data were used to obtain first insights into the genomics of scleroglucan and oxalate production and to predict putative proteins involved in the synthesis of both metabolites.
moreover, our data establish the first sequence database for s. rolfsii, which allows research into other biological processes of s. rolfsii, such as host-pathogen interaction.
in order to provide a basis for genetic and metabolic engineering approaches, we studied scleroglucan and oxalate biosynthesis in s. rolfsii using different transcriptomic approaches.
two s. rolfsii transcriptomes obtained from scleroglucan-producing and scleroglucan-nonproducing conditions were pooled and sequenced using the  <dig> pyrosequencing technique yielding ~ <dig>  reads.
the results presented in this paper provide for the first time genomic and transcriptomic data about s. rolfsii and demonstrate the power and usefulness of combined transcriptome sequencing and comparative microarray analysis.
although the physicochemical properties of scleroglucan are well understood, almost nothing is known about the genetics of scleroglucan biosynthesis.
using comparative transcriptomics, namely agilent microarray hybridization and suppression subtractive hybridization, we identified ~ <dig> unigenes which are differently expressed under scleroglucan-producing and non-producing conditions.
