having shown that qrt-pcr and affymetrix® genechip® data from the same hormone replacement therapy  study yielded concordant results, we used quantile-normalized gene microarray data to identify the most stably expressed among probe sets for prospective internal reference genes across three brain regions from the hrt study and an additional study of normally menstruating rhesus macaques .
twelve animals were used per study, and three brain regions were analyzed from each animal.
sequences co-annotated for ribosomal protein s27a , and ubiquitin were among the most stably expressed under all conditions and selection criteria used for both studies.
in the cycle study, multiple probe sets annotated for actin, gamma  <dig>  showed high signal intensity and were among the most stably expressed.
higher annotation quality on the human genechip® facilitated more targeted analysis than could be accomplished using the rhesus genechip®.
we recently demonstrated that relative gene expression from qrt-pcr data normalized using gapdh, alg <dig> and rpl13a expression values mirrored relative expression using quantile normalization in robust multichip analysis  on the affymetrix® genechip® rhesus macaque genome array.
here we assess the use of gene microarray analysis to facilitate selection of internal reference sequences with higher expression stability across experimental conditions than can be expected using traditional selection methods.
using gene microarray analysis, we identified genes showing high expression stability under various sex-steroid environments in different regions of the rhesus macaque brain.
in pcr studies, genes designated as "housekeeping genes" have been used as internal reference genes under the assumption that their expression is stable and independent of experimental conditions.
use of quantile-normalized microarray gene expression values represents an improvement over traditional methods of selecting internal reference genes for pcr analysis.
gene selection was limited to  <dig> previously published human "housekeeping" genes.
