the method was tested both on bacterial communities found in chloroethene-contaminated groundwater samples and in aerobic granular sludge biofilms originating from wastewater treatment systems.
the strength of this methodology relies on the identification of t-rfs by comparison of experimental and digital t-rflp profiles obtained from the same samples.
digital t-rflp profiles were generated from the denoised full pyrosequencing datasets, and the sequences contributing to each digital t-rf were classified to taxonomic bins using the greengenes reference database.
here, a bioinformatics methodology for pyrosequencing-based t-rf identification  was developed to combine pyrosequencing and t-rflp approaches for the description of microbial communities.
pyrotrf-id profits from complementary advantages of pyrosequencing and t-rflp and is particularly adapted for optimizing laboratory and computational efforts to describe microbial communities and their dynamics in any biological system.
the high resolution of the microbial community composition is provided by pyrosequencing, which can be performed on a restricted set of selected samples, whereas t-rflp enables simultaneous fingerprinting of numerous samples at relatively low cost and is especially adapted for routine analysis and follow-up of microbial communities on the long run.
on average, 63±18% of all experimental t-rfs  were affiliated to phylotypes.
in molecular microbial ecology, massive sequencing is gradually replacing classical fingerprinting techniques such as terminal-restriction fragment length polymorphism  combined with cloning-sequencing for the characterization of microbiomes.
dna extracts were subjected to amplification of the 16s rrna gene pool, t-rflp with the haeiii restriction enzyme,  <dig> tag encoded flx amplicon pyrosequencing, and pyrotrf-id analysis.
pyrotrf-id was efficient for high-throughput mapping and digital t-rflp profiling of pyrosequencing datasets.
both digital and experimental t-rflp profiles were aligned with maximum cross-correlation coefficients of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for high- and low-complexity environments, respectively.
