quantifying the conspicuousness of objects against particular backgrounds is key to understanding the evolution and adaptive value of animal coloration, and in designing effective camouflage.
additionally, we developed a new method for measuring edge disruption based on an understanding of sensory processing and the way in which false edges are thought to interfere with animal outlines.
our novel measure of disruptive coloration was the best predictor of capture times overall, highlighting the importance of false edges in concealment over and above pattern or luminance matching.
the validation of these methods opens up new lines of investigation surrounding the form and function of different types of camouflage, and may apply more broadly to the evolution of any visual signal.
disruptive coloration is a further camouflage strategy where high contrast patterns disrupt they prey’s tell-tale outline, making it more difficult to detect.
we assessed how well existing disruptive coloration measures predicted capture times.
animal colorationbackground matchingcamouflagecrypsisdisruptive colorationimage processingpattern analysispredationsignallingvisionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000268biotechnology and biological sciences research councilbb/l017709/1bb/l017709/1skelhorn john stevens martin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
quantifying detectability can reveal how colour patterns affect survival, how animals’ appearances influence habitat preferences, and how receiver visual systems work.
background matching was assessed using several established methods, including sophisticated feature-based pattern analysis, granularity approaches and a range of luminance and contrast difference measures.
our study also provides the first test of the efficacy of many established methods for quantifying how conspicuous animals are against particular backgrounds.
the efficacy of our new method for measuring disruptive camouflage together with its biological plausibility and computational efficiency represents a substantial advance in our understanding of the measurement, mechanism and definition of disruptive camouflage.
