kidney renal clear cell carcinoma  is one of fatal genitourinary diseases and accounts for most malignant kidney tumours.
our study identified a set of differentially expressed genes and pathways in kidney renal clear cell carcinoma, and represents a comprehensive computational approach to analysis large-scale next-generation sequencing data.
kidney renal clear cell carcinomatcgarna-seqdifferentially expressed genespathwaysgene network analysismachine learning classifier21- <dig> july  <dig>  <dig> international conference on bioinformatics and computational biology las vegas, nv, usa
combining differentially expressed genes with pathway and network analyses using intelligent computational approaches provide an unprecedented opportunity to identify upstream disease causal genes and effective drug targets.
like many types of cancers, there is no curative treatment for metastatic kirc.
the study not only confirmed a number of identified differentially expressed genes in literature reports, but also provided new findings.
based on these findings, we built a support vector machine based supervised-learning classifier to predict unknown samples, and the classifier achieved high accuracy and robust classification results.
identification of distinctly expressed genes and altered pathways are important in effective biomarker identification for early cancer diagnosis and treatment planning.
differentially expressed genes were obtained from the rna-seq data.
we combined differentially expressed genes, pathways and network analyses to gain new insights into the underlying molecular mechanisms of the disease development.
using advanced sequencing technologies, the cancer genome atlas  project of nih/nci-nhgri has produced large-scale sequencing data, which provide unprecedented opportunities to reveal new molecular mechanisms of cancer.
followed by the experimental design for obtaining significant genes and pathways, comprehensive analysis of  <dig> kirc patients' sequencing data provided by tcga was performed.
furthermore, this study can provide a viable alternative in identifying effective drug targets.
pathway and network analyses were performed.
the pathway and network analyses suggested that information from distinctly expressed genes can be utilized in the identification of aberrant upstream regulators.
the network analysis leads to the identification of significantly disrupted pathways and associated genes involved in the disease development.
