our results suggest that foxo is constrained by strong purifying selection except four sites in foxo <dig>  which have undergone positive darwinian selection.
whether the functional divergences are primarily due to adaptive selection pressure or relaxed selective constraint remains an open question.
phylogenetic analysis was used to characterize the family evolutionary history by identifying two duplications early in vertebrate evolution.
the degree of homology between these four members is high, especially in the forkhead domain, which contains the dna-binding interface.
we present a phylogeny describing the evolutionary history of the foxo gene family and show that the genes have evolved through duplications followed by purifying selection except for four sites in foxo <dig> fixed by positive selection lie mostly within the non-conserved optimal pkb motif in the c-terminal part.
sequence similarity searches have performed in genome and scaffold data to identify homologues of foxo in vertebrates.
relaxed selection may play important roles in the process of functional differentiation evolved through gene duplications as well.
yet, mouse foxo knockouts have revealed that each foxo gene has its unique role in the physiological process.
to determine the mode of evolution in vertebrates, we performed a rigorous statistical analysis with foxo gene sequences, including relative rate ratio tests, branch-specific dn/ds ratio tests, site-specific dn/ds ratio tests, branch-site dn/ds ratio tests and clade level amino acid conservation/variation patterns analysis.
as such, this study aims to address the evolutionary mode of foxo, which may lead to the functional divergence.
the functional divergence in this family is best explained by either relaxed purifying selection or positive selection.
to date, the foxo group has four mammalian members: foxo <dig>  foxo3a, foxo <dig> and foxo <dig>  which are orthologs of daf <dig>  an insulin-responsive transcription factor involved in regulating longevity of worms and flies.
