the former species are often acquired by environmental contamination while s. aureus is particularly problematic due to its resistance to antibiotic treatments and ability to reside within mammary tissue in a chronic, subclinical state.
the secretion of a number of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines from mammary epithelial cells stimulated by the bacteria serves to trigger the recruitment and activation of neutrophils in mammary tissue.
mastitis in dairy cattle results from infection of mammary tissue by a range of micro-organisms but principally coliform bacteria and gram positive bacteria such as staphylococcus aureus.
transcriptional profiling was employed to measure changes in gene expression occurring in bovine mammary tissues sampled from three dairy cows after brief and graded intramammary challenges with s. aureus.
the transcriptional responses in infected bovine mammary tissue, even at low doses of bacteria and short periods of infection, probably reflect the combined contributions of gene expression changes resulting from the activation of mammary epithelial cells and infiltrating immune cells.
recombinant s100a <dig> inhibited growth of escherichia coli in vitro and recombinant ptx <dig> bound to e. coli as well as c1q, a subunit of the first component of the complement cascade.
the presence of s100a <dig> and ptx <dig> in milk from infected udder quarters may increase the anti-bacterial properties of milk thereby helping to resolve the mammary tissue infection as well as potentially contributing to the maturation of the newborn calf epithelium and establishment of the newborn gut microbial population.
moreover, the effect of infection on the presence of bioactive innate immune proteins in milk is also unclear.
there was also a strong correlation between somatic cell count, a widely used measure of mastitis, and the level of s100a <dig> in milk from a herd of dairy cows.
the transcriptional responses within bovine mammary epithelial tissue subjected to intramammary challenge with s. aureus are poorly characterised, particularly at the earliest stages of infection.
both genes were shown to be expressed by mammary epithelial cells grown in culture after stimulation with lipopolysaccharide.
