this subgenus is elevated to genus level to accommodate the exannulate mushroom-forming armillarioid species.
the final lineage to diverge is that composed of annulate mushroom-forming armillarioid species, in what is now armillaria sensu stricto.
the six-locus phylogenetic analysis resolves guyanagaster as the earliest diverging lineage in the armillarioid clade.
three loci—28s, ef1α and rpb2—were analyzed in a partitioned nucleotide data set to infer divergence dates and ancestral range estimations for well-supported, monophyletic lineages.
in this study, we conducted phylogenetic analyses to fully resolve the relationship of g. necrorhizus with armillaria.
the molecular clock analysis and ancestral range estimation suggest the most recent common ancestor to the armillarioid lineage arose  <dig> million years ago in eurasia.
the armillarioid lineage evolved in eurasia during the height of tropical rainforest expansion about  <dig> million years ago, a time marked by a warm and wet global climate.
desarmillaria represents an armillarioid lineage that was likely much more widespread in the past.
the production of rhizomorphs is an adaptation to harsh environments, and could be a driver of diversification in armillaria by conferring a competitive advantage to the species that produce them.
the first gasteroid fungus with close affinities to armillaria—guyanagaster necrorhizus—was described from the neotropical rainforests of guyana.
guyanagaster likely evolved from a gilled mushroom ancestor and could represent a highly specialized endemic in the guiana shield.
armillaria root rotcamerooneocenefungal taxonomygasteromycetationguiana shieldmelaninmushroom evolutionphysalacriaceaesystematicshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationdeb-0918591aime m. catherine issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
armillaria species represent those that evolved after the shift in climate from warm and tropical to cool and arid during the late eocene.
data sets containing guyanagaster from two collecting localities, along with a global sampling of  <dig> armillaria species—including newly collected specimens from guyana and africa—at six loci  were used.
no species in either desarmillaria or guyanagaster are known to produce melanized rhizomorphs in nature, whereas almost all armillaria species are known to produce them.
the next lineage to diverge is that composed of species in armillaria subgenus desarmillaria.
