of special note was the finding that the gene tree topologies of marine haplosclerid demosponges, which are inconsistent with the current morphology-based classification, are supported by our reconstructed evolution of secondary structure features.
we showed that analyses of primary rrna sequences, including secondary structure-specific evolutionary models, in combination with reconstruction of the evolution of unusual structural features, reveal a substantial amount of additional information.
however, information regarding its secondary structure is neglected in most phylogenetic analyses.
information about secondary structure also supports the process of aligning rrna sequences across taxa.
here, we explore ssu rrna secondary structures from the three extant classes of phylum porifera , a pivotal, but largely unresolved taxon of early branching metazoa.
this is the first phylogenetic study of poriferan ssu rrna data to date that includes detailed comparative secondary structure information for all three sponge classes.
to encourage and facilitate the application of rrna models in phylogenetics of early metazoans, we present  <dig> ssu rrna secondary structures over the taxonomic range of porifera in a database, along with some basic tools for relevant format-conversion.
we demonstrated that sophisticated secondary structure analyses can increase the potential phylogenetic information of already available rdna sequences currently accessible in databases and conclude that the importance of ssu rrna secondary structure information for phylogenetic reconstruction is still generally underestimated, at least among certain early branching metazoans.
incorporation of this information is essential in order to apply specific rrna evolutionary models to overcome the problem of co-evolution of paired sites, which violates the basic assumption of the independent evolution of sites made by most phylogenetic methods.
both aspects have been shown to increase the accuracy of phylogenetic reconstructions within various taxa.
we found base compositional and structural differences in ssu rrna among demospongiae, hexactinellida  and calcarea .
