aurantiacus to facilitate life under both anaerobic and aerobic conditions, including duplicate genes and gene clusters for the alternative complex iii , auracyanin and nadh:quinone oxidoreductase; and several aerobic/anaerobic enzyme pairs in central carbon metabolism and tetrapyrroles and nucleic acids biosynthesis.
the genomic analyses presented in this report, along with previous physiological, ecological and biochemical studies, indicate that the anoxygenic phototroph cfl.
aurantiacus contains a chimeric photosystem that comprises some characters of green sulfur bacteria and purple photosynthetic bacteria, and also has some unique electron transport proteins compared to other photosynthetic bacteria.
according to 16s rrna analysis, chloroflexi species are the earliest branching bacteria capable of photosynthesis, and cfl.
roseiflexus castenholzii is a recently characterized fap bacterium and phylogenetically closely related to cfl.
the complete genome may also shed light on possible evolutionary connections of photosynthesis.
aurantiacus genome are compared with those of the roseiflexus castenholzii genome.
the central carbon metabolism and sulfur assimilation pathways in cfl.
overall, genomic information is consistent with a high tolerance for oxygen that has been reported in the growth of cfl.
according to previous reports and the genomic information, perspectives of cfl.
genes for the chimeric photosystem, photosynthetic electron transport chain, the 3-hydroxypropionate autotrophic carbon fixation cycle, co2-anaplerotic pathways, glyoxylate cycle, and sulfur reduction pathway are present.
aurantiacus has many interesting and certain unique features in its metabolic pathways.
chloroflexus aurantiacus is a thermophilic filamentous anoxygenic phototrophic  bacterium, and can grow phototrophically under anaerobic conditions or chemotrophically under aerobic and dark conditions.
aurantiacus has been determined, analyzed and compared to the genomes of other photosynthetic bacteria.
