transplanted porcine microbiota into gf mice replicated the phenotypes of pig donors.
besides, the digestive and absorptive ability was different among the three groups in donor pigs and mice recipients.
there were huge differences in gut microbiota composition and gut characteristics among pig breeds, and gut microbiota could partially convey host gut characteristics from pigs to mice.
results showed that different pig breeds exhibited distinct gut microbiota profile based on high-throughput pyrosequencing.
the present study was conducted to compare the differences in gut microbiota composition and gut-phenotypes among pig breeds, and determine whether these differences would transmit to mice colonized with fecal microbiota of different pig breeds.
pig breedsintestinal developmentdigestive and absorptive activitiesgerm-free micefecal microbiota transplantationchina agriculture research systemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
a total of  <dig> 1-day-old germ-free balb/c mice were divided into  <dig> groups , which were transplanted with intact fecal microbiota of tibetan pig , yorkshire pig  and rongchang pig , respectively.
the intestine length in tfm was longer than that in rfm, and tfm had higher villus height in duodenum and jejunum and glp- <dig> mrna expression in ileum than the other two groups .
moreover, the three groups of donor pigs and their mice recipients exhibited different intestinal index and morphology.
in addition, tibetan pigs-derived microbiota improved gut barrier in mice recipients.
yp had higher jejunal lactase and maltase activities than tp and rp, while tp had higher activities of jejunal atpase, γ-gt, and relative sglt <dig> mrna expression in duodenum and jejunum than yp and rp .
likewise, yfm had higher jejunal sucrase and maltase activities than tfm and rfm, whereas higher jejunal γ-gt activity and relative sglt <dig> mrna expression in duodenum and ileum were observed in tfm compared with yfm and rfm .
tp and rp had higher intestinal weight and relative cdx <dig> mrna expression in ileum than yp, and longer intestine, higher villus height of duodenum and jejunum were observed in tp compared with yp and rp .
likely, compared with tfm and rfm, yfm exhibited increasing mda concentration in jejunum , and the relative zo- <dig> mrna expression in duodenum and ileum in tfm were higher than that in yfm .
