using sequence data from nuclear  and chloroplast  dna, we investigate the genetic differentiation of  <dig> psittacanthus schiedeanus  populations across the mesoamerican species range.
species distribution modeling, isolation with migration and bayesian inference methods were used to infer the evolutionary transition of mistletoe invasion, in which evolutionary scenarios were compared through posterior probabilities.
we conducted phylogenetic, population and spatial genetic analyses on  <dig> individuals of p. schiedeanus to gain insight of the evolutionary history of these populations.
gene flow estimates, a significant genetic signal of demographic expansion, and range shifts under past climatic conditions predicted by species distribution modeling suggest post-glacial invasion of p. schiedeanus mistletoes to cloud forests.
the abc results are consistent with a scenario of post-glacial mistletoe invasion, independent of host identity, and that habitat types recently isolated p. schiedeanus populations, accumulating slight phenotypic differences among genetic groups due to recent migration across habitats.
our results provide support for the predominant role of isolation and environmental factors in driving genetic differentiation of mesoamerican parrot-flower mistletoes.
similarly,  <dig> its ribotypes suggest phylogeographic structure, despite the fact that most frequent ribotypes are widespread indicating effective nuclear gene flow via pollen.
under this scenario, climatic fluctuations throughout the pleistocene would have altered the distribution of suitable habitat for mistletoes throughout mesoamerica leading to variation in population continuity and isolation.
nine haplotypes were identified after sequencing the trnl-f intergenic spacer.
these haplotypes showed phylogeographic structure, with three groups with restricted gene flow corresponding to the distribution of individuals/populations separated by habitat , with post-glacial population expansions and potentially corresponding to post-glacial invasion types.
ecological adaptation to host taxa is thought to result in mistletoe speciation via race formation.
our analyses revealed shallow levels of population structure with three genetic groups present across the sample area.
however, approximate bayesian computation  analyses strongly supported a scenario of simultaneous divergence among the three groups isolated recently.
