the distribution of retrocopies based on their ds values revealed a burst pattern of young retrocopies in the genome.
among these retrocopies, retrogenes were more prevalent in old than young retrocopies, which indicates that most retrocopies may have been eliminated during evolution, even though some retrocopies survived, attained biological function as retrogenes, and became old.
thus, investigating retrocopies in the coelacanth genome can determine the role of retrocopies in coelacanth genome innovations and perhaps even water-to-land adaptations.
we determined the ds values, dn/ds ratios, expression patterns, and enrichment of functional categories for  <dig> retrocopies in the african coelacanth genome.
we identified  <dig> ensembl genes that overlapped with the coelacanth genome retrocopies.
our study identified  <dig> retrocopies in the coelacanth genome.
sequence analysis of these retrocopies and their parent genes, transcriptome data, and go annotation information revealed novel insight about the potential role of genomic retrocopies in coelacanth evolution and vertebrate adaptations during the evolutionary transition from water to land.
go enrichment analysis revealed different overrepresented go  terms between these “retrocopy-overlapped genes” and the retrocopy parent genes, which indicates potential genomic functional organization produced by retrotranspositions.
the coelacanth is known as a “living fossil” because of its morphological resemblance to its fossil ancestors.
the retrocopy birth pattern was shown to be more similar to that in tetrapods than ray-finned fish, which indicates a genomic transformation that accompanied vertebrate evolution from water to land.
among the  <dig> retrocopy-overlapped genes, we also identified  <dig> that were coelacanth-specific, which could represent a potential molecular basis for coelacanth evolution.
retrocopies are a type of novel genetic element that are likely to contribute to genome or phenotype innovations.
coelacanth | retrocopy | novel genetic elementsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
