previous studies on the effects of rhizotoxic ions on root growth and physiological functions suggested that some mechanisms were common to all rhizotoxins, while others were more specific.
these gene groups are likely to reflect the common and differential cellular responses and the induction of defense systems in response to each ion.
we also identified co-expressed gene groups specific to rhizotoxic ions, which might aid further detailed investigation of the response mechanisms.
our analyses revealed that both general and specific genes were induced in arabidopsis roots exposed to various rhizotoxic ions.
in contrast, gene ontological categorization identified sets of genes uniquely induced by each stressor, with distinct patterns of biological processes and molecular function.
to understand this complex system, we performed comparative transcriptomic analysis with various rhizotoxic ions, followed by bioinformatics analysis, in the model plant arabidopsis thaliana.
several defense systems, such as the production of reactive oxygen species and disturbance of ca homeostasis, were triggered by all stressors, while specific defense genes were also induced by individual stressors.
the top  <dig> % of genes whose expression was most increased by each stressor were compared with identify common and specific gene expression responses induced by these stressors.
roots of arabidopsis were treated with the major rhizotoxic stressors, aluminum  ions, cadmium  ions, copper  ions and sodium  chloride, and the gene expression responses were analyzed by dna array technology.
these contained known resistance genes for each stressor, such as atalmt <dig>  in the al-specific group and dreb  in the nacl-specific group.
rhizotoxic ions in problem soils inhibit nutrient and water acquisition by roots, which in turn leads to reduced crop yields.
in order to understand the complex responses of roots to rhizotoxic ions, we performed comparative transcriptomic analysis followed by bioinformatics characterization.
similar studies in different plant species could help to clarify the resistance mechanisms at the molecular level to provide information that can be utilized for marker-assisted selection.
