this method is broadly applicable to a number of different types of image-based datasets derived from a wide spectrum of experimental conditions and is suitable to adaptively process new images which are continuously added to existing datasets.
these results demonstrate that our methods can be used to better identify novel phenotypes in image-based datasets from a wide range of conditions and organisms.
experiment results also validate that our method performs consistently under different order of image input, variation of starting conditions including the number and composition of existing phenotypes, and dataset from different screens.
restoring pre-defined biological meaningful phenotypes, differentiating novel phenotypes from known ones and clarifying novel phenotypes from each other.
we demonstrate that our method can detect various novel phenotypes effectively in complex datasets.
validations were carried out on different dataset, including published rnai screening using drosophila embryos , dataset for cell cycle phase identification using hela cells  and synthetic dataset using polygons, our methods tackled three aforementioned tasks effectively with an accuracy range of 85%–90%.
a gaussian mixture model  is employed to estimate the distribution of each existing phenotype, and then used as reference distribution in gap statistics.
we also propose a two-step procedure to modify the novelty detection method based on one-class svm, so that it can be used to online phenotype discovery.
this method features phenotype modelling and iterative cluster merging using improved gap statistics.
arbitrarily extracted information causes biased analysis, while combining the complete existing datasets with each new image is intractable in high-throughput screens.
in different conditions, we compared the svm based method with our method using various datasets and our methods consistently outperformed svm based method in at least two of three tasks by 2% to 5%.
the recent emergence of high-throughput automated image acquisition technologies has forever changed how cell biologists collect and analyze data.
when our method is implemented in the context of a drosophila genome-scale rnai image-based screening of cultured cells aimed to identifying the contribution of individual genes towards the regulation of cell-shape, it efficiently discovers meaningful new phenotypes and provides novel biological insight.
here we present the design and implementation of a novel and robust online phenotype discovery method with broad applicability that can be used in diverse experimental contexts, especially high-throughput rnai screens.
in our findings, the proposed method is suitable for online phenotype discovery in diverse high-throughput image-based genetic and chemical screens.
historically, the interpretation of cellular phenotypes in different experimental conditions has been dependent upon the expert opinions of well-trained biologists.
