recently, a preliminary phylogenetic analysis was reported for nac gene family from  <dig> plant species.
in the present study, a comprehensive analysis of nac gene family in populus was performed.
based on the genomic organizations, we can conclude that segmental duplications contribute significantly to the expansion of populus nac gene family.
the comprehensive expression profiles analysis provides first insights into the functional divergence among members in nac gene family.
taken together, our results presented here would be helpful in laying the foundation for functional characterization of nac gene family and further gaining an understanding of the structure-function relationship between these family members.
however, no comprehensive study incorporating phylogeny, chromosomal location, gene structure, conserved motifs, and expression profiling analysis has been presented thus far for the model tree species populus.
the gene structure and motif compositions were considerably conserved among the subfamilies.
the majority of nacs showed specific temporal and spatial expression patterns based on est frequency and microarray data analyses.
however, the expression patterns of a majority of duplicate genes were partially redundant, suggesting the occurrence of subfunctionalization during subsequent evolutionary process.
furthermore, quantitative real-time rt-pcr  was performed to confirm the tissue-specific expression patterns of  <dig> nac genes.
in addition, the high divergence rate of expression patterns after segmental duplications indicates that nac genes in populus are likewise to have been retained by substantial subfunctionalization.
a total of  <dig> full-length nac genes were identified in populus, and they were phylogeneticly clustered into  <dig> distinct subfamilies.
the distributions of  <dig> populus nac genes were non-random across the  <dig> linkage groups , and  <dig> genes  were preferentially retained duplicates that located in both duplicated regions.
