this set of spectra was then evaluated on the basis of measurements with well-defined, cultured leptospiral strains and with  <dig> field isolates of veterinary or human origin.
evaluation of the newly-built reference spectra database allowed reproducible identification at the species level for the defined leptospiral strains and the field isolates.
reference spectra were created with  <dig> leptospiral strains, including pathogenic, non-pathogenic and intermediate strains.
in this study mass spectrometry was used for evaluating extracted leptospiral protein samples and results were compared with molecular typing methods.
results obtained by maldi-tof ms were confirmed by mlst and 16s rrna gene sequencing.
statistical analysis of the three genomospecies l. borgpetersenii, l. interrogans and l. kirschneri revealed distinctive, reproducible differentiating peaks for seven leptospiral strains which represent seven serovars.
in addition, a dendrogram of the reference spectra was compared with phylogenetic trees of the 16s rrna gene sequences and multi locus sequence typing  analysis.
statistical analysis of three pathogenic genomospecies revealed peak differences at the species level and for certain serovars analyzed in this study.
to verify discriminating peaks for the applied pathogenic strains, statistical analysis of the protein spectra was performed using the software tool clinprotools.
maldi-tof ms analysis is a fast and reliable method for species identification, although leptospira organisms need to be produced in a time-consuming culture process.
defined and reproducible protein spectra using maldi-tof ms were obtained for all leptospiral strains.
all leptospiral strains were identified, at least at the species level, using our described extraction protocol.
analysis of the dendrograms of the mlst data, the 16s rrna sequencing, and the maldi-tof ms reference spectra showed comparable clustering.
for this, an extraction protocol for leptospira spp.
maldi-tof msleptospira interrogansleptospira kirschnerileptospira borgpeterseniimulti locus sequence typinglipl32lipl41rrs216s rrnaclinprotools
