the nature of divergences between co-occurring sympatric species, factors contributing to reproductive isolation and modes of genome evolution is a much debated topic in evolutionary biology addressed by various experimental tools.
these experiments showed a clear co-localization of the ribosomal dna and the retrotransposon rex <dig> in a pericentromeric region of one or two acrocentric chromosomes in both species.
we attribute these extensive genome re-arrangements associated with speciation event to stress-induced retrotransposons activation.
we have employed molecular cytogenetic tools to identify the genomic differences between the two species of the sympatric pair on the sub-chromosomal level of resolution.
to determine mechanisms how such extensive genome alternation might have arisen, a pcr screening for retrotransposons from genomic dna of both species was performed.
we examined chromosomes and genomes of one postglacial species pair, sympatric european winter-spawning coregonus albula and the local endemic dwarf-sized spring-spawning c. fontanae, both originating in lake stechlin.
fluorescence in situ hybridization  experiments consistently revealed a distinct variation in the copy number of loci of the major ribosomal dna  between c. albula and c. fontanae genomes.
in c. fontanae, up to  <dig> chromosomes were identified to bear a part of the major ribosomal dna, while in c. albula only 8– <dig> chromosomes possessed these genes.
sympatric species pairs are particularly common in freshwater fishes associated with postglacial lakes in northern temperate environments.
we demonstrated genomic consequences of a rapid ecological speciation on the level undetectable by neither sequence nor karyotype analysis.
such causal interplay between genome differentiation, retrotransposons activation and environmental conditions may become a topic to be explored in a broader genomic context in future evolutionary studies.
we provide indirect evidence that ribosomal dna probably utilized the spreading mechanism of retrotransposons subsequently affecting recombination rates in both genomes, thus, leading to a rapid genome divergence.
