it is challenging to reposition drugs as pharmacological data is large and complex.
in this paper, we fill this gap by proposing a new physarum-inspired prize-collecting steiner tree algorithm to identify subnetworks for drug repositioning.
a new physarum-inspired prize-collecting steiner tree algorithm is proposed in this paper to identify subnetworks.
moreover, we identify seven previously unknown drug candidates that also may interact with the biological cardiovascular system.
drug repositioning can reduce the time, costs and risks of drug development by identifying new therapeutic effects for known drugs.
in dsns, vertex prizes and edge costs represent the similarities and dissimilarities between drugs respectively, and terminals represent drugs in the cardiovascular class, as defined in the anatomical therapeutic chemical classification system.
drug similarity networks  are generated using the chemical, therapeutic, protein, and phenotype features of drugs.
subnetwork identification has already been used to simplify the visualization and interpretation of biological data, but it has not been applied to drug repositioning so far.
steiner tree problemsubnetwork identificationdrug similarity networkbig dataphysarum polycephalum15th international conference on bioinformatics  incob 2016queenstown, singapore 21- <dig> september  <dig> http://incob <dig> apbionet.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
these discoveries show our proposed prize-collecting steiner tree approach as a promising strategy for drug repositioning.
in these dsns, our proposed algorithm identifies subnetworks with an average rand index of  <dig> %, while the gw algorithm can only identify subnetworks with an average rand index of  <dig> %.
we apply both the proposed algorithm and the widely-used gw algorithm to identify subnetworks in our  <dig> generated dsns.
we find evidence to support previous discoveries that nitroglycerin, theophylline and acarbose may be able to be repositioned for cardiovascular diseases.
<dig> frequently occurring drugs in these subnetworks are identified as candidates to be repositioned for cardiovascular diseases.
