the real-time lamp assay identified a variety of hydatid cysts strains recovered in the sudan, including echinococcus canadenses  and echinococcus ortleppi .
following amplification cycles in a simple water bath, lamp products were observed for color change by naked eye and were visualized under uv light source using agarose gel electrophoresis.
however, there was no cross-reactivity with other parasites including cysticercus bovis, fasciola gigantica, and schistosoma bovis and nucleic acid free samples.
the sensitivity studies indicated that the lamp assay detected as little as a 10 fg of parasite dna.
the assay was performed at a constant temperature , with a real-time follow-up using a lightcycler and fluorochrome dye.
the developed lamp assay would be expected to prove highly significant in epidemiological surveys of ce in developing countries or areas of resource-poor settings for both ease of use and cost.
there was 100 % agreement between results of the lamp assay and our previously described nested pcr when testing 10-fold serial dilution of dna extracted from eg-complex hydatid cyst.
real-time lamp positive results were detected by the presence of an amplification curve, whereas negative results were indicated by absence of fluorescence detection.
positive lamp results appeared as a bluish-colored reaction as observed by naked eye, whereas negative lamp results were observed as purple-colored reaction.
cystic echinococcosis  or hydatidosis, caused by the larval stage of echinococcus granulosus -complex, is a neglected parasitic disease of public health importance.
lampcystic echinococcosisechinococcus granulosus-complexhydatid cystssudanissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
a set of six lamp primers, designed from the mitochondrial nadh- <dig> gene of eg cattle strain of genotype  <dig> , was used as a target for lamp assay.
the objective of the present study was to develop and evaluate a real-time loop-mediated isothermal amplification  assay for simple and rapid detection of ce in humans and domestic live stock in sudan.
