when evaluating the structure of the biofilm by confocal laser scanning microscopy, the most prominent observation was a shift in the spatial arrangement of t. denticola, in the presence of p. gingivalis arg-gingipain mutant.
p. gingivalis expresses several virulence factors that may support its survival, regulate its communication with other species in the biofilm, or modulate the inflammatory response of the colonized host tissue.
the role of gingipains in the biofilm-forming capacity of p. gingivalis is barely investigated.
hence, this in vitro study employed a biofilm model consisting of  <dig> “subgingival” bacterial species, incorporating either a wild-type p. gingivalis strain or its derivative lys-gingipain and arg-gingipan isogenic mutants, in order to evaluate quantitative and qualitative changes in biofilm composition.
the wild-type and the two gingipain-deficient p. gingivalis strains exhibited similar growth in their corresponding biofilms.
the gingipains of p. gingivalis may qualitatively and quantitatively affect composition of polymicrobial biofilms.
the present experimental model reveals interdependency between the gingipains of p. gingivalis and t. forsythia or t. denticola.
following 64 h of biofilm growth, the levels of all  <dig> species were quantified by fluorescence in situ hybridization or immunofluorescence.
the gram-negative anaerobes porphyromonas gingivalis, tannerella forsythia and treponema denticola are commonly found as part of the microbiota of subgingival biofilms, and they are associated with the occurrence and severity of the disease.
biofilmporphyromonas gingivalisgingipainstannerella forsythiatreponema denticolaperiodontal microorganismsperiodontal diseasefluorescence in situ hybridizationimmunofluorescenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
periodontal diseases are polymicrobial diseases that cause the inflammatory destruction of the tooth-supporting  tissues.
the most prominent of these virulence factors are the gingipains, which are a set of cysteine proteinases .
among the remaining nine species, only the numbers of t. forsythia were significantly reduced, and only when the lys-gingipain mutant was present in the biofilm.
