in water buffalo calves affected by lethal gastroenteritis was assessed, and a polyphasic characterization of isolated strains of s. typhimurium was performed.
the  <dig> s. typhimurium isolates were all associated with enterocolitis characterized by severe damage of the intestine, and only sporadically isolated with another possible causative agent responsible for gastroenteritis, such as cryptosporidium spp., rotavirus or clostridium perfringens.
the s. typhimurium strains were characterized by phage typing and further genotyped by polymerase chain reaction  detection of  <dig> virulence genes.
three monophasic s. typhimurium  isolates were also found and characterized, displaying three different phage types and three different virulotypes.
three representative strains of s. typhimurium were tested in vivo in a mouse model of mixed infection.
these results provide evidence that salmonella is frequently associated with gastroenteritis in water buffalo calves, particularly s. typhimurium.
moreover, the variety in the number and distribution of different virulence markers among the collected s. typhimurium strains suggests that within this serovar there are different pathotypes potentially responsible for different clinical syndromes.
several salmonella serovars seem to be able to infect water buffalo, but salmonella isolates collected from this animal species have been poorly characterized.
the microbiological analysis of the intestinal contents obtained from  <dig> water buffalo calves affected by lethal gastroenteritis exhibited a significant prevalence of salmonella spp.
the most pathogenic strain was characterized by a high number of virulence factors and the presence of the locus agfa, coding for a thin aggregative fimbria.
in the present study, the prevalence of salmonella spp.
salmonellosis in water buffalo  calves is a widespread disease characterized by severe gastrointestinal lesions, profuse diarrhea and severe dehydration, occasionally exhibiting a systemic course.
other salmonella isolates were mostly isolated from minor intestinal lesions, and often  isolated with other microorganisms, mainly toxinogenic escherichia coli , cryptosporidium spp.
the isolates exhibited nine different phage types and  <dig> different genetic profiles.
