this problem was reproduced multiple times with different wgbs libraries and likely to be associated with the low sequence diversity of bisulfite-converted dna.
<dig> was greatly affected by cluster densities.
software updates in the illumina hiseq platform can affect the outputs from low-diversity sequencing libraries such as wgbs libraries.
methylation of cytosine in genomic dna is a well-characterized epigenetic modification involved in many cellular processes and diseases.
whole-genome bisulfite sequencing , such as methylc-seq and post-bisulfite adaptor tagging sequencing , uses the power of high-throughput dna sequencers and provides genome-wide dna methylation profiles at single-base resolution.
in addition, paired-end sequencing of low diversity libraries using hcs v <dig> .
we have used the illumina hiseq platform for our pbat-based wgbs, and found that different versions of hiseq control software  and real-time analysis  installed on the system provided different global cpg methylation levels  for the same libraries.
to determine which version of hcs is most suitable for wgbs, we used substrates with predetermined cpg methylation levels, and found that hcs v <dig> .
<dig> showed the poorest performance and provided artificially lower cpg methylation levels when 5-methylcytosine is read as guanine .
thus, together with other experimental conditions, special care has to be taken on this point when cpg methylation levels are to be compared between different samples by wgbs.
we found that hcs was the major determinant in the observed differences.
whole-genome bisulfite sequencingdna methylationillumina hiseq platformhiseq control softwarehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003382core research for evolutional science and technology, japan science and technology agencygrant-in-aid for scientific research on innovative areas from the ministry of education, culture, sports, science, and technology of japan25112010sasaki hiroyuki http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of scienceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
<dig> is currently the best for wgbs among the examined hcs versions.
however, the accuracy and consistency of wgbs outputs in relation to the operating conditions of high-throughput sequencers have not been explored.
