gene order is highly conserved with chea-chew and cher-cheb blocks, perhaps reflecting functional linkage.
we also examined the apparently non-typical chemotaxis components, chea <dig>  chea <dig> and chey <dig>  we found that though variants of chea proteins are rare, the chey <dig> variant may be a common type of chey, with a significantly disordered c-terminal region which may be functionally significant.
operon information is not available for most bacteria, so we developed a novel statistical approach to cluster che genes into putative operons.
however, other che genes, most notably chey, are more dispersed on the genome.
we find that many bacterial species potentially have multiple chemotaxis pathways, with grouping of che genes into operons likely to be a major factor in keeping signalling pathways distinct.
we found ppfa in che operons of many species, suggesting that partitioning of cytoplasmic che protein clusters is common.
<dig> species encode more than one of all of these  <dig> proteins, suggesting they have multiple chemotaxis pathways.
chey behaves differently to other che proteins, both in its genomic location and its putative protein interactions, which should be considered when modelling chemotaxis pathways.
chemotaxis is the process by which motile bacteria sense their chemical environment and move towards more favourable conditions.
we then examined the chemotaxis pathways of rhodobacter sphaeroides.
to investigate whether chemotaxis pathways in other bacteria follow the e. coli paradigm, we analysed  <dig> species encoding at least  <dig> homologue of each of the  <dig> core chemotaxis proteins .
using operon-based models, we reconstructed putative chemotaxis pathways for all  <dig> species.
comparison of our operons with shuffled equivalents demonstrates that specific patterns of genomic location may be a determining factor for the observed in vivo chemotaxis pathways.
here, the ppfa protein is known to be critical for correct partitioning of proteins in the cytoplasmically-localised pathway.
