the nuclear envelope is considered a key classification marker that distinguishes prokaryotes from eukaryotes.
nuclear localization signal , a short stretch of amino acid sequence, destines to transport proteins from cytoplasm into nucleus, and is also associated with the development of nuclear envelope.
however, this marker does not apply to the family planctomycetaceae, which has intracellular spaces divided by lipidic intracytoplasmic membranes .
in this study, we identified nls-like motifs that have the same amino acid compositions as experimentally identified nlss in genomes of  <dig> representative species of family planctomycetaceae.
to determine the molecular transformation, we compared nls-bearing protein abundances in the  <dig> representative planctomycetaceae genomes with them in genomes of  <dig> taxonomically varied microorganisms: nine bacteria, two archaea and five fungi.
the results of this study reveal that planctomycetaceae separates slightly from the members of non-planctomycete bacteria but still has substantial differences from fungi, based on the nls-like motifs and nls-bearing protein analysis.
a transition towards increased complexity from non-planctomycete bacteria to planctomycetaceae to archaea and fungi was detected based on the complexity of the  <dig> types of nls-like motifs in the  <dig> nls-bearing proteins families.
we attempted to investigate the nls motifs in planctomycetaceae genomes to demonstrate the potential molecular transition in the development of intracellular membrane system.
afterwards, we aligned the ten types of nls motifs from the  <dig> families containing nls-bearing proteins among bacteria, planctomycetaceae or fungi, considering their diversity, length and origin.
then, we clustered the  <dig> non-redundant nls-bearing proteins into  <dig> families and annotated their involved metabolic pathways.
in the  <dig> strains,  <dig> nls types and  <dig> nls-bearing proteins were identified, principal component analysis showed a significant transitional gradient from bacteria to planctomycetaceae to fungi on their nls-bearing protein abundance profiles.
