agalma includes a small test data set and a built-in test analysis of these data.
they are a cost-effective source of protein-coding gene sequences, and have helped projects grow from a few genes to hundreds or thousands of genes.
agalma also facilitates methods development by providing a complete modular workflow, bundled with test data, that will allow further optimization of each step in the context of a full phylogenomic analysis.
in addition to taking considerable user time, this makes phylogenomic analyses difficult to reproduce, compare, and extend.
we present agalma, an automated tool that constructs matrices for phylogenomic analyses.
agalma allows complex phylogenomic analyses to be implemented and described unambiguously as a series of high-level commands.
in addition to describing agalma, we here present a sample analysis of a larger seven-taxon data set.
implementing such a phylogenomic study, however, is computationally intensive, requires the coordinated use of many complex software tools, and includes multiple steps for which no published tools exist.
phylogenomic studies have therefore been manual or semiautomated.
this will enable phylogenomic studies to be readily reproduced, modified, and extended.
agalma is built on the biolite bioinformatics framework, which tracks provenance, profiles processor and memory use, records diagnostics, manages metadata, installs dependencies, logs version numbers and calls to external programs, and enables rich html reports for all stages of the analysis.
the user provides raw illumina transcriptome data, and agalma produces annotated assemblies, aligned gene sequence matrices, a preliminary phylogeny, and detailed diagnostics that allow the investigator to make extensive assessments of intermediate analysis steps and the final results.
in the past decade, transcriptome data have become an important component of many phylogenetic studies.
phylogenetic studies now regularly include genes from newly sequenced transcriptomes, as well as publicly available transcriptomes and genomes.
