brucella genome data in current databases is largely derived from computational analysis without experimental validation typically found in peer-reviewed publications.
the brucella bioinformatics portal  is developed to integrate existing brucella genome data and analysis tools with literature mining and curation.
bbp is a gateway for brucella researchers to search, analyze, and curate brucella genome data originated from public databases and literature.
these results make possible more comprehensive investigation of brucella pathogenesis.
other bbp features include publication email alert service, brucella researchers' contact database, and discussion forum.
brucella species are gram-negative, facultative intracellular bacteria that cause brucellosis in humans and animals.
to efficiently annotate brucella genes using the large amount of literature publications, a literature mining and curation system coined limix is developed to integrate computational literature mining methods with a pubsearch-powered manual curation and management system.
it is further hypothesized that literature-based brucella gene annotation would increase understanding of complicated brucella pathogenesis mechanisms.
brucella gene mutations and genetic interactions are annotated using limix leading to better understanding of brucella pathogenesis.
the bbp interbru database and brucella genome browser allow users to search and analyze genes of  <dig> currently available brucella genomes and link to more than  <dig> existing databases and analysis programs.
the limix system is used to quickly find and confirm  <dig> brucella gene mutations including  <dig> genes shown to be essential for brucella virulence.
brucella literature publications in pubmed are extracted and can be searched by a textpresso-powered natural language processing method, a mesh browser, a keywords search, and an automatic literature update service.
it is partially due to the lack of a literature mining and curation system able to efficiently incorporate the large amount of literature data into genome annotation.
sequences of four brucella genomes have been published, and various brucella gene and genome data and analysis resources exist.
in addition,  <dig> brucella genetic interactions are extracted from literature publications.
