in many of these properties, the mu-like cmlp  <dig> homologs characterized in this study resemble temperate bacteriophages of enteric bacteria that are responsible for contributions to virulence and host adaptation.
as a first step in the characterization of c. jejuni prophages, we investigated the distribution of prophage dna within a c. jejuni population assessed the dna and protein sequence variability within a subset of the putative prophages found.
southern blotting of c. jejuni dna using probes from genes within the three putative prophages of the c. jejuni sequenced strain rm  <dig> demonstrated the presence of at least one prophage gene in a large proportion  of isolates tested.
the  <dig> prophages and rm  <dig> had a % g+c very similar to c. jejuni sequenced strains, as well as promoter regions characteristic of c. jejuni.
prior work with campylobacter temperate bacteriophages, as well as evidence from prophages in other enteric bacteria, suggests these prophages might have a role in the biology and virulence of the organism.
there was evidence for recombination among groups of prophages, suggesting that the prophages had a mosaic structure.
structural and sequence variability, including short insertions, deletions, and allele replacements, were found within the prophage genomes, some of which would alter the protein products of the orfs involved.
no insertions of novel genes were detected within the sequenced regions.
twelve of these putative prophages were chosen for further analysis.
none of the putative prophages were successfully induced and propagated, so it is not known if they were functional or if they represented remnant prophage dna in the bacterial chromosomes.
these putative prophages form a family of phages with conserved sequences, and appear to be adapted to campylobacter.
however, very little is known about the genetic variability of campylobacter prophages which, if present, could lead to differential phenotypes in isolates carrying the phages versus those that do not.
