r. solanacearum encodes two 3-ketoacyl-acp reductases that both have functions in fatty acid synthesis.
thus, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that rsfabg <dig> and rsfabg <dig> both encode functional 3-ketoacyl-acp reductases and play important roles in r. solanacearum fatty acid synthesis and growth.
we supply the first evidence that, like other enzymes in the bacterial fatty acid biosynthetic pathway, one bacterium may simultaneously possess two or more 3-oxoacyl-acp reductase isozymes.
in contrast, the null mutant strain with the megaplasmid-encoded rsfabg <dig> gene is viable but has a fatty acid composition that differs significantly from that of the wild type strain.
however, there are two ralstonia solanacearum genes, rsc <dig>  and rsp <dig> , annotated as encoding putative 3-ketoacyl-acp reductases.
rsfabgs proteins were purified by nickel chelate chromatography and fatty acid biosynthetic reaction was reconstituted to investigate the 3-ketoacyl-acp reductase activity of rsfabgs in vitro.
and more we also carried out pathogenicity tests on tomato plants using rsfabg mutant strains.
our study also shows that rsfabg <dig> plays a role in adaptation to high salt concentration and low ph, and in pathogenesis of disease in tomato plants.
complementation of escherichia colifabg temperature-sensitive mutant with r. solanacearum fabgs encoded plasmids was carried out to test the function of rsfabgs in fatty acid biosynthesis.
both fabg homologues possess the conserved catalytic triad and the n-terminal cofactor binding sequence of the short chain dehydrogenase/reductase  family.
we report that expression of either of the two proteins  restores growth of the e. coli fabg temperature-sensitive mutant cl <dig> under non-permissive conditions.
in vitro assays demonstrate that both proteins restore fatty acid synthetic ability to extracts of the e. coli strain.
the rsfabg <dig> gene carried on the r. solanacearum chromosome is essential for growth of the bacterium, as is the case for fabg in e. coli.
