during root hair growth and development, gfp-raba1d was enriched at root hair bulges and at the apical dome of vigorously elongating root hairs.
in root cells, gfp-raba1d followed cell plate expansion consistently with cytokinesis-related vesicular trafficking and membrane recycling.
gfp-raba1d accumulated in disc-like structures of nascent cell plates, which progressively evolved to marginal ring-like structures of the growing cell plates.
raba1d participates in both cell plate formation and root hair oscillatory tip growth.
the specific gfp-raba1d subcellular localization confirms a correlation between its specific spatio-temporal accumulation and local vesicle trafficking requirements during cell plate and root hair formation.
arabidopsiscell platecytokinesisrab gtpaselocalizationraba1droot hairtrans-golgi networkvesicleissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
our results support a raba1d role in events that require vigorous membrane trafficking.
atraba1d, a member of the raba <dig> subfamily of small gtpases, was previously found in the vesicle-rich apical dome of growing root hairs suggesting a role during tip growth; however, its specific intracellular localization and role in plants has not been well described.
late endosomes and endoplasmic reticulum labeled with fyve-dsred and er-dsred, respectively, were devoid of gfp-raba1d.
the transient expression of 35s::gfp:raba1d construct in allium porrum and nicotiana benthamiana revealed vesicular structures, which were further corroborated in stable transformed arabidopsis thaliana plants.
light-sheet microscopy revealed involvement of raba1d in root development.
the accumulation of gfp-raba1d in the core of brefeldin a -induced-compartments and the quantitative upregulation of raba1d protein levels after bfa treatment confirmed the association of raba1d with early endosomes/tgn and its role in vesicle trafficking.
progressively, this tip localization dissapeared in mature root hairs suggesting a link between tip localization of raba1d and root hair elongation.
gfp-raba1d colocalized with the trans-golgi network marker mcherry-vti <dig> and with early fm4-64-labeled endosomal compartments.
importantly, gfp-raba1d signal intensity exhibited an oscillatory behavior in-phase with tip growth.
