the yield and quality of canola is frequently threatened by environmental stresses including drought, cold and high salinity.
calcineurin b-like proteins  are ca2+ sensors and regulate a group of ser/thr protein kinases called cbl-interacting protein kinases .
furthermore, the expression levels of six selected bnacbl and  <dig> bnacipk genes in response to salt, drought, cold, heat, aba, methyl viologen  and low potassium were examined by quantitative rt-pcr and these cbl or cipk genes were found to respond to multiple stimuli, suggesting that the canola cbl-cipk network may be a point of convergence for several different signaling pathways.
we also performed a comparison of interaction patterns and expression profiles of cbl and cipk in arabidospsis, canola and rice, to examine the differences between orthologs, highlighting the importance of studying cbl-cipk in canola as a prerequisite for improvement of this crop.
phylogenetic analysis of cbl and cipk gene families across a variety of species suggested genome duplication and diversification.
although the cbl-cipk network has been demonstrated to play crucial roles in plant development and responses to various environmental stresses in arabidopsis, little is known about their function in canola.
our comparative analyses of the cbl-cipk network between canola, arabidopsis and rice highlight functional differences and the necessity to study cbl-cipk gene functions in canola.
the subcellular localization of three bnacbls and two bnacipks were determined using green fluorescence protein  as the reporter.
we also demonstrated interactions between six bnacbls and  <dig> bnacipks using yeast two-hybrid assay, and a subset of interactions were further confirmed by bimolecular fluorescence complementation .
in the present study, we identified seven cbl and  <dig> cipk genes from canola by database mining and cloning of cdna sequences of six cbls and  <dig> cipks.
our findings indicate that cbl and cipk family members may form a dynamic complex to respond to different abiotic or hormone signaling.
