we present a variance-stabilization algorithm, called flowvs, that removes the mean-variance correlations from cell populations identified in each fluorescence channel.
with two publicly available datasets, we show that flowvs removes the mean-variance dependence from raw fc data and makes the within-population variance relatively homogeneous.
comparing phenotypes of heterogeneous cell populations from multiple biological conditions is at the heart of scientific discovery based on flow cytometry .
the homogeneity of variance in cell populations across fc samples is desirable when extracting features uniformly and comparing cell populations with different levels of marker expressions.
flowvs-based variance stabilization can help in performing comparison and alignment of phenotypically identical cell populations across different samples.
since the mean and variance of a cell population are often correlated in fluorescence-based fc measurements, a preprocessing step is needed to stabilize the within-population variances.
flowvs transforms each channel from all samples of a data set by the inverse hyperbolic sine  transformation.
we demonstrate that alternative transformation techniques such as flowtrans, flowscape, logicle, and fcstrans might not stabilize variance.
besides flow cytometry, flowvs can also be applied to stabilize variance in microarray data.
when the biological signal is measured by the average expression of a biomarker, standard statistical methods require that variance be approximately stabilized in populations to be compared.
variance stabilizationflow cytometrybartlett’s testmicroarrayshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000015u.s.
flowvs is therefore an explicit variance-stabilization method that stabilizes within-population variances in each channel by evaluating the homoskedasticity of clusters with a likelihood-ratio test.
on two publicly available fc datasets, flowvs stabilizes within-population variances more evenly than the available transformation and normalization techniques.
the optimum parameters are then used to transform the corresponding channels in every sample.
with a publicly available data set we demonstrate that flowvs performs as well as the vsn software, a state-of-the-art approach developed for microarrays.
for each channel, the parameters of the transformation are optimally selected by bartlett’s likelihood-ratio test so that the populations attain homogeneous variances.
the newly developed flowvs algorithm solves the variance-stabilization problem in fc and microarrays by optimally transforming data with the help of bartlett’s likelihood-ratio test.
