short-read ngs technology  was used to establish a comprehensive repertoire of mirna expressed in either equine cartilage or subchondral bone.
they negatively regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level and play key roles in many biological processes, including skeletal development and cartilage maturation.
differentially expressed mirnas were identified between bone and cartilage from healthy and oc foals, as well as after an experimental mechanical loading.
taken together, our results suggest a role of mirnas in equine oc physiopathology and in the cellular response to biomechanical stress in cartilage and bone.
in silico target prediction and functional enrichment analysis provides new insight into oc molecular physiopathology.
micrornas  are an abundant class of small single-stranded non-coding rna molecules ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides.
samples were also subjected or not to an experimental mechanical loading to evaluate the role of mirnas in the regulation of mechano-transduction pathways.
in cartilage, functional annotation of their predicted targets suggests a role in the maintenance of cartilage integrity through the control of cell cycle and differentiation, energy production and metabolism as well as extracellular matrix structure and dynamics.
epiphyseal cartilage and subchondral bone mirnome were defined, including about  <dig> new mirnas.
in bone, mirna predicited targets were associated with osteoblasts and osteoclasts differentiation, though the regulation of energy production, vesicle transport and some growth factor signaling pathways.
in addition, mirnas involvement in osteoarticular diseases has been proved and some of them were identified as suitable biomarkers for pathological conditions.
undamaged cartilage and subchondral bone samples from healthy  and oc-affected  10-month anglo-arabian foals were analysed.
equine osteochondrosis  is one of the most prevalent juvenile osteoarticular disorders in horses and represents a major concern for animal welfare and economic reasons.
this study aims to investigate the potential role of mirnas in equine osteochondrosis  physiopathology.
