bovine viral diarrhea virus  is a pestivirus that affects cattle production worldwide and that can infect other ungulates such as cervids and even wild boar .
we assessed the sharing of bvdv infections among hunted red deer, wild boar and cattle in south-central spain.
sampled red deer  and wild boar  were located on  <dig> hunting estates, and cattle  were located on  <dig> nearby farms.
conversely, no wild boar tested positive by both elisa or rt-pcr.
it is believed that domestic livestock can become infected through contact with wild animals, though it is known that infection can spread among wild animals in the absence of contact with livestock.
little is known about the sharing of bvdv infection between wild and domestic animals in the same habitat, which is important for designing eradication campaigns and preventing outbreaks, especially on hunting estates with high animal densities.
these results suggest the potential of bvdv to serve as a surveillance marker in these shared habitats.
higher red deer abundance was significantly associated with greater risk that extensively raised cattle would test positive for bvdv by elisa.
high seroprevalence of bvdv in red deer from our study area suggests that although bvdv infection is common, animals usually survive the infection.
we used elisa kits for the serological screening, taqman rt-pcr assay for the virus determination, and subsequent phylogenetic analysis for  <dig> rt-pcr positive sample amplicons.
our findings suggest that bvdv is circulating between cattle and red deer populations in proximity, but further work is required to determine whether they share the same strain.
further research is needed to verify and investigate the role of red deer as a bvdv reservoir.
fifty-two red deer  and  <dig> cattle  samples tested positive by elisa.
a high apparent prevalence  was obtained for red deer, while only five cattle farms tested positive by rt-pcr.
eleven red deer  tested positive by both elisa and rt-pcr; these animals may have been sampled during the last phase of viremia, or they may represent previously exposed individuals infected by a different bvdv strain.
this suggests that there might be a common bvdv infecting both cattle and red deer.
