here we conducted phylogenomic and functional analyses of aquaporins in the salmon louse, a marine ectoparasitic copepod that feeds on the skin and body fluids of salmonids, and used the primary structures of the isolated channels to uncover the genomic repertoires in arthropoda.
aquaporinaquaglyceroporinarthropodcrustaceacopepodsalmon louselepeoptheirusparasiteatlantic salmonevolutionosmoregulationfluid homeostasispermeabilityselectivityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
while the aquaporin repertoire of atlantic salmon represents a 6-fold redundancy compared to the louse, the functional assays reveal that the permeation properties of the different crustacean grades of aquaporin are largely conserved to the vertebrate counterparts.
heterologous expression of the crnas in amphibian oocytes demonstrated that pripl transports water and urea, while bib does not.
phylogenetic inference of the louse nucleotides and proteins in relation to orthologs identified in chelicerata, myriapoda, crustacea and hexapoda revealed that the arthropod aquaporin superfamily can be classified into three major grades  classical aquaporins including big brain  and prip-like  channels  aquaglyceroporins  and  unorthodox aquaporins .
cloning and remapping the louse cdnas to the genomic dna revealed that they are encoded by 1– <dig> exons, with two of the glps being expressed as n-terminal splice variants .
our data suggest that the aquaporin repertoires of extant arthropods have expanded independently in the different lineages, but can be phylogenetically classified into three major grades as opposed to four present in deuterostome animals.
genomic screening identified  <dig> aquaporin paralogs in the louse in contrast to  <dig> in its host the atlantic salmon.
glp1_v <dig>  − <dig>  −3_v <dig> and −3_v <dig> each transport water, glycerol and urea, while glp1_v <dig> and the aqp12-like channels were retained intracellularly.
an emerging field in biomedical research is focusing on the roles of aquaporin water channels in parasites that cause debilitating or lethal diseases to their vertebrate hosts.
transcript abundance analyses revealed expression of each louse paralog at all developmental stages, except for glp1_v <dig>  which is specific to preadult and adult males.
