after masking of the repeat sequence,  <dig> peptides that were orthologous matched to different amp families were found.
to investigate the antimicrobial activities of the predicted peptides,  <dig> potential amp genes belonging to different amp families were selected to test their antimicrobial activities after bioinformatics identification.
a total of  <dig> unigenes that matched the  <dig> known amp sequences in apd <dig> database were extracted and annotated using blast2go program.
in this study, we used ests including those generated from b. napus cdna libraries of seeds, pathogen-challenged leaves and deposited in the public databases, as a model, to perform in silico identification and consequently in vitro confirmation of putative amp activities through a highly efficient system of recombinant amp prokaryotic expression.
in total,  <dig>  were generated from cdna libraries of pathogen-challenged leaves and  <dig>  ests from seeds of b. napus, and the  <dig>  ests of b. napus were downloaded from the est database of plantgdb.
among these unigenes,  <dig> unigenes from b. napus pathogen-challenged leaves had the highest ratio  in this unigene dataset, which is  <dig> times that of the unigene datasets of b. napus seeds  and  <dig>  times that of the public est dataset.
the results showed that  <dig> recombinant amps displayed expected antimicrobial activities against e. coli and micrococcus luteus and sclerotinia sclerotiorum strains.
first, all the known amps from the amp databank  were individually queried against all the unigenes using the blastx program.
about 87 % of each est library was lipid-transfer protein  , defensin, histone, endochitinase, and gibberellin-regulated proteins.
the most abundant unigenes in the leaf library were endochitinase and defensin, and ltp and histone in the pub est library.
these results proved that the high-throughput method developed that combined an in silico procedure with a recombinant amp prokaryotic expression system is considerably efficient for identification of new amps from genome or est sequence databases.
the amp genes were all optimized according to escherichia coli codon usage and synthetized through one-step polymerase chain reaction method.
the accumulation of gene sequences, especially expressed sequence tags  from plant cdna libraries, has provided a rich resource for genes discovery including potential antimicrobial peptides .
expressed sequence tagantimicrobial peptidesantimicrobial activitiesbrassica napusin silico identificationhighly efficient amp prokaryotic expression systemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
