for the first time, we have reported the use of nca to quantitatively analyze a plant tf-grn important in floral development for obtaining nontrivial information about connectivity strengths between tfs and their target genes as well as tf activity.
in the future, the identification of interactions between plant tfs and their target genes on a genome scale would allow the use of nca to provide quantitative regulatory information about plant tf-grns, leading to improved insights on cellular regulatory programs.
nca found strong interactions between certain tf-gene pairs including lfy → myb <dig>  ag → crc, ap2 → rd <dig>  agl15 → rav <dig> and hy5 → hlh <dig>  and the direction of the interaction  for some agl <dig> targets for which this information was not previously available.
gene regulatory networks  are models of molecule-gene interactions instrumental in the coordination of gene expression.
however, since nca relies on documented connectivity information about the underlying tf-grn, it is currently limited in its application to larger plant networks because of the lack of documented connectivities.
in this work, we employed nca to quantitatively analyze a plant tf-grn important in floral development using available regulatory information from agris, by processing previously reported gene expression data from four shoot apical meristem cell types.
the activity trends of four tfs - lfy, ag, hy <dig> and ap3/pi as deduced by nca correlated well with the changes in expression levels of the genes encoding these tfs across all four cell types; such a correlation was not observed for sep <dig>  ap <dig> and agl <dig>
transcription factor -grns are an important subset of grns that characterize gene expression as the effect of tfs acting on their target genes.
the nca model satisfactorily accounted for gene expression measurements in a tf-grn of seven tfs  and  <dig> genes.
although such networks can qualitatively summarize tf-gene interactions, it is highly desirable to quantitatively determine the strengths of the interactions in a tf-grn as well as the magnitudes of tf activities.
a computational methodology developed for this purpose is network component analysis , which has been used for studying large-scale microbial tf-grns to obtain nontrivial, mechanistic insights.
