amplifolia  populations on the southern brazilian coast, and were used to infer genetic relationships and genetic structure of these psa populations, in addition to cox2- <dig> and rbcl-s regions.
an event of demographic expansion from a population with low effective number, followed by a pattern of isolation by distance was obtained for psa populations with the three analyses.
the findings indicated that degenerated hegs are reminiscent of the presence of a full-length and functional heg, once fixed for psa populations.
size polymorphisms in group i introns has been interpreted as the result of the degeneration of homing endonuclease genes  inserted in peripheral loops of intron paired elements.
in this study, intron size polymorphisms were characterized for different porphyra spiralis var.
five intron size polymorphisms within  <dig> haplotypes were obtained from  <dig> individuals representing eight localities along the distribution of psa in the eastern coast of south america.
analyses with the other markers indicated an event of demographic expansion from a population with low effective number.
to our knowledge, this was the first study to address intraspecific evolutionary history of a nuclear group i intron; to use nuclear, mitochondrial and chloroplast dna for population level analyses of porphyra; and intron size polymorphism as a marker for population genetics.
the different degrees of degeneration of the heg do not refrain intron self-splicing.
in order to infer genetic structure and genetic relationships of psa, these polymorphisms and haplotypes were used as markers for pairwise fst analyses, mantel's test and median joining network.
group i introns are found in the nuclear small subunit ribosomal rna gene  of some species of the genus porphyra .
the five cox2- <dig> haplotypes and the unique rbcl-s haplotype were used as markers for summary statistics, neutrality tests tajima's d and fu's fs and for median joining network analyses.
introns of different sizes were tested qualitatively for in vitro self-splicing.
the cline of heg degeneration determined the pattern of isolation by distance.
