the identification of f. hepatica genes involved in the parasite’s virulence through modulation of host immune system is utmost important to comprehend evasion mechanisms of the parasite and develop more effective strategies against fasciolosis.
of these, a group of the virulence-related genes , not previously described, were found likely to be associated with immunomodulation based on in silico functional categorisation, showing significant sequence similarities with various immune receptors , cytokines , cluster of differentiations  or molecules associated with other immunomodulatory mechanisms .
in brief, the comparison of the parasite transcripts with the specialised public databases containing sequence data of non-parasitic organisms  or of numerous pathogens and investigation of the sequences in terms of nucleotide evolution  and cytokine signaling relation were conducted.
a number of the parasite transcripts  were predicted to be virulence-related on the basis of the exclusive homology with the pathogen-associated data, positive selection or relationship with cytokine signaling.
some of the genes  appeared to be under positive selection , imitating proteins associated with cytokine signaling .
in this study, to identify the parasite’s putative virulence genes which are associated with host immunomodulation, we explored whole transcriptome of an adult f. hepatica using current transcriptome profiling approaches integrated with detailed in silico analyses.
with a comparative transcriptome profiling approach, we have identified a number of potential immunomodulator genes of f. hepatica , which are firstly described here, could be employed for the development of better strategies  in the battle against both zoonotically and economically important disease, fasciolosis.
ngs of the whole transcriptome resulted in  <dig> , <dig> sequence reads, yielding a total of  <dig>  transcripts .
fasciola hepaticawhole transcriptometrematoderna-seqvirulenceimmunomodulationevasionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
