we demonstrated and validated the principle and performance of our method using synthetic datasets.
we then applied our method to yeast cell line and breast cancer microarray data and obtained biologically plausible results.
modeling biological networks serves as both a major goal and an effective tool of systems biology in studying mechanisms that orchestrate the activities of gene products in cells.
biological networks are context-specific and dynamic in nature.
to address these challenges, we formulated the inference of differential dependency networks that incorporate both conditional data and prior knowledge as a convex optimization problem, and developed an efficient learning algorithm to jointly infer the conserved biological network and the significant rewiring across different conditions.
experiments on both synthetic and real data demonstrate the effectiveness of the knowledge-fused differential dependency network in revealing the statistically significant rewiring in biological networks.
we expect the knowledge-fused differential dependency network analysis, together with the open-source r package, to be an important and useful bioinformatics tool in biological network analyses.
biological networksprobabilistic graphical modelsdifferential dependency networknetwork rewiringnetwork analysissystems biologyknowledge incorporationconvex optimization
the identified network rewiring events are supported by previous studies in the literature and also provide new mechanistic insight into the biological systems.
while differential networks cannot be constructed by existing knowledge alone, novel incorporation of prior knowledge into data-driven approaches can improve the robustness and biological relevance of network inference.
the method efficiently leverages data-driven evidence and existing biological knowledge while remaining robust to the false positive edges in the prior knowledge.
to systematically characterize the selectively activated regulatory components and mechanisms, modeling tools must be able to effectively distinguish significant rewiring from random background fluctuations.
however, the major unresolved roadblocks include: big solution space but a small sample size; highly complex networks; imperfect prior knowledge; missing significance assessment; and heuristic structural parameter learning.
the open-source r software package and the experimental data are freely available at http://www.cbil.ece.vt.edu/software.htm.
