thousands of cssr markers identified in the present study can enrich molecular markers and will facilitate marker-assisted selection in sweetpotato breeding.
de novo assembly yielded  <dig>  unigenes with an average length of  <dig> bp.
thus, high throughput transcriptome sequencing is needed to generate enormous transcript sequences from sweetpotato root for gene discovery and molecular marker development.
additionally, these results also suggested that transcriptome analysis based on illumina paired-end sequencing is a powerful tool for gene discovery and molecular marker development for non-model species, especially those with large and complex genome.
the tuberous root of sweetpotato is an important agricultural and biological organ.
there are not sufficient transcriptomic and genomic data in public databases for understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying the tuberous root formation and development.
this study generated a substantial fraction of sweetpotato transcript sequences, which can be used to discover novel genes associated with tuberous root formation and development and will also make it possible to construct high density microarrays for further characterization of gene expression profiles during these processes.
in addition,  <dig>  cdna ssrs  were identified as potential molecular markers in our unigenes.
one hundred pairs of pcr primers were designed and used for validation of the amplification and assessment of the polymorphism in genomic dna pools.
in this study, more than  <dig> million sequencing reads were generated using illumina paired-end sequencing technology.
searching against the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes pathway database  indicated that  <dig>   unigenes were mapped to  <dig> kegg pathways, and  <dig>  were assigned to metabolic pathways, which were well represented by carbohydrate metabolism and biosynthesis of secondary metabolite.
overall, these sequences and markers will provide valuable resources for the sweetpotato community.
based on sequence similarity search with known proteins, a total of  <dig>   genes were identified.
