the widely diverging traits uncovered for the clade-vii members  are consistent with their resolution as separate lineages in the chloroplast phylogeny.
our results underscore the high variability in genome architecture among prasinophyte lineages, highlighting the strong pressure to maintain a small and compact chloroplast genome in picoplanktonic species.
unexpectedly, we found that all three species from clade vi  harbor chloroplast genes not previously documented for chlorophytes  and that picocystis contains a trans-spliced group ii intron.
viridiplantaeprasinophytesprasinococcalespicocystispicoplanktonic algaenephroselmisplastid genomephylogenomicsgenome reductiontrans-spliced group ii intronissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
although the nephroselmis and picocystis cpdnas feature a large inverted repeat encoding the rrna operon, gene partitioning among the single copy regions is remarkably different.
we present here the newly sequenced chloroplast genomes of nephroselmis astigmatica  and of five picoplanktonic species from clade vi  and clade vii .
the unique set of six chloroplast genes found in the prasinococcales supports the ancestral status of this lineage within the prasinophytes.
varying from  <dig>  to  <dig>  kb in size and encoding  <dig> to  <dig> conserved genes, the cpdnas of the newly investigated picoplanktonic species are substantially smaller than those observed for larger-size prasinophytes, are economically packed and contain a reduced gene content.
these chloroplast dnas  were compared with those of the six previously sampled prasinophytes  in order to gain information both on the relationships among prasinophyte lineages and on chloroplast genome evolution.
the phylogenies inferred from cpdna-encoded proteins are essentially congruent with 18s rdna trees, resolving with robust support all six examined prasinophyte lineages, with the exception of the pycnococcaceae.
nuclear-encoded 18s rdna phylogenies unveiled nine prasinophyte clades  but their branching order is still uncertain.
