however,  the persistence of this phenomenon in monosporal culture lines from crossed parental isolates,  its correlation with nuclear exchanges and  the potential mechanisms responsible for mitochondrial inheritance are still unknown.
we present the basic building blocks for a better understanding of the mitochondrial inheritance process and segregation in these important symbiotic fungi.
we also investigated the presence of a putative mitochondrial segregation apparatus in glomeromycota by identifying proteins similar to those found in other fungal groups.
these results strongly support the presence of a nuclear-independent mitochondrial segregation mechanism in r. irregularis.
furthermore, a nearly complete set of genes was identified with putative orthology to those found in other fungi and known to be associated with the mitochondrial segregation in saccharomyces cerevisiae and filamentous fungi.
our findings suggest that mitochondrial segregation might take place either during spore formation or colony development and that it might be independent of the nuclear segregation machinery.
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungimitochondrial segregationanastomosismitochondrial nucleoidsprotein orthologymonosporal culturesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
using the amf model organism r. irregularis, we tested whether the presence of a heteroplasmic state in progeny spores was linked to the occurrence of nuclear exchanges and whether the previously observed heteroplasmic state persisted in monosporal in vitro crossed-culture lines.
however, only one parental mitochondrial dna and nuclear genotype were recovered in each monosporal crossed-cultures, with an overrepresentation of certain mitochondrial haplotypes.
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi  are members of the phylum glomeromycota, an early divergent fungal lineage that forms symbiotic associations with the large majority of land plants.
we observed the occurrence of biparental inheritance both for mitochondrial and nuclear markers tested in single spores obtained from crossed-isolates.
