the first indications of an altered sub-cellular environment came from our observation that a common laboratory strain, gv <dig>  caused a drastic increase in stromule frequency.
agrobacterium tumefaciens-based transient assays have become a common tool for answering questions related to protein localization and gene expression in a cellular context.
stromules, or ‘stroma-filled-tubules’ emanate from the surface of plastids and are sensitive to a variety of biotic and abiotic stresses.
bacterial production of the hormone was found to be dependant on the presence of a trans-zeatin synthase gene  located on the ti plasmid of gv <dig>  bacteria-derived cytokinins were also correlated with changes to both soluble sugar level and starch accumulation.
our results suggest that the impact of the bacteria can be minimized by choosing agrobacterium strains devoid of the tzs gene, but that the alterations to sub-cellular organization and cell carbohydrate status cannot be completely avoided using this strategy.
these effects were found to be the result of strain-dependant secretion of cytokinin and its accumulation in the plant tissue.
using a protocol typical of transient assays we evaluated the impact of gv <dig> infiltration on chloroplast behaviour and morphology in nicotiana benthamiana.
this indicates that cells visualized during transient assays may not be as ‘normal’ as was previously assumed.
our experiments confirmed that gv <dig> consistently induces stromules and alters plastid position relative to the nucleus.
although we have chosen to focus on how transient agrobacterium infestation alters plastid based parameters, these changes to the morphology and position of a single organelle, combined with the measured increases in sugar and starch content, suggest global changes to cell physiology.
although this premise is widely accepted, the question of whether cellular organization and organelle morphology is altered in agrobacterium-infiltrated cells has not been examined in detail.
