it is well known that mushrooms produce defense proteins and secondary metabolites against predators and competitors; however, less is known about the correlation between the tissue-specific expression and the target organism  specificity of these molecules.
our data show that many genes encoding predicted and already characterized defense proteins are differentially expressed in these tissues.
the pbs-soluble proteome of c. cinerea primordia and mycelium was analyzed by shotgun lc-ms. this proteome data confirmed the presence of intracellular defense proteins in primordia.
in order to characterize the regulation in the expression of defense loci and the transcriptional circuitries controlling sexual reproduction in basidiomycetes, we sequenced the poly -positive transcriptome of stage  <dig> primordia and vegetative mycelium of c. cinerea a43mutb43mut.
this study shows that the exposure of different tissues in fungi to different types of antagonists shapes the expression pattern of defense loci in a tissue-specific manner.
furthermore, we identify a transcriptional circuitry conserved among basidiomycetes during fruiting body formation that involves, amongst other transcription factors, the up-regulation of a velvet domain-containing protein.
the predicted specificity of these proteins with regard to target organisms suggests that their expression pattern correlates with the type of antagonists these tissues are confronted with.
the aims of this study were: first, to evaluate the tissue specificity of defense gene expression in the model mushroom coprinopsis cinerea and, second, to assess the degree of conservation in transcriptional regulation during sexual development in basidiomycetes.
comparison of our data to analogous data from laccaria bicolor and schizophyllum commune revealed that the transcriptional regulation of nearly  <dig> loci is conserved and probably subjected to stabilizing selection.
in addition, conserved transcriptional circuitries involved in developing sexual organs in fungi are not characterized, despite the growing number of gene expression datasets available from reproductive and vegetative tissue.
a velvet domain-containing protein was found to be up-regulated in all three fungi, providing preliminary evidence of a possible role of the velvet protein family in sexual development of basidiomycetes.
