additional performance comparison experiments show that dmirnet outperforms the state-of-the-art ensemble-based model  <cit>  which has shown the best performance across the same three datasets, with a factor of up to  <dig> .
1) inferred correlations from the observed expression profiles using conventional correlation-based methods include numerous erroneous links or over-estimated edge weight due to the transitive information flow among direct associations.
micrornas  play important regulatory roles in the wide range of biological processes by inducing target mrna degradation or translational repression.
our empirical experiments on three datasets demonstrate the combinatorial effects of necessary components in dmirnet.
2) due to the high-dimension-low-sample-size problem on the microarray dataset, it is difficult to obtain an accurate and reliable estimate of the empirical correlations between all pairs of expression profiles.
further, we identify  <dig> putative novel multi-cancer-related mirna-mrna association relationships from an inferred top  <dig> direct mirna-mrna association network.
based on the correlation between expression profiles of a mirna and its target mrna, various computational methods have previously been proposed to identify mirna-mrna association networks by incorporating the matched mirna and mrna expression profiles.
since dmirnet infers direct relationships from the observed data, dmirnet can contribute to reconstructing various direct regulatory pathways, including, but not limited to, the direct mirna-mrna association networks.
however, there remain three major issues to be resolved in the conventional computation approaches for inferring mirna-mrna association networks from expression profiles.
in this paper, we present dmirnet, a new framework for identifying direct mirna-mrna association networks.
to tackle the aforementioned issues, dmirnet incorporates 1) three direct correlation estimation methods  to infer direct mirna-mrna association networks, 2) the bootstrapping method to fully utilize insufficient training expression profiles, and 3) a rank-based ensemble aggregation to build a reliable and robust model across different datasets.
we believe that dmirnet is a promising method to identify novel direct mirna-mrna relations and to elucidate the direct mirna-mrna association networks.
3) because the previously proposed computational methods usually suffer from varying performance across different datasets, a more reliable model that guarantees optimal or suboptimal performance across different datasets is highly needed.
15th international conference on bioinformatics  incob 2016queenstown, singapore 21- <dig> september  <dig> http://incob <dig> apbionet.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
