in contrast to descriptions concerning volvocine embryos with lower cell numbers, the embryonic cells of p. californica undergo non-simultaneous and non-uniform cell shape changes.
in p. californica, cell wedging in combination with a relocation of the cbs to the basal cell tips explains the curling of the cell sheet during inversion.
in volvocine genera with lower organismal complexity, the cell shape changes and relocation of cbs are less pronounced in comparison to p. californica, while they are more pronounced in all members of the genus volvox.
we focused on the movement patterns of the cell sheet, cell shape changes and changes in the localization of cytoplasmic bridges  connecting the cells.
cell-cell connectionscell sheet bendingcell sheet foldingcytoplasmic bridgesevolutiongreen algaeinversionmorphogenesismulticellularityvolvocaleshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003099fazit stiftungdeutsche forschungsgemeinschaft and the open access publication funds of bielefeld universityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the multicellular volvocine alga pleodorina is intermediate in organismal complexity between its unicellular relative, chlamydomonas, and its multicellular relative, volvox, which shows complete division of labor between different cell types.
we generated three-dimensional models of the identified cell shapes including the localization of cbs.
the volvocine green microalgae form a group of genera closely related to the genus volvox within the order volvocales .
this finding supports an increasing significance of the temporal and spatial regulation of cell shape changes and cb relocations with both increasing cell number and organismal complexity during evolution of differentiated multicellularity.
during embryogenesis, multicellular volvocine embryos turn their cellular monolayer right-side out to expose their flagella.
moreover, fixed and sectioned embryos throughout inversion and at successive stages of development were analyzed by light and transmission electron microscopy.
while the development of spherical volvox embryos has been the subject of detailed studies, the inversion process of bowl-shaped embryos is less well understood.
the development of living embryos was recorded using time-lapse light microscopy.
embryos of multicellular volvocine algae consist of a cellular monolayer that, depending on the species, is either bowl-shaped or comprises a sphere.
