furthermore,  <dig>  orthologous pairs which could be calculated with both nonsynonymous  and synonymous  substitutions were used to infer their sequence divergences.
the comprehensive transcriptome divergent sequence analysis between grain aphid and pea aphid provides an invaluable resource for the investigation of genes involved in host plant adaptation and evolution.
moreover, the demonstration of divergent transcriptome sequences between grain aphid and pea aphid pave the way for the investigation of the molecular mechanisms underpinning the biological variations of these two agriculturally important aphid species.
until now, the genetic factors underlying the divergence between grain aphid and pea aphid still remain unclear due to the limited genomic data of grain aphid available in public databases.
while the host ranges of grain aphid is restricted to cereal crops and in particular wheat, that of pea aphid is wider, mainly colonizing leguminous plant species.
based on a set of transcriptome data of grain aphid generated by using roche  <dig> gs-flx pyrosequencing, comparative analysis between this set of transcriptome data of grain aphid and mrna sequences of pea aphid available in the public databases was performed.
compared with mrna sequences of pea aphid,  <dig>  unigenes were found to be specifically presented in the transcriptome of grain aphid under the rearing conditions described in this study.
although a close phylogenetic relationship between grain aphid and pea aphid was proposed, the biological variations between these two aphid species are obvious.
grain aphid  and pea aphid  are two agriculturally important pest species, which cause significant yield losses to crop plants each year by inflicting damage both through the direct effects of feeding and by vectoring debilitating plant viruses.
grain aphidpea aphidtranscriptomecomparative transcriptomic analysisdivergenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
moreover, of  <dig> orthologs which were identified to have evolved in response to positive selection based on the rates of ka and ks substitutions,  <dig> were predicted to be involved in secondary metabolism and xenobiotic metabolisms which might contribute to the divergence of these two aphid species.
