using the lipan line, we first followed the dynamic development of liver from live embryos to adult and showed the formation of three distinct yet connected liver lobes during development.
liver vasculogenesis started at 55– <dig> hpf when ecs first surrounded hepatocytes from the liver bud surface and then invaded the liver to form sinusoids and later the vascular network.
in the growth phase, there are three distinct stages: avascular growth between 50– <dig> hpf, where ecs are not required; endothelium-dependent growth, where ecs or sinusoids are required for liver growth between 55– <dig> hpf before blood circulation in liver sinusoids; and circulation-dependent growth, where the circulation is essential to maintain vascular network and to support continued liver growth after  <dig> hpf.
liver vasculogenesis in vertebrates occurs through the interaction of endoderm-derived liver epithelium and mesoderm-derived endothelial cells .
to analyze the roles of ecs and blood circulation in liver development, both cloche mutants  and tnnt <dig> morphants  were employed.
early events in vertebrate liver development have been the major focus in previous studies, however, late events of liver organogenesis remain poorly understood.
in zebrafish, although it has been found that ecs are not required for liver budding, how and when the spatio-temporal pattern of liver growth is coordinated with ecs remains to be elucidated.
we found that until  <dig> hpf liver growth and morphogenesis depended on ecs and nascent sinusoids.
after  <dig> hpf, a functional sinusoidal network was essential for continued liver growth.
to study the process of liver development and vasculogenesis in vivo, a two-color transgenic zebrafish line tg was generated and named lipan for liver-specific expression of dsred rfp and exocrine pancreas-specific expression of gfp.
there are two phases of liver development in zebrafish, budding and growth.
an absence of blood circulation in tnnt <dig> morphants caused defects in liver vasculature and small liver.
the lipan line was then crossed with tgy <dig> and vascular development in the liver was traced in vivo.
using a novel non-invasive and label-free fluorescence correction spectroscopy, we detected blood circulation in the liver starting at ~ <dig> hpf.
