the catabolite control protein ccpa in b. cereus atcc  <dig> is involved in optimizing the catabolism of glucose with concomitant repression of gluconeogenesis and alternative metabolic pathways.
furthermore, putative cre-sites, that act as binding sites for ccpa, were identified to be present for these genes.
other genes of which the expression was affected by ccpa deletion and for which putative cre-sites could be identified, included genes with an annotated function in the catabolism of ribose, histidine and possibly fucose/arabinose and aspartate.
notably, expression of the operons encoding non-hemolytic enterotoxin  and hemolytic enterotoxin  was affected by ccpa deletion, and putative cre-sites were identified, which suggests catabolite repression of the enterotoxin operons to be ccpa-dependent.
in exponentially grown cells, the expression of glycolytic genes, including a non-phosphorylating glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase that mediates conversion of d-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to 3-phospho-d-glycerate in one single step, was down-regulated and expression of gluconeogenic genes and genes encoding the citric acid cycle was up-regulated in the b. cereus ccpa deletion strain.
these results indicate ccpa to be involved in the regulation of glucose metabolism, thereby optimizing the efficiency of glucose catabolism.
furthermore, the results point to metabolic control of enterotoxin gene expression and suggest that ccpa-mediated glucose sensing provides an additional mode of control in moderating the expression of the nhe and hbl operons in b. cereus atcc  <dig>
the catabolite control protein ccpa is a transcriptional regulator conserved in many gram-positives, controlling the efficiency of glucose metabolism.
comparative analysis revealed the growth performance and glucose consumption rates to be lower in the b. cereus atcc  <dig> ccpa deletion strain than in the wild-type.
here we studied the role of bacillus cereus atcc  <dig> ccpa in regulation of metabolic pathways and expression of enterotoxin genes by comparative transcriptome analysis of the wild-type and a ccpa-deletion strain.
