horizontal gene transfer was predicted through the gohtam pipeline  and phylogenetic analyses .
genomic information suggests that multiple horizontal gene transfers conferred the adaptation of c. subterraneus subspecies to extreme niches throughout the carbon monoxide utilization and hydrogen production.
caldanaerobacter subterraneusgenomehorizontal gene transferhydrogenasecarbon monoxide dehydrogenaseglycosidaseproteaseesterasephylogenythermophileissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
apart from the codh-associated hydrogenase, these bacteria also contain other hydrogenases, encoded by ech and hyd genes.
each subspecies possesses a gene cluster encoding a carbon monoxide dehydrogenase  and an energy converting hydrogenase .
the codh gene is associated with an operon that resembles the escherichia coli hydrogenase hyc/hyf operons, a novel genetic context distinct from that found in archetypical hydrogenogenic carboxydotrophs.
in this study, comprehensive analysis of three genomes of c. subterraneus subspecies was carried in order to identify genes encoding key metabolic enzymes and to document the genomic basis for the evolution of these organisms.
average nucleotide identity and in silico dna relatedness were estimated for the studied c. subterraneus genomes.
the three genomes of c. subterraneus showed high similarity, although there are substantial differences in their gene composition and organization.
an mbx ferredoxin:nadp oxidoreductase homolog similar to that originally described in the archaeon pyrococcus furiosus was uniquely encoded in the c. subterraneus subsp.
notably, the coos gene of c. subterraneus subsp.
pacificus and its homologs in c. subterraneus subsp.
the caldanaerobacter subterraneus species includes thermophilic fermentative bacteria able to grow on carbohydrates substrates with acetate and l-alanine as the main products.
phylogenetic reconstructions of the genes from these operons and those from the ech operon are incongruent to the species tree.
the variety of hydrolases found in their genomes indicate the versatility of the species in obtaining energy and carbon from diverse substrates, therefore these organisms constitute a remarkable resource of enzymes with biotechnological potential.
