our findings are inconsistent with a one-dimensional spreading model for long-range repression and suggest that gro-mediated repression must be regulated at a post-recruitment step.
while this gro-recruitment is required for repression, our data show that it is not sufficient for repression.
our chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing analysis of temporally staged drosophila embryos shows that gro binds in a highly dynamic manner primarily to clusters of discrete  segments.
this analysis also allows us to define a set of high confidence gro repression targets.
the ability of gro to repress transcription at a distance together with its ability to oligomerize and bind to histones has led to the suggestion that gro may spread along chromatin.
consistent with the idea that gro may facilitate communication between silencers and promoters, gro binding is enriched at both cis-regulatory modules, as well as within the promotors of potential target genes.
integration of gro binding data with transcriptomic analysis suggests that, contrary to what has been observed for another gro family member, drosophila gro is probably a dedicated repressor.
through analysis of chromatin associated pre-mrna levels at these targets, we find that genes regulated by gro in the embryo are enriched for characteristics of promoter proximal paused rna polymerase ii.
furthermore, our findings suggest a role for rna polymerase ii pausing in gro-mediated repression.
grouchotranscriptional repressiondrosophila embryogenesischip-seqrna-seqchromatin-associated rna-seq, rna polymerase ii pausinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthgm044522courey albert j. http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthgm092473issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
the transcriptional corepressor groucho  is required for the function of many developmentally regulated dna binding repressors, thus helping to define the gene expression profile of each cell during development.
