gene ontology and kegg analysis revealed that genes involved in transcription/translation and many metabolic pathways were upregulated at the merozoite stage, highlighting unique growth requirements of this stage.
the data presented here describe the global gene expression profile of the merozoite stage and the creation of transgenic parasite strains that show stage-specific expression of reporter genes in the cat intestine.
principal component analysis highlighted the unique profile of merozoites, placing them approximately half-way on a continuum between the tachyzoite/bradyzoite and oocyst samples.
merozoites are the first developmental stage in the coccidian cycle that takes place within the gut of the definitive host.
prior studies have shown that antibodies to surface antigen one  and many dense granule proteins do not label merozoites: our microarray data confirms that these genes were not expressed at this stage.
these data and reagents will be useful in unlocking how the parasite senses and responds to the felid gut environment to initiate enteric development.
however, culturing methods for stages that normally develop in the gut of the definitive felid host, including the merozoite and sexual stages, have not been developed hindering the ability to study a large portion of the parasite’s life cycle.
considerable work has been carried out to understand the biology of tachyzoites and bradyzoites of toxoplasma gondii in large part due to in vitro culture methods for these stages.
we analyzed the merozoite data in context of the life cycle by comparing it to previously published data for the oocyst, tachyzoite, and bradyzoite stages.
here, we begin to unravel the molecular aspects of enteric stages by providing new data on merozoite stage gene expression.
also, the expression for many rhoptry and microneme proteins was drastically reduced while the expression for many surface antigens was increased at the merozoite stage.
toxoplasma gondiimerozoiteenteric stagesdefinitive hostlife cycleparasitegene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
to profile gene expression differences in enteric stages we harvested merozoites from the intestine of infected cats and hybridized mrna to the affymetrix toxoplasma genechip.
