lastly, we expanded our computational analysis to identify omps from other borrelial organisms, including both lyme disease and relapsing fever spirochetes.
using a consensus computer algorithm, we generated a list of candidate omps for both lyme disease and relapsing fever spirochetes and determined that three of the predicted b. burgdorferi proteins identified were indeed novel borrelial omps.
borrelialyme diseaserelapsing feverouter membrane proteinshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000060national institute of allergy and infectious diseasesai059373ai-29735kenedy melisha r. radolf justin d. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
similar to gram-negative organisms, borrelia spirochetes are dual-membrane organisms with both an inner and outer membrane.
therefore, we utilized a consensus computational network analysis to identify novel borrelial omps.
using this system, we identified  <dig> potential omps from b. burgdorferi and characterized three  to confirm that our computer-based methodology did, in fact, identify borrelial omps.
furthermore, we have shown that bb <dig>  the product of a co-transcribed downstream gene, also encodes a novel, previously uncharacterized borrelial omp.
proteolysis assays indicate that bb <dig> is partially sensitive to both proteinase k and trypsin, further indicating that bb <dig> is surface-exposed.
using a series of computer-based algorithms, we selected all protein-encoding sequences predicted to be om-localized and/or to form β-barrels in the borrelial om.
consistent with a prior study, we also confirmed that bb <dig> is surface-exposed and associates with the borrelial om.
although the outer membrane contains integral membrane proteins, few of the borrelial outer membrane proteins  have been identified and characterized to date.
importantly, the studies described in this report provide a framework by which omps from any human pathogen with a diderm ultrastructure could be cataloged to identify novel virulence factors and vaccine candidates.
