using mtt assay, we identified a range of capparis spinosa doses, which were not toxic.
this capparis spinosa also appeared to act as a weaker scavenging free radical agent as evidenced by dpph radical scavenging test.
in this work, we aimed to evaluate immunomodulatory properties of capparis spinosa leaf extracts in vitro on human peripheral blood mononuclear cells  from healthy individuals.
finally, polyphenolic compounds including catechin, caffeic acid, syringic acid, rutin and ferulic acid were identified by hplc, in the capparis spinosa preparation.
interestingly, capparis spinosa aqueous fraction appeared to induce an overall anti-inflammatory response through significant inhibition of il- <dig> and induction of il- <dig> gene expression when pbmcs were treated with the non toxic doses of  <dig> and/or 500 μg/ml.
unexpectedly, we found out that capparis spinosa aqueous fraction exhibited an increase in cell metabolic activity, even though similar doses did not affect cell proliferation as shown by cfse.
capparis spinosaperipheral blood mononuclear cellsanti-inflammationcytokinesgene expressioncell proliferationcell viabilitymoroccan ministry of researchmoroccan ministry laboratory fundingbadou abdallah issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
capparis spinosa l. is an aromatic plant growing wild in dry regions around the mediterranean basin.
capparis spinosa was shown to possess several properties such as antioxidant, antifungal, and anti-hepatotoxic actions.
phytoscreening analysis of the used capparis spinosa preparations showed that these contain tannins; sterols, alkaloids; polyphenols and flavonoids.
surprisingly, quantification assays showed that our capparis spinosa preparation contains low amounts of polyphenols relative to capparis spinosa used in other studies.
altogether, these findings suggest that our capparis spinosa preparation contains interesting compounds, which could be used to suppress il- <dig> and to enhance il- <dig> gene expression in certain inflammatory situations.
