wild-type embryos irradiated before the mid-blastula transition  underwent normal cell division until reaching the mbt, after which they underwent massive, catastrophic apoptosis.
although maternal expression of xr <dig> was sufficient to abrogate apoptosis triggered by post-mbt γ-radiation, radiation tolerance from zygotically-derived xr <dig> was acquired gradually, indicating that synthesis of xr <dig> protein is not sufficient to prevent apoptosis.
our data suggest that bcl-xl is an effective counterbalance to proapoptotic factors during embryonic development but has no apparent effect on the thyroid hormone-induced apoptosis that occurs during metamorphosis.
thus, repression of radiation-induced apoptosis by overexpression of bcl-xl during embryonic development depends upon the timing of its expression and post-translational events that enable the protein to become effective.
however, the transgene did not prevent the apoptotic response of tadpoles to thyroid hormone during metamorphosis.
post-metamorphic xr <dig> frogs were reared to sexual maturity, thus allowing us to produce second-generation embryos and enabling us to distinguish between the maternal and zygotic contributions of bcl-xl to the γ-radiation apoptotic response.
furthermore, post-mbt apoptosis triggered by irradiation before the mbt could only be restrained by maternal expression of bcl-xl.
it is particularly prevalent in the central nervous system and during remodelling processes such as formation of the digits and in amphibian metamorphosis.
maternal expression of xr <dig> was also sufficient to abrogate apoptosis triggered by post-mbt γ-radiation.
the effects on developmental, thyroid hormone-induced and γ-radiation-induced apoptosis in embryos were examined in these transgenic animals.
apoptosis, which is dependent upon a balance between pro- and anti-apoptotic factors, also enables the embryo to rid itself of cells damaged by gamma irradiation.
over-expression of bcl-xl derived from xr <dig> females, but not males, provided partial protection from apoptosis.
tolerance to post-mbt γ-radiation from zygotically-derived xr <dig> was acquired gradually after the mbt in spite of abundant xr <dig> protein synthesis.
