the potentials were obtained using a new monte carlo reference state , which simulates the expected probability density of atom-atom contacts via exhaustive sampling of structure space with random probes.
using the mcrs allowed us to calculate the expected atom contact densities with high resolution over a broad distance range including very short distances.
protein hydration sites were predicted in a test set of  <dig> proteins with experimentally determined water locations.
the mcrs greatly improves prediction of water locations over existing methods.
we developed original knowledge-based potentials to study protein hydration at the level of atom contacts.
knowledge-based potentials for hydration of protein atoms of different types were obtained based on frequencies of their contacts at different distances with protein-bound water molecules, in a non-redundant training data base of  <dig> proteins with known 3d structures.
efforts to build a working description of solvation, both by continuous models and by molecular dynamics, yield controversial results.
mcrs atomic hydration potentials provide a detailed distance-dependent description of hydropathies of individual protein atoms.
possible applications of atomic hydration potentials to structure verification, protein folding and stability, and protein-protein interactions are discussed.
in addition, the contribution of the energy of macromolecular solvation into total folding free energy was estimated, and tested in fold recognition experiments.
this allows placement of water molecules on the surface of proteins and in protein interfaces with much higher precision.
the potentials provide a means to estimate the total solvation energy for a protein structure, in many cases achieving a successful fold recognition.
the correct folds were preferred over all the misfolded decoys for the majority of proteins from the improved rosetta decoy set based on the structure hydration energy alone.
specifically constructed knowledge-based potentials appear to be promising for accounting for the solvation at the molecular level, yet have not been used for this purpose.
