rna levels of modulatory enzymes of the glycolytic pathway  were downregulated by ss while those involved in the krebs cycle  were upregulated.
our data showed that ss increased the rna levels of integrins and vascular adhesion molecules.
bbb ecs are responsive to inflammatory stimuli.
one of the most important and often neglected physiological stimuli contributing to the differentiation of vascular endothelial cells  into a blood-brain barrier  phenotype is shear stress .
cerebral blood flowshear stresscell cyclealternativein vitroinflammation
ss also increased the rna level of multidrug resistance transporters, ion channels, and several p <dig> enzymes.
the rna level of a number of specialized carrier-mediated transport systems  was also upregulated.
genomic and proteomic analyses are currently used to examine bbb function in healthy and diseased brain and characterize this dynamic interface.
ss affected multiple aspect of the endothelial physiology spanning from tight junctions formation to cell division as well as the expression of multidrug resistance transporters.
trans-endothelial electrical resistance  and permeability measurements to know substances have shown that ss promoted the formation of a tight and highly selective bbb.
in this study we showed that ss plays a key role in promoting the differentiation of vascular endothelial cells into a truly bbb phenotype.
ss also inhibited endothelial cell cycle via regulation of btg family proteins encoding genes.
furthermore, the expression pattern of key protein regulators of the cell cycle and parallel gene array data supported a cell proliferation inhibitory role for ss.
this was paralleled by significant increase in the cytoskeletal protein content while that of membrane, cytosol, and nuclear sub-cellular fractions decreased.
measurements of glucose consumption versus lactate production showed that ss negatively modulated the glycolytic bioenergetic pathways of glucose metabolism in favor of the more efficient aerobic respiration.
