functional categorization of the degs revealed that az tissue has an apparently higher response to external stimuli than does that of ripe fruit, revealing a higher expression of auxin-signaling genes, as well as lignin catabolic and biosynthetic pathway, aromatic amino acid biosynthetic pathway, isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway, protein amino acid dephosphorylation, amino acid transport, and photosynthesis.
in fleshy fruit, abscission of fully ripe fruit is a process intimately linked to the ripening process.
although fully ripe fruit have marked physiological differences with respect to their azs, dissimilarities in gene expression have not been thoroughly investigated.
we generated a set of est sequences from olive fruit at full ripening, and degs between two different olive tissues, ripe fruit and their az, were also identified.
a comparative analysis of the transcription profiles conducted in ripe-fruit pericarp and az evidenced that  <dig>  genes were differentially expressed genes  in fruit and az.
by contrast, fruit-enriched transcripts are involved in atp synthesis coupled proton transport, glycolysis, and cell-wall organization.
the present study examines the transcriptome of olive fruit and their az tissues at the last stage of ripening, monitored using mrna-seq.
roche- <dig> massive parallel pyrosequencing enabled us to generate  <dig>  high-quality est sequences, among which  <dig>  were from ripe-fruit pericarp and  <dig>  from az tissues.
in many fruit-tree species, such as olive , there is a coupling of the full ripening and the activation of the abscission-zone .
abscissiongene expressionolea europaea <dig> pyrosequencingripeningtranscriptomic comparativeissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013
regarding the cross-talk between fruit and az, using qrt-pcr, we confirmed a set of tf genes that were differentially expressed, revealing profiles of expression that have not previously been reported, this offering a promising beginning for studies on the different transcription regulation in such tissues.
