specifically, we hypothesized that the biologically significant relationships between the vdr transcriptome and phenotype-associated biology could be discovered by integrating the known vdr transcription factor binding sites and all published trait- and disease-associated snps.
by integrating vdr genome-wide binding data  with the national human genome research institute  gwas catalog of snps we would see where and which target gene interactions and pathways are impacted by inherited genetic variation in vdr binding sites, indicating which of vdr’s multiple functions are most biologically significant.
to examine how genetic variation impacts vdr function we overlapped  <dig>  vdr genomic binding peaks from six vdr chip-seq datasets with  <dig>  snps, derived from gwas-significant snps  and their correlated variants  from hapmap <dig> and the  <dig> genomes project.
the enrichment of genetic variation in non-dr <dig> motifs suggests a significant role for the vdr to bind in multimeric complexes containing other transcription factors that are the primary dna binding component.
the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily acts as a genomic sensor of diverse signals.
these analyses showed that vdr peaks are enriched for snps associated with immune phenotypes suggesting that vdr immunomodulatory functions are amongst its most important actions.
nuclear hormone receptors are targets for many therapeutic drugs, and include the vitamin d receptor .
for each phenotype a hypergeometric test was used to determine if snps were enriched at vdr binding sites.
our work provides a framework for the combination of chip-seq and gwas findings to provide insight into the underlying phenotype-associated biology of a given transcription factor.
their actions are often intertwined with other transcription factors.
motif analyses revealed that only two of these  <dig> snps reside within a canonical vdr binding site , and that 1/ <dig> of the  <dig> snps significantly impacted binding and gene regulation by other transcription factors, including nf-κb.
bonferroni correction for multiple testing across the  <dig> phenotypes yielded  <dig> snps that were either disease- or phenotype-associated with seven predominately immune related including self-reported allergy; esophageal cancer was the only cancer phenotype.
