both models may be used to estimate the initial absolute concentration of target sequence when a standard curve is not available.
mechanistic models describing the annealing phase with kinetic theory offer the most potential for accurate interpretation of qpcr data.
the equilibrium values are then used in a stepwise method to describe the whole qpcr process.
new results for kinetic modeling of qpcr are presented.
it is argued that the kinetic approach to modeling and interpreting quantitative pcr data has the potential to give more precise estimates of the true initial target concentrations than other methods currently used for analysis of qpcr data.
rate constants of kinetic models are the same for solutions that are identical except for possibly having different initial target concentrations.
analysis of qpcr curves from such solutions are thus analyzed by simultaneous non-linear curve fitting with the same rate constant values applying to all curves and each curve having a unique value for initial target concentration.
the models were fit to two data sets for which the true initial target concentrations are known.
they also give better estimates of initial target concentration.
model  <dig> was found to be slightly more robust than model  <dig> giving better estimates of initial target concentration when estimation of parameters was done for qpcr curves with very different initial target concentration.
the two models presented here give a unified model of the qpcr process in that they explain the shape of the qpcr curve for a wide variety of initial target concentrations.
numerous models for use in interpreting quantitative pcr  data are present in recent literature.
model  <dig> assumes annealing of complementary targets strands and annealing of target and primers are both reversible reactions and reach a dynamic equilibrium.
kinetic theory may be used to model the annealing phase and does not assume constant efficiency of amplification.
analytic formulae are given for the equilibrium values of all single and double stranded molecules at the end of the annealing step.
two models are presented in which the efficiency of amplification is based on equilibrium solutions for the annealing phase of the qpcr process.
both models give better fit to observed qpcr data than other kinetic models present in the literature.
even so, they have not been thoroughly investigated and are rarely used for interpretation of qpcr data.
both models include the effect of primer concentration during the annealing phase.
