previous evidence suggests that the scavenger receptor cd <dig> is essential for productive infection of pams with prrsv.
moreover, an increasing proportion of pams apparently lacking cd <dig> were found susceptible to prrsv at the later incubation stages, thus conflicting with current understanding that cd <dig> is essential for productive infection of pams with prrsv.
the models informed by our data support the hypothesis that although cd <dig> may have enhanced cell susceptibility, it was not essential for productive infection in our study.
the results have implications for the development of therapeutics aiming to boost target cell resistance and prompt future investigation of dynamic changes in macrophage susceptibility to prrsv and other viruses.
macrophages are essential to innate immunity against many pathogens, but some pathogens also target macrophages as routes to infection.
identifying the cellular mechanisms that mediate pam susceptibility to the virus is crucial for developing effective interventions.
our dynamic model–inference approach provides strong support that pam susceptibility to the prrs virus is transient, reversible and can be mediated by compounds produced by the target cells themselves, and that these can render pams lacking the cd <dig> receptor susceptible to prrsv.
our in-vitro experiment showed that pam susceptibility to prrsv changed considerably over incubation time.
the porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus  is an rna virus that infects porcine alveolar macrophages  causing devastating impact on global pig production.
here we use an integrative in-vitro–in-silico modelling approach to determine whether and how pam susceptibility to prrsv changes over time, to assess the role of cd <dig> expression on such changes, and to infer other potential causative mechanisms altering cell susceptibility.
instead the models promote the existence of a reversible cellular state, such as macrophage polarization, mediated in a density dependent manner by autocrine factors, to be responsible for the observed kinetics in cell susceptibility.
prrsvcd163alveolar macrophageshost cell susceptibilitymathematical modelinfection dynamicsstatistical inferencehost-pathogen interactionpigshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000268biotechnology and biological sciences research councilbb/j004235/1bb/j004324/1archibald alan ait-ali tahar http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004963seventh framework programmefp7-kbbe-2009-3-245141fp7- 228394nielsen jens nauwynck hans issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
we developed process based dynamic mathematical models and fitted these to the data to assess alternative hypotheses regarding potential underlying mechanisms for the observed susceptibility and biomarker trends.
