in support of metabolite provisioning between filarial nematodes and wolbachia, the synthesis of the critical metabolite, heme, by wdi appears to be synchronized in a stage-specific manner  with the production of heme-binding proteins in d. immitis.
we critically evaluated the transcriptomes of the various life cycle stages to reveal sex-biased transcriptional patterns, as well as transcriptional differences between larval stages that may be involved in larval maturation.
therefore, we detailed the developmental transcriptome of both d. immitis and its wolbachia  in order to gain a better understanding of parasite-endosymbiont interactions throughout the nematode life cycle.
as with many other filarial nematodes, d. immitis contains wolbachia, an obligate bacterial endosymbiont thought to be involved in providing certain critical metabolites to the nematode.
over  <dig> million single-end 50 bp reads were generated from total rna from d. immitis adult males and females, microfilariae  and third and fourth-stage larvae .
interestingly, a large proportion of both d. immitis and wdi genes display microfilarial-biased transcriptional patterns.
dirofilaria immitis, or canine heartworm, is a filarial nematode parasite that infects dogs and other mammals worldwide.
current disease control relies on regular administration of anthelmintic preventives, however, relatively poor compliance and evidence of developing drug resistance could warrant alternative measures against d. immitis and related human filarial infections be taken.
hierarchical clustering revealed both d. immitis and wdi transcriptional activity in the l <dig> stage is clearly distinct from other life cycle stages.
our integrated transcriptomic study has highlighted interesting correlations between wolbachia and d. immitis transcription throughout the life cycle and provided a resource that may be used for the development of novel intervention strategies, not only for the treatment and prevention of d. immitis infections, but of other closely related human parasites as well.
concurrent transcriptome sequencing identified potential molecular interactions between parasite and endosymbiont that are more prominent during certain life cycle stages.
