we have devised a competitive assay to estimate the relative binding affinities of histone h <dig> mammalian somatic subtypes h1a-e and h1° for long chromatin fragments  in physiological salt  at constant stoichiometry.
the conservation of the relative affinities for sar and non-sar dna, in spite of a strong preference for sar sequences, indicates that differential affinity alone cannot be responsible for the heterogeneous distribution of some subtypes in cell nuclei.
the large differences in relative affinity of the h <dig> subtypes for chromatin suggest that differential affinity could be functionally relevant and thus contribute to the functional differentiation of the subtypes.
h <dig> has multiple isoforms; the subtypes differ in timing of expression, extent of phosphorylation and turnover rate.
avian h <dig> had an affinity ~12-fold higher than h1e for both dna and chromatin.
the h <dig> complement of native chromatin was perturbed by adding an additional amount of one of the subtypes.
the amounts of chromatin, sar and additional h <dig> were adjusted so as to keep the stoichiometry of perturbed chromatin similar to that of native chromatin.
a certain amount of sar  dna was present in the mixture to avoid precipitation of chromatin by excess h <dig>  sar dna also provided a set of reference relative affinities, which were needed to estimate the relative affinities of the subtypes for chromatin from the distribution of the subtypes between the sar and the chromatin.
the relative affinities of the subtypes for chromatin were equivalent to those estimated for a sar dna fragment and a puc <dig> fragment of similar length.
in vertebrates, the amino acid substitution rates differ among subtypes by almost one order of magnitude, suggesting that each subtype might have acquired a unique function.
in conditions of free exchange, h1a was the subtype of lowest affinity, h1b and h1c had intermediate affinities and h1d, h1e and h1° the highest affinities.
h <dig> subtypes freely exchange in vitro between chromatin binding sites in physiological salt .
