diauxic growth with benzoate preference was observed for binary and ternary substrate mixtures containing 4-methylbenzoate and succinate .
apparently, simultaneous repression of 4-methylbenzoate and succinate utilization from the ternary substrate mixture resulted from  inhibition of 4-methylbenzoate uptake, and  combined inhibition of succinate uptake  and succinate conversion to acetyl-coa .
anaerobic degradation4-methylbenzoatearomatic compoundsrepressiondiauxieternary substrate mixturephysiologytranscript analysisproteomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
strain pmbn <dig> for benzoate from mixtures with 4-methylbenzoate, and thus temporal separation of the benzoyl-coa  and 4-methylbenzoyl-coa  pathway, may reflect a catabolic tuning towards metabolic efficiency and the markedly broader range of aromatic substrates feeding into the central anaerobic benzoyl-coa pathway.
strain pmbn <dig> anaerobically degrades a wide variety of aliphatic and aromatic compounds and is unique for anaerobic degradation of 4-methylbenzoate.
at high concentrations of organic substrates, microbial utilization of preferred substrates  often results in diauxic growth with hierarchical substrate depletion.
anaerobic growth and substrate consumption were monitored in binary and ternary mixtures of 4-methylbenzoate, benzoate and succinate, in conjuction with time-resolved abundance profiling of selected transcripts and/or proteins related to substrate uptake and catabolism.
on the contrary, 4-methylbenzoate and succinate were utilized simultaneously from a binary mixture, as well as after benzoate depletion from the ternary mixture.
considering the presence of these two different anaerobic “aromatic ring degrading” pathways, substrate preferences of magnetospirillum sp.
the benzoate-mediated repression of c4-dicarboxylate utilization in magnetospirillum sp.
unlike the carbon catabolite repression-mediated discriminative utilization of carbohydrates, the substrate preferences of non-carbohydrate-utilizing bacteria for environmentally relevant compound classes  are rarely investigated.
the preferential or simultaneous utilization of benzoate and other aromatic acids from mixtures with aliphatic acids may represent a more common nutritional behavior among  degradation specialist than previously thought.
the latter proceeds via a distinct reaction sequence analogous to the central anaerobic benzoyl-coa pathway to intermediates of central metabolism.
