caution must be taken for interspecies studies since unsuitable probesets will result in spurious differentially regulated genes between human and nhp.
while researchers have utilized versions of the affymetrix human genechip® for the assessment of expression patterns in non human primate  samples, there has been no comprehensive sequence analysis study undertaken to demonstrate that the probe sequences designed to detect human transcripts are reliably hybridizing with their orthologs in nhp.
the utility of human genechips® for the assessment of nhp expression patterns can be effectively evaluated by analyzing the hybridization behaviour of isc probesets.
rma normalization method and isc probesets are recommended for interspecies studies.
analysis of both qualitative detection calls and quantitative signal intensities showed that intra-species reproducibility  was much higher than interspecies reproducibility .
isc probesets exhibited higher interspecies reproducibility than the overall expressed probesets.
isc probesets in each of the seven affymetrix genechip® platforms  were identified for both monkey and chimpanzee.
the correlation coefficients between human  and monkey  are  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for mas <dig>  , dchip and rma  normalization method, respectively.
expression data was generated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells  of  <dig> human and  <dig> monkey  samples using the focus genechip®.
appropriate normalization methods were identified that further improve the reliability of human genechips® for interspecies  comparisons.
importantly, appropriate normalization methods could be leveraged to greatly improve interspecies correlations.
by aligning probe sequences with expressed sequence tags  in nhp, inter-species conserved  probesets, which have two or more probes complementary to ests in nhp, were identified on human genechip® platforms.
it is feasible to use affymetrix human genechip® platforms to assess the expression profiles of nhp for intra-species studies.
