the analysis of conserved haplotypes across samples from the atlantic strongly suggests that emamectin benzoate resistance developed at a single source, and rapidly spread across the atlantic within the period  <dig> when the chemical was first introduced, to  <dig> when samples for the present study were obtained.
the salmon louse, lepeophtheirus salmonis, is an ectoparasite of salmonids that causes huge economic losses in salmon farming, and has also been causatively linked with declines of wild salmonid populations.
here, we introduce the first single nucleotide polymorphism  array for the salmon louse, which includes  <dig> markers, and present a population genomic scan using this array on  <dig> lice from twelve farms distributed across the north atlantic.
however, to date, this example of human-induced evolution is poorly documented at the population level due to the lack of molecular tools.
our results support the hypothesis of a single panmictic population of lice in the atlantic, and importantly, revealed very strong selective sweeps on linkage groups  <dig> and  <dig>  these sweeps included candidate genes potentially connected to pesticide resistance.
finally, these results have highly significant implications for the way pesticide resistance is considered and managed within the aquaculture industry.
these results provide unique insights into the development and spread of pesticide resistance in the marine environment, and identify a small genomic region strongly linked to emamectin benzoate resistance.
lice control on farms is reliant upon a few groups of pesticides that have all shown time-limited efficiency due to resistance development.
after genotyping a further  <dig> lice from  <dig> full sibling families, a genome-wide association analysis established a highly significant association between the major sweep on linkage group  <dig> and resistance to emamectin benzoate, the most widely used pesticide in salmonid aquaculture for more than a decade.
as such, important evolutionary and management questions, linked to the development and dispersal of pesticide resistance in this parasite, remain unanswered.
