since the alignment algorithm may also affect the range of pid, this study also considered the effect of algorithm, and the combination of algorithm and pid method.
in order to see which pid method was most highly correlated with structural similarity, four different pid calculations were compared to similarity scores  from the comparison of the corresponding protein three-dimensional structures.
accordingly, quantification of the variation in pid caused by the different calculations would help in interpreting pid values in the literature.
this paper illustrates that not only is pid a poor measure of sequence similarity when compared to the z-score, but that there is also a large uncertainty in reported pid values.
the combined effect of alignment algorithm and pid calculation gave a variation of up to 22% on the test data, with an average of  <dig> % ±  <dig> % for sequence pairs with < 30% identity.
however, although there are several different ways to calculate percentage identity and each may yield a different result for the same alignment, the method of calculation is rarely reported.
percentage identity  is frequently quoted in discussion of sequence alignments since it appears simple and easy to understand.
the findings presented here should prove helpful to those new to sequence analysis, and in warning those who seek to interpret the value of a pid reported in the literature.
the highest correlation coefficient for a pid calculation was  <dig> .
although it is well known amongst expert sequence analysts that pid is a poor score for discriminating between protein sequences, the apparent simplicity of the percentage identity score encourages its widespread use in establishing cutoffs for structural similarity.
the maximum variation in pid due to the calculation method was  <dig> % while the effect of alignment algorithm on pid was up to  <dig> % across three popular alignment methods.
since better alternatives to pid exist to quantify sequence similarity, these should be quoted where possible in preference to pid.
