we analysed the epidemiological characteristics of the  <dig> cases of l-bse and  <dig> cases of h-bse detected in france from january  <dig> to late  <dig> and looked for individual risk factors.
our regression analyses, which adjusted for the effect of age and birth cohort showed an age effect for l-bse and the descriptive analysis showed a particular age structure in the area where the cluster was detected.
while the epidemiology of classical bse  has been widely described, atypical bses are still poorly documented, but appear to differ from c-bse.
however, this median age differed significantly from that of classical bse  years).
the relatively small number of cases of atypical bse and the few individual data available for the tested population limited our analysis to the investigation of age and cohort effect only.
we conclude that it is essential to maintain bse surveillance to further elucidate our findings.
as l-bse cases did not appear to be homogeneously distributed throughout the country, two complementary methods were used: spatial analysis and regression modelling.
among animals over eight years of age, we showed that the risk of being detected as a l-bse case increased with age at death.
the geographical cluster detected for l-bse could be partly due to the age structure of the background-tested bovine population.
l-bse and h-bse were studied separately as both the biochemical properties of their pathological prion protein and their features differ in animal models.
as of december  <dig>  around  <dig> atypical bse cases have currently been reported in  <dig> countries, with over one third in france.
to the best of our knowledge this is the first study to describe the epidemiology of the two types of atypical bse.
atypical bovine spongiform encephalopathyl-bseh-bsespatial analysisrisk factorsfrance
no birth cohort effect was evident.
the median age at detection for l-bse and h-bse cases was  <dig>   and  <dig>   years respectively, with no significant difference between the two distributions.
