to obtain more information on the genetic control of tip-burn symptoms, we focused on the identification of genes differentially expressed in response to increasing intracellular ca2+ and k+ concentrations in b. oleracea lines derived from tip-burn susceptible, tip-burn resistant cabbages , and kale .
tip-burn resistant cabbage and kale plants showed phenotypes clearly indicative of heat-shock, freezing, and drought stress tolerance compared to tip-burn susceptible cabbages, demonstrating a correlation between intracellular ca2+ and k+ concentrations and tolerance of abiotic stress with differential gene expression.
gene ontology enrichment analysis indicated that these genes participated in regulatory metabolic processes or stress responses.
our results indicate that the genes involved in regulatory metabolic processes or stress responses were differentially expressed in response to increasing ca2+ and k+ concentrations in the b. oleracea leaf.
we compared the levels of major macronutrient cations, including ca2+ and k+, in three leaf segments, the leaf apex , middle of leaf , and leaf base , of tip-burn susceptible, tip-burn resistant cabbages, and kale.
tip-burn resistant cabbage and kale-specific genes were largely related to stress and transport activity based on go annotation.
localized ca2+ deficiency in cabbage leaves causes tip-burn, bringing about serious economic losses .
although it has been known that the occurrence of tip-burn is related to ca2+ deficiency, there is limited information on the underlying mechanisms of tip-burn or the relationship between ca2+ and tip-burn incidence.
transcriptome analysis identified  <dig>  loci as putative non-redundant genes in the three leaf segments of the three b. oleracea lines and showed significant changes in expression of  <dig>  loci based on ca2+ and k+ levels.
among these,  <dig> loci were identified as tip-burn related phenotype-specific genes.
we selected  <dig> genes that were up- or down-regulated in response to increasing ca2+ and k+ concentrations in the three leaf segments of the three plant lines.
our transcriptome data and the genes identified may serve as a starting point for understanding the mechanisms underlying essential macronutrient deficiencies in plants, as well as the features of tip-burn in cabbage and other brassica species.
ca2+ and k+ concentrations were highest in kale, followed by tip-burn resistant and then tip-burn susceptible cabbages.
one of the most important members of the genus brassica, cabbage, requires a relatively high level of calcium for normal growth .
