the dna polymerase preference for certain sequence motifs was verified by amplification from single-primer templates.
recent studies have implicated the dna polymerase as the primary source of bias, particularly initiation of polymerization on the template strand.
however, pcr is known to introduce biases, especially during multiplex reactions.
after normalization, the next generation sequencing  results of the amplified libraries were directly compared to the unamplified synthetic library.
the results suggest that the interaction of the dna polymerase with the primer:template junction during the initiation of dna polymerization is very important in terms of overall amplification bias and has broader implications for both the primer design process and multiplex pcr.
we incorporated the observed dna polymerase preference into a primer-design program that guides the placement of the primer to an optimal location on the template.
in our study, amplification from a synthetic library containing a  <dig> nucleotide random portion was used to provide an in-depth characterization of dna polymerase priming bias.
the synthetic library was amplified with three commercially available dna polymerases using an anchored primer with a random 3’ hexamer end.
dna polymerase priming bias was characterized using a synthetic library amplification system and ngs.
we demonstrate that certain sequence motifs are preferred over others as primers where the six nucleotide sequences at the 3’ end of the primer, as well as the sequences four base pairs downstream of the priming site, may influence priming efficiencies.
polymerase chain reaction  is one of the most important developments in modern biotechnology.
the characterization of dna polymerase priming bias was then utilized to guide the primer-design process and demonstrate varying amplification efficiencies among three commercially available dna polymerases.
here, high throughput sequencing was used to systematically demonstrate and characterize dna polymerase priming bias.
dna polymerases in the same family from two different commercial vendors prefer similar motifs, while another commercially available enzyme from a different dna polymerase family prefers different motifs.
pcrdna polymerasepriming biasnext generation sequencingppipolymerase preference indexic-architect
