our results highlight the importance of strain interactions in disease dynamics in environments where various pathogen genotypes co-occur.
yet, the effects of coinfections of environmental opportunistic pathogens on disease outcome are still poorly known, although as host-generalists they are highly likely to participate in coinfections.
however, disease outcome depends both on the characteristics of individual strains and their interactions.
in nature, organisms are commonly coinfected by two or more parasite strains, which has been shown to influence disease virulence.
differences in virulence seemed to associate with the identity of the coinfecting bacterial strains, and their pairwise interactions.
number of coinfecting strains significantly influenced the virulence of infection, with three-strain coinfection differing from the two-strain and single infections.
intraspecific competition can lead to plastic increase in virulence, likely caused by faster utilization of host resources stimulated by the competitive interactions between the strains.
the individual strains differed in their virulence, growth and ability for interference competition.
we asked whether coinfection with conspecific opportunistic strains leads to changes in virulence, and if these changes are associated with bacterial growth or interference competition.
this indicates that benefits of competitive ability  for virulence are highest when multiple strains co-occur, whereas the high virulence in coinfection may be independent from in vitro bacterial growth.
we infected zebra fish  with three geographically and/or temporally distant environmental opportunist flavobacterium columnare strains in single and in coinfection.
flavobacterium columnaregenotypecompetitioncooperationinhibitionvirulencezebra fishhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002341suomen akatemia266879252411mappes johanna sundberg lotta-riina olvi-säätiöhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004012jane ja aatos erkon säätiöissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
growth of the strains was studied in single and in co-cultures in liquid medium, and interference competition  on agar.
