the startle threshold of grey seals expressed in units of sensation levels was comparable to thresholds reported for other mammals .
intense acoustic stimuli with sudden onsets elicit a startle reflex while stimuli of similar intensity but with longer rise times only cause a cardiac defence response.
the startle reflex has become a model system for the study of the neural basis of simple learning processes and emotional processing and is often used as a diagnostic tool in medical applications.
in this study we investigate the follow-up behaviour associated with the startle reflex in wild-captured animals using an experimental setup that allows individuals to exhibit avoidance behaviour.
we present evidence that repeated elicitation of the acoustic startle reflex leads to rapid and pronounced sensitisation of sustained spatial avoidance behaviour in grey seals .
our results demonstrate that the acoustic startle reflex plays a crucial role in mediating flight responses and strongly influences the motivational state of an animal beyond a short-term muscular response by mediating long-term avoidance.
the biological function of the startle reflex is most likely associated with mediating rapid flight responses.
however, previous studies did not allow animals to avoid the stimulus and the evolutionary function and long-term behavioural consequences of repeated startling remain speculative.
the reflex is therefore not only a measure of emotional state but also influences emotional processing.
autonomous reflexes enable animals to respond quickly to potential threats, prevent injury and mediate fight or flight responses.
animals developed rapid flight responses, left the exposure pool and showed clear signs of fear conditioning.
in contrast, animals exposed to non-startling  stimuli of the same maximum sound pressure habituated and flight responses waned or were absent from the beginning.
the data indicate that repeated startling by anthropogenic noise sources might have severe effects on long-term behaviour.
future, studies are needed to investigate whether such effects can be associated with reduced individual fitness or even longevity of individuals.
