for the two remaining species all individuals had incomplete mlst profiles and wolbachia pseudogenes that may be indicative of lateral gene transfer into host genomes.
instead, the findings may be indicative of transient infections that result from spillover events from a yet unknown source.
it also emphasises that global estimates of wolbachia frequencies may need to consider lateral gene transfer and wolbachia spillover that may be regionally restricted, transient and not inherited.
in a previous study of tephritid fruit fly species of tropical australia we detected a high incidence of identical wolbachia strains in several species as well as wolbachia pseudogenes.
they can also be transferred horizontally into uninfected host lineages.
these spillover events appear to be restricted to northern australia, without proliferation in host lineages further south.
here, we have investigated this further by analysing field specimens of  <dig> species collected along a  <dig>  km climate gradient of eastern australia.
the presence of wolbachia pseudogenes at high prevalence in two species in absence of complete mlst profiles may represent footprints of historic infections that have been lost.
our study highlights that tropical fruit fly communities contain wolbachia pseudogenes and may be exposed to frequent horizontal wolbachia transfer.
a wolbachia spillover from an infected source population must occur prior to the establishment of heritable infections, but this spillover may be transient.
the detection of wolbachia was restricted to northern australia, including in five species that only occur in the tropics.
the detection of identical low prevalence strains in a small number of individuals of seven species may question their role as reproductive manipulator and their vertical inheritance.
within the more widely distributed bactrocera tryoni and bactrocera neohumeralis, wolbachia also only occurred in the north, and was not linked to any particular mitochondrial haplotypes.
wolbachia sequences were detected in individuals of nine of the  <dig>  species.
seven  species displayed four distinct wolbachia strains based on characterisation of full multi locus sequencing  profiles; the strains occurred as single and double infections in a small number of individuals .
