in this study, we identified high temperature-altered pear mirnas using the next generation sequencing technology, and futher molecularly characterized mirna-mediated regulaton of target gene expression in the meristem tip and base tissues of in vitro-grown, asgv-infected pear shoots under different temperatures.
spatial expression patterns of the mirnas and their target genes were found to be expressed in shoot tip and base tissues by qrt-pcr.
previously, we showed that high temperature treatment reduces the titers of apple stem grooving virus  from the tips of in vitro-grown pyrus pyrifolia plants.
gene ontology  analysis showed that high-ranking mirna target genes were involved in metabolic processes, responses to stress, and signaling, indicating that these high temperature-responsive mirnas have functions in diverse gene regulatory networks.
in addition, high temperature reduced viral titers in the shoot meristem tip, while negatively regulated mirna-mediated target genes related to resistance disease defense and hormone signal transduction pathway were up-regulated in the p. pyrifolia shoot tip in response to high temperature.
these results suggested that mirnas may have important functions in the high temperature-dependent decrease of asgv titer in in vitro-grown pear shoots.
the results of this study provide valuable information for further exploration of the function of high temperature-altered mirnas in suppressing viral infections in pear and other fruit trees.
pyrus pyrifoliamicrornahigh temperaturesmall rna sequencingapple stem grooving virusissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
this is the first report of mirnas differentially expressed at 24 °c and 37 °c in the meristem tip of pear shoots infected with asgv.
target genes for differentially expressed known and novel mirnas were predicted and functionally annotated.
using in vitro-grown p. pyrifolia shoot meristem tips infected with asgv, a total of  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> clean reads were obtained from illumina high-throughput sequencing of small rna libraries at 24 °c and 37 °c, respectively.
we identified  <dig> conserved and  <dig> novel mirnas.
seven conserved mirnas and  <dig> novel mirnas were differentially expressed at different temperatures.
micrornas  have functions in diverse biological processes such as growth, signal transduction, disease resistance, and stress responses in plants.
