viable resistance against root lesion nematodes in walnut plants may be accomplished in the future using this gene stacking technology.
a. tumefaciens, carrying self-complimentary iaam and ipt transgenes, and agrobacterium rhizogenes, carrying a self-complimentary pv <dig> gene from p. vulnus, were used as co-transformation vectors.
to test for resistance, transformed walnut roots were challenged with p. vulnus and microshoots were challenged with a virulent strain of a. tumefaciens.
current nematode control strategies include nematicides, crop rotation, and tolerant cultivars, but these methods have limits.
crown gall   and the root lesion nematodes   are major challenges faced by the california walnut industry, reducing productivity and increasing the cost of establishing and maintaining orchards.
walnutsresistancegene stackingcrown gallroot lesion nematodespratylenchus vulnusrnaico-transformation
rolabc genes were introduced by the resident t-dna in the a. rhizogenes ri-plasmid used as a vector for plant transformation.
transgenic line 33-3- <dig> exhibited complete crown gall control and 32% fewer nematodes.
the transgenic plants had thicker, longer roots than untransformed controls possibly due to insertion of rolabc genes.
when the pv <dig> gene was present in roots with or without rolabc genes there was partial or complete control of rlns.
we sought to place both cg and nematode resistance into a single walnut rootstock genotype using co-transformation to stack the resistance genes.
cg and nematode resistance gene stacking controlled cg and rlns simultaneously in walnuts.
although complete immunity to nematode infection was not observed, transgenic lines yielded up to 79% fewer nematodes per root following in vitro co-culture than untransformed controls.
combining the two bacterial strains at a 1: <dig> rather than 1: <dig> ratio increased the co-transformation efficiency.
developing genetic resistance through novel approaches like rna interference  can address these problems.
pv <dig> and pv <dig>  genes were also transferred separately using a. tumefaciens.
beneficial plant genotype and phenotype changes are caused by co-transformation using a. tumefaciens and a. rhizogenes strains.
