after  <dig> d of rearing, final body weight and average daily gain in ll-pegf were greater  than those in control, but no significant differences between ll-pegf, ll-ev and antibiotic control.
no significant difference was observed on adfi/adg.
oral administration of pegf-secreting l. lactis had beneficial effects on intestinal health and performance of early-weaned piglets.
sucrase in the  <dig> intestinal segments, aminopeptidase a in the duodenum and jejunum, aminopeptidase n and dipeptidase iv in the duodenum in ll-pegf were higher than those in control .
for in vivo study, forty piglets were randomly allocated to control, antibiotic control, empty vector-expressing l. lactis  and pegf-secreting l. lactis .
overall period average daily feed intake was higher in ll-pegf, ll-ev and antibiotic control than in control .
lactobacillus increased in the cecum in ll-ev compared with control and antibiotic control .
epidermal growth factor  is an important growth factor in regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, survival and apoptosis.
porcine epidermal growth factorlactococcus lactisearly-weaned pigletsintestinal developmentproduction performance
this study aimed to construct and express porcine egf , and use l. lactis as vehicle for producing and delivering pegf.
furthermore, investigating biological activity of pegf and exploring applications feasibility of combination effects of l. lactis and pegf on early weaned piglets’ production.
furthermore, escherichia coli and enterococcus counts decreased in the ileum and lactobacillus increased in the ileum and cecum digesta in ll-pegf compare with the control .
secreted pegf was a fully biologically active protein, as demonstrated by its capacity to stimulate l <dig> mouse fibroblast cell line proliferation in vitro.
we have generated a recombinant lactococcus lactis which produced and secreted fully biologically active porcine egf.
ll-pegf increased villous height in the duodenum, jejunum and ileum than in control and ll-ev .
