this study focused on analyzing the genomic sequence of serratia sp.
subsequently, comparative genomic analyses were performed among a total of  <dig> serratia species.
the prodigiosin biosynthesis gene cluster in yd25t belongs to the type i pig cluster, which is the main form of pig-encoding genes existing in most of the pigmented serratia species.
in addition, a complete autoinducer- <dig>  system  as a conserved bacterial operator is found in the genome of serratia sp.
phylogenetic analysis using the genomic sequence of yd25t combined with phylogenetic and phenotypic analyses support this strain as a member of a novel and previously uncharacterized serratia species.
several serratia strains produce prodigiosin and serrawettin w <dig> as the main bioactive compounds, and the biosynthetic pathways are co-regulated by quorum sensing .
phylogenetic analysis based on concatenated lsr and luxs proteins revealed that yd25t formed an independent branch and was clearly distant from the strains that solely produce either prodigiosin or serrawettin w <dig>  the fe  ion reduction assay confirmed that strain yd25t could produce an ai- <dig> signal molecule.
gram-negative bacteria of the genus serratia are potential producers of many useful secondary metabolites, such as prodigiosin and serrawettins, which have potential applications in environmental bioremediation or in the pharmaceutical industry.
strain yd25t isolated from rhizosphere soil under continuously planted burley tobacco collected from yongding, fujian province, china, which is unique in producing both prodigiosin and serrawettin w <dig>
a hybrid polyketide synthases -non-ribosomal peptide synthetases  gene cluster putatively involved in biosynthesis of antimicrobial serrawettin w <dig> was identified in the genome of yd25t, and its biosynthesis pathway was proposed.
unveiling the genomic sequence of s. surfactantfaciens yd25t benefits the usage of this unique strain as a model system for studying the biosynthesis regulation of both prodigiosin and serrawettin w <dig> by the qs system.
genomic sequence and metabolite analysis of serratia surfactantfaciens yd25t indicate that this strain can be further explored for the production of useful metabolites.
in contrast, the serratia strain, which can simultaneously produce prodigiosin and serrawettin w <dig>  has not been reported.
we found potent antimicrobial activity of serrawettin w <dig> purified from yd25t against various pathogenic bacteria and fungi as well as antitumor activity against hela cells.
