the k-mer hash length is a key factor affecting the output of de novo transcriptome assembly packages using de bruijn graph algorithms.
even though annotation is one of the primary goals of a transcriptome assembly, the success of assembly strategies does not consider the impact of k-mer selection on the annotation output.
pair-wise comparison analyses  were produced to reveal missing kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  ortholog identifiers , and to determine a strategy that maximizes the recovery of biological information in a de novo transcriptome assembly.
this undesirable effect can be minimized, but not eliminated, with clustering of multi-k assemblies with redundancy removal.
the complete extraction of biological information in de novo transcriptomics studies requires both the production of a ca and efforts to identify unique contigs that are present in individual k-mer assemblies but not in the ca.
a common solution to this problem is the clustering of single k-mer assemblies.
analyses of single k-mer assemblies resulted in the generation of various quantities of contigs and functional annotations within the selection window of k-mers .
for each k-mer in this window, generated assemblies contained certain unique contigs and kois that were not present in the other k-mer assemblies.
this study demonstrated that different k-mer choices result in various quantities of unique contigs per single k-mer assembly which affects biological information that is retrievable from the transcriptome.
producing a non-redundant ca of k-mers  <dig> to  <dig> resulted in a more complete functional annotation than any single k-mer assembly.
this study provides an in-depth k-mer selection analysis that is focused on the degree of functional annotation achieved for a non-model organism where no reference genome information is available.
assemblies constructed with varying single k-mer choices might result in the loss of unique contiguous sequences  and relevant biological information.
individual k-mers and clustered assemblies  were considered using three representative software packages.
however, a fraction of unique annotations remained  in the assemblies of individual k-mers  that were not present in the non-redundant ca.
