because mass production of v. planifolia through indirect shoot differentiation from callus culture is rare and may be a successful use of in vitro techniques for producing somaclonal variants, we have established a novel protocol for the regeneration of vanilla plants and investigated the initial biochemical and molecular mechanisms that trigger shoot organogenesis from embryogenic/organogenic callus.
two-dimensional electrophoresis followed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight-tandem mass spectrometry  analysis revealed that  <dig> protein spots are significantly expressed  at earlier stages of shoot differentiation.
nmr analysis techniques also allowed the identification of some secondary metabolites such as phenolic compounds whose accumulation was enhanced during shoot differentiation.
the subculture of embryogenic/organogenic calli onto shoot differentiation medium triggers the stimulation of cell metabolism principally at three levels namely  initiation of photosynthesis, glycolysis and phenolic compounds synthesis;  amino acid - protein synthesis, and protein stabilization;  sugar degradation.
in accordance with proteomic analysis, metabolic profiling using 1d and 2d nmr techniques showed the importance of numerous compounds related with sugar mobilization and nitrogen metabolism.
these results might contribute to elucidate the complex mechanism that leads to vanilla callus differentiation and subsequent shoot formation into plb organogenesis.
moreover, our results highlight an early intermediate metabolic event in vanillin biosynthetic pathway with respect to secondary metabolism.
these biochemical mechanisms associated with the initiation of shoot formation during protocorm - like body  organogenesis could be coordinated by the removal of tdz in callus maintenance medium.
the majority of these proteins are involved in amino acid-protein metabolism and photosynthetic activity.
vanilla plants are conventionally propagated by stem cuttings and thus causing injury to the mother plants.
these calli were maintained by subculturing on bm containing iaa  and tdz  during  <dig> months and formed embryogenic/organogenic calli.
histological analysis showed that shoot organogenesis was induced between  <dig> and  <dig> days after embryogenic/organogenic calli were transferred onto ms basal medium with naa .
by associating proteomics and metabolomics analyses, the biochemical and molecular markers responsible for shoot induction have been studied in 15-day-old calli at the stage where no differentiating part was visible on organogenic calli.
for embryogenic callus induction, seeds obtained from 7-month-old green pods of v. planifolia were inoculated on ms basal medium  containing tdz .
indeed, for the first time in vanilla tissue culture, phenolic compounds such as glucoside a and glucoside b were identified.
vanilla planifolia is an important orchid commercially cultivated for the production of natural vanilla flavour.
