we extended the scpe model by introducing a new scoring function, the local score.
we performed a thorough assessment of the scpe model on the lpxa family and extended it to all other members of known structure of the lβh superfamily.
the model starts with the coding sequence of a protein with known three-dimensional structure.
maximum likelihood calculations show that the local-score and global-score scpe substitution matrices obtained for lpxa outperform the jtt model for the lpxa family and for the structurally constrained sites of class i of other members within the lβh superfamily.
we studied site-dependent entropies, amino acid probability distributions, and substitution matrices predicted by scpe and compared with experimental data for several members of the lβh superfamily.
structure conservation constrains evolutionary sequence divergence, resulting in observable sequence patterns.
most current models of protein evolution do not take structure into account explicitly, being unsuitable for investigating the effects of structure conservation on sequence divergence.
here, we introduce a new scoring function, the "local score", in which the sequence accepted at the previous evolutionary time-step is used as the reference.
to this end, we recently developed the structurally constrained protein evolution  model.
we also evaluated structure conservation during simulations.
in our first brief report we used a "global score", in which the same reference sequence, the ancestral one, was used at each evolutionary step.
overall, scpe outperforms jtt in the description of sequence patterns observed in structurally constrained sites.
then, a "score" for the trial sequence is calculated and the mutation is accepted only if its score is under a given cutoff, λ. the scpe score measures the distance between the trial sequence and a given reference sequence, given the structure.
at each evolutionary time-step of an scpe simulation, a trial sequence is generated by introducing a random point mutation in the current coding dna sequence.
