while identifying sites, it adjusts parameters to model site density changing with the distance from the transcription start site.
ohmm could be used to predict physical occupancy, and provides guidance for proper design of gel-shift experiments.
ignoring these features can lead to inaccurate predictions as well as incorrect design and interpretation of experimental results.
moreover, considering ohmm as a biophysical model allows us to learn the classification threshold in a principled manner.
high evolutionary conservation scores and enrichment in experimentally verified regulated genes suggest that nf-κb binding sites predicted by our method are likely to be functional.
based upon our predictions, new insights into nf-κb function and regulation and possible new biological roles of nf-κb were uncovered.
interpreting hmm parameters as biophysical quantities, this method uses the occupancy probability of a transcription factor on a dna sequence as the discriminant function, earning the algorithm the name ohmm: occupancy via hidden markov model.
in the context of binding sites to transcription factor nf-κb, we find that the occupancy probability predicted by ohmm correlates well with the binding affinity in gel shift experiments.
dna sequence binding motifs for several important transcription factors happen to be self-overlapping.
we have developed a tool based on a hidden markov model  that identifies binding location of transcription factors with preference for self-overlapping dna motifs by combining the effects of their alternative binding modes.
our method deals specifically with identifying locations with multiple overlapping binding sites by computing the local occupancy of the transcription factor.
ohmm learns the classification threshold by training emission probabilities using unaligned sequences containing known sites and estimating transition probabilities to reflect site density in all promoters in a genome.
another feature of ohmm is that we allow transition probabilities to change with location relative to the tss.
moreover, most methods use arbitrary thresholds and fail to provide a biophysical interpretation of statistical quantities.
