vertebrates display an increased number of nmdar genes and splice variants, which may play a role in their greater diversity of physiological responses.
qpcr results show that all  <dig> aplysia iglur subunits are expressed in all nervous system ganglia.
nmdar genes show very high conservation in motifs responsible for forming the conductance pore of the ion channel.
our results suggest a significant role for l-glu mediated responses throughout the aplysia nervous system, consistent with l-glu’s role as the primary excitatory neurotransmitter.
invertebrate organisms such as aplysia californica  are well-studied models for iglur-mediated function, yet no studies to date have analyzed the evolutionary relationships between iglur genes in these species and those in vertebrates, to identify genes that may mediate plasticity.
the number of nmdar subunits is greater in vertebrates due to an increased number of splice variants and an increased number of genes, likely due to gene duplication events.
orthologous nmdar subunits in all species studied suggests conserved function across bilateria, and potentially a conserved mechanism of neuroplasticity and learning.
the neurotransmitter l-glutamate  acting at ionotropic l-glu receptors  conveys fast excitatory signal transmission in the nervous systems of all animals.
extensive gene gain and loss of ampar genes may result in different physiological properties that are taxon specific.
the expression status of iglur genes in the aplysia nervous system was also examined.
during learning, two subtypes of iglur, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptors  and n-methyl-d-aspartate receptors , are dynamically regulated postsynaptically in vertebrates.
ampar subunits form an orthologous group, and there is high variability in the number of ampar genes in each species due to extensive taxon specific gene gain and loss.
iglur-dependent neurotransmission is a key component of the synaptic plasticity that underlies learning and memory.
our analysis shows that ancestral genes for both nmdar and ampar subtypes were present in the common bilaterian ancestor.
