further characterization of paternal factors delivered to the oocyte could lead to the identification of biomarkers for better selection of sires to improve reproductive efficiency.
expression of the genes cycs, eea <dig>  slc16a <dig>  mepce, and tfb2m was validated in three new pairs of biological replicates of embryos.
studies of the paternal contribution to reproductive performance are limited.
however, recent discoveries have shown that, in addition to dna, sperm delivers transcription factors and epigenetic components that are required for fertilization and proper embryonic development.
the role of the differentially expressed gene tfb2m in embryonic development was further assessed through expression knockdown at the zygotic stage, which resulted in decreased development to the blastocyst stage.
fertilityembryonic developmentmethylationtranscriptomeivfhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007015university of wisconsin-madisonmsn176063msn162253salih sana m. khatib hasan issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
the relationship between the paternal contribution and the embryonic transcriptome is unclear, although differences in methylated regions were identified which could influence the reprogramming of the early embryo.
we hypothesized that sire fertility is associated with differences in dna methylation patterns in sperm and that the embryonic transcriptomic profiles are influenced by the fertility status of the bull.
assessment of the epigenetic signature of spermatozoa between high and low fertility bulls revealed  <dig> differentially methylated regions.
infertility in dairy cattle is a concern where reduced fertilization rates and high embryonic loss are contributing factors.
additionally, dna methylation signatures of sperm from high and low fertility sires were characterized by performing whole-genome dna methylation binding domain sequencing.
despite similar morphology and development to the blastocyst stage, preimplantation embryos derived from high and low fertility bulls displayed significant transcriptomic differences.
blastocysts derived from each high and low fertility bulls were evaluated for morphology, development, and transcriptomic analysis using rna-sequencing.
embryo morphology and developmental capacity did not differ between embryos generated from either a high or low fertility bull.
