biological processes related to protein catabolism, amino acid transaminations, rna splicing and blood coagulation were also found to be regulated by diet, while the expression of genes involved in protein and atp synthesis differed between the half-sibfamilies.
efforts towards utilisation of diets without fish meal  or fish oil  in finfish aquaculture have been being made for more than two decades.
we report the first results obtained using a transcriptomic approach on the liver of two half-sibfamilies of the european sea bass that exhibit similar growth rates when fed a fish-based diet , but significantly different growth rates when fed an all-plant diet .
no significant diet-family interaction for the regulation of lc-pufa biosynthesis pathways could be detected by microarray analysis.
statistical analysis identified  <dig> unique annotated genes differentially expressed between groups of fish fed the two diets,  <dig> genes regulated by genetic factors, and  <dig> genes that exhibited diet-family interactions.
metabolic responses to substitution of fishery products have been shown to impact growth performance and immune system of fish as well as their subsequent nutritional value, particularly in marine fish species, which exhibit low capacity for biosynthesis of long-chain poly-unsaturated fatty acids .
in addition, the combination of our transcriptomic data with an analysis of plasmatic immune parameters revealed a stimulation of complement activity associated with an immunodeficiency in the fish fed vd, and different inflammatory status between the two half-sibfamilies.
overall, the combined gene expression, compositional and biochemical studies demonstrated a large panel of metabolic and physiological effects induced by total substitution of both fm and fo in the diets of european sea bass and revealed physiological characteristics associated with the two half-sibfamilies.
overall gene expression was analysed using oligo dna microarrays .
the main objective of the present study was to analyse the effects of a plant-based diet on the hepatic transcriptome of european sea bass .
