the number of ctgf-positive cells provided the most reliable overall measure for disease progression at histological level, bilirubin at biochemical level, and metalloproteinase inhibitor  <dig>  at transcript level.
prominent molecular events exhibited by strong transcript peaks are found for the transcriptional regulator nr0b <dig>  and  <dig> -dihydroxyvitamin d 24-hydroxylase  at 6 h. based on these clusters, we constructed a decision tree of factor combinations potentially useful as markers for different time intervals of disease progression.
statistical analysis of the more than  <dig>  data points revealed distinct temporal phases of disease.
our detailed time-resolved explorative study of liver homogenates following bdl revealed a well-coordinated response, resulting in disease phase dependent parameter modulations at morphological, biochemical, metabolic and gene expression levels.
best prediction for onset of disease is achieved by fibronectin , for early disease phase by cytochrome p <dig> 1a <dig> , passage to perpetuation phase by collagen1α- <dig> , and transition to the progression phase by interleukin 17-a , with early and late progression separated by col1a <dig>  notably, these predictions remained stable even for randomly chosen small sub-sets of factors selected from the clusters.
as obstructive cholestasis often progresses insidiously, markers for the diagnosis and staging of the disease are urgently needed.
to this end, we compiled a comprehensive data set of serum markers, histological parameters and transcript profiles at  <dig> time points of disease progression after bile duct ligation  in mice, aiming at identifying a set of parameters that could be used as robust biomarkers for transition of different disease progression phases.
time course correlation analysis of biochemical, histochemical and mrna transcript parameters  defined  <dig> clusters for different phases of disease progression.
interestingly, a small set of selected parameters can be used as diagnostic markers to predict disease stages in mice with cholestatic liver disease.
