the use of ap-fast blue fluorescent detection may provide a helpful alternative for fluorescent transcript visualization, as the ap reaction can proceed for extended times with a high signal-to-noise ratio.
to achieve high signal intensities we optimized embryo permeabilization properties by hydrogen peroxide treatment and hybridization conditions by application of the viscosity-increasing polymer dextran sulfate.
the application of different detection systems allowed for a one-step antibody detection procedure for visualization of transcripts, which significantly reduced working steps and hands-on time shortening the protocol by one day.
since pod activity is rather quickly quenched by substrate excess, less abundant transcripts can often not be efficiently visualized even when applying tsa.
conventional two-color fish protocols require two separate rounds of horseradish peroxidase -based transcript detection, which involves tyramide signal amplification  and inactivation of the first applied antibody-enzyme conjugate before the second detection round.
we show here that the alkaline phosphatase  substrates fast red and fast blue can be used for chromogenic as well as fluorescent visualization of transcripts.
we show that the combination of ap-fast blue and pod-tsa-carboxyfluorescein  detection provides a powerful tool for simultaneous fluorescent visualization of two different transcripts in the zebrafish brain.
the obtained signal enhancement allowed us to develop a sensitive two-color fish protocol by combining ap and pod reporter systems.
two-color fluorescent in situ hybridization  can be used to compare different transcript distributions at cellular resolution.
whole-mount in situ hybridization  is extensively used to characterize gene expression patterns in developing and adult brain and other tissues.
digoxigenindinitrophenoltyramide signal amplification dextran sulfatehydrogen peroxidepermeabilizationfast redfast bluealkaline phosphatasehorseradish peroxidaseprosomere
