amino acid sequence comparisons identified key catalytic or regulatory regions, as  <dig> residues were highly conserved among all nox/duox orthologs, and  <dig> of these were identical with those mutated in nox <dig> in variants of x-linked chronic granulomatous disease.
nox <dig> was lost in rodents, and nox <dig>  which functions in the inner ear in gravity perception, emerged the most recently, corresponding to full-time adaptation of vertebrates to land.
we assembled and analyzed the deduced amino acid sequences of  <dig> nox/duox orthologs from  <dig> species, including vertebrates, urochordates, echinoderms, insects, nematodes, fungi, slime mold amoeba, alga and plants.
these results provide a guide for future structure-function studies and for understanding the evolution of biological functions of these enzymes.
molecular taxonomy revealed seven distinct subfamilies of noxes and duoxes.
comparison of evolutionary substitution rates demonstrates that nox <dig>  the regulatory subunits p47phox and p67phox, and duox are more stringently conserved in vertebrates than other noxes and nox regulatory subunits.
members of the nox/duox family have been identified in a wide variety of organisms, including mammals, nematodes, fruit fly, green plants, fungi, and slime molds; however, little is known about the molecular evolutionary history of these enzymes.
in addition to canonical motifs, the b-loop, tm6-fad, vxgpfg-motif, and extreme c-terminal regions were identified as important for nox activity, as verified by mutational analysis.
in contrast to ros defense enzymes, such as superoxide dismutase and catalase that are present in prokaryotes, ros-generating nox/duox orthologs only appeared later in evolution.
this report provides the first comprehensive analysis of the evolution and conserved functions of nox and duox family members, including identification of conserved amino acid residues.
the presence of these non-canonical, but highly conserved regions suggests that all nox/duox may possess a common biological function remained in a long history of nox/duox evolution.
nadph-oxidases  and the related dual oxidases  play varied biological and pathological roles via regulated generation of reactive oxygen species .
