the unambiguous identification and a detailed structure characterization of both the wild type and the mutant spep were obtained by mass spectrometric analyses.
the mutant espepa was constructed from plasmid pet28b-spep applying the one-step overlap extension pcr strategy.
in this work we constructed spep mutant by substituting the glutamic acid in the catalytic site with a residue of alanine.
in this manner we were able to evaluate the anti-biofilm activity of spep mutant in absence of proteolytic activity.
previously reports evaluated the anti-infective properties of serratiopeptidase , an extracellular metalloprotease produced by serratia marcescens atcc  <dig> , in impairing virulence-related staphylococcal properties, such as attachment to inert surfaces and adhesion/invasion on eukaryotic cells.
new knowledge obtained from data reported in this paper calls attention to a novel mechanism of action of spep.
the use of indwelling medical devices is associated with a significant risk of infections by staphylococcus aureus  which possesses a variety of virulence factors including many toxins and the ability to invade eukaryotic cells or to form biofilm on biotic and abiotic surfaces.
there sulting plasmids were costransformed in ecbl <dig> cells with the plasmid pruw4inh <dig> harboring the erwinia chrysanthemi secretion system.
as expected, this mutant did not display protease activity but it retained its anti-biofilm properties, suggesting that this action is independent by enzymatic activity.
the resultant supernatants sterilized by filtration were separately used to condition biofilm formation of s. aureus.
bacterial pellets and supernatants were collected and analyzed by sds-page and zymography.
this protein could be developed as a potential “antipathogenic agent” capable to impair the ability of s. aureus to form biofilm on prostheses, catheters and medical devices, exploiting a mechanism different from the proteolytic activity.
blocking s. aureus colonization may reduce the incidence of invasive infectious diseases.
