while many pipelines now incorporate rna-seq data in training ghmms, there has been relatively little investigation into additionally combining rna-seq data at the point of prediction, and room for improvement in this area motivates this study.
the impact of gene annotation quality on functional and comparative genomics makes gene prediction an important process, particularly in non-model species, including many fungi.
as these methods do not require sets of homologous proteins, improving gene prediction from these resources is of benefit to fungal researchers.
generalised hidden markov models  have proven to be invaluable tools in gene annotation and, recently, rna-seq has emerged as a cost-effective means to significantly improve the quality of automated gene annotation.
we demonstrate the success of a novel method of incorporating rna-seq data into ghmm fungal gene prediction.
generalised hidden markov modelgene annotationfungigene predictionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
these results are 4-5% better than those of augustus, the next best performing rna-seq driven gene predictor tested.
codingquarry is a highly accurate, self-training ghmm fungal gene predictor designed to work with assembled, aligned rna-seq transcripts.
our approach capitalises on the high quality of fungal transcript assemblies by incorporating predictions made directly from transcript sequences.
sets of homologous protein sequences are rarely complete with respect to the fungal species of interest and are often small or unreliable, especially when closely related species have not been sequenced or annotated in detail.
in these cases, protein homology-based evidence fails to correctly annotate many genes, or significantly improve ab initio predictions.
stringent benchmarking against high-confidence annotation subsets showed codingquarry predicted  <dig> % of schizosaccharomyces pombe genes and  <dig> % of saccharomyces cerevisiae genes perfectly.
rna-seq data informs annotations both during gene-model training and in prediction.
