results indicate that parallel  version and serial version of density based lesion border detection methods generate the same accuracy rates for  <dig> dermoscopy images, in which mean of border error is  <dig> %, mean of recall is  <dig> %, and mean of precision is  <dig> % respectively.
therefore, webcl parallel version of density based skin lesion border detection introduced in this study can supplement expert dermatologist, and aid them in early diagnosis of skin lesions.
because of this, the automated assessment of lesion borders in dermoscopic images has become an important area of study.
fast density based skin lesion border detection method has been implemented in parallel with a new parallel technology called webcl.
developed webcl-parallel density based skin lesion border detection method runs efficiently from internet browsers.
webcl takes full advantage of parallel computational resources including multi-cores and gpus on a local machine, and allows for compiled code to run directly from the web browser.
previous research indicates that one of the highest accuracy rates can be achieved using density based clustering techniques for skin lesion border detection.
in this study, density based clustering technique for skin lesion border detection is parallelized and redesigned to run very efficiently on the heterogeneous platforms  by transforming the technique into a series of independent concurrent operations.
dermoscopy is a highly effective and noninvasive imaging technique used in diagnosis of melanoma and other pigmented skin lesions.
this makes border detection one of the most important steps in dermoscopic image analysis.
moreover, webcl version's speedup factor for  <dig> dermoscopy images' lesion border detection averages around ~ <dig> .
while webcl is currently an emerging technology, a full adoption of webcl into the html <dig> standard would allow for this implementation to run on a very large set of hardware and software systems.
many aspects of the lesion under consideration are defined in relation to the lesion border.
in addition, we tested parallel code on  <dig> dermoscopy images and showed the execution speedups with respect to the serial version.
when large amount of high resolution dermoscopy images considered in a usual clinical setting along with the critical importance of early detection and diagnosis of melanoma before metastasis, the importance of fast processing dermoscopy images become obvious.
for this, we used webcl, an emerging technology that enables a html <dig> web browser to execute code in parallel for heterogeneous platforms.
webcl is a javascript binding of opencl, which takes advantage of gpu computing from a web browser.
