yet surprisingly little is known about the molecular evolution of cnes across diverse mammalian taxa or their role in specific phenotypic adaptations.
we examined  <dig>  vertebrate-specific and ~ <dig>  mammalian-specific cnes across  <dig> and  <dig> mammalian orders respectively, and tested for changes in the rate of evolution of cnes located in the proximity of genes underlying the development or functioning of auditory systems.
as we focused on cnes putatively associated with genes underlying the development/functioning of auditory systems, we incorporated echolocating taxa in our dataset because of their highly specialised and derived auditory systems.
comparisons of cne substitution rates from several genomic regions containing genes linked to auditory system development and hearing revealed differences between echolocating and non-echolocating taxa.
we found that cne substitution rates were highest in rodents and lowest in primates, consistent with previous findings.
wider taxonomic sampling of four cnes associated with the homeobox genes hmx <dig> and hmx <dig> – which are required for inner ear development – revealed family-wise variation across diverse bat species.
levels of selective constraint acting on cnes differed both across genomic locations and taxa, with observed variation in substitution rates of cnes among bat species.
phylogenetic reconstructions of concatenated cnes broadly recovered accepted mammal relationships despite high levels of sequence conservation.
specifically within one family of echolocating bats that utilise frequency-modulated echolocation calls varying widely in frequency and intensity high levels of sequence divergence were found.
conserved non-coding elements  are an abundant group of putative regulatory sequences that are highly conserved across divergent groups and thus assumed to be under strong selective constraint.
many cnes may contain regulatory factor binding sites, and their frequent spatial association with key developmental genes – such as those regulating sensory system development – suggests crucial roles in regulating gene expression and cellular patterning.
