the biochemical and structural characterization of stacka reported here provides insights into the biochemical specificity, overall fold, thermal stability, molecular basis of ligand binding and inter-domain motion in acka family of enzymes.
acetate kinase  and phosphotransacetylase , key enzymes of acetate utilization pathway, regulate flux of metabolites in glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, tca cycle, glyoxylate bypass and fatty acid metabolism.
atp and mg2+ could be substituted by other nucleoside 5′-triphosphates  and divalent cations , respectively.
unexpectedly, form-ii stacka structure showed a drastic change in the conformation of residues 230– <dig> compared to that of form-i.
further investigation revealed electron density corresponding to a citrate molecule in a pocket located at the dimeric interface of form-ii stacka.
interestingly, a similar dimeric interface pocket lined with largely conserved residues could be identified in form-i stacka as well as in other enzymes homologous to acka suggesting that ligand binding at this pocket may influence the function of these enzymes.
dramatic conformational differences observed between unliganded and citrate-bound forms of stacka led to identification of a putative ligand-binding pocket at the dimeric interface of stacka with implications for enzymatic function.
stacka protomer consists of two domains with characteristic βββαβαβα topology of askha superfamily of proteins.
further, the km for acetyl-phosphate was significantly lower than for acetate and the enzyme could catalyze the reverse reaction  more efficiently.
bacteria such as escherichia coli and salmonella typhimurium can utilize acetate as the sole source of carbon and energy.
form-i stacka represents the first structural report of an unliganded acka.
here we report kinetic characterization of s. typhimurium acka  and structures of its unliganded  and citrate-bound  forms.
spectroscopic and structural analyses of stacka further suggested occurrence of inter-domain motion upon ligand-binding.
