hcb- <dig> mice are more resistant to b. pertussis infection than c3h mice, which could partially be ascribed to the b. pertussis susceptibility locus- <dig>  on chromosome  <dig>  the presence of c57bl/ <dig> genome on this locus instead of c3h genome resulted in a decreased number of bacteria in the lung.
eight of these genes, which showed a strong difference in gene expression between the two mouse strains, map to the immunoglobulin heavy chain complex .
thus, by microarray analysis we significantly reduced the number of candidate susceptibility genes within the bps <dig> locus.
gene expression changes upon b. pertussis infection are highly identical between the two mouse strains despite the differences in the course of b. pertussis infection.
to further elucidate the role of host genetic factors, in particular in the bps <dig> locus, in b. pertussis infection, and to identify candidate genes within in this region, we compared expression profiles in the lungs of the c3h and hcb- <dig> mouse strains following b. pertussis inoculation.
upon b. pertussis inoculation  <dig>  genes were differentially expressed in the lungs of both mouse strains.
because the genes that were differentially regulated between the mouse strains only showed differences in expression before infection, it appears likely that such intrinsic differences in gene regulation are involved in determining differences in susceptibility to b. pertussis infection.
two hundred and six genes were differentially expressed between the two mouse strains, but, remarkably, none of these were up- or down-regulated upon b. pertussis infection.
alternatively, such genetic differences in susceptibility may be explained by genes that are not differentially regulated between these two mouse strains.
genes in the igh complex, among which igh-1a/b, are likely candidates to explain differences in susceptibility to b. pertussis.
further work should establish the role of the igh complex in b. pertussis infection.
twelve and a half percent of the genomes of these mice are from a different genetic background.
