eragrostis tef is an allotetraploid  annual, c <dig> grass with an estimated nuclear genome size of  <dig> mbp.
phylogenetic analyses of the most important classes of tes were carried out in a comparative framework including paralog elements from rice and maize.
transposable elements are usually the most abundant repetitive component in plant genomes.
eragrostis tefrepetitive sequencestransposable elementssatellite sequenceshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007176scuola superiore sant'annaapomis11azdoctoral school in life sciencesgebre yohannes gedamu zuccolo andrea issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
an extensive and in depth characterization of the repetitive component is essential in understanding the evolution and function of the genome.
although a draft assembly of the e. tef genome was made available in  <dig>  characterization of the repetitive portion of the e. tef genome has not been a subject of a detailed analysis.
using new paired-end sequence data and a de novo repeat identification strategy, we identified the most repetitive elements in the e. tef genome.
altogether we identified  <dig>  medium/highly repetitive sequences that collectively represent about 27 % of the teff genome.
finally, an abundant tandem repeat accounting for more than 4 % of the whole genome was identified and partially characterized.
the approach we used was designed to avoid underestimation of repeat contribution; such underestimation is characteristic of whole genome assembly projects.
repetitive sequences constitute most of the dna in eukaryotic genomes.
analyzing a large sample of randomly sheared reads we obtained a library of the repetitive sequences of e. tef.
putative repeat sequences were annotated based on similarity to known repeat groups in other grasses.
they contribute to genome size variation, cause mutations, can result in chromosomal rearrangements, and influence gene regulation.
it is widely grown in ethiopia, where it provides basic nutrition for more than half of the population.
the data collected represent a valuable resource for further analysis of the genome of this important orphan crop.
