the genes of plants can be up- or down-regulated during viral infection to influence the replication of viruses.
fifteen randomly selected genes were used for a combined virus-induced gene silencing  knockdown experiment, using bamv infection to investigate the roles played by these genes during viral infection, specifically addressing the means by which these genes influence the accumulation of bamv protein.
six knockdown plants showed an increase in the accumulation of bamv, suggesting that they played a role in the resistance to viral infection, while three plants showed a reduction in coat protein, indicating a positive influence on the accumulation of bamv in plants.
this study reports an efficient and straightforward method for the identification of host genes involved in viral infection.
differential gene expression in nicotiana benthamiana plants in response to infection with bamboo mosaic virus  was revealed using cdna-amplified fragment length polymorphism .
identification of these differentially expressed genes could shed light on the defense systems employed by plants and the mechanisms involved in the adaption of viruses to plant cells.
an interesting observation was that eight of the nine plants showing an increase in bamv coat protein were associated with cell rescue, defense, death, aging, signal transduction, and energy production.
the combination of both dna-aflp and vigs methodologies made it possible to screen a large number of genes and identify those associated with infections of plant viruses.
following inoculation with bamv, n. benthamiana displayed differential gene expression in response to the infection.
we succeeded in establishing a cdna-aflp system to help track changes in gene expression patterns in n. benthamiana plants when infected with bamv.
in this report,  <dig> of the  <dig> analyzed genes exhibited either a positive or a negative influence on the accumulation of bamv in n. benthamiana plants.
nine of the  <dig> genes showed either a positive or a negative influence on the accumulation of bamv protein.
