many studies have provided algorithms or methods to assess a statistical significance in quantitative proteomics when multiple replicates for a protein sample and a lc/ms analysis are available.
we have experimented to operate on several parameters to control a fdr, including a fold-change, a statistical test, and a minimum number of permuted significant pairings.
the results suggest that it is possible to perform a significance analysis without protein sample replicates.
it is simple, and is complementary to other more sophisticated algorithms that are not designed for dealing with a small number of sample replicates.
although a fold-change is a conventional threshold that can be used when there are no sample replicates, it does not provide an assessment of statistical significance such as a false discovery rate  which is an important indicator of the reliability to identify differentially expressed proteins.
in this work, we investigate whether differentially expressed proteins can be detected with a statistical significance from a pair of unlabeled protein samples without replicates and with only duplicate lc/ms injections per sample.
a fdr is used to gauge the statistical significance of the differentially expressed proteins.
we demonstrate that a statistical significance can be inferred without protein sample replicates in label-free quantitative proteomics.
although none of these parameters alone gives a satisfactory control of a fdr, we find that a combination of these parameters provides a very effective means to control a fdr without compromising the sensitivity.
only duplicate lc/ms injections per sample are needed.
but, confidence is still lacking in using datasets for a biological interpretation without protein sample replicates.
the method is evaluated for its sensitivity and specificity by a roc analysis, and is further validated with a -labeled internal-standard protein sample and additional unlabeled protein sample replicates.
the approach described in this study would be useful in many exploratory experiments where a sample amount or instrument time is limited.
naturally, this method is also suitable for proteomics experiments where multiple sample replicates are available.
