understanding the biological basis of phenotypic variation in a. thaliana with respect to v. longisporum resistance will provide new approaches for implementing durable resistance in cruciferous crops.
three stunting resistance qtl of ler origin, two co-localising with wall-associated kinase-like -genes, were detected in winter.
the same chromosomal region controlled the level of abscisic acid  and jasmonic acid  in response to v. longisporum: the level of aba was higher in colonization-susceptible ler than in colonization-resistant bur after v. longisporum infection.
verticillium longisporum is a soil-borne vascular pathogen infecting cruciferous hosts such as oilseed rape.
independent of erecta, stunting was caused in a light-dependent manner with possible participation of sa and wakl genes.
phytohormone measurements and analyses in defined mutants and near-isogenic lines  were used to identify genes and signalling pathways that underlie different resistance qtl.
quantitative disease resistance  is the major control means, but its molecular basis is poorly understood so far.
stunting resistance qtl were contributed by both parents.
the strongest stunting resistance qtl was shown to be identical with erecta.
qtl for resistance to v. longisporum-induced stunting, systemic colonization by the fungus and for v. longisporum-induced chlorosis were identified.
systemic colonization was controlled independently of stunting.
the vec <dig> qtl on chromosome  <dig> had the strongest effect on systemic colonization.
aba and ja showed a genotype-specific response that corresponded with systemic colonization by the fungus.
furthermore, bur showed a much stronger induction of salicylic acid  by v. longisporum than ler.
signalling systems with a hitherto unknown role in the qdr of a. thaliana against v. longisporum were identified: erecta mediated resistance against v. longisporum-induced stunting.
a functional erecta pathway, which was present in bur, conferred partial resistance to v. longisporum-induced stunting.
