furthermore, we validated bi-allelic variants in the form of single nucleotide polymorphism  between the cold susceptible and tolerant lines of sorghum.
to gain further insights on the molecular mechanism of cold tolerance in sorghum we performed transcriptome profiling between known cold sensitive and tolerant sorghum lines using rna sequencing technology under control and cold stress treatments.
this study also offers resource for gene based snp that can be applied towards targeted genomic studies of cold tolerance in sorghum and other cereal crops.
here we report on the identification of differentially expressed genes  between contrasting sorghum genotypes, hongkezi  and btx <dig>  under cool and control temperatures using rnaseq approach to elucidate the molecular basis of sorghum response to cold stress.
additionally, specific genes such as plant cytochromes, glutathione s-transferases, and heat shock proteins were found differentially regulated under cold stress between cold tolerant and susceptible genotype of sorghum.
the results gathered provide an insight into the complex mechanisms associated with cold response in sorghum, which involve an array of transcription factors and genes which were previously related to abiotic stress response.
a new strategy which involved an integrated analysis of differential gene expression and identification of bi-allelic single nucleotide polymorphism  was conducted to determine and analyze differentially expressed genes and variation involved in cold stress response of sorghum.
however, it is susceptible to early-season cold stress  which limits stand-establishment and seedling growth.
we identified a subset of genes under cold stress for downstream analysis, including transcription factors that exhibit differential abundance between the sensitive and tolerant genotypes.
we identified transcription factors including dehydration-responsive element-binding factors, c-repeat binding factors, and ethylene responsive transcription factors as significantly upregulated during cold stress in cold tolerant hkz.
cold stresssorghumtranscriptome profilingrnaseqsingle nucleotide polymorphismgene based variantsus sorghum checkoff programus sorghum checkoff programissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
an analysis of transcriptome profile showed that in response to cold, a total of  <dig> degs were detected under cold and control temperatures in both genotypes.
sorghum is a versatile cereal crop, with excellent heat and drought tolerance.
a total of  <dig>  snp were identified between the cold sensitive and tolerant genotypes with minimum read of four.
