in m. acuminata cultivars, structural heterozygosity is thought to be one of the main causes of sterility, which is essential for obtaining seedless fruits but hampers breeding.
the present study aims at producing a saturated linkage map of m. acuminata, taking into account hypotheses on the structural heterozygosity of the parents.
an f <dig> progeny of  <dig> individuals was obtained from a cross between two genetically distant accessions of m. acuminata, 'borneo' and 'pisang lilin' .
we propose a synthetic map with  <dig> linkage groups containing  <dig> markers  covering  <dig> cm.
these sterile and vegetatively propagated cultivars are based on the a genome from musa acuminata, exclusively for sweet bananas such as cavendish, or associated with the b genome  in cooking bananas such as plantain varieties.
to solve some complex ordering of the markers on linkage groups, we associated tools such as tree-like graphic representations, recombination frequency statistics and cytogenetical studies to identify structural rearrangements and build parsimonious linkage group order.
these skewed markers were distributed in different linkage groups for each parent.
only partial genetic maps are presently available due to chromosomal rearrangements within the parents of the mapping populations.
based on the gametic recombination of each parent, two parental maps composed of ssr and dart markers were established.
we also propose two complete parental maps with interpretations of structural rearrangements localized on the linkage groups.
this paper also illustrates a methodological approach, transferable to other species, to investigate the mapping of structural rearrangements and determine their consequences on marker segregation.
an illustration of such an approach is given for the p. lilin parent.
the structural heterozygosity in p. lilin is hypothesized to result from a duplication likely accompanied by an inversion on another chromosome.
the genus musa is a large species complex which includes cultivars at diploid and triploid levels.
this causes large segregation distortions inducing pseudo-linkages and difficulties in ordering markers in the linkage groups.
