about  <dig>  genes were strongly up-regulated by drought and we identified regulators such as erf, myb, nac, bhlh, and wrky transcription factors, receptor-like kinases, and calcium signaling components as potential targets for soybean improvement as well as the jasmonate and abscisic acid biosynthetic genes jmt, lox <dig>  and aba <dig>  drought stressed soybean leaves show reduced mrna levels of stomatal development genes including fama-like, mute-like and speechless-like bhlh transcription factors and leaves formed after drought stress had a reduction in stomatal density of  <dig>  % and stomatal index of  <dig>  %.
using transformed hairy roots, we validated the increase in promoter activity of gmwrky <dig> and gmwrky <dig> during dehydration and after 20 μm aba treatment.
the largest change was a root-specific 160-fold increase in the coumestan coumestrol making it a potential biomarker for drought and a promising target for improving drought responses.
our toolbox provides new targets and strategies for improving soybean drought tolerance and includes the coumestan coumestrol, transcription factors that regulate stomatal density, water stress-responsive wrky gene promoters and a novel dna element that appears to be enriched in water stress responsive promoters.
a number of these may serve as new targets for the biotechnological improvement of drought responses in soybean .
meme analyses suggest that abre , crt/dre  and a novel gtgcntgc/g element play roles in transcriptional activation and these could form components of synthetic promoters to drive expression of transgenes.
<dig> metabolites showed significant changes during water stress in roots and  <dig> in leaves.
the purpose of this project was to identify metabolites, proteins, genes, and promoters associated with water stress responses in soybean.
previous reports suggest that coumestrol stimulates mycorrhizal colonization and under certain conditions mycorrhizal plants have improved drought tolerance.
this suggests that reducing stomatal density may improve drought tolerance.
we identified metabolites, proteins, and genes that are strongly up or down regulated during rapid water stress following removal from a hydroponics system.
