a total of  <dig> samples were re-sequenced with illumina miseq sequencer and panel characterization in terms of coverage, number of variants found and allele drop-out potential impact has been carried out.
although a consensus has been established in the elimination of primer sequences from aligned data , more complex configurations need to be managed in order to increase the retrieved information from available data.
this methodology has been compared to the illumina custom amplicon workflow, available on illumina miseq, on the analysis of data obtained with four newly designed truseq custom amplicon gene panels.
four gene panels, specific for parkinson disease, for intracerebral hemorrhage diseases  and for familial hemiplegic migraine  were designed.
the reliability of such approaches rests on the high specificity and deep coverage, although sequencing artifacts attributable to pcr-like amplification can be encountered.
our method shows how to manage one of these complex configurations, when two mutations occur.
results show that 14 % of identified variants is potentially affected by allele drop-out artifacts and that both the custom amplicon workflow and the procedure proposed here could correctly identify them.
between these artifacts, allele drop-out, which is the preferential amplification of one allele, causes an artificial increase in homozygosity when heterozygous mutations fall on a primer pairing region.
allele drop-out plays a crucial role in amplicon-based targeted re-sequencing and specific procedures in data analysis of amplicon data should be adopted.
next-generation sequencingamplicon-based sequencingallele drop-outbioinformatic pipelineprimer trimmingtwelfth annual meeting of the italian society of bioinformatics  milan, italy 3- <dig> june  <dig> http://www.bioinformatics.it/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
furthermore, a more complex configuration in presence of two mutations was simulated in silico.
in this configuration, our proposed methodology outperforms custom amplicon workflow, being able to correctly identify two mutations in all the studied configurations.
here, a procedure to manage such artifacts, based on a pipeline composed of two steps of alignment and variant calling, is proposed.
