arguably the “black box” nature of drug action in a new indication is one of the main blocks to progression, highlighting the need for methods that inform on the broader target mechanism in the disease context.
we demonstrate that the analysis of co-expressed genes may be a critical first step towards illumination of both disease pathology and mode of drug action.
we illustrate this using a psoriatic skin transcriptome, as an exemplar, and recover two widely used psoriasis drugs  with distinct modes of action.
cogena out-performs the results of connectivity map and nffinder webservers in similar disease transcriptome analyses.
drug repositioningpathway analysismode of actionpsoriasisthe portfolio of translational research of the national institutes for health research cardiovascular biomedical research unit at bartsuk medical research counciljid-2015-0339barnes michael r. major research plan of the national natural science foundation of chinau1435222bo xiaochen plan for innovative graduate student at nudtb140202jia zhilong plan for interdisciplinary joint phd students at nudt http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004543china scholarship councilissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
drug repositioning, finding new indications for existing drugs, has gained much recent attention as a potentially efficient and economical strategy for accelerating new therapies into the clinic.
the cogena framework enables simultaneous, pathway driven, disease and drug repositioning analysis.
we achieve this using a novel framework, co-expressed gene-set enrichment analysis  for co-expression analysis of gene expression signatures and gene set enrichment analysis of co-expressed genes.
in conclusion, by targeting co-expressed genes within disease transcriptomes, cogena offers novel biological insight, which can be effectively harnessed for drug discovery and repositioning, allowing the grouping and prioritisation of drug repositioning candidates on the basis of putative mode of action.
cogena can be used to illuminate coordinated changes within disease transcriptomes and identify drugs acting mechanistically within this framework.
