a total of  <dig> qtls were identified through composite interval mapping  of the  <dig> analyzed fruit characteristics: fruit diameter , height , height/diameter ratio, weight , rind thickness , segments per fruit, total soluble solids , total titratable acidity , juice content , number of seeds, tss/tta ratio and number of fruits per box.
diversity arrays technology  markers, combined with next-generation sequencing, have wide applicability in the construction of high-resolution genetic maps and in quantitative trait locus  mapping.
this study aimed to construct an integrated genetic map using full-sib progeny derived from murcott tangor and pera sweet orange and dartseq™ molecular markers and to perform qtl mapping of twelve fruit quality traits.
using onemap software to obtain the integrated genetic map, we considered only the dart loci that showed no segregation deviation.
the genomic sequence  of c. sinensis was compared to the genetic map, and synteny was clearly identified.
the likelihood ratio and the genomic information from the available citrus sinensis l. osbeck genome were used to determine the linkage groups .
further analysis of the map regions with the highest lod scores enabled the identification of putative genes that could be associated with the fruit quality characteristics.
an integrated linkage map of murcott tangor and pera sweet orange using dartseq™ molecular markers was established and it was useful to perform qtl mapping of twelve fruit quality traits.
a controlled murcott x pera crossing was conducted at the citrus germplasm repository at the sylvio moreira citrus centre of the agronomic institute  located in cordeirópolis, sp, in  <dig>  in  <dig>  278 f <dig> individuals out of a family of  <dig> confirmed hybrid individuals were analyzed for fruit traits and genotyped using the dartseq markers.
the obtained linkage map was used to assign sequences that had not been previously assigned to a position in the reference genome.
the next generation sequences data allowed the comparison between the linkage map and the genomic sequence  of c. sinensis and the identification of genes that may be responsible for phenotypic traits in citrus.
integrated linkage mapsyntenysweet orangemandarinshybridsfapesp2008/57909-22011/18605-0cristofani-yaly mariângela machado marcos antonio inct-citros cpnq573848/2008-4machado marcos antonio issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
