protein loops encompass 50% of protein residues in available three-dimensional structures.
binding site, catalytic pocket... however, the description of protein loops with conventional tools is an uneasy task.
we systematically extracted all seven-residue fragments in a bank of  <dig> protein loops and grouped them according to the structural-letter sequence, named structural word.
we developed a method to systematically decompose and study protein loops using recurrent structural motifs.
to our knowledge, it is the first time that pattern mining helps to increase the signal-to-noise ratio in protein loops.
this finding helps to better describe protein loops and might permit to decrease the complexity of long-loop analysis.
moreover, half of recurrent motifs exhibit a significant level of amino-acid conservation with at least four significant positions and 87% of long loops contain at least one such word.
detailed results are available at http://www.mti.univ-paris-diderot.fr/publication/supplementary/2009/accloop/.
we developed a simple and accurate method that allows the description and analysis of the structures of short and long loops using structural motifs without restriction on loop length.
about 30%  of structural words are over-represented, and cover about 40% of loop lengths.
we complement our analysis with the detection of statistically over-represented patterns of structural letters as in conventional dna sequence analysis.
these structural words have low structural variability .
interestingly, these words exhibit lower structural variability and higher sequential specificity, suggesting structural or functional constraints.
our study reveals that 73% of loop-lengths are covered by only  <dig> highly recurrent structural words out of  <dig> observed words).
regular secondary structures, helices and strands, have been widely studied whereas loops, because they are highly variable in terms of sequence and structure, are difficult to analyze.
the difficult task of the structural grouping of huge data sets is thus easily accomplished by handling structural letter strings as in conventional protein sequence analysis.
we focused the analysis on highly recurrent words of loops .
due to data sparsity, long loops have rarely been systematically studied.
this approach permits a systematic analysis of loops of all sizes since we consider the structural motifs of seven residues rather than complete loops.
we extracted meaningful structural motifs that are found in both short and long loops.
this method is based on the structural alphabet hmm-sa.
this method is based on the structural alphabet hmm-sa and not on structural alignment and geometrical parameters.
as expected, half of these motifs display a flanking-region preference but interestingly, two thirds are shared by short  and long loops.
