the objective of this work was to analyze gene transcription during peridiole and basidiospore development, while focusing specifically on cell cycle progression and lipid metabolism.
we identified three clusters among the regulated genes which showed differential expression between the peridiole developmental stages and the basidiospores.
our results show that basidiocarp formation in p. microcarpus involves a complex array of genes that are regulated throughout peridiole development.
throughout different developmental stages of the peridioles we analyzed,  <dig> genes were regulated between adjacent compartments  corresponding to  <dig> % of the genes present in the p. microcarpus genome.
the fungus produces a complex basidiocarp composed of peridioles at different developmental stages and an upper layer of basidiospores free of the hyphae and ready for wind dispersal upon the rupture of the basidiocarp pellis.
high expression of transcripts related to β-oxidation and the glyoxylate shunt indicated that fatty acids served as a major carbon source for basidiosporogenesis.
during peridiole development, transcripts for proteins involved in cellular processes, signaling, and information storage were detected, notably those for coding transcription factors, dna polymerase subunits, dna repair proteins, and genes involved in chromatin structure.
for both internal embedded basidiospores  and external free basidiospores , upregulated transcripts were found to involve primary metabolism, particularly fatty acid metabolism .
gene expressionperidiole developmentsporescell cyclefatty acid metabolismissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
this is the first work to describe gene expression patterns during basidiocarp formation in an ectomycorrhizal gasteromycete fungus and sheds light on genes that may play important roles in the developmental process.
during basidiosporogenesis, a process that takes place inside the basidiocarp peridioles, a conspicuous reserve of fatty acids is present throughout development.
we identified waves of transcripts with coordinated regulation and identified transcription factors which may play a role in this regulation.
