the development of feedstocks with better biomass quality will improve conversion efficiency and the sustainability of the value-chain.
progress in the genetic improvement of biomass quality may be substantially expedited by the development of genetic markers associated to quality traits, which can be used in a marker-assisted selection program.
a total of  <dig> qtls for a variety of biomass quality characteristics were identified,  <dig> of which were detected in both growth seasons.
these results are a first step towards the development of marker-assisted selection programs in miscanthus to improve biomass quality and facilitate its use as feedstock for biofuel production.
miscanthusbiofuelquantitative trait loci genetic mapyieldbiomass qualitycell wall compositionsaccharification efficiencyconversion efficiencyeuropean union fp7project id: 251132issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
a new snp-based genetic map for m. sinensis was built using a genotyping-by-sequencing  approach, which resulted in  <dig> short-sequence uniparental markers that formed  <dig> linkage groups in the male map and  <dig> linkage groups in the female map.
in this work we report for the first time the genetic mapping of cell wall composition and bioconversion traits in the bioenergy crop miscanthus.
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
to this end, a mapping population was developed by crossing two parents of contrasting cell wall composition.
plants were phenotyped for cell wall composition and conversion efficiency characters in the second and third growth season after establishment.
twenty qtls were directly associated to different conversion efficiency characters.
analyses revealed that for some traits previously identified qtls in sorghum occurred in homologous regions on the same chromosome.
marker sequences were aligned to the sorghum reference genome to facilitate cross-species comparisons.
one of the challenges that currently impedes commercial cellulosic biofuel production is the technical difficulty to efficiently convert lignocellulosic biomass into biofuel.
the performance of 182 f <dig> offspring individuals along with the parents was evaluated in a field trial with a randomized block design with three replicates.
