our results provide strong evidence that a newly identified recessive disorder in the fleckvieh population is caused by a nonsense mutation in pld <dig>  most likely resulting in an impaired function of the encoded protein.
bovine hereditary zinc deficiency  is an autosomal recessive disorder of cattle, first described in holstein-friesian animals.
although the phenotype of affected calves strongly resembles bhzd, a zinc deficiency resulting from malabsorption is unlikely to be responsible for the diseased fleckvieh calves.
autozygosity mappingnext-generation sequencingrecessive inheritancezinc deficiency-likefleckviehnonsense mutationpld4issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
a strong association signal was observed on chromosome  <dig> .
the deleterious allele has an estimated frequency of  <dig> % in the fleckvieh population.
in spite of the similar disease phenotypes, slc39a <dig>  the gene responsible for bhzd in holstein-friesian was excluded as underlying gene for the disorder in the affected fleckvieh calves.
the deleterious effect of the mutation is manifested in a significantly lower survival rate of descendants from risk matings when compared with the survival rate of descendants from non-risk matings.
analysis of the sequencing data revealed a nonsense mutation  in a phospholipase encoding gene  as candidate causal polymorphism.
recently, eight calves with the phenotypic appearance of bhzd have been reported in the fleckvieh cattle population.
however, no mutation that was compatible with recessive inheritance could be detected in these candidate genes.
one of the affected calves was re-sequenced together with  <dig> unaffected fleckvieh animals.
autozygosity mapping in the eight affected animals revealed a common segment of extended homozygosity encompassing  <dig>  kb .
affected calves suffer from severe skin lesions and show a poor general health status.
in order to identify the disease-associated region, genotypes of eight affected calves obtained with the illumina bovinehd beadchip comprising  <dig>  snps were contrasted with the genotypes of  <dig>  unaffected animals.
to confirm the causality, genotypes of the p.w215x-mutation were obtained from  <dig>  animals representing three different breeds.
none of the unaffected animals was homozygous for the defect allele, while all eight affected calves were homozygous.
