the tag counts were converted to number of transcripts per cell by assuming that the sum of all transcripts in a single cell was 5· <dig>  our aim was to investigate whether the less resource demanding and more widespread oligoarray technique could provide data that were correlated to and had the same absolute scale as those obtained with mpss and sage.
on an absolute scale, the number of transcripts per cell and gene was generally higher based on oligoarrays than on mpss and sage, and ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for the  <dig>  overlapping genes.
the oligoarrays and transcount provide quantitative transcript concentrations that are correlated to mpss and sage data, but, the absolute scale of the measurements differs across the technologies.
the correlations involving the oligoarray data were not weaker than, but, similar to the correlation between the mpss and sage data, both when the entire concentration range was considered and at high concentrations.
the mpss data were on same scale as the sage data, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>   and  <dig> to <dig>   transcripts per cell and gene.
by use of the transcount method we calculated absolute transcript concentrations from spotted oligoarray intensities, enabling direct comparisons with tag counts obtained with mpss and sage.
oligoarrays have become an accessible technique for exploring the transcriptome, but it is presently unclear how absolute transcript data from this technique compare to the data achieved with tag-based quantitative techniques, such as massively parallel signature sequencing  and serial analysis of gene expression .
if so, this may explain the apparent higher transcript detection efficiency of the oligoarrays, and has to be clarified before absolute transcript concentrations can be interchanged across the technologies.
a number of  <dig>  unique transcripts were detected in common for the three technologies and served as the basis for our analyses.
the data sets were more strongly correlated at high transcript concentrations than at low concentrations.
the ability to obtain transcript concentrations from oligoarrays opens up the possibility of efficient generation of universal transcript databases with low resource demands.
the discrepancy questions whether the sum of all transcripts within a single cell might be higher than the number of 5· <dig> suggested in the literature and used to convert tag counts to transcripts per cell.
