results showed that a consistent sequence of events occurred during the remodelling of lace plant leaves, which provides an excellent system to study developmental pcd in vivo.
the lace plant  forms perforations between longitudinal and transverse veins in spaces known as areoles, via developmental pcd; cell death begins in the center of these areoles and develops towards the margin, creating a gradient of pcd.
these findings can be used to compare and contrast with other developmental pcd examples in plants.
subsequent to tonoplast rupture, cessation of brownian motion occurred, as well as the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential , nuclear shrinkage and pm collapse.
the invagination of the tonoplast membrane and the presence of vesicles, both containing organelle materials, suggested evidence for both micro- and macro-autophagy, respectively.
the vacuole then swelled, causing nuclear displacement towards the plasma membrane  and tonoplast rupture followed closely, indicating mega-autophagy.
timing from tonoplast rupture to pm collapse was approximately  <dig> minutes.
the entire process from initial chlorophyll reduction to pm collapse took approximately  <dig> hours.
approximately six hours following pm collapse, cell wall disappearance began and was nearly complete within  <dig> hours.
perhaps concurrently with this, increased numbers of vesicles, small mitochondrial aggregates, and perinuclear accumulation of both chloroplasts and mitochondria were observed.
mitochondrial aggregates, as well as individual chloroplasts were subsequently seen undergoing brownian motion in the vacuole.
this gradient was examined using both long- and short-term live cell imaging, in addition to histochemical staining, in order to establish the order of cellular events that occur during pcd.
developmentally regulated programmed cell death  is the controlled death of cells that occurs throughout the life cycle of both plants and animals.
aponogeton madagascariensisautophagylace plantlive-cell imagingprogrammed cell death
