little is known regarding the genomic structure of flatworm tgrs, the expression of tgr variants and whether the absence of conventional thioredoxin and glutathione systems is a signature of the entire platyhelminth phylum.
our results indicate that thioredoxin and glutathione pathways differ in parasitic and free-living flatworms and that canonical enzymes were specifically lost in the parasitic lineage.
we examine platyhelminth genomes and transcriptomes and find that all platyhelminth parasites  conform to a biochemical scenario involving, exclusively, a selenium-dependent linked thioredoxin-glutathione system having tgr as a central redox hub.
instead, they possess a linked thioredoxin-glutathione system with the selenocysteine-containing enzyme thioredoxin glutathione reductase  as the single redox hub that controls the overall redox homeostasis.
platyhelminth parasites possess a unique and simplified redox system for diverse essential processes, and thus tgr is an excellent drug target for platyhelminth infections.
tgr has been recently validated as a drug target for schistosomiasis and new drug leads targeting tgr have recently been identified for these platyhelminth infections that affect more than  <dig> million people and for which a single drug is currently available.
we also provide experimental evidence that alternative initiation of transcription and alternative transcript processing contribute to the generation of tgr variants in platyhelminth parasites.
we identify tgr variants in schistosoma spp.
they provide electrons for deoxyribonucleotide synthesis, function as antioxidant defenses, in detoxification, fe/s biogenesis and participate in a variety of cellular processes.
in contrast to their mammalian hosts, platyhelminth  parasites studied so far, lack conventional thioredoxin and glutathione systems.
in contrast, the free-living platyhelminth schmidtea mediterranea  possesses conventional and linked thioredoxin and glutathione systems.
inhibition of the central redox wire hub would lead to overall disruption of redox homeostasis and disable dna synthesis.
