we propose a sequential strategy for building clinical risk prediction models that integrate genome-wide measurements from two molecular levels in a complementary way.
we consider imputation of linear predictor values to be a feasible and sensible approach for dealing with partial overlap in complementary integrative analysis of molecular measurements at different levels.
more generally, these results indicate that a complementary strategy for integrating different molecular levels can result in more stable risk prediction signatures, potentially providing a more reliable insight into the underlying biology.
correspondingly, it might be beneficial to also integrate complementary information from different molecular levels when building multivariable risk prediction models for a clinical endpoint, such as treatment response or survival.
to deal with partial overlap, we develop an imputation approach that allows us to use all available data.
the imputed linear predictor is then used for adjustment when building a prognostic signature from the gene expression data.
from snp data, an automatically selected set of prognostic snps, by componentwise likelihood-based boosting, imputation is performed for the corresponding linear predictor by a linking model that incorporates e.g.
despite an extremely small overlap in the application example with gene expression and snps, several genes are seen to be more stably identified when taking the  linear predictor from the snp data into account.
single nucleotide polymorphisms  and gene expression.
this approach is investigated in two acute myeloid leukemia applications combining gene expression with either snp or dna methylation data.
in the application with gene expression and dna methylation, prediction performance with respect to survival also indicates that the proposed approach might work well.
unfortunately, such a high-dimensional modeling task will often be complicated by a limited overlap of molecular measurements at different levels between patients, i.e.
high-throughput technology allows for genome-wide measurements at different molecular levels for the same patient, e.g.
measurements from all molecular levels are available only for a smaller proportion of patients.
for evaluation, we consider stability, as quantified by inclusion frequencies across resampling data sets.
