the encoded iqd proteins contain a plant-specific domain of  <dig> conserved amino acid residues, referred to as the iq <dig> domain, which is characterized by a unique and repetitive arrangement of three different calmodulin recruitment motifs, known as the iq, 1-5- <dig>  and 1-8- <dig> motifs.
we demonstrated calmodulin binding for iqd <dig>  the smallest iqd protein in arabidopsis, which consists of a c-terminal iq <dig> domain and a short n-terminal extension.
a striking feature of iqd proteins is the high isoelectric point  and frequency of serine residues .
the existence of an iqd-like gene in bryophytes suggests that iqd proteins are an ancient family of calmodulin-binding proteins and arose during the early evolution of land plants.
interaction of iqd <dig> and iqd <dig> with calmodulin and the presence of predicted calmodulin binding sites in all iqd family members suggest that iqd proteins are a new class of calmodulin targets.
the basic isoelectric point of iqd proteins and their frequently predicted nuclear localization suggest that iqd proteins link calcium signaling pathways to the regulation of gene expression.
here, we present a comparative genome-wide analysis of a new class of putative calmodulin target proteins in arabidopsis and rice.
comparative phylogenetic analyses indicate that the major iqd gene lineages originated before the monocot-eudicot divergence.
we compared the arabidopsis and rice iqd gene families in terms of gene structure, chromosome location, predicted protein properties and motifs, phylogenetic relationships, and evolutionary history.
our comparative genomics analysis of iqd genes and encoded proteins in two model plant species provides the first step towards the functional dissection of this emerging family of putative calmodulin targets.
we previously identified a novel, calmodulin-binding nuclear protein, iqd <dig>  which stimulates glucosinolate accumulation and plant defense in arabidopsis thaliana.
we identified and analyzed  <dig> and  <dig> iqd1-like genes in arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa, respectively.
calcium signaling plays a prominent role in plants for coordinating a wide range of developmental processes and responses to environmental cues.
the extant iqd loci in arabidopsis primarily resulted from segmental duplication and reflect preferential retention of paralogous genes, which is characteristic for proteins with regulatory functions.
stimulus-specific generation of intracellular calcium transients, decoding of calcium signatures, and transformation of the signal into cellular responses are integral modules of the transduction process.
