in previous infection trials, we observed a primary immune response after infection which was unable to protect cattle from re-infection.
to test this, rna-seq was used for transcriptome analysis of recto-anal junction tissue and ileal peyer’s patches in nine holstein-friesian calves in response to a primary and secondary escherichia coli o157:h <dig> infection with the shiga toxin  negative nctc <dig> strain.
in tissue of the recto-anal junction, only  <dig> genes were found to be significantly affected by a first infection compared to  <dig> genes in the ileal peyer’s patches.
whereas, re-infection significantly changed the expression of  <dig> and  <dig> genes in the recto-anal junction tissue and the peyer’s patches, respectively.
although the recto-anal junction is a major site of colonization, this area does not seem to be modulated upon infection to the same extent as ileal peyer’s patches as the changes in gene expression were remarkably higher in the ileal peyer’s patches than in the recto-anal junction during a primary but not a secondary infection.
these results may reflect a suppression of certain immune pathways, making cattle more prone to persistent colonization after re-infection.
these data might indicate that a primary infection promotes a re-infection with ehec by suppressing the immune function.
we can conclude that the main effect on the transcriptome was immunosuppression by e. coli o157:h <dig>  due to an upregulation of immune suppressive effects  or a downregulation of immunostimulatory effects  in the ileal peyer’s patches.
a significant downregulation of  <dig> immunostimulatory genes and a significant upregulation of seven immune suppressing genes was observed.
enterohaemorrhagic escherichia coli , like e. coli o157:h <dig> are frequently detected in bovine faecal samples at slaughter.
the immune response against ehec in cattle cannot always clear the infection as persistent colonization and shedding in infected animals over a period of months often occurs.
