their methods, however, are only described as flow diagrams, which require programming skills and the understanding of input and output of the connected programs to reproduce.
3- <dig> october  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  eleventh international conference on bioinformatics  bangkok, thailand
although several tools for mirna and target identification are available, the number of tools tailored towards plants is limited, and those that are available have specific functionality, lack graphical user interfaces, and restrict the number of input sequences.
second, it comes with graphical user interfaces  for ease of use.
c-mii constitutes the first complete software package with graphical user interfaces enabling computational identification of both plant mirna genes and mirna targets.
to overcome these limitations and programming complexities, we proposed c-mii as a ready-made software package for both plant mirna and target identification.
fourth, in terms of functionality, it extends the standard computational steps of mirna target identification with mirna-target folding and go annotation.
users can identify plant mirnas and targets via step-by-step execution, explore the detailed results from each step, filter the results according to proposed constraints in plant mirna and target biogenesis, and export sequences and structures of interest.
with the provided functionalities, it can help accelerate the study of plant mirnas and targets, especially for small and medium plant molecular labs without bioinformaticians.
large-scale computational identifications of mirnas and/or targets of several plants have been also reported.
third, it supplies bird's eye views of the identification results with infographics and grouping information.
finally, it supports multi-project and multi-thread management.
c-mii was designed and implemented based on established computational steps and criteria derived from previous literature with the following distinguishing features.
fifth, it provides helper functions for the update of pre-installed databases and automatic recovery.
