this date is in agreement with recent, controversial, arguments that an older, perhaps short-lived, land connection may have existed between south america and present-day panama 23– <dig> mya.
the aims of our present study were to infer evolutionary relationships, lineage diversity, and timing of divergence of the south american bolitoglossa using mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data from specimens primarily from localities in the andes and upper amazon basin.
nevertheless, all sampled species of south american bolitoglossa are members of a single clade that is one of several constituting the subgenus eladinea, one of seven subgenera in this large genus.
the currently recognized species richness of south american salamanders is surprisingly low compared to north and central america.
divergence time estimates suggest that bolitoglossa arrived in south america from central america by at least the early miocene, ca.
the ancestors of south american salamanders likely arrived at least by the early miocene, well before the completion of the late pliocene panamanian land bridge .
rather than two upper amazonian species currently recorded for this region, we propose that at least eight should be recognized, although these additional lineages remain to be formally described.
another single exemplar from the andes of northwestern ecuador is highly divergent from all other specimens and is sister to all newly studied samples.
south american salamanders of the genus bolitoglossa show strong phylogeographic structure at fine geographic scales and deep divergences at the mitochondrial gene cytochrome b  and high diversity at the nuclear recombination activating gene- <dig> .
since its arrival in south america, bolitoglossa has diversified more extensively than previously presumed and currently includes several cryptic species within a relatively small geographic area.
species often contain multiple genetically divergent lineages that are occasionally geographically overlapping.
