a comprehensive evaluation of four statistical frameworks  shows that none of these methods sufficiently accounts for inter-specific gene length differences, which inevitably results in false positive candidate genes.
we show that the published genomes and annotations of the three closely related drosophila species d. melanogaster, d. simulans and d. mauritiana have limitations for inter-specific gene expression studies.
this is due to missing gene models in at least one of the genome annotations, unclear orthology assignments and significant gene length differences in the different species.
we present a straight-forward reciprocal re-annotation pipeline that allows to reliably compare the expression for nearly all genes annotated in d. melanogaster.
we conclude that our reciprocal re-annotation of previously published genomes facilitates the analysis of significantly more genes in an inter-specific differential gene expression study.
until now, the main applications of this technique have been to study the variation of gene expression in a whole organism, tissue or cell type under different conditions or at different developmental stages.
we propose that published reference genomes should be re-annotated before using them as references for rna-seq experiments to include as many genes as possible and to account for a potential length bias.
rna-seq based on short reads generated by next generation sequencing technologies has become the main approach to study differential gene expression.
however, rna-seq also has a great potential to be used in evolutionary studies to investigate gene expression divergence in closely related species.
rna-seqannotationdifferential gene expressionexoneratedrosophilaclosely related speciesemerging model systemsrpkmdeseq2voomlimmalength biashttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001663volkswagen foundation <dig> 983posnien nico http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000781european research council242553mcgregor alistair p. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
