the three-year field experiment confirmed the ability of reynoutria × bohemica to grow on vast coalmine spoil banks.
its hybrid, reynoutria × bohemica, was described in the czech republic in  <dig> and has been widespread ever since.
relationships between nitrogen, phosphorus, emodin, and belowground knotweed biomass belong to the most interesting results of this study.
we examined whether reynoutria × bohemica as a medicinal plant providing stilbenes and emodin, can be cultivated in spoil bank substrates and hence in the coalmine spoil banks changed into arable fields.
japanese knotweed, reynoutria japonica, is known for its high growth rate, even on adverse substrates, and for containing organic substances that are beneficial to human health.
nitrogen supplied to knotweed by melilot was correlated with the ratio of resveratrol to resveratrol glucosides, indicating that knotweed bestowed some of its glucose production upon covering part of the energy demanded for nitrogen fixation by melilot's rhizobia, and that there is an exchange of organic substances between these two plant species.
we designed a pot experiment and a field experiment to assess the effects of various factors on the growth efficiency of reynoutria × bohemica on clayish substrates and on the production of stilbenes and emodin in this plant.
melilot served as a donor of mycorrhizal fungi to knotweed, which did not form any mycorrhiza when grown alone.
in the pot experiment, plants were grown on different substrates that varied in organic matter and nutrient content, namely the content of nitrogen and phosphorus.
however, the concentration of the organic constituents studied was higher in plants grown on clayish low-nutrient substrates in the presence of melilot.
as expected, the production of knotweed biomass was highest on high-nutrient substrates, namely compost.
the production of this species reached  <dig>  t of dry mass per hectare.
knotweed phosphorus was predominantly taken up from the substrate and was negatively correlated with the content of resveratrol and resveratrol derivatives, while knotweed nitrogen was mainly supplied by melilot rhizobia and was positively correlated with the content of resveratrol and resveratrol derivatives.
