these findings provide a rapid and reproducible transformation method without external addition of acetosyringone, which could be useful for improving white-rot fungi for their various biotechnological applications.
the transformation efficiency was maximum at 20°c whereas no transfer was observed at temperature above 29°c.
white-rot fungi are primarily the major degraders of lignin, a major obstacle for commercial exploitation of plant byproducts to produce bioethanol and other industrially important products.
this paper describes an efficient and convenient agrobacterium-mediated gene transformation system for successful delivery of t-dna, carrying the genes coding for β-glucuronidase , green fluorescent protein  and hygromycin phosphotransferase  to the nuclear genome of lignin degrading white-rot fungi such as phanerochaete chrysosporium, ganoderma sp.
rck- <dig>  pleurotus sajor-caju and fungal isolate bhr-udsc without supplementation of acetosyringone.
the fungal transformants were confirmed by pcr and southern hybridization.
the expression vector pcambia 1304-rckk was constructed by the addition of gpd promoter from plasmid p <dig> to the binary vector backbone pcambia <dig>  which controls uida and gfp gene.
a. tumefaciens played a major role in plant genetic engineering and basic research in molecular biology, accounting for nearly 80% of the transgenic plants produced so far.
transformation frequency varied from  <dig> to 75% depending on the fungal species used in this study.
agrobacterium tumefaciens, a soil phytopathogenic bacterium, generally transforms plants by delivering a portion of the resident ti- plasmid, the t-dna .
initially, it was believed that only dicotyledons, gymnosperms and a few monocotyledonous species could be transformed by this bacterium; but recent reports have totally changed this scenario by demonstrating that many 'recalcitrant' species not included in its natural host range can also be transformed, especially filamentous fungi.
transmission electron microscope  analysis revealed the attachment of bacterial cells to the fungal hyphae.
