the set of signatures designed specifically for the bcp's was entirely different from the existing broad spectrum signatures as mentioned in the background section.
the signatures already existing in the databases like the type  <dig> copper blue, multiple copper oxidase, cyt b/b <dig>  photosystem  <dig> psaa&b, psag&k, and reiske iron sulphur protein are not specified signatures for blue copper proteins as the name itself suggests.
most profile and motif databases strive to classify protein sequences into a broad spectrum of protein families.
clustalw analysis of the protein sequences of each of the blue copper proteins was the basis for designing protein signatures or peptides.
these signatures can be very useful for the annotation of uncharacterized proteins and highly specific to retrieve blue copper protein sequences of interest from the non redundant databases containing a large deposition of protein sequences.
the blue copper proteins chosen for the study were plantacyanin, plastocyanin, cucumber basic protein, stellacyanin, dicyanin, umecyanin, uclacyanin, cusacyanin, rusticyanin, sulfocyanin, halocyanin, azurin, pseudoazurin, amicyanin and nitrite reductase which were identified in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
blue copper proteins are found in the electron transport chain of prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
proteins having similar functions from different sources can be identified by the occurrence in their sequences, a conserved cluster of amino acids referred to as pattern, motif, signature or fingerprint.
the protein signatures and peptides identified in this study were designed involving the active site region involving the amino acids bound to the copper atom.
this work describes the signatures designed based on the copper metal binding motifs in blue copper proteins.
the common feature in all blue copper proteins is a trigonal planar arrangement of two nitrogen ligands  and one sulphur containing thiolate ligand , with strong interactions between the copper center and these ligands.
it was highly specific for each kind of blue copper protein and the false picks were minimized.
