existing theoretical models addressing the optimal combination of constitutive versus induced defence focus solely on host adaptation and ignore the fact that the efficacy of protection depends on genotype-specific host-parasite interactions.
a parasite population subjected to a specific immune receptor can evolve heightened genetic diversity, which makes parasite detection more difficult for the hosts.
these contrasting results indicate that evolutionary feedback between host and parasite populations is a key factor shaping the selection regime for immune networks facing antagonistic coevolution.
here, we develop a signal-transduction network model inspired by the invertebrate innate immune system, in order to address the effect of parasite coevolution on the optimal combination of constitutive and induced defence.
parasite coevolution against specific immune defence alters the prediction of the optimal use of defence, and the effect of parasite coevolution varies between different immune components.
parasites diversify to escape elimination by a specific effector too.
optimal defencehost-parasite coevolutionconstitutive immunityinduced immunityimmune network evolutionindividual-based simulationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000781european research council309555van doorn g. sander netherlands organization for scientific research <dig> .012van doorn g. sander issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
however, this diversification does not alter the optimal balance between constitutive and induced defence: the reliance on constitutive defence is promoted by the receptor’s inability to detect, but not the effectors’ inability to eliminate parasites.
we show that this coevolutionary feedback renders the induced immune response less efficient, forcing the hosts to invest more heavily in constitutive immunity.
our analysis reveals that coevolution of parasites with specific immune components shifts the host’s optimal allocation from induced towards constitutive immunity.
therefore, to ensure timely protection, organisms may partly rely on constitutive defence despite its sustained cost that renders it less economical.
