using rna-seq, we surveyed the as patterns in tomato seedlings, flowers and young developing fruits and found that  <dig>  % of expressed multi-exon genes underwent as in these tissues.
the predominant type of as events is intron retention, followed by alternative splice donor and acceptor, whereas exon skipping has the lowest frequency.
although the frequencies of as events are similar among seedlings, flowers and early growth fruits, the fruits generated more splice variants per gene.
further comparison of gene expression in early growth fruits at  <dig>   <dig> and 10 days post anthesis revealed that  <dig> multi-exon genes had at least one splice variants differentially expressed during early fruit development, whereas only  <dig> out of them showed differential expression at gene level.
high throughput rna sequencing  technology is advancing the genome-wide analysis of as events in plant species, but the landscape of as in early growth fruit is still not available for tomato , a model plant for fleshy fruit development study.
in addition, the study discovered  <dig> new transcription regions  unlinked to the annotated chromosomal regions, from where  <dig> putative protein coding transcripts and  <dig> putative long non-coding rnas were identified.
the newly found ntrs will also be useful for updating the tomato genome annotation.
the landscape of as obtained in this study will facilitate future investigation on transcriptome complexity and as regulation during early fruit growth in tomato.
transcriptome profiling has revealed the coordinated complex regulation of gene expression in the process.
early fruit growth mainly characterized by active cell division and cell expansion contributes to the formation of fruit morphology and quality traits.
our genome-wide analysis of as events reveals a distinctive as pattern in early growth tomato fruits.
we also identified  <dig> multi-exon genes showing differential splicing during early fruit growth.
alternative splicingnew transcription regions rna-seqtranscriptomefruittomatoissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
