whole-genome analysis identifies californian haplotypes from the northern-most populations as highly distinctive, with a significant excess of amino acid changes that may be indicative of molecular adaptation; d-loop sequences fail to identify this unique mitochondrial lineage.
this allowed us to test a key assumption of conservation genetics, specifically, that the d-loop accurately reflects genealogical relationships and variation of the larger mitochondrial genome.
estimates of variation and genealogical relationships from the displacement  loop region  are contradicted by the complete mitochondrial genome, as well as the protein coding fraction of the mitochondrial genome.
for wildlife managers, this means that the populations of greatest conservation concern may be at the highest risk of being misidentified by d-loop haplotyping.
the most commonly used genetic marker for characterizing animal biodiversity and identifying maternal lineages is the mitochondrial genome.
we used massively parallel multiplexed sequencing to sequence complete mitochondrial genomes from  <dig> fishers, a threatened carnivore that possesses low mitogenomic diversity.
overall mitogenomic divergence in fishers is exceedingly low, with  <dig> segregating sites and an average pairwise distance between genomes of  <dig>  across their aligned length .
this message is timely because it highlights the new opportunities for basing conservation decisions on more accurate genetic information.
first, inferred genealogical reconstructions based on the fisher d-loop region contradict inferences based on the entire mitogenome to the point that the populations of greatest conservation concern cannot be accurately resolved.
the sources of this contradiction trace primarily to the near-absence of mutations marking the d-loop region of one of the most divergent lineages, and secondarily to independent  mutations at two nucleotide position in the d-loop amplicon.
second, the impact of recurrent mutation appears most acute in closely related haplotypes, due to the low level of evolutionary signal  relative to evolutionary noise .
science-based wildlife management relies on genetic information to infer population connectivity and identify conservation units.
