we implemented the metamqap as a web server available for free use by all academic users at the url
finally, we compared our method with the mqaps that scored best in the 7th edition of casp, using casp <dig> server models  as the test data.
as a reference, we calculated the value of correlation between the local deviations and trivial features that can be calculated for each residue directly from the models, i.e.
several model quality assessment programs  have been developed to detect local inaccuracies in unrefined crystallographic models, but it is not known if they are useful for computational models, which usually exhibit different and much more severe errors.
the ability to identify local errors in models was tested for eight mqaps: verify3d, prosa, bala, anolea, prove, tune, refiner, proqres on  <dig> models from the casp- <dig> and casp- <dig> experiments, by calculating the spearman's rank correlation coefficients between per-residue scores of these methods and local deviations between c-alpha atoms in the models vs. experimental structures.
we found that absolute correlations of scores returned by the mqaps and local deviations were poor for all methods.
local model accuracy predicted by metamqap shows an impressive correlation coefficient of  <dig>  with true deviations from native structures, a significant improvement over all constituent primary mqap scores.
computational models of protein structure are usually inaccurate and exhibit significant deviations from the true structure.
metamqap predicts the absolute deviation  of individual c-alpha atoms between the model and the unknown true structure as well as global deviations .
therefore, we developed metamqap, a meta-predictor based on a multivariate regression model, which uses scores of the above-mentioned methods, but in which trivial parameters are controlled.
the global metamqap score is correlated with model gdt_ts on the level of  <dig> .
solvent accessibility, depth in the structure, and the number of local and non-local neighbours.
