the on-line monitoring of a simulated high-throughput cultivation process revealed strong variances in growth kinetics and a twofold difference in product formation.
because of their higher transfer volume and hence precision in comparison to pin replicators, they reduce the variance of initial biomass concentrations.
in this study, the effects of conventional replication methods and replication tools  on growth kinetics of escherichia coli scs <dig> pqe- <dig> pse <dig> were observed.
applying different replication tools and methods for one single strain resulted in high time differences of growth of the slowest and fastest growing culture.
such processes typically include several steps, whereby some of them are linked by replication steps: transformation, plating, colony picking, preculture, main culture and induction.
the shortest time difference  was evaluated for the  <dig> cultures that were transferred with an 8-channel pipette from a thawed and mixed cryoculture and the longest time difference  for cultures that were transferred with a steel replicator with fixed pins from a frozen cryoculture.
another experiment showed that varying growth kinetics, caused by varying initial biomass concentrations  led to strongly varying product formation upon induction at a defined point of time.
with respect to the results obtained, other methods to increase the comparability between parallel cultivations by compensating differences in biomass concentrations are required, such as using autoinduction media, fed-batch operation of precultures or on-line monitoring in microtiter plates combined with automated liquid handling.
to improve the reproducibility of high-throughput cultivation processes and the comparability between different applied cultures, it is strongly recommended to use automated or manual liquid handling stations or, alternatively, multi-channel pipettes.
high-throughput cultivations in microtiter plates are the method of choice to express proteins from recombinant clone libraries.
growth was monitored with the biolector, an on-line monitoring technique for microtiter plates.
finally, a high-throughput cultivation process was simulated with corynebacterium glutamicum pekex2-phod-gfp, beginning at the colony picking step.
furthermore, the influence of these effects on product formation of escherichia coli prhothi-2-ecfbfp was investigated.
