we analyzed the gene interactions for two gene data sets  by adopting a measure of directional dependence based on a copula function.
we have compared our results with those from other methods in the literature.
although microarray results show a transcriptional co-regulation pattern and do not imply that the gene products are physically interactive, this tight genetic connection may suggest that each gene product has either direct or indirect connections between the other gene products.
indeed, recent comprehensive analysis of a protein interaction map revealed that those histone genes are physically connected with each other, supporting the results obtained by our method.
the results illustrate that our method can be an alternative to bayesian networks in modeling gene interactions.
the copula mutual information approach will help to propose the new variant of aracne : an algorithm for the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks.
in recent years, there has been an increasing interest in the reconstruction of gene networks from gene expression data.
genes interact with each other as basic building blocks of life, forming a complicated network.
we expect that our study may help to design artificial drug candidates, which can block or activate biologically meaningful pathways.
with the deposition of huge microarray data sets in public domains, study on gene networking is now possible.
recent work includes linear models, boolean network models, and bayesian networks.
among them, bayesian networks seem to be the most effective in constructing gene networks.
a major problem with the bayesian network approach is the excessive computational time.
another advantage is that our approach can detect directional dependence.
moreover, our copula approach can be extended to investigate the effects of local environments on protein-protein interactions.
discreteness of the characteristics is not required in the copula approach which involves use of uniform representation of the continuous random variables.
the relationship between groups of genes with different functions can be represented as gene networks.
information loss due to binary transformation.
our method is able to overcome the limitation of bayesian network method for gene-gene interaction, i.e.
