high levels of chitinolytic activity were detected in the cell-free culture supernatant of e. coli bl <dig> cells harboring the recombinant plasmid and induced with iptg.
n-terminal sequencing confirmed the proper removal of the native signal peptide during the secretion of the recombinant product.
the secretion of the recombinant protein into the culture medium was directed by its native signal peptide.
chromobacterium violaceum is a free-living β-proteobacterium found in tropical and subtropical regions.
a c. violaceum chitinase was expressed in e. coli and purified by affinity chromatography on a chitin matrix.
this newly identified signal peptide is a promising secretion factor that should be further investigated in future studies, aiming to demonstrate its usefulness as an alternative tool for the extracellular production of recombinant proteins in e. coli.
the secreted recombinant protein was purified by affinity chromatography on a chitin matrix and showed an apparent molecular mass of  <dig>  kda, as estimated by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
however, none of the chitinase genes of the atcc  <dig> strain have been subjected to experimental validation.
moreover, c. violaceum genes with potential applications in industry, medicine and agriculture have also been identified, such as those encoding chitinases.
the open reading frame  cv <dig> of c. violaceum atcc  <dig> encodes a protein  that is composed of a signal peptide, a chitin-binding domain, a linker region, and a c-terminal catalytic domain belonging to family  <dig> of the glycoside hydrolases.
the genomic sequencing of c. violaceum atcc  <dig> has revealed many genes that underpin its adaptability to diverse ecosystems.
this work aimed to experimentally validate one of the chitinases from c. violaceum.
the enzyme was able to hydrolyze colloidal chitin and the synthetic substrates p-nitrophenyl-β-d-n,n’-diacetylchitobiose and p-nitrophenyl-β-d-n,n’,n”-triacetylchitotriose.
the mature enzyme was able to hydrolyze colloidal chitin and synthetic substrates.
