in our previous study, p. flavipulchra jg <dig> was found to synthesize a pseudoalteromonas flavipulchra antibacterial protein  with l-amino acid oxidase activity and five small chemical compounds, which were the main competitive agents of the strain.
chitinases and quorum quenching enzymes present in p. flavipulchra, which coincide with great chitinase and acyl homoserine lactones degrading activities of strain jg <dig>  suggest other potential mechanisms contribute to antibacterial/antifungal activities.
the genome of p. flavipulchra jg <dig> exhibits significant genetic advantages against other microorganisms, encoding antimicrobial agents as well as abilities to adapt to various adverse environments.
genes involved in synthesis of various antimicrobial substances enriches the antagonistic mechanisms of p. flavipulchra jg <dig> and affords several admissible biocontrol procedures in aquaculture.
the analysis of the genome of p. flavipulchra jg <dig> provides a better understanding of its competitive properties and also an extensive application prospect.
furthermore, jg <dig> also evolves a range of mechanisms adapting the adverse marine environment or multidrug rearing conditions.
the antibacterial protein pfap may also participate in the biosynthesis of 6-bromoindolyl-3-acetic acid, indicating a synergistic effect between the antibacterial macromolecule and small molecules.
in this study, more extensive genomic analysis was performed to identify specific genes or gene clusters which related to its competitive feature, and further experiments were carried out to confirm the physiological roles of these genes when competing with other microorganisms in marine environment.
moreover, movability and rapid response mechanisms to phosphorus starvation and other stresses, such as antibiotic, oxidative and heavy metal stress, enable jg <dig> to adapt to deleterious, fluctuating and oligotrophic marine environments.
many strains of the genus pseudoalteromonas were confirmed to produce bioactive compounds that provide those advantages over their competitors.
