furthermore, with a view to the production of commercially available tendon graft-based materials for application in human and veterinary medicine, the automation of key procedural steps is highly required to develop manufacturing processes under gmp conditions.
effectiveness of decellularization was assessed by residual nuclei count and calculation of dna content.
both the automated protocols and the manually performed protocol resulted in roughly 2% residual nuclei and 13% residual dna content.
tendon decellularization was completed by using non-ionic detergent treatment .
the automation of this key procedure in decellularization of large tendon samples is an important step towards the processing of large sample quantities under standardized conditions.
there were no significant differences in decellularization effectiveness between samples decellularized by the automated freeze-thaw procedure and samples that underwent manual freeze-thaw cycles.
further, we inferred no significant differences in the effectiveness of decellularization between two different cooling and heating rates applied in the automated freeze-thaw process.
decellularization of tendon tissue plays a pivotal role in current tissue engineering approaches for in vitro research as well as for translation of graft-based tendon restoration into clinics.
automated freeze-thaw cycles performed by using a liquid nitrogen-based controlled rate freezer were as effective as previously described manual freeze-thaw procedures for decellularization of equine superficial digital flexor tendons.
cytocompatibility was evaluated by culturing allogeneic adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells on the tendon scaffolds.
automation of essential decellularization steps like freeze-thawing is crucial for the development of more standardized decellularization protocols and commercial graft production under good manufacturing practice  conditions in the future.
in this study, a liquid nitrogen-based controlled rate freezer was utilized for automation of repeated freeze-thawing for decellularization of equine superficial digital flexor tendons.
regenerative medicinetissue engineeringtendonhorseautomationdecellularizationcontrolled rate freezerhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004350studienstiftung des deutschen volkesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
successful cell culture was achieved with samples decellularized by automated freeze-thawing as well as with tendon samples decellularized by manually performed freeze-thaw cycles.
additional tendon specimens underwent manually performed freeze-thaw cycles based on an established procedure.
