robustness to noise is tested using a published mathematical model of the segment polarity gene network in drosophila melanogaster.
the bpds framework allows an effective representation of the search space for algebraic dynamic models that improves computational performance.
the inference of gene regulatory networks  from experimental observations is at the heart of systems biology.
boolean polynomial dynamical systems provide a powerful modeling framework for the reverse engineering of gene regulatory networks, that enables a rich mathematical structure on the model search space.
reverse-engineeringnetwork inferenceboolean networksmolecular networksgene regulatory networkspolynomial dynamical systemsalgebraic dynamic modelsevolutionary computationdna microarray datatime series datadata noise
furthermore, since the network inference problem is typically underdetermined, it is essential to have the option of incorporating into the inference process, prior knowledge about the network, along with an effective description of the search space of dynamic models.
finally, it is also important to have an understanding of how a given inference method is affected by experimental and other noise in the data used.
benchmarking of the algorithm is done by comparison with a spectrum of state-of-the-art network inference methods on data from the synthetic irma network to demonstrate that our method has good precision and recall for the network reconstruction task, while also predicting several of the dynamic patterns present in the network.
the algorithm takes as input time series data, including those from network perturbations, such as knock-out mutant strains and rnai experiments.
it uses an evolutionary algorithm for local optimization with an encoding of the mathematical models as bpds.
this includes the inference of both the network topology and its dynamics.
while there are many algorithms available to infer the network topology from experimental data, less emphasis has been placed on methods that infer network dynamics.
it allows for the incorporation of prior biological knowledge while being robust to significant levels of noise in the data used for inference.
