these differences likely make important contributions to phenotypic sexual dimorphism in adult zebrafish; thus, from an evolutionary standpoint, the precise roles of sex-specific selection and sexual conflict in the evolution of sexually dimorphic gene expression are very important.
by using zebrafish affymetrix microarrays to compare gene expression patterns in male and female somatic and gonadal tissues, we identified a large number of genes  demonstrating differences in transcript abundance between male and female danio rerio.
we also identified a large number of genes demonstrating elevated transcript abundance in testes and ovaries relative to male body and female body, respectively.
phenotypic sexual dimorphism almost certainly reflects differing patterns of gene expression between the sexes, and microarray studies have documented widespread sexually dimorphic gene expression.
male-enriched genes were more abundant than female-enriched genes, and expression bias for male-enriched genes was greater in magnitude than that for female-enriched genes.
overall our results support the hypothesis that male-biased evolutionary pressures have resulted in male-biased patterns of gene expression.
interestingly, our results seem to be at odds with a handful of other microarray-based studies of sex-specific gene expression patterns in zebrafish.
the results of our study and others like it set the stage for further work aimed at directly addressing this exciting issue in comparative genomics.
although the evolutionary significance of sexual dimorphism in gene expression remains unresolved, these studies have led to the formulation of a hypothesis that male-driven evolution has resulted in the masculinization of animal transcriptomes.
here we use a microarray assessment of sex- and gonad-biased gene expression to test this hypothesis in zebrafish.
under conservative statistical significance criteria, all sex-biases in gene expression were due to differences between testes and ovaries.
