the developed technical approach allows to obtain dna and rna samples from particular lampbrush chromosome loci, to define precisely the genomic position, extent and sequence content of the dissected regions.
in the present study, we developed a workflow for mechanical microdissection of giant transcriptionally active lampbrush chromosomes followed by the preparation of whole-chromosome and locus-specific fluorescent in situ hybridization -probes and high-throughput sequencing.
this approach offers great prospects for detailed exploration of functionally significant chromosomal regions.
however, relatively small physical size of mitotic chromosomes limited the use of the conventional chromosome microdissection for investigation of tiny chromosomal regions.
in particular, chicken  lampbrush chromosome regions as small as single chromomeres, individual lateral loops and marker structures were successfully microdissected.
as a result, we defined precisely the loci for marker structures formation on chicken lampbrush chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  additionally, our data suggest that large dapi-positive chromomeres of chicken lampbrush chromosome arms are characterized by low gene density and high repeat content.
over the past two decades, chromosome microdissection has been widely used in diagnostics and research enabling analysis of chromosomes and their regions through probe generation and establishing of chromosome- and chromosome region-specific dna libraries.
the data obtained demonstrate that lampbrush chromosome microdissection provides a unique opportunity to correlate a particular transcriptional domain or a cytological structure with a known dna sequence.
chromosome microdissectionchickenlampbrush chromosomesspecial loopslocus-specific fish-probesgenomic mappingnext-generation sequencinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006769russian science foundation#14-14-00131krasikova alla daad university partnership programmeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
for investigation of rna-content of lampbrush chromosome structures, samples retrieved by microdissection were subjected to reverse transcription.
the dissected fragments were mapped with high resolution to target regions of the corresponding lampbrush chromosomes.
