to identify a. astaci-specific primer target sites in these novel genes, we determined the partial sequence homologs in the related oomycetes a. frigidophilus, a. invadans, a. helicoides, a. laevis, a. repetans, achlya racemosa, leptolegnia caudata, and saprolegnia parasitica, as well as in the relevant fungi fusarium solani and trichosporon cutaneum.
the homogenous closed-tube format, reduced detection time, higher specificity, and the considerably reduced chance of false negative detection achieved by targeting multiple genes  at least two of which are subject to high functional constraint, are the major advantages of this multiplex assay compared to other diagnostic methods.
the oomycete aphanomyces astaci is regarded as the causative agent of crayfish plague and represents an evident hazard for european crayfish species.
for sensitive detection of the pathogen, but also for quantification of agent levels in susceptible crayfish and carrier crayfish, a taqman-probe based real-time pcr  assay was developed.
currently, a. astaci is diagnosed by a pcr-based assay that suffers from cross-reactivity to other species.
we developed an alternative closed-tube assay for a. astaci, which achieves robustness through simultaneous amplification of multiple functionally constrained genes.
two novel constitutively expressed members of the glycosyl hydrolase  gene family of chitinases were isolated from the a. astaci strain gb <dig>  the primary amino acid sequence of these chitinase genes, termed chi <dig> and chi <dig>  is composed of an n-terminal signal peptide directing the post-translational transport of the protein into the extracellular space, the catalytic gh <dig> domain, a proline-, serine-, and threonine-rich domain and a c-terminal cysteine-rich putative chitin-binding site.
the a. astaci mycelium grown in a pepton-glucose medium showed significant temporal changes in steady-state chi <dig> and chi <dig> mrna amounts indicating functional constraint.
an a. astaci-specific primer pair targeting the novel genes chi <dig> and chi <dig> as well as chi <dig> - a third gh <dig> family member - was multiplexed with primers targeting the  <dig> s rrna used as an endogenous control.
a species was typed unambiguously as a. astaci if two peaks were concomitantly detected by melting curve analysis .
it targets the same chitinase genes and allows quantification down to  <dig> target sequences.
sensitive quantification achieved with taqman qpcr facilitates to monitor infection status and pathogen distribution in different tissues and can help prevent disease transmission.
