the majority of cnvrs, however, is shared between wild and domesticated individuals, indicating that domestication had minor effect on the overall diversity of cnvrs.
we identified  <dig>  cnvrs with an average size of  <dig> kilobases comprising a total of  <dig>  megabases of the pig genome and  <dig> overlapping genes.
copy number variable regions  can result in drastic phenotypic differences and may therefore be subject to selection during domestication.
studying copy number variation in relation to domestication is highly relevant in pigs because of their very rich natural and domestication history that resulted in many different phenotypes.
variations of copy number  of antimicrobial related genes suggest an ongoing process of evolution of these genes to combat food-borne pathogens.
structural variationcopy number variationnext generation sequencing dataread depth method
functional analyses revealed that cnvrs are enriched with genes related to sensory perception, neurological process and response to stimulus, suggesting their contribution to adaptation in the wild and behavioral changes during domestication.
cnvrs in pigs are enriched for genes related to sensory perception, neurological process, and response to stimulus.
comparison between different populations showed that larger populations have more cnvrs, highlighting that cnvrs are, like other genetic variation such as snps and microsatellites, reflecting demographic history rather than phenotypic diversity.
to investigate the evolutionary dynamic of cnvrs, we applied read depth method on next generation sequence data from  <dig> individuals, comprising wild boars and domestic pigs from europe and asia.
the majority of cnvrs ascertained in domestic pigs are also variable in wild boars, suggesting that the domestication of the pig did not result in a change in cnvrs in domesticated pigs.
a small portion of cnvrs was unique to domestic pigs and may have been selected during domestication.
also, the excess of cnvrs in non-genic regions implies that a major part of these variations is likely to be  neutral.
the majority of variable regions were found to reflect demographic patterns rather than phenotypic.
