we then compute shortest paths from different drug targets to the set of resistance proteins in the protein-protein interactome, to derive a sub-network relevant to study emergence of drug resistance.
the shortest paths are then scored and ranked based on a new scheme that considers  drug-induced gene upregulation data, from microarray experiments reported in literature, for the individual nodes and  edge-hubness, a network parameter which signifies centrality of a given edge in the network.
emergence of drug resistant varieties of tuberculosis is posing a major threat to global tuberculosis eradication programmes.
insights obtained about the propensity of a drug to trigger resistance will be useful both for more careful identification of drug targets as well as to identify target-co-target pairs, both implementable in early stages of drug discovery itself.
a new concept of 'co-targets' has been proposed to counter drug resistance, co-targets being defined as protein that need to be simultaneously inhibited along with the intended target, to check emergence of resistance to a given drug.
different targets appear to have different propensities for four drug resistance mechanisms.
the study leads to the identification of possible pathways for drug resistance, providing novel insights into the problem of resistance.
a set of proteins involved in both intrinsic and extrinsic drug resistance mechanisms are identified from literature.
we derive a genome-scale protein-protein interaction network for mycobacterium tuberculosis h37rv from the string database, with proteins as nodes and interactions as edges.
although several approaches have been explored to counter resistance, there has been limited success due to a lack of understanding of how resistance emerges in bacteria upon drug treatment.
a systems level analysis of the proteins involved is essential to gain insights into the routes required for emergence of drug resistance.
high-scoring paths identified from this analysis indicate most plausible pathways for the emergence of drug resistance.
