the lowest recorded rates are those of the miocene small stem cervid procervulus praelucidus.
skeletal maturity estimates indicate late attainment in sampled candiacervus and procervulus praelucidus.
growth rates sensu sander & tückmantel plotted against the anteroposterior bone diameter as a proxy for body mass indicate three groups: one with high growth rates including megaloceros, cervus, alces, and dama; an intermediate group with capreolus and muntiacus; and a group showing low growth rates, including dwarf candiacervus and procervulus.
low absolute growth rates characterize dwarf candiacervus sp.
ii and c. ropalophorus compared to megaloceros giganteus displaying high rates, whereas dama dama is characterized by intermediate to low growth rates.
island evolutionpleistocenecervidaecandiacervusmegalocerosbone histologycementum analysisgrowth rateslongevityskeletal maturityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
dwarf candiacervus, in an allometric context, show an extended lifespan compared to other deer of similar body size such as mazama which has a maximum longevity of 12 years in the wild.
tooth cementum analysis of first molars of two senile megaloceros giganteus specimens revealed ages of  <dig> and 19 years whereas two old dwarf candiacervus specimens gave ages of  <dig> and 18 years.
histological analyses of long bones and teeth in a phylogenetic context have been shown to provide reliable estimates of growth and life history patterns in extant and extinct mammals.
comparison with other clades of mammals reveals that changes in size and life history in evolution have occurred in parallel, with various modes of skeletal tissue modification.
similarity of bone tissue types across the eight species examined indicates a comparable mode of growth in deer, with long bones mainly possessing primary plexiform fibrolamellar bone.
there is a rich histological record of growth across deer species recorded in long bones and teeth, which can be used to understand ontogenetic patterns within species and phylogenetic ones across species.
an illustrative case study is that of the dwarfed morphotypes of candiacervus from the pleistocene of crete versus the giant deer megaloceros giganteus, both in a clade together with dama dama among extant species.
