using the uncoordinated expression profiles with transcript abundance as a standard,  <dig> candidate resistance genes were identified, including  <dig> overlapping genes and  <dig> vp1620-specific genes.
genes with similar expression patterns were further classified according to the scales of changed transcript abundances, and  <dig> genes were rescued as supplementary candidate resistance genes.
functional characterization showed that phospholipases associated with ros production played vital roles in early defense responses to h. avenae via involvement in diverse defense-related pathways as a hub switch.
the ros levels were determined by luminol-chemiluminescence assay.
two types of expression profiles were established to predict candidate resistance genes after developing a novel strategy to generate clean rna-seq data by removing the transcripts of h. avenae within the raw data before assembly.
the rna-sequencing was performed using an incompatible wheat cultivar vp <dig> and a compatible control cultivar wen <dig> infected with h. avenae at 24 h,  <dig> d and  <dig> d. infection assays showed that vp <dig> failed to block penetration of h. avenae but disturbed the transition of developmental stages, leading to a significant reduction in cyst formation.
functional characterizations revealed that diverse defense-related pathways were responsible for wheat resistance against h. avenae.
furthermore, strong bursts of reactive oxygen species  within vp <dig> roots infected with h. avenae were induced at 24 h and  <dig> d, and eight ros-producing genes were significantly upregulated, including three class iii peroxidase and five lipoxygenase genes.
this study is the first to investigate the early defense responses of wheat against h. avenae, not only provides applicable candidate resistance genes for breeding novel wheat cultivars, but also enables a better understanding of the defense mechanisms of wheat against h. avenae.
transcriptome assemblies and redundancy filteration were obtained by trinity, tgi clustering tool and blastn, respectively.
gene ontology annotation was yielded by blast2go program, and metabolic pathways of transcripts were analyzed by path_finder.
therefore, comparative transcriptomic analyses were performed to identify more applicable resistance genes for cultivar breeding.
large-scale identification of wheat resistance genes were processed by comparative transcriptomic analysis.
moreover, phospholipase was involved in many defense-related pathways and localized in the connection position.
cereal cyst nematode heterodera avenae, an important soil-borne pathogen in wheat, causes numerous annual yield losses worldwide, and use of resistant cultivars is the best strategy for control.
the transcriptional gene expression profiles were obtained by quantitative rt-pcr.
