the goal of the present study was to assess the antiangiogenic capacity of epc expressing gbp- <dig>  and their impact on blood vessel formation in an axially vascularized 3-d bioartificial construct in vivo.
this indicates a significant reduction of blood vessel density and thereby inhibition of blood vessel formation from the avl constructs caused by gbp- <dig>  in addition, gbp- <dig> expressed from epc significantly reduced cell apoptosis compared to gbp-1-negative controls.
most notably, the ratio of blood vessel surface area over total construct surface area in construct cross sections was significantly reduced in the presence of gbp-1-epc.
guanylate binding protein- <dig>  is a large gtpase which is actively secreted by endothelial cells.
transgenic epc expressing the proinflammatory antiangiogenic gtpase gbp- <dig> can reduce blood vessel density and inhibit apoptosis in a developing bioartificial vascular network and may become a new powerful tool to manipulate angiogenetic processes in tissue engineering and other pathological conditions such as tumour angiogenesis.
undifferentiated gbp-1-epc, however, did not secrete increased levels of vegf compared to undifferentiated control epc expressing an empty vector .
the new vascular network arises from an arterio-venous loop  embedded in a fibrin matrix inside a separation chamber.
total surface area of the construct as calculated from cross sections was larger after transplantation of gbp-1-epc compared to control ev-epc.
this indicated reduced formation of fibrovascular tissue and less resorption of fibrin matrix compared to constructs containing ev-epc.
functional in vitro testing demonstrated a significant increase in vegf secretion by gbp-1-epc after induction of cell differentiation.
it is a marker and intracellular inhibitor of endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.
we previously demonstrated that stable expression of gbp- <dig> in murine endothelial progenitor cells  induces their premature differentiation and decreases their migration capacity in vitro and in vivo.
