bilobate leaf fossils bauhinia ungulatoides and b. fotana together with other late paleogene – early neogene chinese record of the genus suggest that bauhinia had been diverse in south china by the late paleogene.
the taxonomy, distribution, and leaf architecture of bauhinia and its allies across the world are summarized in detail, which formed the basis for classifying the bilobate leaf fossils and evaluating the fossil record and biogeography of bauhinia.
the fossil record, extant species diversity, as well as molecular phylogenetic analyses demonstrate that the bauhiniinae might have originated in the paleogene of low-latitudes along the eastern tethys seaway.
then the genus spread into south america probably via the isthmus of panama since the miocene onward, and underwent regional extinctions in the boreotropics of mid-high-latitudes during the neogene climatic cooling.
two species of bauhinia are described from the middle miocene fotan group of fujian province, southeastern china.
nov. is characterized by shallowly to moderately bilobate, pulvinate leaves with shallowly cordate bases and acute apices on each lobe, as well as paracytic stomatal complexes.
their great similarities to some species from south america and south asia respectively imply that bauhinia might have undergone extensive dispersals and diversification during or before the miocene.
hence, bauhinia presently exhibits a pantropical intercontinental disjunct distribution.
this provides the opportunity to understand the early evolution, diversification, and biogeographic history of orchid trees from an historical perspective under the framework of morphological and molecular studies.
bauhiniabauhiniinaebilobate leavesbiogeographycaesalpinioideaecercideaeevolutionfotan grouplegumesleguminosaemiocenenorth atlantic land bridgeorchid treespantropical intercontinental disjunctsouth chinatethys seawaythe national natural science foundation of china4137202941206173wong william oki shi gongle issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
is paraphyletic and may as well be subdivided into nine genera, including bauhinia l. s.s. and its allies.
possesses moderately bilobate, pulvinate leaves with moderately to deeply cordate bases and acute or slightly obtuse apices on each lobe.
they dispersed southwards into africa, migrated from eurasia to north america via the north atlantic land bridge or floating islands during the oligocene.
their leaves are usually characteristic bilobate and are thus easily recognized in the fossil record.
