exposure of prostate cells to physiological levels of prolactin or testosterone results in an up-regulation of eaac <dig> expression and a corresponding increase in the high-affinity transport of l-aspartate into the cells.
the studies show for the first time that eaac <dig> is expressed in normal rat prostate epithelial cells, in normal and hyperplastic human prostate glands, and in human malignant prostate cell lines.
the present report is concerned with the identification of this putative l-aspartate transporter in rat and human prostate cells.
this study shows that eaac <dig> functions as the high-affinity l-aspartate transporter that is responsible for the uptake and accumulation of aspartate in prostate cells.
in other cells , eaac <dig> has been reported to function as a glutamate transporter rather than as an aspartate transporter.
the identification of eaac <dig> as the high-affinity l-aspartate transporter now permits studies to elucidate the mechanism of hormonal regulation of eaac <dig> gene expression, and to investigate the mechanism by which the cellular environment effects the functioning of eaac <dig> as an aspartate transporter or as a glutamate transporter.
in most mammalian cells aspartate is synthesized; and, therefore is a non-essential amino acid.
in contrast, in citrate-producing prostate cells, aspartate is an essential amino acid that must be derived from circulation.
prostate epithelial cells accumulate a high level of aspartate that is utilized as a substrate for their unique function of production and secretion of enormously high levels of citrate.
in earlier kinetic studies we identified the existence of a unique na+-dependent high-affinity l-aspartate transport process in rat prostate secretory epithelial cells.
eaac <dig> expression and high-affinity l-aspartate transport are correspondingly down-regulated by eaac <dig> sirna knock down.
the regulation of eaac <dig> expression and l-aspartate transport by testosterone and prolactin is consistent with their regulation of citrate production in prostate cells.
