the cle and clel genes are found in conifers and they exhibit at least as much sequence diversity in these species as they do in other plant species.
surprisingly, transcript abundances of these te differentiation-inhibitors sharply increased during early te differentiation, suggesting that some cells differentiate into phloem cells in addition to tes in these cultures.
we undertook a meta-analysis of the genbank/embl/ddbj gymnosperm est database and the picea abies and p. glauca genomes and identified  <dig> putative cle genes and  <dig> clel genes among eight pinophyta species, in the genera cryptomeria, pinus and picea.
there is a rapidly growing awareness that plant peptide signalling molecules are numerous and varied and they are known to play fundamental roles in angiosperm plant growth and development.
the preferential expression of these vascular development-regulating genes in phloem in conifers, as they are in dicot species, suggests close parallels in the regulation of secondary growth and wood formation in gymnosperm and dicot plants.
we therefore sought to identify cle and clel genes in gymnosperms and conduct a comparative analysis of these gene families with angiosperms.
the predicted conifer cle and clel protein sequences had close phylogenetic relationships with their homologues in arabidopsis.
applied cle <dig> and cle41/ <dig> peptides inhibited root elongation in pinus radiata seedlings.
based on our bioinformatic analysis, we predict a novel mechanism of regulation of the expression of several conifer clel peptides, via alternative splicing resulting in the selection of alternative c-terminal exons encoding separate clel peptides.
only one cle peptide sequence has been 100% conserved between gymnosperms and angiosperms over  <dig> million years of evolutionary history, the cle41/44-tdif peptide and its likely conifer orthologues.
notably, perfect conservation of the active cle dodecapeptide in presumed orthologues of the arabidopsis cle41/44-tracheary element differentiation  protein, an inhibitor of tracheary element  differentiation, was seen in all eight conifer species.
we show evidence that two clel genes are alternatively spliced via 3′-terminal acceptor exons encoding separate clel peptides.
two closely related peptide signalling molecule families are the clavata3-embryo-surrounding region  and cle-like  genes, which encode precursors of secreted peptide ligands that have roles in meristem maintenance and root gravitropism.
cle peptide ligandsclel peptide ligandspinophytaconifersphylogenetic analysispine tracheary element system
