boron -toxicity is an important disorder in agricultural regions across the world.
these differentially expressed tdfs were related to signal transduction, carbohydrate and energy metabolism, nucleic acid metabolism, protein and amino acid metabolism, lipid metabolism, cell wall and cytoskeleton modification, stress responses and cell transport.
in addition, b-toxicity-induced alteration in the expression levels of genes encoding inorganic pyrophosphatase  <dig>  at4g <dig> and methionine synthase differed between the two species, which might play a role in the b-tolerance of c. sinensis.
the aims of this study were to elucidate the adaptive mechanisms of citrus plants to b-toxicity and to identify b-tolerant genes.
the higher b-tolerance of c. sinensis might be related to the findings that b-toxic c. sinensis leaves had higher expression levels of genes involved in photosynthesis, which might contribute to the higher photosyntheis and light utilization and less excess light energy, and in reactive oxygen species  scavenging compared to b-toxic c. grandis leaves, thus preventing them from photo-oxidative damage.
here we successfully used cdna-aflp to isolate  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated transcript-derived fragments  from b-toxic c. grandis leaves, whilst only  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated tdfs from b-toxic c. sinensis ones, demonstrating that gene expression is less affected in b-toxic c. sinensis leaves than in b-toxic c. grandis ones.
our findings reveal some novel mechanisms on the tolerance of plants to b-toxicity at the gene expression level.
b concentration was higher in b-toxic c. sinensis leaves than in b-toxic c. grandis ones.
c. sinensis leaves could tolerate higher level of b than c. grandis ones, thus improving the b-tolerance of c. sinensis plants.
b-toxicity-induced changes in seedlings growth, leaf co <dig> assimilation, pigments, total soluble protein, malondialdehyde  and phosphorus were less pronounced in c. sinensis than in c. grandis.
