the experimental results show that all the  <dig> features of nfd have statistically significant difference with respect to changes in various levels of nocodazole drug concentrations  and the phenotypic changes of neurites were consistent to the known effect of nocodazole in promoting neurite retraction.
hcs-neurons can 1) automatically extract all quantitative phenotype features in both nfd and gfds, 2) identify statistically significant phenotypic changes upon drug treatments using anova and regression analysis, and 3) generate an accurate classifier to group neurons treated by different drug concentrations using support vector machine and an intelligent feature selection method.
the proposed hcs-neurons method is helpful in identifying and classifying chemical or biological molecules that alter the morphology of a group of neurons in hcs.
therefore, it is desirable to develop an automated image analysis method for analyzing multi-neuron images.
we propose an automated analysis method with novel descriptors of neuromorphology features for analyzing hcs-based multi-neuron images, called hcs-neurons.
few automatic methods focus on analyzing multi-neuron images collected from hcs used in drug discovery.
three identified features, total neurite length, average neurite length, and average neurite area were able to achieve an independent test accuracy of  <dig> % for the six-dosage classification problem.
however, the discovery of drugs targeting neurons is still hampered by the inability to accurately identify and quantify the phenotypic changes of multiple neurons in a single image  of a high-content screen.
to observe multiple phenotypic changes of neurons, we propose two kinds of descriptors which are neuron feature descriptor  of  <dig> neuromorphology features, e.g., neurite length, and generic feature descriptors , e.g., haralick texture.
we provided an automatic hcs-based method for generating accurate classifiers to classify neurons based on their phenotypic changes upon drug treatments.
