quantifying real-time carbon allocation and photoassimilate transport dynamics, as demonstrated here, will be important for functional genomic studies to unravel the mechanisms controlling phloem transport in large crop plants, which will provide crucial insights for improving yields.
positron emission tomography , developed for dynamic imaging in medicine, has been applied in plant studies to measure the transport and allocation patterns of carbohydrates, nutrients, and phytohormones labeled with positron-emitting radioisotopes.
carbon allocationpositron emission tomography transportimagingcarbon- <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
to demonstrate the utility of pet, we measured 11c-photoassimilate transport and allocation in sorghum bicolor, an important staple crop, at vegetative and reproductive stages .
although important aspects of whole-plant carbon allocation in crop plants  occur late in development when the plants are large, techniques to study carbon transport and allocation processes have not been adapted for large plants.
our results show that commercial pet scanners can be used reliably to measure whole-plant c-allocation in large plants nondestructively including, importantly, allocation to roots in soil.
further, our results suggest that nodes may be important control points for photoassimilate distribution in crops of the family poaceae.
based on measurements of a phantom, we optimized instrument settings, including use of 3-d mode and attenuation correction to maximize the accuracy of measurements.
the 11c-photoassimilate transport speed did not change over the two developmental stages.
here we describe the adaptation and optimization of a commercial clinical pet scanner to measure transport dynamics and allocation patterns of 11c-photoassimilates in large crops.
this capability revealed extreme changes in carbon allocation in sorghum plants, as they advanced to maturity.
however, within a stem, transport speeds were reduced across nodes, likely due to higher 11c-photoassimilate unloading in the nodes.
