to demonstrate and validate our concept on a biochemically well-defined case, we analyze e. coli translation initiation sites in order to show that we can find biologically relevant signals.
in the case of translation initiation sites we could clearly deduce the most discriminative motifs and their positional variation from example sequences.
conventional kernels utilized so far do not provide an easy interpretation of the learnt representations in terms of positional and compositional variability of the underlying biological signals.
for that case, our results clearly show that the shine-dalgarno sequence is the most important signal upstream a start codon.
we showed that the oligo kernel can provide a valuable tool for the analysis of relevant signals in biological sequences.
by introducing a kernel parameter that controls the degree of position-dependency, our feature space representation can be tailored to the characteristics of the biological problem at hand.
we propose a kernel-based approach to datamining on biological sequences.
by means of these two parameters oligo kernels can easily be adapted to different biological problems.
a regularized learning scheme enables application even to biological problems for which only small sets of example sequences are available.
our approach includes a visualization method for transparent representation of characteristic sequence features.
attractive features of our approach are its flexibility with respect to oligomer length and position conservation.
on the other hand, by means of the kernel trick we can provide a general learning algorithm for that high-dimensional representation because all required statistics can be computed without performing an explicit feature space mapping of the sequences.
we also find evidence for signals downstream of the start codon, previously introduced as transcriptional enhancers.
these signals are mainly characterized by occurrences of adenine in a region of about  <dig> nucleotides next to the start codon.
kernel-based learning algorithms are among the most advanced machine learning methods and have been successfully applied to a variety of sequence classification tasks within the field of bioinformatics.
