the multi-scale model captures the activation and differentiation of naïve cd <dig> + t cells into effector cytotoxic t cells in the lymph node following adenovirus-mediated vaccination against a tumor antigen, the trafficking of the resulting cytotoxic t cells into blood and tumor microenvironment, the production of cytokines within the tumor microenvironment, and the interactions between tumor cells, t cells and cytokines that control tumor growth.
however, the strength of the immune response cannot be improved enough by multiple adenovirus vaccinations to reduce tumor burden if the cytotoxic activity or local proliferation of cytotoxic t cells in response to tumor antigens is not greatly enhanced.
overall, this study illustrates how mechanistic models can be used for in silico screening of the optimal therapeutic dosage and timing in cancer treatment.
using immune checkpoint modulators in the clinic to increase the number and activity of cytotoxic t lymphocytes that recognize tumor antigens can prolong survival for metastatic melanoma.
the calibrated model captures the modest suppression of tumor cell growth observed in the b16f <dig> model, a transplantable mouse model for metastatic melanoma, and was used to explore the impact of multiple vaccinations on controlling tumor growth.
in many fields, cad  is a tool used to optimize integrated system behavior using a mechanistic model that is based upon knowledge of constitutive elements.
to better understand the therapeutic role that cytotoxic cd <dig> + t cells can play in controlling tumor growth, we developed a multi-scale mechanistic model of the biology using impulsive differential equations and calibrated it to a self-consistent data set.
using the calibrated mechanistic model, we found that the cytotoxic cd <dig> + t cell response was prolonged by multiple adenovirus vaccinations.
in short, these clinical trials demonstrate proof-of-principle but optimizing the specific therapeutic strategies remains a challenge.
yet, only a fraction of the patient population receives clinical benefit.
the objective of this study was to develop a predictive simulation platform for optimizing anti-tumor immunity using different treatment strategies.
