our goal was to establish a method to characterize sequence features found in compound sensitive exons.
we compared the sequence features; splice site scores, number of splicing factor binding sites, and properties of branch sequence and polypyrimidine tracts, and found that polypyrimidine tracts were stronger  in the mouse tg <dig> insensitive exons.
we also compared the features between tg <dig> skip-enhanced and insensitive exons within the species, and discovered that human tg <dig> skip-enhanced exons were shorter and had less splicing factor binding sites than the group of human tg <dig> insensitive exons.
mouse insensitive exons homologous to human tg <dig> skip-enhanced exons shared these properties.
splicing-targeting therapy tries to ameliorate the disease by altering the exon combination of transcripts to reduce the undesired effect of genetic mutations.
here we developed a comparative transcriptomic approach to explore features that make an exon sensitive to a chemical compound.
in this study we established a comparative transcriptomic approach, which shed lights on how small chemical compounds modulate rna splicing.
our results suggested that these features are prerequisites for tg <dig> skip-enhanced exons and weak polypyrimidine tracts are defining features, which were supported by a decision tree analysis on all cassette exons in human.
the results described here was the first attempt to decipher the targeting rules of a splicing modulator compound.
we compared tg <dig> responsiveness between homologous exon pairs and identified  <dig> pairs in which human exons were skip-enhanced but not mouse exons.
recent advances in the development of small chemical compounds that can modulate rna splicing brought excitement to the field of splicing-targeting therapy.
in this study, we chose tg <dig>  a potential drug for duchenne muscular dystrophy, and performed rna-sequencing on samples from human and mouse skeletal muscle cells, with and without tg <dig> treatments.
comparative pharmacogenomicscomparative transcriptomicsvirtual massive mutagenesisrna-targeting therapypersonalized medicinesplicing modulatorpolypyrimidine tractduchenne muscular dystrophyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
