to understand better the defense response to this pathogen as a means for obtaining more tolerant cultivars, we monitored the transcriptome profiles of roots from resistant plants of g. barbadense cv.
our results suggest that the cotton defense response has significant transcriptional complexity and that large accumulations of defense-related transcripts may contribute to v. dahliae resistance in cotton.
however, the interaction between v. dahliae and cotton is a complicated process, and its molecular mechanism remains obscure.
pima90- <dig> that were challenged with v. dahliae.
this study generated a substantial amount of cotton transcript sequences that are related to defense responses against v. dahliae.
dahliae, indicating that this wilt process includes both biotrophic and necrotrophic stages.
the most abundant tf family was the nac group , followed by g2-like , myb , bhlh , bzip  erf, c3h, and wrky.
these genomics resources and knowledge of important related genes contribute to our understanding of host–pathogen interactions and the defense mechanisms utilized by g. barbadense, a non-model plant system.
in all,  <dig>  high-quality expressed sequence tags  were generated from a full-length cdna library of g. barbadense.
the branch of "sa→npr1→tga→pr-1→disease resistance" was first discovered in the interaction of cotton–v.
they were assigned to the functional classification of plant–pathogen interactions, including disease defenses and signal transduction.
verticillium wilt, caused by the fungal pathogen verticillium dahliae, is the most severe disease in cotton , causing great lint losses worldwide.
we also analyzed the expression of genes involved in pathogen-associated molecular pattern  recognition, the activation of effector-triggered immunity, tfs, and hormone biosynthesis, as well as genes that are pathogenesis-related, or have roles in signaling/regulatory functions and cell wall modification.
these tools can be applied in establishing a modern breeding program that uses marker-assisted selections and oligonucleotide arrays to identify candidate genes that can be linked to valuable agronomic traits in cotton, including disease resistance.
