for comparison, dna microarrays were also used to identify differential transcriptional regulation in h. salinarum, and 17% of all genes were found to have non-average transcript levels in exponential versus stationary phase.
by far the largest group is comprised of genes that are translated with above-average efficiency specifically in exponential phase, including genes for many ribosomal proteins, rna polymerase subunits, enzymes, and chemotaxis proteins.
the studies have revealed that in saccharomyces cerevisiae, arabidopsis thaliana, and human cell lines translational regulation plays a significant role.
to identify differentially regulated genes, exponentially growing and stationary phase cells were compared.
most global studies of gene regulation concentrate on transcript level regulation, and very few global analyses of differential translational efficiencies exist.
particularly, until now no global study of translational control with any prokaryotic species was available.
for the first time in any prokaryotic species it was shown that a significant fraction of genes is under differential translational control.
a global analysis of translational control was performed with two haloarchaeal model species, halobacterium salinarum and haloferax volcanii.
in h. volcanii, 12% of all genes are translated with non-average efficiencies.
however, neither the fractions nor the identity of regulated genes are conserved between h. salinarum and h. volcanii, indicating that prokaryotes as well as eukaryotes use differential translational control for the regulation of gene expression, but that the identity of regulated genes is not conserved.
translation of 1% of all genes is specifically repressed in either of the two growth phases.
in contrast to h. salinarum,  <dig> % of genes have non-average translational efficiency in both growth phases, and thus they might be regulated by other stimuli than growth phase.
more than 20% of h. salinarum transcripts are translated with non-average efficiencies.
the overlap with h. salinarum is negligible.
for  <dig> h. salinarum genes potentiation of regulation was observed, but for the majority of regulated genes either transcriptional or translational regulation is employed.
