then, we explored  <dig>  bes and we identified reads likely to contain repetitive mobile elements , simple sequence repeats and putative proteins, and to estimate the gc content  of the reads.
the vast majority of the top-hits made by our sequences were to populus trichocarpa , theobroma cacao , ricinus communis , vitis vinifera  and prunus persica .
remarkably, a number of bac-end pair sequences could be mapped to intervals of the sequenced arabidopsis thaliana, v. vinifera and p. trichocarpa chromosomes, and putative collinear microsyntenic regions were identified.
therefore, improving our understanding of passion fruit genomics is essential and to some degree a pre-requisite if its genetic resources are to be used more efficiently.
the library represents six haploid genome equivalents, and the average insert size was 108 kb.
around  <dig> % of all bes were found to have high levels of similarity to plant genes and ontological terms were assigned to more than half of the sequences analysed .
we generated the first large-insert library for a member of passifloraceae.
the passion fruit  is a tropical crop of economic importance both for juice production and consumption as fresh fruit.
in this study, we have constructed a large-insert bac library and provided the first view on the structure and content of the passion fruit genome, using bac-end sequence  data as a major resource.
passiflorapassion fruitgenomicsbac-end sequencingrepetitive elementsgene contentmicrosyntenyfluorescent in situ hybridizationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
this bac library provides a new resource for genetic and genomic studies, as well as it represents a valuable tool for future whole genome study.
to check its utility for gene isolation, successful macroarray screening experiments were carried out with probes complementary to eight passiflora gene sequences available in public databases.
the library consisted of  <dig>  clones and its levels of organellar dna were very low.
bacs harbouring those genes were used in fluorescent in situ hybridizations and unique signals were detected for four bacs in three chromosomes .
