the improved predictions stem from the novel features that express collocation of the secondary structure segments in the protein sequence and that combine evolutionary and secondary structure information.
our work demonstrates that conservation and arrangement of the secondary structure segments predicted along the protein chain can successfully predict structural classes which are defined based on the spatial arrangement of the secondary structures.
in contrast to existing sequence-based structural class predictors, which target four major classes and which are designed for high identity sequences, we predict seven classes from sequences that share twilight-zone identity with the training sequences.
tests on  <dig> twilight-zone and  <dig> high-similarity benchmark datasets and comparison with over two dozens of modern competing predictors show that modas provides the best overall accuracy that ranges between 80% and  <dig> % , depending on the dataset.
this translates into 19% and 8% error rate reduction when compared against the best performing competing method on two largest datasets.
modas is also the first to utilize a novel, custom-built feature-based sequence representation that combines evolutionary profiles and predicted secondary structure.
the proposed predictor provides accurate predictions at 58% accuracy for membrane proteins class, which is not considered by majority of existing methods, in spite that this class accounts for only 2% of the data.
a web server is available at http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/modas/.
knowledge of structural class is used by numerous methods for identification of structural/functional characteristics of proteins and could be used for the detection of remote homologues, particularly for chains that share twilight-zone similarity.
the proposed modular approach to structural class prediction  method is unique as it allows for selection of any subset of the classes.
our comprehensive design considers  <dig> feature selection methods and  <dig> classifiers to develop support vector machine-based classifiers that are tailored for each of the seven classes.
