the isvm and tsvm methods were validated with the molecules from the most representative organisms contained in the refseq database: rattus norvegicus, mus musculus, homo sapiens, drosophila melanogaster and arabidopsis thaliana.
consequently, this work aims to investigate the transductive learning towards tis identification and compare the results with those obtained in inductive method.
the transductive inference presents better results both in f-measure and in sensitivity in comparison with the inductive method for predicting the tis.
the transductive method presented f-measure and sensitivity higher than 90% and also higher than the results obtained with isvm.
these approaches were compared with the tishunter, tis miner, netstart tools, presenting satisfactory results.
in relation to precision, the results are similar for the isvm and tsvm classifiers.
however, the results show that the application of tsvm approach ensured an improvement, specially for f-measure and sensitivity.
the correct protein coding region identification is an important and latent problem in the molecular biology field.
this problem becomes a challenge due to the lack of deep knowledge about the biological systems and unfamiliarity of conservative characteristics in the messenger rna .
machine learningtransductive learningsvmtsvmtranslation initiation sitemrnaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
in the field of bioinformatics, machine learning methods have been widely applied based on the inductive inference, as inductive support vector machine .
the isvm and tsvm approaches were implemented in the transdutis tool, transdutis-i and transdutis-t respectively, available in a web interface.
similarly, the problem of predicting the tis may take advantage of transductive methods due to the fact that the amount of new sequences grows rapidly with the progress of genome project that allows the study of new organisms.
on the other hand, not so much attention has been given to transductive inference-based machine learning methods such as transductive support vector machine .
the transductive inference performs well for problems in which the amount of unlabeled sequences is considerably greater than the labeled ones.
