the discrimination power of rsp typing appears to be comparable to conventional β-tubulin gene analysis.
the amino acid sequences of rsps of genome-sequenced strains of aspergillus species were first verified and compared to compile a reliable biomarker list for the identification of aspergillus species.
in this process, we revealed that many amino acid sequences of rsps  registered in the public protein databases needed to be corrected or newly added.
however, the results are based on simple mass spectral pattern-matching, with no peak assignment and no taxonomic input.
the results are concluded to be phylogenetic in that they reflect the molecular evolution of housekeeping rsps.
this method would therefore be suitable for species identification and discrimination at the strain to species level.
accurate identification of aspergillus species is a very important subject.
rsp typing was able to further discriminate the strains belonging to aspergillus section fumigati.
the verified rsps were allocated to rsp types based on their mass.
the resulting dendrogram based on rsp types showed a relatively good concordance with the tree based on β-tubulin gene sequences.
mass spectral fingerprinting using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry  is generally employed for the rapid identification of fungal isolates.
because rsp typing can characterize the strains within section fumigati, this method has potential as a powerful and reliable tool in the field of clinical microbiology.
we propose here a ribosomal subunit protein  typing technique using maldi-tof ms for the identification and discrimination of aspergillus species.
the rsp typing method could be applied to identify aspergillus species, even for species within section fumigati.
peak assignments of rsps of each sample strain as observed by maldi-tof ms were then performed to set rsp type profiles, which were then further processed by means of cluster analysis.
aspergillusribosomal subunit proteinsmatrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometryhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007802institute for fermentation, osakahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of science25430198sato hiroaki issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
