this work is the first study which aims to investigate whether the performance of computational identification of cooperative tf pairs could be improved by using a more biologically relevant way to define the targets of a tf.
compared with the first three algorithms, the fourth algorithm uses a more biologically relevant way to define the targets of a tf.
this suggests that the computational identification of cooperative tf pairs is indeed improved when using a more biologically relevant way to define the targets of a tf.
identification of cooperative tf pairs could be improved by using a more biologically relevant way to define the targets of a tf.
while different algorithms have distinct sophisticated cooperativity measures, the targets of a tf are usually defined using chip-chip data.
strikingly, the prediction results of our simple pa <dig> are more biologically meaningful than those of the  <dig> existing sophisticated algorithms in the literature, all of which used chip-chip data to define the targets of a tf.
the lists of tf target genes, the matlab codes and the prediction results of the four proposed algorithms could be downloaded from our companion website http://cosbi <dig> ee.ncku.edu.tw/tfi/
computational identification of cooperative tf pairs has become a hot research topic and many algorithms have been proposed in the literature.
a typical algorithm for predicting cooperative tf pairs has two steps.
in addition, our pa <dig> has the power to predict several experimentally validated cooperative tf pairs, which have not been successfully predicted by any existing algorithms in the literature.
the main contribution of this study is not to propose another new algorithm but to provide a new thinking for the research of computational identification of cooperative tf pairs.
measure the cooperativity of a tf pair by the statistical significance of the overlap of the targets of these two tfs using the hypergeometric test.
define the targets of a tf using  chip-chip data in the first algorithm,  tf binding data in the second algorithm,  tf perturbation data in the third algorithm, and  the intersection of tf binding and tf perturbation data in the fourth algorithm.
transcriptional regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes is usually accomplished by cooperative transcription factors .
chip-chip analysis can only identify the binding targets of a tf but it cannot distinguish the true regulatory from the binding but non-regulatory targets of a tf.
by adopting four existing performance indices, we show that the fourth proposed algorithm  significantly out performs the other three proposed algorithms.
however, there is an inherent weakness in using chip-chip data to define the targets of a tf.
design a measure for calculating the cooperativity of a tf pair based on the targets of these two tfs.
this study shows that the performance of computational
9- <dig> september  <dig> joint 26th genome informatics workshop and asia pacific bioinformatics network  14th international conference on bioinformatics  tokyo, japan
this suggests that properly defining the targets of a tf may be more important than designing sophisticated cooperativity measures.
researchers should put more effort on properly defining the targets of a tf  rather than totally focus on designing sophisticated cooperativity measures .
