surface display techniques, suffer from various drawbacks and reports on high-level extracellular secretion of heterologous proteins in gram-negative bacteria are scarce.
the results were further validated using purified his-tagged recombinant proteins of the corresponding fragments in enzyme-linked immunoassay and surface plasmon resonance analysis.
polypeptides from the growth medium of the library clones were screened for binding to a selection of s. aureus target molecules and adhesive fragments of known staphylococcal adhesins  as well as polypeptides of novel function  were detected.
these expression techniques are currently a field of active research.
the purpose of the current study was to construct a convenient, new technique for identification of unknown bacterial adhesive polypeptides directly from the growth medium of the escherichia coli host and to identify novel proteinaceous adhesins of the model organism staphylococcus aureus.
randomly fragmented chromosomal dna of s. aureus was cloned into a unique restriction site of our expression vector, which facilitates secretion of foreign flag-tagged polypeptides into the growth medium of e. coli ΔflicΔflid, to generate a library of  <dig> clones expressing flag-tagged polypeptides.
the method, here used on s. aureus, is convenient due to the use of soluble proteins from the growth medium and can in principle be applied to any bacterial species of interest.
characterization of such molecules is crucial for the understanding of bacterial pathogenesis, design of vaccines and development of antibacterial drugs.
alternative expression methods developed for the analysis of adhesins, e.g.
sequence and bioinformatics analyses showed that in our example, the library covered approximately 32% of the s. aureus proteome.
application of the method on s. aureus allowed us to identify three known adhesins and in addition, five new polypeptides binding to human plasma and extracellular matrix proteins.
bacterial adhesive proteins, called adhesins, are frequently the decisive factor in initiation of a bacterial infection.
