however, while such tests nominally assume independent microarray experiments, we expect dependency between the experiments in microarray compendia, due to both project-specific factors  in the multi-project compendium setting and effective dependency induced by gene-gene correlations.
these results support utilization of neff as a potent descriptor of microarray compendia.
consistent with this latter result, we observed improved performance in trni using subsets of the data compared to results using the full compendium.
we present evidence of substantial effective dependency among microarrays in this compendium, and characterize that dependency with respect to experimental condition factors.
we then introduce a measure neff of the effective number of experiments in a compendium, and find that corresponding to the dependency observed in this particular compendium there is a huge reduction in effective sample size i.e., neff =  <dig>  versus n =  <dig>  furthermore, we found that the neff of select subsets of experiments actually exceeded neff of the full compendium, suggesting that the adage 'less is more' applies here.
this work facilitates a more refined approach to construction and utilization of mrna expression compendia in trni.
we identified experimental condition factors that trend with changes in trni performance and neff , including growth phase and media type.
transcriptional regulatory network inference  from large compendia of dna microarrays has become a fundamental approach for discovering transcription factor -gene interactions at the genome-wide level.
herein, we characterize the nature of dependency in an escherichia coli microarray compendium and explore its consequences on the problem of determining which and how many arrays to use in correlation-based trni.
in correlation-based trni, network edges can in principle be evaluated using standard statistical tests.
in addition, they highlight a straightforward correlation-based method for trni with demonstrated meaningful statistical testing for significant edges, readily applicable to compendia from any species, even when a truth set is not available.
