more cgi shores were methylated than cgis in maize suggested that dna methylation level was not positively correlated with cpg density.
the most differentially methylated region between embryo and endosperm are cgi shores.
many genes involved in embryogenesis and seed development were found differentially methylated in embryo and endosperm.
methylation level was associated with allelic silencing of only a small number of imprinting genes.
our results indicated that dna methylation is associated with both gene silencing and gene activation in maize.
through medip-seq we systematically analyzed the methylomes of maize embryo and endosperm and results indicated that the global methylation status of embryo was more than that of the endosperm.
our results also revealed that many dna methylation regions didn’t affect transcription of the corresponding genes.
through a genome-wide analysis, dna methylation peaks were characterized and mapped in maize embryo and endosperm genome, respectively.
dna methylation impacts the transposable element  silencing, gene imprinting and expression regulation.
the maize embryo genome contained more dna methylation than endosperm.
dna methylationmaizeembryoendospermtransposable elementimprinting genemedip-seqissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
differences could be observed at the total number of methylation peaks, dmrs and specific methylated genes which were tightly associated with development of embryo and endosperm.
distinct methylation level was observed across maize embryo and endosperm.
result showed that 99% tes were methylated in maize embryo, but a large portion of them  were not methylated in endosperm.
maize embryo and endosperm exhibit distinct pattern/level of methylation.
these two genes may be associated with distinct methylation levels across maize embryo and endosperm.
the promoter sequence and transcriptional termination region  were more methylated than the gene body  region based on peak number and methylated depth.
