our work contributes to the functional characterization of pvtify transcriptional regulators in common bean, an agronomically important legume.
ja signaling is involved in many aspects of plant growth/development and in defense responses to biotic and abiotic stresses.
transcriptome analysis via microarray hybridization using the newly designed bean custom array 90 k was performed on transgenic roots of composite plants with modulated  pvtify10c gene expression.
relevant p-responsive genes that participate in carbon metabolic pathways, cell wall synthesis, lipid metabolism, transport, dna, rna and protein regulation, and signaling were oppositely-regulated in control vs. pvtify10c-silenced roots of composite plants under p-stress.
in addition, we found that several pvtify genes, as well as genes from the ja biosynthetic pathway, responded to p-deficiency.
members from the large pvtify gene family are important global transcriptional regulators that could participate as repressors in the ja signaling pathway.
in addition, we propose that the ja-signaling pathway involving pvtify genes might play a role in regulating the plant response/adaptation to p-starvation.
transcription factorstify gene familyphaseolus vulgaris pvtify genesja-signalingtranscriptome analysisp-starvation response
here, we identified the tify genes  from the legume common bean  and functionally characterized pvtify10c as a transcriptional regulator.
data were interpreted using gene ontology and mapman adapted to common bean.
these data indicate that pvtify10c regulates, directly or indirectly, the expression of some p-responsive genes; this process could be mediated by ja-signaling.
comparative global gene expression analysis revealed opposite regulatory changes in processes such as rna and protein regulation, stress responses and metabolism in pvtify10c silenced vs. over-expressing roots.
we selected pvtify10c as a representative ja-responsive pvtify gene for further functional analysis.
a subgroup of tify genes named jaz  has been identified as repressors of jasmonate -regulated transcription in arabidopsis and other plants.
