differentiation and copy number of repetitive sequences affect directly chromosome structure which contributes to reproductive isolation and speciation.
chromosome structures of five cucumis species were investigated using gish and comparative mapping of specific satellites.
in summary, comparative cytogenetic mapping of major satellites and gish revealed the distinct differentiation of chromosome structure during species formation.
cucumischromosome structuregenomic in situ hybridization repetitive dnaevolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
preferential distribution of repetitive dnas at the subtelomeric regions was found in c. sativus, c hystrix and c. metuliferus, while majority was positioned at the pericentromeric heterochromatin regions in c. melo and c. anguria.
southern hybridization was employed to study the proliferation of satellites, whose structural characteristics were helpful for analyzing chromosome evolution.
obvious interstitial telomeric repeats were observed in chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> of c. sativus, which might provide evidence of the fusion hypothesis of chromosome evolution from x =  <dig> to x =  <dig> in cucumis species.
specific satellites including 45s rdna, type i/ii, type iii, type iv, centm and telomeric repeat were then comparatively mapped in these species.
unique positioning of type iii and centm only at the centromeric domains of c. sativus and c. melo, respectively, combining with unique southern bands, revealed rapid evolutionary patterns of centromeric dna in cucumis.
further, comparative gish  through using genomic dna of other species as probes revealed high homology of repeats between c. sativus and c. hystrix.
type i/ii and type iv produced bright signals at the subtelomeric regions of c. sativus and c. hystrix simultaneously, which might explain the significance of their amplification in the divergence of cucumis subgenus from the ancient ancestor.
in present study, the distinct chromosomal structures of five cucumis species were revealed through genomic in situ hybridization  technique and comparative cytogenetic mapping of major satellite repeats.
the evolution of repetitive sequences was the main force for the divergence of cucumis species from common ancestor.
besides, the significant correlation was found between gene density along chromosome and gish band intensity in c. sativus and c. melo.
comparative cytogenetic mapping has been verified an efficient tool to elucidate the differentiation and distribution of repetitive sequences in genome.
