development and implementation of a sliding window approach to identify differential transcription using rna-seq data, not only allowed for identification of σh-dependent promoters, but also provides a general approach for sensitive identification of differentially transcribed promoters and genes, particularly for genes that are transcribed from multiple promoter elements only some of which show differential transcription.
while σb has been shown to control a large regulon and play important roles in stress response and virulence in the pathogen listeria monocytogenes, the function of σh has not yet been well defined in listeria, even though σh controls a large regulon in the closely related non-pathogenic bacillus subtilis.
using rna-seq characterization of a l. monocytogenes strain with deletions of all  <dig> genes encoding alternative σ factors , which was further modified to overexpress sigh , we identified  <dig> transcription units  that are transcribed from σh-dependent promoters.
interestingly, we found that three operons that encode competence genes  are transcribed from σh-dependent promoters.
and coia and its σh-dependent promoter were only found in l. monocytogenes.
while these promoters were highly conserved in l. monocytogenes, none of them were found in all listeria spp.
this σh-dependent regulation of competence related genes is conserved in the pathogen l. monocytogenes, but not in other non-pathogenic listeria strains.
identification of these promoters was facilitated by use of a bio-informatics approach that compared normalized rna-seq coverage , between Δbchl::prha-sigh and a Δbchl control, using sliding windows of 51 nt along the whole genome rather than comparing nrc calculated only for whole genes.
alternative σ factors are important transcriptional regulators in bacteria.
combined with prior data that indicated a role of σh in virulence in a mouse model, this suggests a possible novel role of σh-dependent competence genes in l. monocytogenes virulence.
our data indicate that a number of l. monocytogenes competence genes are regulated by σh.
