using illumina sequencing technology, the differences between the transcriptomes of heat-tolerant and -sensitive rice lines in response to high night temperature stress at the early milky stage was described here for the first time.
the analysis results for the sequencing data indicated that  <dig> transcripts showed different expressions between heat-tolerant and -sensitive rice, and rt-qpcr analyses confirmed the expression patterns of selected transcripts.
the candidate transcripts may provide genetic resources that may be useful in the improvement of heat-tolerant characters of rice.
we analyzed the transcriptome profiles for rice grain from heat-tolerant and -sensitive lines in response to high night temperatures at the early milky stage using the illumina sequencing method.
based on the functional annotation of the differentially expressed genes, the possible process that regulates these differentially expressed transcripts in rice grain responding to high night temperature stress at the early milky stage was further analyzed.
rice yield and quality are adversely affected by high temperatures, especially at night; high nighttime temperatures are more harmful to grain weight than high daytime temperatures.
in addition, the model may support future studies on the molecular mechanisms underlying plant responses to high night temperatures.
this analysis indicated that high night temperature stress disrupts electron transport in the mitochondria, which leads to changes in the concentration of hydrogen ions in the mitochondrial and cellular matrix and influences the activity of enzymes involved in tca and its secondary metabolism in plant cells.
functional analysis of the differentially expressed transcripts indicated that  <dig> genes have functional annotation and their functions are mainly involved in oxidation-reduction , metabolic , transport , transcript regulation , defense response  and photosynthetic  processes.
riceearly milky stagehigh night temperaturetranscriptomicsrna-sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
unfortunately, global temperatures are consistently increasing at an alarming rate and the minimum nighttime temperature has increased three times as much as the corresponding maximum daytime temperature over the past few decades.
the model proposed here is based on differences in expression and transcription between two rice lines.
