we conclude that psi:biology determines structures that are estimated to have a higher degree of biomedical interest than those determined during the first two phases of psi based on a broad array of biomedical annotations.
we interpret the added value to mean that team-based structural biology projects that utilize the expertise and technologies of structural genomics centers together with biological laboratories in the community are conducted in a synergistic manner.
protein structure initiativestructural genomicsprotein annotationsprotein annotationscientific partnershipsstructure to function relationships
both results hold when the annotation rates are examined either at the level of the entire protein or for annotations that are known to fall at specific residues within the portion of the protein that has a determined structure.
we show that the annotation rates can be used in conjunction with established metrics, i.e.
these are designed to provide measures of the amount of structure to function connections that can be leveraged from each structure.
the numbers of structures and impact of publication records, to monitor the progress of psi:biology towards its goals of examining structure to function connections of high biomedical relevance.
the metric provides an objective means to quantify the overall impact of psi:biology as it uses biomedical annotations from external sources.
the transition to the third phase entailed the formation of psi:biology partnerships which are composed of structural genomics centers and biomedical science laboratories.
a second result is that the subset of psi:biology structures determined through psi:biology partnerships have a higher rate of annotations than those determined exclusive of those partnerships.
for the psi:biology partnerships, we see that there is an associated added value that represents part of the progress toward the goals of psi:biology.
one result is that psi:biology structures are found to have a higher rate of annotations than structures determined during the first two phases of psi.
protein structure initiative:biology  is the third phase of psi where protein structures are determined in high-throughput to characterize their biological functions.
we present a method to examine the impact of protein structures determined under the auspices of psi:biology by measuring their rates of annotations.
