from this collection  <dig> tfs were found to be autoregulated, most of them negatively, though a significant proportion of positive feedback circuits were also identified.
it represents a paradigm of gene regulation in bacteria due its complex life style .
in addition, six global regulators were defined in b. subtilis based on the number and function of their regulated genes.
59% of them were predicted to be repressors, 17% activators, 17% were putatively identified as dual regulatory proteins and the remaining  <dig> % could not be associated with a regulatory role.
repression seems to be the most common regulatory mechanism in firmicutes due to the high proportion of repressors in the detected collection in these genomes.
in order to gain insight into the organization and evolution of the b. subtilis regulatory network and to provide an alternative framework for further studies in bacteria, we identified and analyzed its repertoire of dna-binding transcription factors in terms of their abundance, family distribution and regulated genes.
a collection of  <dig> dna-binding transcription factors  was identified in b. subtilis, half of them with experimental evidence.
we also quantified their abundance, family distribution, and regulatory roles in the context of firmicutes.
from this analysis three families were found conserved in all the firmicutes; fifteen families were distributed in all firmicutes except in the phyla mollicutes; two were constrained to bacillales and finally two families were found to be specific to b. subtilis, due to their specie specific distribution.
in this work we identified and described the characteristics associated to the repertoire of dna-binding tfs in b. subtilis.
this work should not only contribute to our understanding of the regulation of gene expression in bacteria from the perspective of b. subtilis but also provide us the basis for comprehensive modeling of transcriptional regulatory networks in firmicutes.
bacillus subtilis is one of the best-characterized organisms in gram-positive bacteria.
