our study advances our understanding of plant responses to abiotic stresses and serves as a basis for uncovering the biological role of pin genes in soybean development and adaption to adverse environments.
our data indicates that gmpin <dig>  a legume-specific pin gene, which was responsive to several abiotic stresses, might play a role in auxin re-distribution in soybean root under abiotic stress conditions.
the soybean pin genes were differentially regulated by various abiotic stresses and phytohormone stimuli, implying crosstalk between auxin and abiotic stress signaling pathways.
soybeanglycine maxpinauxin efflux carrierspolar auxin transportabaabiotic stressesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
this study provided the first comprehensive analysis of the soybean pin gene family.
transmembrane proteins of the pin family are auxin efflux facilitators.
pin genes have been characterized in several plant species, while comprehensive analysis of this gene family in soybean has not been reported yet.
in this study, twenty-three members of the pin gene family were identified in the soybean genome through homology searches.
analysis of chromosome distribution and phylogenetic relationships of the soybean pin genes indicated nine pairs of duplicated genes and a legume specific subfamily.
information on phylogenetic relationships, gene structure, protein profiles and expression profiles of the soybean pin genes in different tissues and under various abiotic stress treatments helps to identity candidates with potential roles in specific developmental processes and/or environmental stress conditions.
the plant phytohormone auxin controls many aspects of plant growth and development, which largely depends on its uneven distribution in plant tissues.
they play a key role in polar auxin transport and are associated with auxin asymmetrical distribution in plants.
organ/tissue expression patterns and promoter activity assays of the soybean pins suggested redundant functions for most duplicated genes and complementary and tissue-specific functions during development for non-duplicated genes.
this was further supported by the altered auxin distribution under these conditions as revealed by dr5::gus transgenic soybean hairy root.
