initial screening of a b. pseudomallei signature-tagged mutagenesis library identified an attenuated mutant with a transposon insertion in a gene encoding the sensor component of an uncharacterised two-component signal transduction system , which we designated bprrs.
however, loss of a single component, either the sensor histidine kinase bprs or its cognate response regulator bprr, resulted in significant transcriptomic and phenotypic differences from the wild-type strain.
single gene inactivation of either the response regulator gene  or the sensor histidine kinase gene  resulted in mutants with reduced swarming motility and reduced virulence in mice.
burkholderia pseudomallei is the causative agent of melioidosis, a severe invasive disease of humans and animals.
burkholderia pseudomalleitwo-component signal transductiontranscriptomicsflagellavirulencehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000925national health and medical research council1043667545855boyce john d. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000923australian research councilce0562063adler ben issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
the transcriptomes of the bprs, bprr and bprrs mutants were compared with the transcriptome of the parent strain k <dig>  inactivation of the entire bprrs tcsts  resulted in altered expression of only nine genes, including both bprr and bprs, five phage-related genes and bpss <dig>  encoding a putative  <dig>  10-methylene tetrahydromethanopterin reductase involved in one carbon metabolism.
however, a bprrs double mutant was not attenuated for virulence and displayed wild-type levels of motility.
in contrast, the transcriptomes of each of the bprr and bprs single gene mutants revealed more than  <dig> differentially expressed genes common to both mutants, including regulatory genes and those required for flagella assembly and for the biosynthesis of the cytotoxic polyketide, malleilactone.
we hypothesize that the dramatically altered phenotypes of these single mutants are the result of cross-regulation with one or more other tcstss and concomitant dysregulation of other key regulatory genes.
