we identified  <dig> different mariner lineages belonging to six distinct subfamilies, including a subfamily not described previously.
wide variation in lineage abundance and copy number were observed among species and among mariner lineages, suggesting continuous turn-over.
most mariner lineages are inactive and contain a high proportion of damaged copies.
different amplification times were observed for mariner lineages shared by different species, a finding best explained by either horizontal transmission or a reactivation process.
mariner lineages were observed at almost all “life cycle” stages: recent amplification, subsequent decay and potential -invasion or invasion of genomes.
the mariner family of transposable elements is one of the most widespread in the metazoa.
in this work, we used a comparative genomics approach to access the genus-wide diversity and evolution of mariner transposable elements in twenty drosophila sequenced genomes.
hence, 23% of copies correspond to several miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements  sublineages, the first ever described in drosophila for mariner.
this analysis is the first comprehensive survey of this family of transposable elements at a genus scale.
drosophilacomparative genomicstc1-marinertransposable elementsmitesdeletion rateissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014
different lineages within one species have also amplified at different times, corresponding to successive invasions.
we detected some instances of multiple or ongoing transposition bursts.
the estimation of the transposition rates over time revealed that all lineages followed a similar progression consisting of a rapid amplification burst followed by a rapid decrease in transposition.
in the most successful mites, internal deletion is often associated with internal rearrangement, which sheds light on the process of mite origin.
we showed that, in addition to substitutions that rapidly inactivate copies, internal deletion is a major mechanism contributing to element decay and the generation of non-autonomous sublineages.
