in this study, the high error rate of pacbio long sequence reads of a. comosus’s total genomic dna were improved by leveraging on the high accuracy but short illumina reads for error-correction via the latest error correction module from novocraft.
phylogenetic analysis confirmed the recent taxonomical relation among the member of commelinids which support the monophyly relationship between arecales and dasypogonaceae and between zingiberales to the poales, which includes the a. comosus.
analysis of selection pressure on protein-coding genes using ka/ks ratio showed significant positive selection exerted on the rps <dig> gene of the pineapple chloroplast with p less than  <dig> .
overall, the genome contained  <dig> unique coding regions and  <dig> were repeated in the ir region with its genes contents, structure and arrangement similar to its sister taxon, typha latifolia.
error corrected long pacbio reads were assembled by using a single tool to produce a contig representing the pineapple chloroplast genome.
the plant, which is indigenous to south america, is the most important species in the bromeliaceae family and is largely traded for fresh fruit consumption.
the complete pineapple chloroplast will serve as a reference for in-depth taxonomical studies in the bromeliaceae family when more species under the family are sequenced in the future.
the genome of  <dig>  bp in length is featured with the conserved quadripartite structure of chloroplast containing a large single copy region  with a size of  <dig>  bp, a small single copy region  with a size of  <dig>  bp and two inverted repeat regions  each with the size of  <dig>  bp.
a total of  <dig> repeats structure were detected in both the coding and non-coding regions with a majority being tandem repeats.
here, we report the complete chloroplast sequence of the md- <dig> pineapple that was sequenced using the pacbio sequencing technology.
the complete sequence of the chloroplast of pineapple provides insights to the divergence of genic chloroplast sequences from the members of the subclass commelinidae.
the genetic sequence information will also make feasible other molecular applications of the pineapple chloroplast for plant genetic improvement.
