h. volcanii demonstrates some biofilm phenotypes similar to bacterial biofilms, but also has interesting phenotypes that may be unique to this organism or to this class of organisms, including changes in cellular morphology and an unusual form of social motility.
time-lapse photography of static liquid biofilms also revealed wave-like social motility.
the developmental processes, functional properties and dynamics of h. volcanii biofilms provide insight on how haloarchaeal species might persist, interact and exchange dna in natural communities.
advances in biofilm biology have been made over decades for model bacterial species, and include characterizations of social behaviors and cellular differentiation during biofilm development.
to visualize the extracellular matrix, biofilms formed by gfp-expressing cells were stained with concanavalin a, dapi, congo red and thioflavin t. stains colocalized with larger cellular structures and indicated that the extracellular matrix may contain a combination of polysaccharides, extracellular dna and amyloid protein.
biofilms were cultured in static liquid and visualized with fluorescent cell membrane dyes and by engineering cells to express green fluorescent protein .
analysis by confocal scanning laser microscopy showed that h. volcanii cells formed microcolonies within 24 h, which developed into larger clusters by 48 h and matured into flake-like towers often greater than 100 μm in height after 7 days.
because h. volcanii has one of the most advanced genetic systems for any archaeon, the phenotypes reported here may promote the study of genetic and developmental processes in archaeal biofilms.
however, the biology of archaeal biofilms is only now being explored.
following a switch to biofilm growth conditions, a sub-population of cells differentiated into chains of long rods sometimes exceeding 25 μm in length, compared to their planktonic disk-shaped morphology.
finally, we quantified gene exchange between biofilm cells, and found that it was equivalent to the mating frequency of a classic filter-based experimental method.
