the bionj algorithm results in phylogenies most in accordance with the current ncbi taxonomy, with nj and fastme performing insignificantly worse, and stc performing as well if applied to high quality distance matrices.
here, we extend the recently described genome blast distance phylogeny  strategy to compute phylogenetic trees from all completely sequenced plastid genomes currently available and from a selection of mitochondrial genomes representing the major eukaryotic lineages.
our results indicate that, at this taxonomic level, plastid genomes are much more valuable for inferring phylogenies than are mitochondrial genomes, and that distances based on breakpoints are of little use.
blastn, tblastx, or combinations of both are used to locate high-scoring segment pairs  between two sequences from which pairwise similarities and distances are computed in different ways resulting in a total of  <dig> gbdp variants.
using the most treelike distance matrices, as judged by their δ values, distance methods are able to recover all major plant lineages, and are more in accordance with apicomplexa organelles being derived from "green" plastids than from plastids of the "red" type.
other factors do not significantly affect the phylogenetic outcome.
δ values are found to be a reliable predictor of phylogenetic accuracy.
δ values are a topology-independent tool of general use for the development and assessment of distance methods for phylogenetic inference.
phylogenetic methods which do not rely on multiple sequence alignments are important tools in inferring trees directly from completely sequenced genomes.
distances based on the proportion of "matched" hsp length to average genome length were best for tree estimation.
the suitability of these distance formulae for phylogeny reconstruction is directly estimated by computing a recently described measure of "treelikeness", the so-called δ value, from the respective distance matrices.
gbdp-like methods can be used to reliably infer phylogenies from different kinds of genomic data.
additionally, we compare the trees inferred from these matrices using upgma, nj, bionj, fastme, or stc, respectively, with the ncbi taxonomy tree of the taxa under study.
