after enrichment analysis, we found that tiia regulated genes are involved in carbohydrate metabolism, the cell cycle, apoptosis, dna damage and cytoskeleton reorganization.
severe dna damage, cell cycle arrest at the g2/m transition and apoptosis with cytoskeleton reorganization were detected in tiia-treated gastric cancer cells.
combining transcriptomics and proteomics results, we propose that tiia treatment could lead cell stresses, including nutrient deficiency and dna damage, by inhibiting the glucose metabolism of cancer cells.
in most solid tumors, a metabolic switch to glucose is a hallmark of cancer cells, which do this to provide nutrients for cell proliferation.
however, the mechanism associated with glucose metabolism by which tiia acts on gastric cancer cells remains to be elucidated.
this study provides an insight into how the tiia regulatory metabolism in gastric cancer cells suppresses cell growth, and may help improve the development of cancer therapy.
tanshinone iia  is a diterpene quinone extracted from the plant danshen  used in traditional chinese herbal medicine.
tanshinone iiagastric cancerglycolysisisobaric tags for relative and absolute quantificationnext generation sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
we found that tiia treatment is able to significantly inhibit cell growth and the proliferation of gastric cancer in a dose-dependent manner.
our proteomics data revealed the downregulation of intracellular atp levels, glucose-6-phosphate isomerase and l-lactate dehydrogenase b chains by tiia, which might work with disorders of glucose metabolism and extracellular lactate levels to suppress cell proliferation.
in total,  <dig>  unique transcripts and  <dig> proteins were identified.
it has been reported to have anti-tumor potential against several kinds of cancer, including gastric cancer.
using next-generation sequencing-based rna-seq transcriptomics and quantitative proteomics-isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification , we characterized the mechanism of tiia regulation in gastric cancer cell line ags.
