cultivation on poly-ε-caprolacton-collagen-i nanofibers induced parallel alignment of cells and positive expression of desmin.
in this study the myogenic differentiation potential of mscs upon co-cultivation with myoblasts and under stimulation with hepatocyte growth factor  and insulin-like growth factor- <dig>  was evaluated.
hence, the future goal of tissue engineering  is the replacement and repair of lost muscle tissue by newly generating skeletal muscle combining different cell sources, such as myoblasts and mesenchymal stem cells , within a three-dimensional matrix.
igf-1hgfmesenchymal stem cellsmyogenic differentiationpcl-collagen nanofibersskeletal muscle tissue engineeringhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftbe 4803/3-1beier j. p. interdisciplinary center for clinical research elan fonds of the university hospital of erlangenissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017
mscs could be successfully differentiated into the myogenic lineage both in mono- and in co-cultures independent of hgf and igf- <dig> stimulation by expressing desmin, myocyte enhancer factor  <dig>  myosin heavy chain  <dig> and alpha-sarcomeric actinin.
the effect of different concentrations of hgf and igf- <dig> alone, as well as in combination, on myogenic differentiation was analysed using microscopy, multicolour flow cytometry and real-time pcr.
furthermore, with the development of a biocompatible nanofiber scaffold we established the basis for further experiments aiming at the generation of functional muscle tissue.
three-dimensional cultivation in fibrin-collagen-i gels induced higher levels of myogenic differentiation compared with two-dimensional experiments.
furthermore, the influence of different three-dimensional culture models, such as fibrin, fibrin-collagen-i gels and parallel aligned electrospun poly-ε-caprolacton collagen-i nanofibers, on myogenic differentiation was analysed.
volumetric muscle loss caused by trauma or after tumour surgery exceeds the natural regeneration capacity of skeletal muscle.
latest research showed that seeding skeletal muscle cells on aligned constructs enhance the formation of myotubes as well as cell alignment and may provide a further step towards the clinical application of engineered skeletal muscle.
primary rat myoblasts and rat mscs were mono- and co-cultivated for  <dig>   <dig> or 14 days.
even though, stimulation with hgf/igf- <dig> does not seem essential for sufficient myogenic differentiation.
the addition of hgf/igf- <dig> might not be essential for achieving successful myogenic differentiation.
we further analysed the behaviour of msc-myoblast co-cultures in different 3d matrices.
