these results demonstrate that in addition to nbmapkkkα, nbmapkkkβ and nbmapkkkγ also function as positive regulators of pcd.
in plants, mapk cascades are associated with responses to various abiotic and biotic stresses such as plant pathogens.
mapk cascades function through sequential phosphorylation: mapk kinase kinases  phosphorylate mapk kinases , and phosphorylated mapkks phosphorylate mapks.
although some plant mapkkks, including the mapkkkα of nicotiana benthamiana , are known to play crucial roles in plant defense responses, the functional relationship among mapkkk genes is poorly understood.
furthermore, in epistasis analysis of the functional relationships among nbmapkkkβ, nbmapkkkγ, and nbmapkkkα  conducted by combining transient overexpression analysis and virus-induced gene silencing, silencing of nbmapkkkα suppressed cell death induced by the overexpression of the nbmapkkkβ kinase domain or of nbmapkkkγ, but silencing of nbmapkkkβ failed to suppress cell death induced by the overexpression of nbmapkkkα or nbmapkkkγ.
the mitogen-activated protein kinase  cascade is an evolutionarily ancient mechanism of signal transduction found in eukaryotic cells.
we cloned three novel mapkkk genes from n. benthamiana: nbmapkkkβ, nbmapkkkγ, and nbmapkkkε <dig>  transient overexpression of full-length nbmapkkkβ or nbmapkkkγ or their kinase domains in n. benthamiana leaves induced hypersensitive response -like cell death associated with hydrogen peroxide production.
silencing of nbmapkkkγ suppressed cell death induced by the nbmapkkkβ kinase domain but not that induced by nbmapkkkα.
here, we performed a comparative functional analysis of mapkkks to investigate the signaling pathway leading to the defense response.
this activity was dependent on the kinase activity of the overexpressed mapkkk.
in addition, virus-induced silencing of nbmapkkkβ or nbmapkkkγ expression significantly suppressed the induction of programmed cell death  by viral infection.
their great diversity is assumed to allow mapkkks to regulate many specific signaling pathways in plants despite the relatively limited number of mapkks and mapks.
