analysis of clones up-regulated during dehydration procedures  has identified a number of significant cellular processes, namely the production and mobilisation of trehalose, protection of cellular systems via small heat shock proteins and tissue/cellular remodelling during the dehydration process.
energy production, leading to protein production, and cell division characterise the recovery process.
energy production, initiation of protein translation and cell division, plus potential tissue repair processes dominate genes identified during recovery.
microarray analysis has proved to be a powerful technique for understanding the processes and genes involved in cryoprotective dehydration, beyond the few candidate genes identified in the current literature.
the physiological mechanisms underlying cryoprotective dehydration have been well characterised in m. arctica and to date this process has been described in only a few other species: the antarctic nematode panagrolaimus davidi, an enchytraied worm, the larvae of the antarctic midge belgica antarctica and the cocoons of the earthworm dendrobaena octaedra.
heat map analysis identified a duplication of the trehalose-6-phosphate synthase  gene in m. arctica and also  <dig> clones co-regulated with tps, including a number of membrane associated and cell signalling proteins.
insects provide tractable models for enhancing our understanding of the physiological and cellular processes that enable survival at extreme low temperatures.
a cdna microarray was generated using  <dig>  m. arctica clones printed in duplicate.
they possess three main strategies to survive the cold: freeze tolerance, freeze avoidance or cryoprotective dehydration, of which the latter method is exploited by our model species, the arctic springtail megaphorura arctica, formerly onychiurus arcticus .
q-pcr on selected candidate genes has also contributed to our understanding with glutathione-s-transferase identified as the major antioxdidant enzyme protecting the cells during these stressful procedures, and a number of protein kinase signalling molecules involved in recovery.
