we developed a statistical method, called switchfinder, for the analysis of time-series data, in particular gene expression data, based on a change-point model.
switchfinder is a novel approach to the analysis of biological time-series data, supporting inference and interactive exploration of its inherent dynamic patterns, hence facilitating biological discovery process.
the fundamental idea behind it is the following: there are change-points  in the gene behaviour separating intervals of increasing and decreasing activity, whereas the intervals may have different durations.
switchfinder was applied to our original data - the gene expression time-series measured in neuroblastoma cell line upon treatment with all-trans retinoic acid .
time-series analysisdynamic patterns of gene expressionchange-point problemchange-point modelingbayesian modelingmcmcgibbs samplingneuroblastomaatra-induced differentiationeuropean union's seventh framework programme, health, fp7/2007-2013no:  <dig>  the asset consortium.bulashevska svetlana issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
with this, the gene expression profiles are represented in a qualitative manner - as sets of the dynamic features at their onset-times.
model inference was facilitated with the bayesian methodology using markov chain monte carlo  technique gibbs sampling.
we developed a web application of the approach, enabling to put queries to the gene expression time-courses and to deduce groups of genes with common dynamic patterns.
elucidating the switch-points is important for the identification of biologically meanigfull features and patterns of the gene dynamics.
two types of the model - based on linear and on generalized logistic function - were used to capture the data between the switch-points.
time-resolved gene expression data captures temporal behaviour of the genes genome-wide under various biological conditions: in response to stimuli, during cell cycle, differentiation or developmental programs.
the analysis revealed eight patterns of the gene expression responses to atra, indicating the induction of the bmp, wnt, notch, fgf and ntrk-receptor signaling pathways involved in cell differentiation, as well as the repression of the cell-cycle related genes.
