we have investigated the two prokaryotic domains for patterns of gene-enzyme relationships in the first committed step of arginine biosynthesis.
this paper focuses on a new and surprising aspect of glutamate acetylation.
in this group of sequences, we find the short novel nags of the type identified in m. tuberculosis.
in m. tuberculosis and many other bacteria, this domain evolved as an independent enzyme, whereas it fused either with a carbamate kinase fold to give the classical nags  or with argh as in marine gamma proteobacteria.
most of them have a classical nags with the exception of idiomarina loihiensis and pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis which nevertheless can grow in the absence of arginine and therefore appear to rely on the arg sequence for arginine biosynthesis.
screening prokaryotic genomes for virtual argh-x 'fusions' where x stands for a homologue of arg, we retrieved a large number of bacteria and several archaea, all of them devoid of a classical nags.
the gene-enzyme relationship for the first committed step of arginine biosynthesis should now be considered in a new perspective.
until recently, this reaction was thought to be catalyzed by either of two enzymes:  the classical n-acetylglutamate synthase  first characterized in escherichia coli and pseudomonas aeruginosa several decades ago and also present in vertebrates, or  the bifunctional version of ornithine acetyltransferase  present in bacteria, archaea and many eukaryotes.
we recently showed that in moritella abyssi and m. profunda, two marine gamma proteobacteria, the gene for the last enzyme in arginine biosynthesis  is fused to a short sequence that corresponds to the c-terminal, n-acetyltransferase-encoding domain of nags and is able to complement an arga mutant of e. coli.
the argh-a fusion, designated argh, and discovered in moritella was found to be present in  marine gamma proteobacteria of the alteromonas- and vibrio-like group.
the n-acetylation of l-glutamate is regarded as a universal metabolic strategy to commit glutamate towards arginine biosynthesis.
among these organisms, at least thermus, mycobacterium and streptomyces species appear to rely on this short nags version for arginine biosynthesis.
in addition to bifunctional oat, nature appears to implement at least three alternatives for the acetylation of glutamate.
