this paper describes the first example of multiplex rt-late-pcr and its utility, when combined with puramp sample preparation, for quantitative analysis of transcript levels in single cells.
we, thus, postulated that simultaneous quantification of oct <dig> and xist transcripts in individual blastomeres at the 8-cell stage could be informative as to their subsequent fate.
our results demonstrate, however, that both oct <dig> and xist rna levels vary in individual blastomeres comprising the same embryo, with some cells having particularly elevated levels of either transcript.
we overcame these difficulties by combining puramp, a single-tube method for rna preparation and quantification, with late-pcr, an advanced form of asymmetric pcr.
with this technique, copy numbers of different rnas can be accurately measured independently from their relative abundance in a cell, a goal that cannot be achieved using symmetric pcr.
we constructed a duplex rt-late-pcr assay for real-time measurement of oct <dig> and xist templates and confirmed its specificity and quantitative accuracy with different methods.
the cells of the inner cell mass are pluripotent and express high levels of oct <dig> mrna, which is down-regulated in the surrounding trophectoderm.
we then undertook analysis of sets of blastomeres isolated from embryos at the 8-cell stage.
analysis of multiple embryos also shows that xist and oct <dig> expression levels are not correlated at the 8-cell stage, although transcription of both genes is up-regulated at this time in development.
the formation of two distinctive cell lineages in preimplantation mouse embryos is characterized by differential gene expression.
in addition, comparison of data from males and females allowed us to determine that the efficiency of the oct4/xist assay is unaffected by sex-related differences in gene expression.
in contrast, the trophectoderm of female embryos contains xist mrna, which is absent from cells of the inner mass.
prior to blastocyst formation, all blastomeres of female embryos still express both of these rnas.
the technique illustrated in this work is relevant to a wide array of applications, such as stem cell and cancer cell analysis and preimplantation genetic diagnostics.
