a total of  <dig> unique proteins were predicted as a part of the cri secretome from complete open reading frames , and 41 % of them were cronartium-specific.
to increase our understanding of molecular wp-br interactions, here we report genome-wide transcriptional profile analysis of c. ribicola using rna-seq.
this comprehensive transcriptome profiling substantially improves our current understanding of molecular wp-br interactions.
to cause stem cankers and kill white pine trees the fungus elaborates a life cycle with five stages of spore development on five-needle pines and the alternate host ribes plants.
over  <dig> million rna-seq 100-bp paired-end  reads from rust fungal spores were de novo assembled and a reference transcriptome was generated with  <dig>  transcripts that were expressed from  <dig>  unigenes.
the secreted fungal protein genes that were up-regulated in pine needle tissues during early infection were primarily associated with cell wall modifications, possibly to mask the rust pathogen from plant defenses.
this study further identified a repertoire of candidate effectors and other pathogenicity determinants.
the repertoire of candidate effectors and other putative pathogenicity determinants identified here are valuable for future functional analysis of cri virulence and pathogenicity.
large-scale changes of in planta gene expression profiles were observed, revealing that multiple fungal biosynthetic pathways were enhanced during mycelium growth inside infected pine stem tissues.
conversely, many fungal genes that were up-regulated at the urediniospore stage appeared to be signalling components and transporters.
differentially expressed genes  were identified to gain an understanding of molecular events important during the wpbr fungus life cycle by comparing cri transcriptomes at different infection stages.
the fungus cronartium ribicola  is an economically and ecologically important forest pathogen that causes white pine blister rust  disease on five-needle pines.
