the network structure reveals direct associations between the variables and the joint probability density allows one to ask arbitrary probabilistic questions on the data.
we also show that imposing separate sparsity penalties for edges connecting different types of variables significantly improves edge recovery performance.
our results show that mgms reliably uncover the underlying graph structure, and when used for classification, their performance is comparable to popular discriminative methods .
to choose these sparsity parameters, we propose a new efficient model selection method, named stable edge-specific penalty selection .
in addition, we use a heuristic search that is linear in size of the sparsity value search space as opposed to the cubic grid search required by other model selection methods.
furthermore, our stability based method for model selection determines sparsity parameters faster and more accurately  than other model selection methods.
separation of sparsity penalties by edge type is essential for accurate network edge recovery.
we studied the properties of mgm learning and applications of mgms to high-dimensional data .
mixed variable types are common in biomedical datasets.
mgms are able to accurately recover dependencies between sets of continuous and discrete variables in both simulated and biomedical datasets.
with the ongoing availability of comprehensive clinical and biomedical datasets, mgms are expected to become a valuable tool for investigating disease mechanisms and answering an array of critical healthcare questions.
our model also suggested biologically relevant mrna markers that are linked to these three clinical variables.
in terms of edge recovery, steps selected mgms outperform those models selected using standard techniques, including aic, bic and cross-validation.
mixed graphical models  are graphical models learned over a combination of continuous and discrete variables.
statistical methods for omics data integration and analysis  <dig> smodia 2014heraklion, crete, greece 10- <dig> november  <dig> http://smodia <dig> com/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
we applied our method to clinical and mrna expression data from the lung genomics research consortium  and the learned mgm correctly recovered connections between the diagnosis of obstructive or interstitial lung disease, two diagnostic breathing tests, and cigarette smoking history.
