the comparative genomic analysis of the sag clarifies the phylogenetics of these bacteria and supports the distinct species classification.
for each sag species, we sequenced at least one numerically dominant strain from cf airways recovered during acute exacerbation and an invasive, non-lung isolate.
we conducted intra and inter species whole-genome comparative analyses with  <dig> publically available streptococcus genomes and seven in-house closed high quality finished sag genomes; s. constellatus , s. intermedius , and s. anginosus .
s. anginosus was the most variable species sequenced in this study, yielding both the smallest and the largest sag genomes containing multiple genomic rearrangements, insertions and deletions.
the streptococcus anginosus group  represents three closely related species of the viridans group streptococci recognized as commensal bacteria of the oral, gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts.
streptococcus milleri groupstreptococcus anginosus groupstreptococcus anginosusstreptococcus constellatusstreptococcus intermediusphylogeneticsvirulencecomparative genomicswhole-genome sequencing
the sag genomes were most closely related to s. gordonii and s. sanguinis, based on shared orthologs and harbor a similar number of proteins within each cog category as other streptococcus species.
in contrast, within the s. constellatus and s. intermedius species, there was extensive continuous synteny, with only slight differences in genome size between strains.
numerous potential virulence determinants were identified and provide a foundation for further studies into sag pathogenesis.
little genomic information or description of virulence mechanisms is currently available for sag.
within s. constellatus we were able to determine important snps and changes in vntr numbers that occurred over the course of one year.
numerous characterized streptococcus virulence factor homologs were identified within the sag genomes including; adherence, invasion, spreading factors, lpxtg cell wall proteins, and two component histidine kinases known to be involved in virulence gene regulation.
mobile elements, primarily integrative conjugative elements and bacteriophage, account for greater than 10% of the sag genomes.
