previous studies in an enhanced gfp variant  identified a series of deletions that can retain gfp fluorescence.
the fluorescent gfp mutants were characterized for their whole-cell fluorescence and fraction soluble.
most commercially available fps have been optimized for their oligomerization state to prevent potential structural constraints that may interfere with the native function of fused proteins.
in this study, we interrogated the structural plasticity of a uv-optimized gfp variant  to amino acid deletions, characterized the effects of deletions and explored the feasibility of rescuing the fluorescence of deletion mutants using folding-enhancing mutations.
other approach to reducing structural constraints may include minimizing the structure of gfps.
fluorescent gfp mutants with internal deletions were purified and characterized for their spectral and folding properties.
further analysis suggested that the five internal deletions diminished the efficiency of protein folding and chromophore maturation.
our results suggested that a “size-minimized” gfp may be developed by iterative incorporation of amino acid deletions, followed by fluorescence rescue with folding-enhancing mutations.
folding-ehancing mutations were introduced to deletion mutants to rescue their compromised fluorescence.
protein expression under hypothermic condition or incorporation of folding-enhancing mutations could rescue the compromised fluorescence of deletion mutants.
in addition, we generated dual deletion mutants that can retain gfp fluorescence.
transposon mutagenesis was used to screen amino acid deletions in gfp that led to fluorescent and nonfluorescent phenotypes.
we identified twelve amino acid deletions that can retain the fluorescence of gfpuv.
green fluorescent protein transposon mutagenesisamino acid deletionsprotein foldingchromophore maturationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
green fluorescent protein  and its derivative fluorescent proteins  are among the most commonly used reporter systems for studying gene expression and protein interaction in biomedical research.
