high performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analyses provided biochemical evidence that di-n-acetylated nulo molecules are expressed at relatively high levels by l. interrogans serovar lai strain  <dig>  and at lower levels by l. alexanderi serovar manhao and l. fainei serovar hurstbridge.
sialic acids are part of a larger family of nonulosonic acid  molecules that includes pseudaminic and legionaminic acids.
endogenous expression of n-acetylneuraminic acid  was documented in l. interrogans serovar copenhageni strain l1- <dig>  neu5ac biosynthesis is also supported by a unique gene fusion event resulting in an enzyme with an n-terminal n-acetylneuraminic acid synthase domain and a c-terminal phosphatase domain.
additional studies are needed to clarify the exact context and functional significance of nulo expression.
analysis of the composition and phylogeny of putative nulo biosynthetic gene clusters in l. interrogans serovar lai and serovar copenhageni revealed that both strains have complete biosynthetic pathways for legionamimic acid synthesis, a molecule with the same stereochemistry as sialic acid.
microbial expression of sialic acids and other nonulosonic acids has been shown to contribute to host-microbe interactions in a variety of contexts, including participation in colonization, immune subversion, and behaviors such as biofilm formation, autoagglutination and motility.
leptospira species encode nulo biosynthetic pathways and synthesize multiple nulo molecules including sialic acid.
sialic acids are negatively charged nine carbon backbone sugars expressed on mammalian cell surfaces.
lectin-based affinity purification of nulo-modified molecules, followed by mass spectrometric identification suggests post-translational modification of surface lipoproteins, including loa <dig>
here we use a combination of molecular tools to investigate the presence of nulo biosynthetic gene clusters among clinical and saprophytic isolates of the genus leptospira.
