survey results and collectors’ perceptions tally to an extent.
some of the species  were critically low in plant density with less than a plant per m <dig> while delphinium glaciale, fritillaria delavayi and aconitum orochryseum were confined to narrow altitude range.
high species evenness was recorded among nardostachys grandiflora, chrysosplenium nudicaule, saussurea gossypiphora and aconitum orochryseum with average species density of  <dig> plant m− <dig>  rhodiola crenulata, and dactylorhiza hatagirea followed by meconopsis horridula and meconopsis simplicifolia were ranked as most threatened species with average species density of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  plant m− <dig>  respectively.
onosma hookeri, corydalis crispa and delphinium glaciale were some of the species ranked as threatened species followed by halenia elliptica .
out of the  <dig> priority species identified by the expert group, collectors’ perception on ecological status of the priority species differed from survey findings.
priority species identified by expert group were found vulnerable and patchy in distribution.
chrysosplenium nudicaule  ranked as most threatened species followed by corydalis dubia, and meconopsis simplicifolia.
the most abundant  species was onosma hookeri .
percent relative abundance showed irregular pattern of species distribution.
this paper attempts to identify some of the priority medicinal plant species harvested in the wild and assess their ecological status for their judicious utilization, and to help provide policy guidance for possible domestication and support strategic conservation frameworks.
medicinal plants serve as one of the major sources of income for high altitude inhabitants in the himalaya, particularly in countries like nepal, and bhutan.
people here harvest huge volumes of medicinal plants indiscriminately, risking their sustainability.
moreover, major chunk of medicinal plants harvested remain unaccounted as illegal harvest and marketing seemed to occur across the borders.
wild harvestingmedicinal plantshigh altitudelingshibhutaneu medicinal plants phase ii projectroyal government of bhutanissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016
collectors were aware that most species identified in priority list are threatened and existing harvesting plan are hardly implemented as it is not pragmatic.
