this tissue represents a model system for studying ion absorption across polarised epithelial cells as it provides a major pathway for fish to acquire zinc directly from water whilst sharing a conserved zinc transporting system with mammals.
to investigate the underlying molecular events invoked by zinc depletion we performed a temporal analysis of transcriptome changes observed within the zebrafish gill.
the present study demonstrates the importance of including the time-dimension in microarray studies.
there was also significant bias for annotations relating to development, cell cycle, cell differentiation, gene regulation, butanoate metabolism, lysine degradation, protein tyrosin phosphatases, nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide metabolism, and cellular metabolic processes.
many of the processes affected reflected a fundamental restructuring of the gill epithelium through reactivation of developmental programs leading to stem cell differentiation.
zinc deficiency is detrimental to organisms, highlighting its role as an essential micronutrient contributing to numerous biological processes.
annotation enrichment analysis revealed that 'developmental process' was the most significantly overrepresented biological process go term , involving 26% of all regulated genes.
the specific regulation of genes known to be involved in development of diabetes provides new molecular links between zinc deficiency and this disease.
down-regulation was dominant at most time points and distinct sets of genes were regulated at different stages.
gill samples were collected at five time points and transcriptome changes analysed in quintuplicate using a 16k oligonucleotide array.
network analysis of the temporal expression profile indicated that transcription factors foxl <dig>  wt <dig>  nr5a <dig>  nr6a <dig>  and especially, hnf4a may be key coordinators of the homeostatic response to zinc depletion.
of the genes represented the expression of a total of  <dig> transcripts showed differential regulation by zinc depletion .
