thus, the present work is aimed at the identification of potential therapeutic ncrna targets for rrms through differential network analysis of ncrna – mrna coexpression networks.
ncrna – mrna coexpression networks have been constructed from both selected ncrna  and mrna large-scale expression data obtained from  <dig> patients in relapse, the same  <dig> patients in remission and  <dig> healthy controls.
the differential network analysis  has revealed that, although both network topology and the majority of the genes are maintained, few ncrna – mrna links appear in more than one network.
our results suggest that the diseased state of rrms has a strong impact on the ncrna – mrna network of peripheral blood leukocytes, as a massive rewiring of the network happens between conditions.
finally, among the potential therapeutic target ncrnas, snora <dig> seems to be the most promising candidate.
we have selected as potential therapeutic targets the ncrnas that appear in the disease-specific network and were found to be differentially expressed in a previous study.
condition-specific  networks have been built and compared to identify the parts of the system most affected by perturbation and aid the identification of potential therapeutic targets among the ncrnas.
several studies have revealed a potential role for both small nucleolar rnas  and micrornas  in the physiopathology of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis .
multiple sclerosisncrnasnornamirnacoexpressiondifferential networktherapeutic targetrewiringaca40issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
all the coexpression networks we built present a scale-free topology and many snornas are shown to have a prominent role in their architecture.
our findings also indicate that the role snornas have in targeted gene silencing is a widespread phenomenon.
however, it has been suggested that, in order to extract additional information from large-scale expression experiments, differential expression studies must be complemented with differential network studies.
