pcr specificity screening across a panel of clinically relevant species, coupled with in silico analysis of all species within the order pasteurellales, demonstrated that the fucp assay was 100 % specific for h. influenzae; all other examined species failed to amplify.
has confounded accurate identification of h. influenzae, leading to both false-positive and false-negative results with existing speciation assays.
on the molecular level, frequent genetic exchange amongst haemophilus spp.
this study is the first of its kind to use large-scale comparative genomic analysis of haemophilus spp.
the fucp assay outperforms existing h. influenzae targets, most of which were identified prior to the next-generation genomics era and thus lack validation across a large number of haemophilus spp.
haemophilus influenzae is an opportunistic bacterial pathogen that exclusively colonises humans and is associated with both acute and chronic disease.
haemophilus influenzaehaemophilus haemolyticusnthigenomicsfucppcrreal-time pcrspeciestaqmanassayissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
despite its clinical significance, accurate identification of h. influenzae is a non-trivial endeavour.
h. haemolyticus can be misidentified as h. influenzae from clinical specimens using selective culturing methods, reflecting both the shared environmental niche and phenotypic similarities of these species.
based on this phylogeny, h. influenzae could be differentiated from closely related species.
next, a h. influenzae-specific locus, fucp, was identified, and a novel taqman real-time pcr assay targeting fucp was designed.
to accurately delineate h. influenzae and to identify a species-specific molecular signature for this species.
we recommend use of the fucp assay in clinical and research laboratories for the most accurate detection and diagnosis of h. influenzae infection and colonisation.
whole-genome single-nucleotide polymorphism data from  <dig> closely related global haemophilus isolates, including  <dig> australian isolate genomes generated in this study, were used to construct a whole-genome phylogeny.
