for quantitative polymerase chain reaction , the interpretation of the results from the environmental samples still remains a challenge.
legionelladetectionenvironmental samplesmagnetic particlesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015
legionella testing conducted at environmental laboratories plays an essential role in assessing the risk of disease transmission associated with water systems.
however, drawbacks of culture-based methodology used for legionella enumeration can have great impact on the results and interpretation which together can lead to underestimation of the actual risk.
up to 20% of the samples analysed by these laboratories produced inconclusive results, making effective risk management impossible.
inhibitors may cause up to 10% of inconclusive results.
the ims method results were not affected by microbiota while culture counts were significantly reduced  or negative in the same samples.
so the rate of inconclusive results of culture and pcr was  <dig>  and  <dig> %, respectively, without any inconclusive results reported for the ims method.
of the  <dig> water samples,  <dig> presented interfering microbiota by culture and  <dig> presented partial or complete inhibition of the pcr reaction.
this study compared a quantitative method based on immunomagnetic separation  with culture and qpcr, as a new approach to routine monitoring of legionella.
first, pilot studies evaluated the recovery and detectability of legionella spp using an ims method, in the presence of microbiota and biocides.
damage by biocides of viable legionella was detected by the ims method.
eighteen  of the  <dig> samples were positive by the ims method, thirteen of them reporting counts below  <dig> colony forming units per liter , six presented interfering microbiota and three presented pcr inhibition.
the ims method generally improved the recovery and detectability of legionella in environmental matrices, suggesting the possibility to use ims method as valuable indicator of risk.
legionella spp was detected by culture in  <dig>  of the  <dig> samples.
