BACKGROUND
the liver plays a major role in metabolism and performs a number of vital functions in the body. therefore, the determination of hepatic metabolite dynamics and the analysis of the control of the respective biochemical pathways are of great pharmacological and medical importance. extra- and intracellular time-series data from stimulus-response experiments are gaining in importance in the identification of in vivo metabolite dynamics, while dynamic network models are excellent tools for analyzing complex metabolic control patterns. this is the first study that has been undertaken on the data-driven identification of a dynamic liver central carbon metabolism model and its application in the analysis of the distribution of metabolic control in hepatoma cells.


RESULTS
dynamic metabolite data were collected from hepg <dig> cells after they had been deprived of extracellular glucose. the concentration of  <dig> extra- and intracellular intermediates was quantified using hplc, lc-ms-ms, and gc-ms. the in silico metabolite dynamics were in accordance with the experimental data. the central carbon metabolism of hepatomas was further analyzed with a particular focus on the control of metabolite concentrations and metabolic fluxes. it was observed that the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase exerted substantial negative control over the glycolytic flux, whereas oxidative phosphorylation had a significant positive control. the control over the rate of nadph consumption was found to be shared between the nadph-demand itself  and the nadph supply .


CONCLUSIONS
based on time-series data, a dynamic central carbon metabolism model was developed for the investigation of new and complex metabolic control patterns in hepatoma cells. the control patterns found support the hypotheses that the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and the warburg effect are promising targets for tumor treatment. the systems-oriented identification of metabolite dynamics is a first step towards the genome-based assessment of potential risks posed by nutrients and drugs.

