BACKGROUND
uncoupling protein one  is a mitochondrial inner membrane protein capable of uncoupling the electrochemical gradient from adenosine-5′-triphosphate  synthesis, dissipating energy as heat. ucp <dig> plays a central role in nonshivering thermogenesis in the brown adipose tissue  of hibernating animals and small rodents. a ucp <dig> ortholog also occurs in plants, and aside from its role in uncoupling respiration from atp synthesis, thereby wasting energy, it plays a beneficial role in the plant response to several abiotic stresses, possibly by decreasing the production of reactive oxygen species  and regulating cellular redox homeostasis. however, the molecular mechanisms by which ucp <dig> is associated with stress tolerance remain unknown.


RESULTS
here, we report that the overexpression of ucp <dig> increases mitochondrial biogenesis, increases the uncoupled respiration of isolated mitochondria, and decreases cellular atp concentration. we observed that the overexpression of ucp <dig> alters mitochondrial bioenergetics and modulates mitochondrial-nuclear communication, inducing the upregulation of hundreds of nuclear- and mitochondrial-encoded mitochondrial proteins. electron microscopy analysis showed that these metabolic changes were associated with alterations in mitochondrial number, area and morphology. surprisingly, ucp <dig> overexpression also induces the upregulation of hundreds of stress-responsive genes, including some involved in the antioxidant defense system, such as superoxide dismutase , glutathione peroxidase  and glutathione-s-transferase . as a consequence of the increased ucp <dig> activity and increased expression of oxidative stress-responsive genes, the ucp1-overexpressing plants showed reduced ros accumulation. these beneficial metabolic effects may be responsible for the better performance of ucp1-overexpressing lines in low ph, high salt, high osmolarity, low temperature, and oxidative stress conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
overexpression of ucp <dig> in the mitochondrial inner membrane induced increased uncoupling respiration, decreased ros accumulation under abiotic stresses, and diminished cellular atp content. these events may have triggered the expression of mitochondrial and stress-responsive genes in a coordinated manner. because these metabolic alterations did not impair plant growth and development, ucp <dig> overexpression can potentially be used to create crops better adapted to abiotic stress conditions.

ucp1mitochondriaoxidative stressbiogenesisplantstress response

