BACKGROUND
previous studies examining post-feeding organ regeneration in the burmese python  have identified thousands of genes that are significantly differentially regulated during this process. however, substantial gaps remain in our understanding of coherent mechanisms and specific growth pathways that underlie these rapid and extensive shifts in organ form and function. here we addressed these gaps by comparing gene expression in the burmese python heart, liver, kidney, and small intestine across pre- and post-feeding time points , and by conducting detailed analyses of molecular pathways and predictions of upstream regulatory molecules across these organ systems.


RESULTS
identified enriched canonical pathways and upstream regulators indicate that while downstream transcriptional responses are fairly tissue specific, a suite of core pathways and upstream regulator molecules are shared among responsive tissues. pathways such as mtor signaling, ppar/lxr/rxr signaling, and nrf2-mediated oxidative stress response are significantly differentially regulated in multiple tissues, indicative of cell growth and proliferation along with coordinated cell-protective stress responses. upstream regulatory molecule analyses identify multiple growth factors, kinase receptors, and transmembrane receptors, both within individual organs and across separate tissues. downstream transcription factors myc and srebf are induced in all tissues.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that largely divergent patterns of post-feeding gene regulation across tissues are mediated by a core set of higher-level signaling molecules. consistent enrichment of the nrf2-mediated oxidative stress response indicates this pathway may be particularly important in mediating cellular stress during such extreme regenerative growth.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hyperplasiahypertrophynrf2mtorregenerationrnaseqhttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000154division of integrative organismal systemsiob-0466139issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

