BACKGROUND
baculoviruses are insect-associated viruses carrying large, circular double-stranded-dna genomes with significant biotechnological applications such as biological pest control, recombinant protein production, gene delivery in mammals and as a model of dna genome evolution. these pathogens infect insects from the orders lepidoptera, hymenoptera and diptera, and have high species diversity which is expressed in their diverse biological properties including morphology, virulence or pathogenicity. spodoptera frugiperda , the fall armyworm, represents a significant pest for agriculture in america; it is a host for baculoviruses such as the spodoptera frugiperda multiple nucleopolyhedrovirus   having been classified as a group ii alphabaculovirus making it a very attractive target for bioinsecticidal use.


RESULTS
genome analysis by pyrosequencing revealed that sfmnpv cola has  <dig> orfs,  <dig> of which were not present in the other sequenced genotypes of the virus . an in-depth bioinformatics study showed that orf <dig> and orf <dig> were acquired by a recent homologous recombination process between spodoptera frugiperda and spodoptera litura  nucleopolyhedroviruses. auxiliary genes are numerous in the affected locus which has a homologous region , a repetitive sequence associated with genome replication which became lost in sfcola along with  <dig> orf. besides, the mrnas associated with two acquired genes appeared in the virus’ life-cycle during the larval stage. predictive studies concerning the theoretical proteins identified that orf <dig> protein would be a phosphatase involved in dna repair and that the orf <dig> protein would be a membrane polypeptide associated with cell transport.


CONCLUSIONS
the sfcola genome was thus revealed to be a natural recombinant virus showing evidence of recent horizontal gene transfer between different baculovirus species occurring in nature. this feature could be the cause of its high insecticidal power and therefore sfcola becomes a great candidate for bioinsecticide formulations.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
baculovirusspodoptera frugiperdahorizontal gene transferhomologous recombinationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

