BACKGROUND
alzheimer’s disease  is the most common form of neurodegenerative disorder that leads to a decline in cognitive function. in ad, aggregates of amyloid β peptide precede the accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles, both of which are hallmarks of the disease. the great majority  of the ad cases are not originated from genetic defects, therefore supporting the central roles of epigenetic modifications that are acquired progressively during the life span. strong evidences have indicated the implication of epigenetic modifications, including histone modification and dna methylation, in ad. recent studies revealed that 5-hydroxymethylcytosine  is dynamically regulated during neurodevelopment and aging.


RESULTS
we show that amyloid peptide 1– <dig>  could significantly reduce the overall level of 5hmc in vitro. we found that the level of 5hmc displayed differential response to the pathogenesis in different brain regions, including the cortex, cerebellum, and hippocampus of app-psen <dig> double transgenic  mice. we observed a significant decrease of overall 5hmc in hippocampus, but not in cortex and cerebellum, as the dtg mice aged. genome-wide profiling identified differential hydroxymethylation regions  in dtg mice, which are highly enriched in introns, exons and intergenic regions. gene ontology analyses indicated that dhmr-associated genes are highly enriched in multiple signaling pathways involving neuronal development/differentiation and neuronal function/survival.


CONCLUSIONS
5hmc-mediated epigenetic regulation could potentially be involved in the pathogenesis of ad.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
alzheimer’s disease5-hydroxymethylcytosinedna demethylationamyloid peptidehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31371309li xuekun national key basic research program of china2014cb943001li xuekun http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthns079625p50ag025688jin peng issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

