BACKGROUND
cytotoxicity assays have been used by researchers to screen for cytotoxicity in compound libraries. researchers can either look for cytotoxic compounds or screen "hits" from initial high-throughput drug screens for unwanted cytotoxic effects before investing in their development as a pharmaceutical. these assays may be used as an alternative to animal experimentation and are becoming increasingly important in modern laboratories. however, the execution of these assays in large scale and different laboratories requires, among other things, the management of protocols, reagents, cell lines used as well as the data produced, which can be a challenge. the management of all this information is greatly improved by the utilization of computational tools to save time and guarantee quality. however, a tool that performs this task designed specifically for cytotoxicity assays is not yet available.


RESULTS
in this work, we have used a workflow based lims -- the flux system -- and the together workflow editor as a framework to develop fluxcttx, a tool for management of data from cytotoxicity assays performed at different laboratories. the main work is the development of a workflow, which represents all stages of the assay and has been developed and uploaded in flux. this workflow models the activities of cytotoxicity assays performed as described in the oecd  <dig> guidance document.


CONCLUSIONS
fluxcttx presents a solution for the management of the data produced by cytotoxicity assays performed at interlaboratory comparisons. its adoption will contribute to guarantee the quality of activities in the process of cytotoxicity tests and enforce the use of good laboratory practices . furthermore, the workflow developed is complete and can be adapted to other contexts and different tests for management of other types of data.

laboratory information management systemsworkflowcytotoxicity testsoecd129good laboratory practicesinterlaboratory comparison28- <dig> october  <dig> brazilian symposium on bioinformatics  <dig> belo horizonte, brazil

