BACKGROUND
one of the loci responsible for feather development in chickens is k. the k allele is partially dominant to the k+ allele and causes a retard in the emergence of flight feathers at hatch. the k locus is sex linked and located on the z chromosome. therefore, the locus can be utilized to produce phenotypes that identify the sexes of chicks at hatch. previous studies on the organization of the k allele concluded the integration of endogenous retrovirus  <dig>  into one of two large homologous segments located on the z chromosome of late feathering chickens. in this study, a detailed molecular analysis of the k locus and a dna test to distinguish between homozygous and heterozygous late feathering males are presented.


RESULTS
the k locus was investigated with quantitative pcr by examining copy number variations in a total of fourteen markers surrounding the ev <dig> integration site. the results showed a duplication at the k allele and sequence analysis of the breakpoint junction indicated a tandem duplication of  <dig>  basepairs. the tandem duplication of this region results in the partial duplication of two genes; the prolactin receptor and the gene encoding sperm flagellar protein  <dig>  sequence analysis revealed that the duplication is similar in broiler and white leghorn. in addition, twelve late feathering animals, including broiler, white leghorn, and brown layer lines, contained a  <dig> bp breakpoint junction fragment, indicating that the duplication is similar in all breeds. the breakpoint junction was used to develop a taqman-based quantitative pcr test to allow distinction between homozygous and heterozygous late feathering males. in total,  <dig> % of the animals tested were correctly assigned,  <dig> % were unassigned and no animals were incorrectly assigned.


CONCLUSIONS
the detailed molecular analysis presented in this study revealed the presence of a tandem duplication in the k allele. the duplication resulted in the partial duplication of two genes; the prolactin receptor and the gene encoding sperm flagellar protein  <dig>  furthermore, a dna test was developed to distinguish between homozygous and heterozygous late feathering males.

