BACKGROUND
recent developments in sequencing technology have facilitated widespread investigations of genomic variants, including continuous stretches of homozygous genomic regions. for cattle, a large proportion of these runs of homozygosity  are likely the result of inbreeding due to the accumulation of elite alleles from long-term selective breeding programs. in the present study, roh were characterized in four cattle breeds with whole genome sequence data and the distribution of predicted functional variants was detected in roh regions and across different roh length classes.


RESULTS
on average,  <dig>  % of the genome was located in roh across four cattle breeds. there were an average of  <dig>  roh per genome with an average size of ~ <dig> kbp, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  kbp. there was a significant correlation between shared short roh regions and regions putatively under selection . by investigating the relationship between roh and the predicted deleterious and non-deleterious variants, we gained insight into the distribution of functional variation in inbred  regions. predicted deleterious variants were more enriched in roh regions than predicted non-deleterious variants, which is consistent with observations in the human genome. we also found that increased enrichment of deleterious variants was significantly higher in short  and medium  roh regions compared with long  roh regions , which is different than what has been observed in the human genome.


CONCLUSIONS
this study illustrates the distribution of roh and functional variants within roh in cattle populations. these patterns are different from those in the human genome but consistent with the natural history of cattle populations, which is confirmed by the significant correlation between shared short roh regions and regions putatively under selection. these findings contribute to understanding the effects of inbreeding and probably selection in shaping the distribution of functional variants in the cattle genome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
runs of homozygositypolymorphismsinbreedingcattlegenome sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

