BACKGROUND
very virulent infectious bursal disease virus  induces immunosuppression and inflammation in young birds, which subsequently leads to high mortality. in addition, infectious bursal disease  is one of the leading causes of vaccine failure on farms. therefore, understanding the immunopathogenesis of ibdv in both the spleen and the bursae could help effective vaccine development. however, previous studies only profiled the differential expression of a limited number of cytokines, in either the spleen or the bursae of fabricius of ibdv-infected chickens. thus, this study aims to evaluate the in vitro and in vivo immunoregulatory effects of vvibdv infection on macrophage-like cells, spleen and bursae of fabricius.


RESULTS
the viral load was increased during the progression of the in vitro infection in the hd <dig> macrophage cell line and in vivo, but no significant difference was observed between the spleen and the bursae tissue. vvibdv infection induced the expression of pro-inflammatory and th <dig> cytokines, and chemokines from hd <dig> cells in a time- and dosage-dependent manner. furthermore, alterations in the lymphocyte populations, cytokine and chemokine expression, were observed in the vvibdv-infected spleens and bursae. a drastic rise was detected in numbers of macrophages and pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in the spleen, as early as 2 days post-infection . on  <dig> dpi, macrophage and t lymphocyte infiltration, associated with the peak expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the bursae tissues of infected chickens were observed. the majority of the significantly regulated pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, in vvibdv-infected spleens and bursae, were also detected in vvibdv-infected hd <dig> cells. this cellular infiltration subsequently resulted in a sharp rise in nitric oxide  and lipid peroxidation levels.


CONCLUSIONS
this study suggests that macrophage may play an important role in regulating the early expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, first in the spleen and then in the bursae, the latter tissue undergoing macrophage infiltration at  <dig> dpi.

keywords
vvibdvviral loadgexpreal-time pcrpro-inflammatory cytokineschemokinesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

