BACKGROUND
seeds of momordica charantia  produce high levels of eleostearic acid, an unusual conjugated fatty acid with industrial value. deep sequencing of non-normalized and normalized cdnas from developing bitter melon seeds was conducted to uncover key genes required for biotechnological transfer of conjugated fatty acid production to existing oilseed crops. it is expected that these studies will also provide basic information regarding the metabolism of other high-value novel fatty acids.


RESULTS
deep sequencing using  <dig> technology with non-normalized and normalized cdna libraries prepared from bitter melon seeds at  <dig> dap resulted in the identification of transcripts for the vast majority of known genes involved in fatty acid and triacylglycerol biosynthesis. the non-normalized library provided a transcriptome profile of the early stage in seed development that highlighted the abundance of transcripts for genes encoding seed storage proteins as well as for a number of genes for lipid metabolism-associated polypeptides, including Δ <dig> oleic acid desaturases and fatty acid conjugases, class  <dig> lipases, acyl-carrier protein, and acyl-coa binding protein. normalization of cdna by use of a duplex-specific nuclease method not only increased the overall discovery of genes from developing bitter melon seeds, but also resulted in the identification of  <dig> contigs with homology to  <dig> known lipid genes in arabidopsis. these included candidate genes for eleostearic acid metabolism such as diacylglycerol acyltransferase  <dig> and  <dig>  and a phospholipid:diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1-related enzyme. transcripts were also identified for a novel fad <dig> gene encoding a functional Δ <dig> oleic acid desaturase with potential implications for eleostearic acid biosynthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
 <dig> deep sequencing, particularly with normalized cdna populations, was an effective method for mining of genes associated with eleostearic acid metabolism in developing bitter melon seeds. the transcriptomic data presented provide a resource for the study of novel fatty acid metabolism and for the biotechnological production of conjugated fatty acids and possibly other novel fatty acids in established oilseed crops.

