BACKGROUND
neem tree  is one of the richest sources of skeletally diverse triterpenoids and they are well-known for their broad-spectrum pharmacological and insecticidal properties. however, the abundance of neem triterpenoids varies among the tissues. here, we delineate quantitative profiling of fifteen major triterpenoids across various tissues including developmental stages of kernel and pericarp, flower, leaf, stem and bark using uplc-esi-hrms based profiling. transcriptome analysis was used to identify the initial genes involved in isoprenoid biosynthesis. based on transcriptome analysis, two short-chain prenyltransferases and squalene synthase  were cloned and functionally characterized.


RESULTS
quantitative profiling revealed differential abundance of both total and individual triterpenoid content across various tissues. rna from tissues with high triterpenoid content  were pooled to generate  <dig>  million paired-end reads using illumina ga ΙΙ platform.  <dig>  transcripts were generated by d e novo assembly. transcriptome annotation led to the identification of the putative genes involved in isoprenoid biosynthesis. two short-chain prenyltransferases, geranyl diphosphate synthase  and farnesyl diphosphate synthase  and squalene synthase  were cloned and functionally characterized using transcriptome data. rt-pcr studies indicated five-fold and ten-fold higher relative expression level of aisqs in fruits as compared to leaves and flowers, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
triterpenoid profiling indicated that there is tissue specific variation in their abundance. the mature seed kernel and initial stages of pericarp were found to contain the highest amount of limonoids. furthermore, a wide diversity of triterpenoids, especially c-seco triterpenoids were observed in kernel as compared to the other tissues. pericarp, flower and leaf contained mainly ring-intact triterpenoids. the initial genes such as aigds, aifds and aisqs involved in the isoprenoids biosynthesis have been functionally characterized. the expression levels of aifds and aisqs were found to be in correlation with the total triterpenoid content in individual tissues.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
azadirachta indicatriterpenoidsquantitative profilingtranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

