BACKGROUND
biosurfactants are surface-active biomolecules with great applicability in the food, pharmaceutical and oil industries. endospore-forming bacteria, which survive for long periods in harsh environments, are described as biosurfactant producers. although the ubiquity of endospore-forming bacteria in saline and hypersaline environments is well known, studies on the diversity of the endospore-forming and biosurfactant-producing bacterial genera/species in these habitats are underrepresented.

methods
in this study, the structure of endospore-forming bacterial communities in sediment/mud samples from vermelha lagoon, massambaba, dois rios and abraão beaches , as well as the praia seca salterns  was determined via denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. bacterial strains were isolated from these environmental samples and further identified using 16s rrna gene sequencing. strains presenting emulsification values higher than  <dig> % were grouped via box-pcr, and the culture supernatants of representative strains were subjected to high temperatures and to the presence of up to  <dig> % nacl to test their emulsifying activities in these extreme conditions. mass spectrometry analysis was used to demonstrate the presence of surfactin.


RESULTS
a diverse endospore-forming bacterial community was observed in all environments. the  <dig> bacterial strains isolated from these environmental samples were molecularly identified as belonging to the genera bacillus, thalassobacillus, halobacillus, paenibacillus, fictibacillus and paenisporosarcina. fifty-two strains showed emulsification values of at least 30%, and they were grouped into <dig> box groups. the stability of the emulsification values varied when the culture supernatants of representative strains were subjected to high temperatures and to the presence of up to 20% nacl. the presence of surfactin was demonstrated in one of the most promising strains.


CONCLUSIONS
the environments studied can harbor endospore-forming bacteria capable of producing biosurfactants with biotechnological applications. various endospore-forming bacterial genera/species are presented for the first time as biosurfactant producers.

keywords
biosurfactantsendospore-forming bacteriasaline and hypersaline environmentsmicrobial enhanced oil recoverybioremediationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

