BACKGROUND
the involvement of mads-box genes of the agamous lineage in the formation of both flowers and fruits has been studied in detail in angiosperms. agamous genes are expressed also in the reproductive structures of gymnosperms, yet the demonstration of their role has been problematic because gymnosperms are woody plants difficult to manipulate for physiological and genetic studies. recently, it was shown that in the gymnosperm ginkgo biloba an agamous gene was expressed throughout development and ripening of the fleshy fruit-like structures produced by this species around its seeds. such fleshy structures are evolutionarily very important because they favor the dispersal of seeds through endozoochory. in this work a characterization of the ginkgo gene was carried out by over-expressing it in tomato.


RESULTS
in tomato plants ectopically expressing the ginkgo agamous gene a macroscopic anomaly was observed only in the flower sepals. while the wild type sepals had a leaf-like appearance, the transgenic ones appeared connately adjoined at their proximal extremity and, concomitant with the development and ripening of the fruit, they became thicker and acquired a yellowish-orange color, thus indicating that they had undergone a homeotic transformation into carpel-like structures. molecular analyses of several genes associated with either the control of ripening or the ripening syndrome in tomato fruits confirmed that the transgenic sepals behaved like ectopic fruits that could undergo some ripening, although the red color typical of the ripe tomato fruit was never achieved.


CONCLUSIONS
the ectopic expression of the ginkgo agamous gene in tomato caused the homeotic transformation of the transgenic sepals into carpel-like structures, and this showed that the gymnosperm gene has a genuine c function. in parallel with the ripening of fruits the related transgenic sepals became fleshy fruit-like structures that also underwent some ripening and such a result indicates that this c function gene might be involved, together with other gens, also in the development of the ginkgo fruit-like structures. it seems thus strengthened the hypothesis that agamous mads-box genes were recruited already in gymnosperms for the development of the fleshy fruit habit which is evolutionarily so important for the dispersal of seeds.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
agamous genefleshy fruit-like structuresginkgo bilobamads-box genessolanum lycopersiconissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

