BACKGROUND
horizontal gene transfer , a source of genetic variation, is generally considered to facilitate hosts' adaptability to environments. however, convincing evidence supporting the significant contribution of the transferred genes to the evolution of metazoan recipients is rare.


RESULTS
in this study, based on sequence data accumulated to date, we used a unified method consisting of similarity search and phylogenetic analysis to detect horizontally transferred genes  between prokaryotes and five insect species including drosophila melanogaster, anopheles gambiae, bombyx mori, tribolium castaneum and apis mellifera. unexpectedly, the candidate htgs were not detected in d. melanogaster, an. gambiae and t. castaneum, and  <dig> genes in ap. mellifera sieved by the same method were considered as contamination based on other information. consequently,  <dig> types of  <dig> htgs were detected only in the silkworm. additionally,  <dig> types of the detected silkworm htgs share homologous sequences in species of other lepidopteran superfamilies, suggesting that the majority of these htgs were derived from ancient transfer events before the radiation of ditrysia clade. on the basis of phylogenetic topologies and blast search results, donor bacteria of these genes were inferred, respectively. at least half of the predicted donor organisms may be entomopathogenic bacteria. the predicted biochemical functions of these genes include four categories: glycosyl hydrolase family, oxidoreductase family, amino acid metabolism, and others.


CONCLUSIONS
the products of htgs detected in this study may take part in comprehensive physiological metabolism. these genes potentially contributed to functional innovation and adaptability of lepidopteran hosts in their ancient lineages associated with the diversification of angiosperms. importantly, our results imply that pathogens may be advantageous to the subsistence and prosperity of hosts through effective hgt events at a large evolutionary scale.

horizontal gene transferinsect evolutionlepidoptera evolutionfunctional innovationpathogenic bacteria

