BACKGROUND
freshwater planarians are an attractive model for regeneration and stem cell research and have become a promising tool in the field of regenerative medicine. with the availability of a sequenced planarian genome, the recent application of modern genetic and high-throughput tools has resulted in revitalized interest in these animals, long known for their amazing regenerative capabilities, which enable them to regrow even a new head after decapitation. however, a detailed description of the planarian transcriptome is essential for future investigation into regenerative processes using planarians as a model system.


RESULTS
in order to complement and improve existing gene annotations, we used a  <dig> pyrosequencing approach to analyze the transcriptome of the planarian species schmidtea mediterranea altogether,  <dig>  454-sequencing reads, with an average length of  <dig> bp, were assembled together with the ~ <dig>  sequences of the s. mediterranea unigene set using different similarity cutoffs. the assembly was then mapped onto the current genome data. remarkably, our smed <dig> dataset contains more than  <dig> million novel transcribed nucleotides sequenced for the first time. a descriptive analysis of planarian splice sites was conducted on those smed <dig> contigs that mapped univocally to the current genome assembly. sequence analysis allowed us to identify genes encoding putative proteins with defined structural properties, such as transmembrane domains. moreover, we annotated the smed <dig> dataset using gene ontology, and identified putative homologues of several gene families that may play a key role during regeneration, such as neurotransmitter and hormone receptors, homeobox-containing genes, and genes related to eye function.


CONCLUSIONS
we report the first planarian transcript dataset, smed <dig>  as an open resource tool that can be accessed via a web interface. smed <dig> contains significant novel sequence information about most expressed genes of s. mediterranea. analysis of the annotated data promises to contribute to identification of gene families poorly characterized at a functional level. the smed <dig> transcriptome data will assist in the molecular characterization of s. mediterranea as a model organism, which will be useful to a broad scientific community.

