BACKGROUND
coccidioidomycosis or valley fever is caused by a highly virulent fungal pathogen: coccidioides posadasii or immitis. vaccine development against coccidioides is of contemporary interest because a large number of relapses and clinical failures are reported with antifungal agents. an efficient th <dig> response engenders protection. thus, we have focused on developing a dendritic cell -based vaccine for coccidioidomycosis. in this study, we investigated the immunostimulatory characteristics of an intranasal primary dc-vaccine in balb/c mouse strain that is most susceptible to coccidioidomycosis. the dcs were transfected nonvirally with coccidioides-ag2/pra-cdna. expression of dc-markers, ag2/pra and cytokines were studied by flow cytometry, dot-immunoblotting and cytometric bead array methods, respectively. the t cell activation was studied by assessing the upregulation of activation markers in a dc-t cell co-culture assay. for trafficking, the dcs were co-transfected with a plasmid dna encoding hsv <dig> thymidine kinase  and administered intranasally into syngeneic mice. the trafficking and homing of tk-expressing dcs were monitored with positron emission tomography  using 18f-fiau probe. based on the pet-probe accumulation in vaccinated mice, selected tissues were studied for antigen-specific response and t cell phenotypes using elispot and flow cytometry, respectively.


RESULTS
we found that the primary dcs transfected with coccidioides-ag2/pra-cdna were of immature immunophenotype, expressed ag2/pra and activated naïve t cells. in pet images and subsequent biodistribution, intranasally-administered dcs were found to migrate in blood, lung and thymus; lymphocytes showed generation of t effector memory cell population  and ifn-γ release.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our results demonstrate that the intranasally-administered primary dc vaccine is capable of inducing ag2/pra-specific t cell response. unique approaches utilized in our study represent an attractive and novel means of producing and evaluating an autologous dc-based vaccine.

