BACKGROUND
despite advances in the gene-set enrichment analysis methods; inadequate definitions of gene-sets cause a major limitation in the discovery of novel biological processes from the transcriptomic datasets. typically, gene-sets are obtained from publicly available pathway databases, which contain generalized definitions frequently derived by manual curation. recently unsupervised clustering algorithms have been proposed to identify gene-sets from transcriptomics datasets deposited in public domain. these data-driven definitions of the gene-sets can be context-specific revealing novel biological mechanisms. however, the previously proposed algorithms for identification of data-driven gene-sets are based on hard clustering which do not allow overlap across clusters, a characteristic that is predominantly observed across biological pathways.


RESULTS
we developed a pipeline using fuzzy-c-means  soft clustering approach to identify gene-sets which recapitulates topological characteristics of biological pathways. specifically, we apply our pipeline to derive gene-sets from transcriptomic data measuring response of monocyte derived dendritic cells and a <dig> epithelial cells to influenza infections. our approach apply ward’s method for the selection of initial conditions, optimize parameters of fcm algorithm for human cell-specific transcriptomic data and identify robust gene-sets along with versatile viral responsive genes.


CONCLUSIONS
we validate our gene-sets and demonstrate that by identifying genes associated with multiple gene-sets, fcm clustering algorithm significantly improves interpretation of transcriptomic data facilitating investigation of novel biological processes by leveraging on transcriptomic data available in the public domain. we develop an interactive ‘fuzzy inference of gene-sets ’ package  to facilitate use of of pipeline. future extension of figs across different immune cell-types will improve mechanistic investigation followed by high-throughput omics studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
epithelial cellsdendritic cellsgene-setsinfluenza infectionsgene-gene mutual informationoverlapping gene-setscenter for aids research, university of rochesterp <dig> ai078498national institute of allergy and infectious diseases hhsn272201200005cissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

