BACKGROUND
the increasing resistance of plasmodium, the malaria parasites, to multiple commonly used drugs has underscored the urgent need to develop effective antimalarial drugs and vaccines. the new direction of genomics-driven target discovery has become possible with the completion of parasite genome sequencing, which can lead us to a better understanding of how the parasites develop the genetic variability that is associated with their response to environmental challenges and other adaptive phenotypes.


RESULTS
we present the results of a comprehensive analysis of the genomes of six plasmodium species, including two species that infect humans, one that infects monkeys, and three that infect rodents. the core genome shared by all six species is composed of  <dig>  genes, which make up about 22%-65% of the genome repertoire. these components play important roles in fundamental functions as well as in parasite-specific activities. we further investigated the distribution and features of genes that have been expanded in specific plasmodium lineage. abundant duplicate genes are present in the six species, with 5%-9% of the whole genomes composed lineage specific radiations. the majority of these gene families are hypothetical proteins with unknown functions; a few may have predicted roles such as antigenic variation.


CONCLUSIONS
the core genome components in the malaria parasites have functions ranging from fundamental biological processes to roles in the complex networks that sustain the parasite-specific lifestyles appropriate to different hosts. they represent the minimum requirement to maintain a successful life cycle that spans vertebrate hosts and mosquito vectors. lineage specific expansions  have given rise to abundant gene families in plasmodium. although the functions of most families remain unknown, these lses could reveal components in parasite networks that, by their enhanced genetic variability, can contribute to pathogenesis, virulence, responses to environmental challenges, or interesting phenotypes.

3– <dig> august  <dig> the isibm international joint conference on bioinformatics, systems biology and intelligent computing  shanghai, china

