BACKGROUND
the brown ghost knifefish  is a weakly electric teleost fish of particular interest as a versatile model system for a variety of research areas in neuroscience and biology. the comprehensive information available on the neurophysiology and neuroanatomy of this organism has enabled significant advances in such areas as the study of the neural basis of behavior, the development of adult-born neurons in the central nervous system and their involvement in the regeneration of nervous tissue, as well as brain aging and senescence. despite substantial scientific interest in this species, no genomic resources are currently available.


RESULTS
here, we report the de novo assembly and annotation of the a. leptorhynchus transcriptome. after evaluating several trimming and transcript reconstruction strategies, de novo assembly using trinity uncovered  <dig>  unique contigs containing at least a partial protein-coding sequence based on alignment to a reference set of known actinopterygii sequences. as many as  <dig>  of these contigs contained full or near-full length protein sequences, providing broad coverage of the proteome. a variety of non-coding rna sequences were also identified and annotated, including conserved long intergenic non-coding rna and other long non-coding rna observed previously to be expressed in adult zebrafish  brain, as well as a variety of mirna, snrna, and snorna. shotgun proteomics confirmed translation of open reading frames from over  <dig>  transcripts, including alternative splice variants. assignment of tandem mass spectra was greatly improved by use of the assembly compared to databases of sequences from closely related organisms. the assembly and raw reads have been deposited at ddbj/embl/genbank under the accession number gbkr <dig>  tandem mass spectrometry data is available via proteomexchange with identifier pxd <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
presented here is the first release of an annotated de novo transcriptome assembly from apteronotus leptorhynchus, providing a broad overview of rna expressed in central nervous system tissue. the assembly, which includes substantial coverage of a wide variety of both protein coding and non-coding transcripts, will allow the development of better tools to understand the mechanisms underlying unique characteristics of the knifefish model system, such as their tremendous regenerative capacity and negligible brain senescence.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
de novo transcriptomerna-seqbrainspinal cordapteronotus leptorhynchusbrown ghost knifefishproteomicsnon-coding rnasplice-junction peptidesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

