BACKGROUND
antimicrobial resistance in staphylococci, often associated with treatment failure, is increasingly reported in veterinary medicine. the aim of this study was to investigate patterns and predictors of antimicrobial resistance among staphylococcus spp. isolates from canine samples submitted to the bacteriology laboratory at the university of pretoria academic veterinary hospital between  <dig> and  <dig>  retrospective data of  <dig> staphylococcus isolates were used to calculate the proportion of samples resistant to  <dig> antimicrobial agents. the cochran-armitage trend test was used to investigate temporal trends and logistic regression models were used to investigate predictors of antimicrobial resistance in staphylococcus aureus and staphylococcus pseudintermedius.


RESULTS
results show that  <dig> %  of the s. aureus isolates were resistant to at least one drug while  <dig> % were multidrug resistant. seventy-seven percent  of the s. pseudintermedius isolates were resistant to at least one drug and  <dig> %  were multidrug resistant. resistance to lincospectin was more common among s. aureus  than s. pseudintermedius . similarly, resistance to clindamycin was higher in s. aureus  than s. pseudintermedius  isolates. there was a significant  increase in s. aureus resistance to enrofloxacin over the study period. similarly, s. pseudintermedius exhibited significant increasing temporal trend in resistance to trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole , clindamycin  and orbifloxacin . however, there was a significant decreasing temporal trend in the proportion of isolates resistant to doxycycline , tylosin , kanamycin  and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid .


CONCLUSIONS
high levels of multidrug resistance and the increasing levels of resistance to sulphonamides, lincosamides and fluoroquinolones among staphylococcus spp. isolates in this study are concerning. future studies will need to investigate local drivers of antimicrobial resistance to better guide control efforts to address the problem.

keywords
staphylococcus aureusstaphylococcus pseudintermediusmultidrug resistancemdrantimicrobial resistanceamrdogscaninepredictorsrisk factorsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

