BACKGROUND
recently the study of the complex system of connections in neural systems, i.e. the connectome, has gained a central role in neurosciences. the modeling and analysis of connectomes are therefore a growing area. here we focus on the representation of connectomes by using graph theory formalisms. macroscopic human brain connectomes are usually derived from neuroimages; the analyzed brains are co-registered in the image domain and brought to a common anatomical space. an atlas is then applied in order to define anatomically meaningful regions that will serve as the nodes of the network - this process is referred to as parcellation. the atlas-based parcellations present some known limitations in cases of early brain development and abnormal anatomy. consequently, it has been recently proposed to perform atlas-free random brain parcellation into nodes and align brains in the network space instead of the anatomical image space, as a way to deal with the unknown correspondences of the parcels. such process requires modeling of the brain using graph theory and the subsequent comparison of the structure of graphs. the latter step may be modeled as a network alignment  problem.


RESULTS
in this work, we first define the problem formally, then we test six existing state of the art of network aligners on diffusion mri-derived brain networks. we compare the performances of algorithms by assessing six topological measures. we also evaluated the robustness of algorithms to alterations of the dataset.


CONCLUSIONS
the results confirm that na algorithms may be applied in cases of atlas-free parcellation for a fully network-driven comparison of connectomes. the analysis shows magna++ is the best global alignment algorithm. the paper presented a new analysis methodology that uses network alignment for validating atlas-free parcellation brain connectomes. the methodology has been experimented on several brain datasets.

keywords
human connectomegraph theoryalignment network algorithmsbrainkdd: international workshop on data mining and visualization for brain science in conjunction with 7th acm conference on bioinformatics, computational biology, and health informatics  seattle, wa, usa 02-oct- <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

