BACKGROUND
the importance of infections caused by non-tuberculous mycobacteria  in animals and humans has gained considerable recognition during the past few years. in the developed world, where pig production is extensively practiced, studies on mycobacterial infections and related control strategies have received increasing attention. the infections are reported to be caused by a wide spectrum of ntm. unfortunately, these infections have been less recognized in sub-saharan africa owing to lack of awareness and systematic studies. in this study we aimed at isolating and identifying species of mycobacteria involved in causing infections in slaughter pigs in mubende district of uganda. furthermore we wanted to identify factors associated with infection prevalence in the study area.

methods
a total of  <dig> lymph nodes were collected and cultured for the presence of mycobacteria. isolates were identified by 16s rdna gene sequencing. a questionnaire survey was administered to identify production related factors associated with infection prevalence. data were assembled and analysed using descriptive statistics and mixed effects logistic regression analysis.


RESULTS
mycobacteria were detected in  <dig> %  of the examined lymph nodes,  <dig> %  of lymph nodes with gross lesions typical of mycobacteriosis and 31%  of lymph nodes with no visible lesions. nineteen per cent of the isolated mycobacteria were identified as mycobacterium  avium, of these 78% and 22% were m. avium sub sp. hominissuis and avium respectively. other mycobacterial species included m. senuense , m. terrae  and m. asiaticum . this study found free range systems  and use of water from valley dams  as factors associated with high prevalence of mycobacteria in slaughter pigs.


CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrated a high prevalence of ntm infections among slaughter pigs in mubende district of uganda. m. avium was the most prevalent of all ntm isolated and identified. free range system of pig management and valley dam water were the most significant factors associated with ntm prevalence in mubende district. these findings could be of a major public health concern given that it is in a predominantly pork consuming population with 18% hiv/aids prevalence. therefore, stringent post-mortem inspection at the slaughter houses is of paramount importance to reduce human exposure.

