BACKGROUND
peste des petits ruminants , also known as goat plague, occurs in goats, sheep and related species. it is caused by a morbillivirus in the family paramyxoviridae. in bangladesh ppr is endemic and it causes serious economic losses. pathology of ppr has been reported in different goat and sheep breeds from natural and experimental infections. field results are better indicators of pathogenicity of the circulating virus. the severity of the disease varies with species, breed and immune status of the host. pathological investigations of natural outbreaks of ppr in balck bengal goats are very limited. the current investigation was aimed at describing pathology and antigen localization in natural ppr infections in black bengal goats.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> outbreaks were investigated clinically and virologically. average flock morbidity and mortality were 75% and 59%, respectively, with case fatality rate of 74%. necropsy was conducted on  <dig> goats from  <dig> outbreaks. the major gross lesions were congestion of gastrointestinal tract, pneumonia, engorged spleen, and oedematous lymphnodes. histopathological examination revealed severe enteritis with denudation of intestinal epithelium, severe broncho-interstitial pneumonia with macrophages within lung alveoli and extensive haemorrhages with depletion of lymphoid cells and infiltration of macrophages in the sinuses of spleen. in lymph nodes, the cortical nodules were replaced by wide sinusoids with severe depletion of lymphocytes, infiltration of mononuclear cells and some giant cells in sub-capsular areas and medullary sinuses. ppr virus antigen was found in pneumocytes and alveolar macrophages in lungs. viral rna could be detected by rt-pcr in  <dig> out of  <dig> nasal swab,  <dig> out of  <dig> blood and  <dig> out of  <dig> lymph node samples. sequence analyses revealed closeness of bangladeshi strains with other recent asian isolates.


CONCLUSIONS
natural outbreaks of ppr in black bengal goats in bangladesh resulted in 75% and 59% flock morbidity and mortality, respectively, with a case fatality rate of 74%. the striking histo-morphologic diagnosis of ppr was acute pneumonia and severe gastro-enteritis. a detailed experimental pathological study on black bengal goats infected with recent isolates is required.

keywords
pprnatural outbreakpathologyantigen detectionnucleic acid detectionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

