BACKGROUND
recent biochemical advances have led to inexpensive, time-efficient production of massive volumes of raw genomic data. traditional machine learning approaches to genome annotation typically rely on large amounts of labeled data. the process of labeling data can be expensive, as it requires domain knowledge and expert involvement. semi-supervised learning approaches that can make use of unlabeled data, in addition to small amounts of labeled data, can help reduce the costs associated with labeling. in this context, we focus on the problem of predicting splice sites in a genome using semi-supervised learning approaches. this is a challenging problem, due to the highly imbalanced distribution of the data, i.e., small number of splice sites as compared to the number of non-splice sites. to address this challenge, we propose to use ensembles of semi-supervised classifiers, specifically self-training and co-training classifiers.


RESULTS
our experiments on five highly imbalanced splice site datasets, with positive to negative ratios of 1-to- <dig>  showed that the ensemble-based semi-supervised approaches represent a good choice, even when the amount of labeled data consists of less than 1% of all training data. in particular, we found that ensembles of co-training and self-training classifiers that dynamically balance the set of labeled instances during the semi-supervised iterations show improvements over the corresponding supervised ensemble baselines.


CONCLUSIONS
in the presence of limited amounts of labeled data, ensemble-based semi-supervised approaches can successfully leverage the unlabeled data to enhance supervised ensembles learned from highly imbalanced data distributions. given that such distributions are common for many biological sequence classification problems, our work can be seen as a stepping stone towards more sophisticated ensemble-based approaches to biological sequence annotation in a semi-supervised framework.

acceptor splice sitessemi-supervised learningself-trainingco-trainingimbalanced dataensemble learning2- <dig> november  <dig> ieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine  belfast, uk

