BACKGROUND
the neisseria meningitidis  chromosome shows a high abundance of simple sequence dna repeats  that undergo stochastic, reversible mutations at high frequency. this mechanism is reflected in an extensive phenotypic diversity that facilitates nm adaptation to dynamic environmental changes. to date, phase-variable phenotypes mediated by ssrs variation have been experimentally confirmed for 26 nm genes.


RESULTS
here we present a population-scale comparative genomic analysis that identified  <dig> genes and classified them into  <dig> strong,  <dig> moderate and  <dig> weak candidates for phase variation. deep-coverage dna sequencing of single colonies grown overnight under non-selective conditions confirmed the presence of high-frequency, stochastic variation in  <dig> of them, providing circumstantial evidence for their phase variability.

we confirmed previous observations of a predominance of variable ssrs within genes for components located on the cell surface or dna metabolism. however, in addition we identified an unexpectedly broad spectrum of other metabolic functions, and most of the variable ssrs were predicted to induce phenotypic changes by modulating gene expression at a transcriptional level or by producing different protein isoforms rather than mediating on/off translational switching through frameshifts.

investigation of the evolutionary history of ssr contingency loci revealed that these loci were inherited from a nm ancestor, evolved independently within nm, or were acquired by nm through lateral dna exchange.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, our results have identified a broader and qualitatively different phenotypic diversification of ssrs-mediated stochastic variation than previously documented, including its impact on central nm metabolism.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
neisseria meningitidisphase variationcontingency locicomparative genomicshost-pathogen interactionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

