BACKGROUND
the control of intracellular vesicle trafficking is an ideal target to weigh the role of alternative splicing in shaping genomes to make cells. alternative splicing has been reported for several soluble n-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptors of the vesicle  or of the target membrane , which are crucial to intracellular membrane fusion and protein and lipid traffic in eukaryotes. however, splicing has not yet been investigated in longins, i.e. the most widespread v-snares. longins are essential in eukaryotes and prototyped by vamp <dig>  sec22b and ykt <dig>  sharing a conserved n-terminal longin domain which regulates membrane fusion and subcellular targeting. human vamp7/ti-vamp, encoded by gene sybl <dig>  is involved in multiple cell pathways, including control of neurite outgrowth.


RESULTS
alternative splicing of sybl <dig> by exon skipping events results in the production of a number of vamp <dig> isoforms. in-frame or frameshift coding sequence modifications modulate domain architecture of vamp <dig> isoforms, which can lack whole domains or domain fragments and show variant or extra domains. intriguingly, two main types of vamp <dig> isoforms either share the inhibitory longin domain and lack the fusion-promoting snare motif, or vice versa. expression analysis in different tissues and cell lines, quantitative real time rt-pcr and confocal microscopy analysis of fluorescent protein-tagged isoforms demonstrate that vamp <dig> variants have different tissue specificities and subcellular localizations. moreover, design and use of isoform-specific antibodies provided preliminary evidence for the existence of splice variants at the protein level.


CONCLUSIONS
previous evidence on vamp <dig> suggests inhibitory functions for the longin domain and fusion/growth promoting activity for the Δ-longin molecule. thus, non-snare isoforms with longin domain and non-longin snare isoforms might have somehow opposite regulatory functions. when considering splice variants as "natural mutants", evidence on modulation of subcellular localization by variation in domain combination can shed further light on targeting determinants. although further work will be needed to characterize identified variants, our data might open the route to unravel novel molecular partners and mechanisms, accounting for the multiplicity of functions carried out by the different members of the longin proteins family.

