BACKGROUND
the zinc uptake regulator zur is a zn2+-sensing metalloregulatory protein involved in the maintenance of bacterial zinc homeostasis. up to now, regulation of zinc homeostasis by zur is poorly understood in y. pestis.


RESULTS
we constructed a zur null mutant of y. pestis biovar microtus strain  <dig>  microarray expression analysis disclosed a set of  <dig> zur-dependent genes of y. pestis upon exposure to zinc rich condition. real-time reverse transcription -pcr was subsequently used to validate the microarray data. based on the  <dig> zur-dependent genes, predicted regulatory zur motifs were used to screen for potential direct zur targets including three putative operons znua, znucb and ykgm-rpmj <dig>  the lacz reporter fusion analysis verified that zur greatly repressed the promoter activity of the above three operons. the subsequent electrophoretic mobility shift assay  demonstrated that a purified zur protein was able to bind to the promoter regions of the above three operons. the dnase i footprinting was used to identify the zur binding sites for the above three operons, verifying the zur box sequence as predicted previously in γ-proteobacteria. the primer extension assay was further used to determine the transcription start sites for the above three operons and to localize the - <dig> and - <dig> elements. zur binding sites overlapped the - <dig> sequence of its target promoters, which was consistent with the previous observation that zur binding would block the entry of the rna polymerase to repress the transcription of its target genes.


CONCLUSIONS
zur as a repressor directly controls the transcription of znua, znucb and ykgm-rpmj <dig> in y. pestis by employing a conserved mechanism of zur-promoter dna association as observed in γ-proteobacteria. zur contributes to zinc homeostasis in y. pestis likely through transcriptional repression of the high-affinity zinc uptake system znuacb and two alternative ribosomal proteins ykgm and rpmj <dig> 

