BACKGROUND
tandem repetition of structural motifs in proteins is frequently observed across all forms of life. topology of repeating unit and its frequency of occurrence are associated to a wide range of structural and functional roles in diverse proteins, and defects in repeat proteins have been associated with a number of diseases. it is thus desirable to accurately identify specific repeat type and its copy number. weak evolutionary constraints on repeat units and insertions/deletions between them make their identification difficult at the sequence level and structure based approaches are desired. the proposed graph spectral approach is based on protein structure represented as a graph for detecting one of the most frequently observed structural repeats, ankyrin repeat.


RESULTS
it has been shown in a large number of studies that 3-dimensional topology of a protein structure is well captured by a graph, making it possible to analyze a complex protein structure as a mathematical entity. in this study we show that eigen spectra profile of a protein structure graph exhibits a unique repetitive profile for contiguous repeating units enabling the detection of the repeat region and the repeat type. the proposed approach uses a non-redundant set of  <dig> ankyrin proteins to define rules for the detection of ankyrin repeat motifs. it is evaluated on a set of  <dig> proteins comprising  <dig> known ankyrin proteins and remaining non-solenoid proteins and the prediction compared with uniprot annotation, sequence-based approach, radar, and structure-based approach, console. to show the efficacy of the approach, we analyzed the complete pdb structural database and identified  <dig> previously unrecognized ankyrin repeat proteins. we observe a unique eigen spectra profile for different repeat types and show that the method can be easily extended to detect other repeat types. it is implemented as a web server, ankpred. it is freely available at ‘bioinf.iiit.ac.in/ankpred’.


CONCLUSIONS
ankpred provides an elegant and computationally efficient graph-based approach for detecting ankyrin structural repeats in proteins. by analyzing the eigen spectra of the protein structure graph and secondary structure information, characteristic features of a known repeat family are identified. this method is especially useful in correctly identifying new members of a repeat family.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ankyrin repeatprotein contact networkgraph theoryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

