BACKGROUND
physalis peruviana commonly known as cape gooseberry is a member of the solanaceae family that has an increasing popularity due to its nutritional and medicinal values. a broad range of genomic tools is available for other solanaceae, including tomato and potato. however, limited genomic resources are currently available for cape gooseberry.


RESULTS
we report the generation of a total of  <dig>  p. peruviana expressed sequence tags , using  <dig> gs flx titanium technology. ests, with an average length of 371 bp, were obtained from a normalized leaf cdna library prepared using a colombian commercial variety. de novo assembling was performed to generate a collection of  <dig>  isotigs and  <dig>  singletons, with an average length of  <dig>  bp and 354 bp, respectively. functional annotation was performed using ncbi’s blast tools and blast2go, which identified putative functions for  <dig>  assembled sequences, including gene families involved in all the major biological processes and molecular functions as well as defense response and amino acid metabolism pathways. gene model predictions in p. peruviana were obtained by using the genomes of solanum lycopersicum  and solanum tuberosum . we predict  <dig>  p. peruviana sequences with multiple-exon models and conserved intron positions with respect to the potato and tomato genomes. additionally, to study species diversity we developed  <dig>  ssr markers from assembled ests.


CONCLUSIONS
we present the first comprehensive analysis of the physalis peruviana leaf transcriptome, which will provide valuable resources for development of genetic tools in the species. assembled transcripts with gene models could serve as potential candidates for marker discovery with a variety of applications including: functional diversity, conservation and improvement to increase productivity and fruit quality. p. peruviana was estimated to be phylogenetically branched out before the divergence of five other solanaceae family members, s. lycopersicum, s. tuberosum, capsicum spp, s. melongena and petunia spp.

p. peruvianasolanaceaeestsfunctional annotationgene modelphylogenetics

