BACKGROUND
the asian corn borer , ostrinia furnacalis , has become the most damaging insect pest of corn in asia. however, the lack of genome or transcriptome information heavily hinders our further understanding of acb in every aspect at a molecular level and on a genome-wide scale. here, we used the ion torrent personal genome machine  sequencer to explore the acb transcriptome and to identify relevant genes in response to flubendiamide, showing high selective activity against acb.


RESULTS
we obtained  <dig>  unigenes, with an average length of 716 bp, representing a dramatic expansion of existing cdna sequences available for acb. these sequences were annotated with non-redundant protein , gene ontology , clusters of orthologous groups  and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  to better understand their functions. a total of  <dig> cytochrome p <dig> monooxygenases ,  <dig> carboxyl/cholinesterases  and  <dig> glutathione s-transferases  were manually curated to construct phylogenetic trees, and  <dig> unigenes encoding target proteins  were identified. in addition, we compared and validated the differentially expressed unigenes upon flubendiamide treatment, revealing that the genes for detoxification enzymes , calcium signaling pathways and muscle control pathways , immunoglobulin , chemosensory protein and heat shock protein  <dig> were significantly overexpressed in response to flubendiamide, while the genes for cuticular protein, protease and oxidoreductase showed much lower expression levels.


CONCLUSIONS
the obtained transcriptome information provides large genomic resources available for further studies of acb. the differentially expressed gene data will elucidate the molecular mechanisms of acb in response to the novel diamide insecticide, flubendiamide. in particular, these findings will facilitate the identification of the genes involved in insecticide resistance and the development of new compounds to control the acb.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

the national natural science foundation of china31601667cui li national key research and development program of china 2016yfd0200504cui li the public welfare project from the ministry of agriculture of the people's republic of china201203038rui changhui issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

