BACKGROUND
prions are transmissible, propagating alternative states of proteins, and are usually made from the fibrillar, beta-sheet-rich assemblies termed amyloid. prions in the budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae propagate heritable phenotypes, uncover hidden genetic variation, function in large-scale gene regulation, and can act like diseases. almost all these amyloid prions have asparagine/glutamine-rich  domains. other proteins, that we term here ‘prionogenic amyloid formers’ , have been shown to form amyloid in vivo, and to have n/q-rich domains that can propagate heritable states in yeast cells. also, there are > <dig> other s.cerevisiae proteins with prion-like n/q-rich sequence composition. furthermore, human proteins with such n/q-rich composition have been linked to the pathomechanisms of neurodegenerative amyloid diseases.


RESULTS
here, we exploit the increasing abundance of complete fungal genomes to examine the ancestry of prions/pafs and other n/q-rich proteins across the fungal kingdom. we find distinct evolutionary behavior for q-rich and n-rich prions/pafs; those of ancient ancestry  are q-rich, whereas n-rich cases arose early in saccharomycetes evolution. this emergence of n-rich prion/pafs is linked to a large-scale emergence of n-rich proteins during saccharomycetes evolution, with saccharomycetes showing a distinctive trend for population sizes of prion-like proteins that sets them apart from all the other fungi. conversely, some clades, e.g. eurotiales, have much fewer n/q-rich proteins, and in some cases likely lose them en masse, perhaps due to greater amyloid intolerance, although they contain relatively more non-n/q-rich predicted prions. we find that recent mutational tendencies arising during saccharomycetes evolution , contributed to the expansion/development of the prion phenomenon. variation in these mutational tendencies in saccharomycetes is correlated with the population sizes of prion-like proteins, thus implying that selection pressures on n/q-rich protein sequences against amyloidogenesis are not generally maintained in budding yeasts.


CONCLUSIONS
these results help to delineate further the limits and origins of n/q-rich prions, and provide insight as a case study of the evolution of compositionally-defined protein domains.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
prionevolutionbiascompositionbioinformaticsdiseasemutationyeastfungihttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canadaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

