BACKGROUND
alpha -amidation of peptides is a mechanism required for the conversion of prohormones into functional peptide sequences that display biological activities, receptor recognition and signal transduction on target cells. alpha -amidation occurs in almost all species and amino acids identified in nature. c-terminal valine amide neuropeptides constitute the smallest group of functional peptide compounds identified in neurosecretory structures in vertebrate and invertebrate species.

methods
the α-amidated isoform of valine residue  was conjugated to klh-protein carrier and used to immunize mice. hyperimmune animals displaying high titers of valine amide antisera were used to generate stable hybridoma-secreting mabs. three productive hybridoma  were tested against peptides antigens containing both the c-terminal α-amidated  and free α-carboxylic acid  isovariant of the valine residue.


RESULTS
p18c <dig> mab displayed the highest specificity and selectivity against c-terminal valine amidated peptide antigens in different immunoassays. p18c <dig> mab-immunoreactivity exhibited a wide distribution along the neuroaxis of the rat brain, particularly in brain areas that did not cross-match with the neuronal distribution of known valine amide neuropeptides . these brain regions varied in the relative amount of putative novel valine amide peptide immunoreactive material  estimated through a fmol-sensitive solid-phase radioimmunoassay  raised for p18c <dig> mab.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate the versatility of a single mab able to differentiate between two structural subdomains of a single amino acid. this mab offers a wide spectrum of potential applications in research and medicine, whose uses may extend from a biological reagent  to a detoxifying reagent  or as a specific immunoreagent in immunotherapy settings  among many others.

keywords
valineleucineantibodyantiserahybridomaα-amidationcross-reactivityimmunoassayimmunoconjugateneuropeptideissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

