BACKGROUND
the human microbiome project  was undertaken with the goal of defining microbial communities in and on the bodies of healthy individuals using high-throughput metagenomic sequencing analysis. the viruses present in these microbial communities, the ‘human virome,’ are an important aspect of the human microbiome that is particularly understudied in the absence of overt disease. we analyzed eukaryotic double-stranded dna  viruses, together with dsdna replicative intermediates of single-stranded dna viruses, in metagenomic sequence data generated by the hmp. we studied  <dig> samples from  <dig> subjects were studied, with each subject sampled at up to five major body habitats: nose, skin, mouth, vagina, and stool. fifty-one individuals had samples taken at two or three time points  <dig> to 359 days apart from at least one of the body habitats.


RESULTS
we detected an average of  <dig>  viral genera in each individual. at least one virus was detected in 92% of the individuals sampled. these viruses included herpesviruses, papillomaviruses, polyomaviruses, adenoviruses, anelloviruses, parvoviruses, and circoviruses. each individual had a distinct viral profile, demonstrating the high interpersonal diversity of the virome. some components of the virome were stable over time.


CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first to use high-throughput dna sequencing to describe the diversity of eukaryotic dsdna viruses in a large cohort of normal individuals who were sampled at multiple body sites. our results show that the human virome is a complex component of the microbial flora. some viruses establish long-term infections that may be associated with increased risk or possibly with protection from disease. a better understanding of the composition and dynamics of the virome may hold important keys to human health.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
metagenomicsmicrobiomeviromeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

