BACKGROUND
stem cells can respond to environmental and physiological inputs to adaptively remodel tissues. little is known about whether stem cell niches are similarly responsive. the drosophila ovary germline stem cell  niche is a well-studied model, which is comprised of cap cells that provide anchorage and maintenance signals for gscs to maintain oogenesis. previous studies have shown a strong link between diet and the regulation of oogenesis, making this a useful model system in which to investigate dietary regulation of the niche and its associated stem cells.


RESULTS
we show that the drosophila ovary gsc cap cell niche is a dynamic structure, which can contract and expand in fluctuating dietary conditions. cap cells are lost when adult flies are shifted to nutrient poor diet and are restored after returning flies to nutrient-rich medium. notch signalling in cap and escort cells is similarly reduced and restored by dietary shifts to nutrient poor and rich media. in old flies decreased notch signalling is associated with decreased robustness of the niche to dietary changes. we demonstrated using a notch temperature sensitive allele that removal and restoration of notch signalling also leads to a reduction and re-expansion of the niche. changes in niche size were not associated with apoptosis or cell division. we identified two distinct roles for notch in the adult germarium. notch can act in cap cells to prevent their loss while activation of notch in the flanking escort cells results in expansion of the niche.


CONCLUSIONS
we provide evidence that dietary changes alone are sufficient to alter notch signalling and reversibly change niche size in the adult in wild type flies. we show notch acts in different cells to maintain and re-expand the niche and propose a model in which cell fate transitions between cap cells and flanking somatic cells accounts for niche dynamics. these findings reveal an unexpected reversible plasticity of the gsc niche whose responses provide an integrated read out of the physiological status of the fly that is modulated by diet and age.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

