BACKGROUND
genetic heterogeneity has become a major inconvenience in the genotyping and molecular epidemiology of the intestinal protozoan parasite giardia intestinalis, in particular for the major human infecting genotype, assemblage b. sequence-based genotyping of assemblage b giardia from patient fecal samples, where one or several of the commonly used genotyping loci  are implemented, is often hampered due to the presence of sequence heterogeneity in the sequencing chromatograms. this can be due to allelic sequence heterozygosity  and /or co-infections with parasites of different assemblage b sub-genotypes. thus, two important questions have arisen; i) does ash occur at the single cell level, and/or ii) do multiple sub-genotype infections commonly occur in patients infected with assemblage b, g. intestinalis isolates?


RESULTS
we used micromanipulation in order to isolate single giardia intestinalis, assemblage b trophozoites  and cysts from human patients. molecular analysis at the tpi loci of trophozoites from the gs lineage indicated that ash is present at the single cell level. analyses of assemblage b giardia cysts from clinical samples at the bg and tpi loci also indicated ash at the single cell level. additionally, alignment of sequence data from several different cysts that originated from the same patient yielded different sequence patterns, thus suggesting the presence of multiple sub-assemblage infections in congruence with ash within the same patient.


CONCLUSIONS
our results conclusively show that ash does occur at the single cell level in assemblage b giardia. furthermore, sequence heterogeneity generated during sequence-based genotyping of assemblage b isolates may possess the complexity of single cell ash in concurrence with co-infections of different assemblage b sub-genotypes. these findings explain the high abundance of sequence heterogeneity commonly found when performing sequence based genotyping of assemblage b giardia, and illuminates the necessity of developing new g. intestinalis genotyping tools.

