BACKGROUND
apoptotic cell death is a defining and ubiquitous characteristic of metazoans, but its evolutionary origins are unclear. although caenorhabditis and drosophila played key roles in establishing the molecular bases of apoptosis, it is now clear that cell death pathways of these animals do not reflect ancestral characteristics. conversely, recent work suggests that the apoptotic networks of cnidarians may be complex and vertebrate-like, hence characterization of the apoptotic complement of representatives of the basal cnidarian class anthozoa will help us to understand the evolution of the vertebrate apoptotic network.


RESULTS
we describe the bcl- <dig> and caspase protein repertoires of the coral acropora millepora, making use of the comprehensive transcriptomic data available for this species. molecular phylogenetics indicates that some acropora proteins are orthologs of specific mammalian pro-apoptotic bcl- <dig> family members, but the relationships of other bcl- <dig> and caspases are unclear. the pro- or anti-apoptotic activities of coral bcl- <dig> proteins were investigated by expression in mammalian cells, and the results imply functional conservation of the effector/anti-apoptotic machinery despite limited sequence conservation in the anti-apoptotic bcl- <dig> proteins. a novel caspase type , containing both inactive and active caspase domains, was identified in acropora and appears to be restricted to corals. when expressed in mammalian cells, full-length caspase-x caused loss of viability, and a truncated version containing only the active domain was more effective in inducing cell death, suggesting that the inactive domain might modulate activity in the full-length protein. structure prediction suggests that the active and inactive caspase domains in caspase-x are likely to interact, resulting in a structure resembling that of the active domain in procaspase- <dig> and the inactive caspase domain in the mammalian c-flip anti-apoptotic factor.


CONCLUSIONS
the data presented here confirm that many of the basic mechanisms involved in both the intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways were in place in the common ancestor of cnidarians and bilaterians. with the identification of most or all of the repertoires of coral bcl- <dig> and caspases, our results not only provide new perspectives on the evolution of apoptotic pathways, but also a framework for future experimental studies towards a complete understanding of coral bleaching mechanisms, in which apoptotic cell death might be involved.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
apoptosiscaspasebcl-2coralacropora milleporacnidariahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000923australian research council dp1095343miller david j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

