BACKGROUND
the second messenger cyclic diguanylate  plays a central role in bacterial adaptation to extracellular stimuli, controlling processes such as motility, biofilm development, cell development and, in some pathogens, virulence. the intracellular level of c-di-gmp is controlled by the complementary activities of diguanylate cyclases containing a ggdef domain and two classes of c-di-gmp phosphodiesterases containing an eal or hd-gyp hydrolytic domain. compared to the ggdef and eal domains, the functions of hd-gyp domain family proteins are poorly characterized. the human diarrheal pathogen vibrio cholerae encodes nine putative hd-gyp domain proteins. to determine the contributions of hd-gyp domain proteins to c-di-gmp signaling in v. cholerae, we systematically analyzed the enzymatic functionality of each protein and their involvement in processes known to be regulated by c-di-gmp: motility, biofilm development and virulence.


RESULTS
complementary in vitro and in vivo experiments showed that four hd-gyp domain proteins are active c-di-gmp phosphodiesterases: vc <dig>  vc <dig>  vca <dig> and vca <dig>  mutation of individual hd-gyp domain genes, as well as combinatorial mutations of multiple hd-gyp domain genes, had no effect on motility or biofilm formation of v. cholerae under the conditions tested. furthermore, no single hd-gyp domain gene affected intestinal colonization by v. cholerae in an infant mouse model. however, inactivation of multiple hd-gyp domain genes, including the four encoding functional phosphodiesterases, significantly attenuated colonization.


CONCLUSIONS
these results indicate that the hd-gyp family of c-di-gmp phosphodiesterases impacts signaling by this second messenger during infection. altogether, this work greatly furthers the understanding of this important family of c-di-gmp metabolic enzymes and demonstrates a role for hd-gyp domain proteins in the virulence of v. cholerae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
second messengercyclic diguanylatephosphodiesterasebiofilmmotilityvirulencehd-gypissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

