BACKGROUND
mosquitoes exhibit  <dig> hr rhythms in flight activity, feeding, reproduction and development. to better understand the molecular basis for these rhythms in the nocturnal malaria vector anopheles gambiae, we have utilized microarray analysis on time-of-day specific collections of mosquitoes over  <dig> hr to explore the coregulation of gene expression rhythms by the circadian clock and light, and compare these with the  <dig> hr rhythmic gene expression in the diurnal aedes aegypti dengue vector mosquito.


RESULTS
in time courses from an. gambiae head and body collected under light:dark cycle  and constant dark  conditions, we applied three algorithms that detect sinusoidal patterns and an algorithm that detects spikes in expression. this revealed across four experimental conditions  <dig> probes newly scored as rhythmic. these genes correspond to functions such as metabolic detoxification, immunity and nutrient sensing. this includes glutathione s-transferase gste <dig>  whose expression pattern and chromosomal location are shared with other genes, suggesting shared chromosomal regulation; and pulsatile expression of the gene encoding cyp6m <dig>  a cytochrome p <dig> that metabolizes pyrethroid insecticides. we explored the interaction of light and the circadian clock and highlight the regulation of odorant binding proteins , important components of the olfactory system. we reveal that obps have unique expression patterns as mosquitoes make the transition from ld to dd conditions. we compared rhythmic expression between an. gambiae and ae. aegypti heads collected under ld conditions using a single cosine fitting algorithm, and report distinct similarities and differences in the temporal regulation of genes involved in trna priming, the vesicular-type atpase, olfaction and vision between the two species.


CONCLUSIONS
these data build on our previous analyses of time-of-day specific regulation of the an. gambiae transcriptome to reveal additional rhythmic genes, an improved understanding of the co-regulation of rhythms in gene expression by the circadian clock and by light, and an understanding of the time-of-day specific regulation of some of these rhythmic processes in comparison with a different species of mosquito. improved understanding of biological timing at the molecular level that underlies key physiological aspects of mosquito vectors may prove to be important to successful implementation of established and novel insect control methods.

