BACKGROUND
phytophthora cactorum, a hemibiotrophic oomycete pathogen, can cause destructive diseases on numerous crops worldwide, leading to essential economic losses every year. however, little has been known about its molecular pathogenicity mechanisms. to gain insight into its repertoire of effectors, the p. cactorum transcriptome was investigated using illumina rna-seq.


RESULTS
we first demonstrated an in vitro inoculation method that can be used to mimic natural cyst germination on host plants. over  <dig> million cdna reads were obtained for five life cycle stages  and de novo assembled into  <dig>  unique genes. by comparisons with  <dig> public databases,  <dig> % of the unique genes were annotated, including  <dig>  mapped to the gene models of the annotated relative phytophthora infestans. using tribemcl,  <dig>  gene families conserved across p. cactorum and other three completely sequenced phytophthora pathogen species were determined. in silico analyses revealed that  <dig> p. cactorum effector homologues including  <dig> rxlr effector candidates matched known or putative virulence genes in other oomycetes. about half of the rxlr effector candidates were predicted to share a conserved structure unit, termed the wy-domain fold. a subset of the effector genes were checked and validated by pcr amplification. transcriptional experiments indicated that effector genes were differentially expressed during the life cycle and host infection stages of p. cactorum. ectopic expression in nicotiana benthamiana revealed that rxlr, elicitin and nlp effectors can trigger plant cell death. these effectors are highly conserved across oomycete species. single nucleotide polymorphisms for rxlr effectors were detected in a collection of p. cactorum isolates from different countries and hosts.


CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates the comprehensive sequencing, de novo assembly, and analyses of the transcriptome of p. cactorum life cycle stages. in the absence of genome sequence, transcriptome data is important for infection-related gene discovery in p. cactorum, as demonstrated here for the effector genes. the first look at the transcriptome and effector arsenal of p. cactorum provides valuable data to elucidate the pathogenicity basis of this broad-host-range pathogen.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
phytophthora cactorumtranscriptometribemcleffectorwy-domaintranscriptional profiletransient expressionplant cell deathpolymorphismissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

