BACKGROUND
grain chalkiness is a highly undesirable trait deleterious to rice appearance and milling quality. the physiological and molecular foundation of chalkiness formation is still partially understood, because of the complex interactions between multiple genes and growing environments.


RESULTS
we report the untargeted metabolomic analysis of grains from a notched-belly mutant  with high percentage of white-belly, which predominantly occurs in the bottom part proximal to the embryo. metabolites in developing grains were profiled on the composite platforms of uplc/ms/ms and gc/ms. sampling times were  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 20 days after anthesis, the critical time points for chalkiness formation. a total of  <dig> metabolites were identified, covering most of the central metabolic pathways and partial secondary pathways including amino acids, carbohydrates, lipids, cofactors, peptides, nucleotides, phytohormones, and secondary metabolites. a comparison of the bottom chalky part and the upper translucent part of developing grains of dy <dig> resulted in  <dig> metabolites related to chalkiness formation.


CONCLUSIONS
generally, in comparison to the translucent upper part, the chalky endosperm had lower levels of metabolites regarding carbon and nitrogen metabolism for synthesis of storage starch and protein, which was accompanied by perturbation of pathways participating in scavenging of reactive oxygen species, osmorugulation, cell wall synthesis, and mineral ion homeostasis. based on these results, metabolic mechanism of chalkiness formation is discussed, with the role of embryo highlighted.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
grain chalkinessmetabolomic analysisnotched-belly mutantsricewhite-bellyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3117148531470086liu zhenghui ding yanfeng national high technology research and development program of china2014aa10a605liu zhenghui national science and technology supporting program of china2012bad04b <dig> and 2013bad07b09ding yanfeng issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

