BACKGROUND
human twist <dig> is a highly conserved member of the regulatory basic helix-loop-helix  transcription factors. twist <dig> forms homo- or heterodimers with e-box proteins, such as e2a , myod and hand <dig>  haploinsufficiency germ-line mutations of the twist <dig> gene in humans are the main cause of saethre-chotzen syndrome , which is characterized by limb abnormalities and premature fusion of cranial sutures. because of the importance of twist <dig> in the regulation of embryonic development and its relationship with scs, along with the lack of an experimentally solved 3d structure, we performed comparative modeling for the twist <dig> bhlh region arranged into wild-type homodimers and heterodimers with e <dig>  in addition, three mutations that promote dna binding failure  were studied on the twist <dig> monomer. we also explored the behavior of the mutant forms in aqueous solution using molecular dynamics  simulations, focusing on the structural changes of the wild-type versus mutant dimers.


RESULTS
the solvent-accessible surface area of the homodimers was smaller on wild-type dimers, which indicates that the cleft between the monomers remained more open on the mutant homodimers. rmsd and rmsf analyses indicated that mutated dimers presented values that were higher than those for the wild-type dimers. for a more careful investigation, the monomer was subdivided into four regions: basic, helix i, loop and helix ii. the basic domain presented a higher flexibility in all of the parameters that were analyzed, and the mutant dimer basic domains presented values that were higher than the wild-type dimers. the essential dynamic analysis also indicated a higher collective motion for the basic domain.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest the mutations studied turned the dimers into more unstable structures with a wider cleft, which may be a reason for the loss of dna binding capacity observed for in vitro circumstances.

twist1transcription factorbhlhcomparative modelingmolecular dynamics simulationcollective motions

