BACKGROUND
despite the significance of chicken as a model organism, our understanding of the chicken transcriptome is limited compared to human. this issue is common to all non-human vertebrate annotations due to the difficulty in transcript identification from short read rnaseq data. while previous studies have used single molecule long read sequencing for transcript discovery, they did not perform rna normalization and 5′-cap selection which may have resulted in lower transcriptome coverage and truncated transcript sequences.


RESULTS
we sequenced normalised chicken brain and embryo rna libraries with pacific bioscience iso-seq. 5′ cap selection was performed on the embryo library to provide methodological comparison. from these iso-seq sequencing projects, we have identified 60 k transcripts and 29 k genes within the chicken transcriptome. of these, more than 20 k are novel lncrna transcripts with ~3 k classified as sense exonic overlapping lncrna, which is a class that is underrepresented in many vertebrate annotations. the relative proportion of alternative transcription events revealed striking similarities between the chicken and human transcriptomes while also providing explanations for previously observed genomic differences.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the chicken transcriptome is similar in complexity compared to human, and provide insights into other vertebrate biology. our methodology demonstrates the potential of iso-seq sequencing to rapidly expand our knowledge of transcriptomics.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
iso-seqpacbiosingle molecule long read sequencingtranscriptome sequencingrnaseqchickenaviangallus gallusgenome annotationcoding rnanon-coding rnahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000268biotechnology and biological sciences research councilbb/j004235/1bb/m011461/1bb/m01844x/1issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

