BACKGROUND
in kazakhstan, traditional artisanal cheeses have a long history and are widely consumed. the unique characteristics of local artisanal cheeses are almost completely preserved. however, their microbial communities have rarely been reported. the current study firstly generated the single molecule, real-time  sequencing bacterial diversity profiles of  <dig> traditional artisanal cheese samples of kazakhstan origin, followed by comparatively analyzed the microbiota composition between the current dataset and those from cheeses originated from belgium, russian republic of kalmykia  and italy.


RESULTS
across the kazakhstan cheese samples, a total of  <dig> bacterial species belonging to  <dig> phyla and  <dig> genera were identified. lactococcus lactis , lactobacillus helveticus , streptococcus thermophilus  and lactobacillus delbrueckii  were the dominant bacterial species for these samples. to further evaluate the cheese bacterial diversity of kazakhstan cheeses in comparison with those from other geographic origins, 16s rrna datasets of  <dig> artisanal cheeses from belgium, russian republic of kalmykia  and italy were retrieved from public databases. the cheese bacterial microbiota communities were largely different across sample origins. by principal coordinate analysis  and multivariate analysis of variance , the structure of the kazakhstan artisanal cheese samples was found to be different from those of the other geographic origins. furthermore, the redundancy analysis  identified  <dig> bacterial otus as the key variables responsible for such microbiota structural difference.


CONCLUSIONS
our results together suggest that the diversity of bacterial communities in different groups is stratified by geographic region. this study does not only provide novel information on the bacterial microbiota of traditional artisanal cheese of kazakhstan at species level, but also interesting insights into the bacterial diversity of artisanal cheeses of various geographical origins.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
single moleculereal-time cheesesbacterial diversitykazakhstanthe international s&t cooperation program of china2014dfr31150sun tiansong the china agriculture research systemcars-37sun tiansong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

