BACKGROUND
the pectinolytic enterobacteria of the pectobacterium and dickeya genera are causative agents of maceration-associated diseases affecting a wide variety of crops and ornamentals. for the past decade, the emergence of a novel species d. solani was observed in potato fields in europe and the mediterranean basin. the purpose of this study is to search by comparative genomics the genetic traits that could be distinctive to other dickeya species and be involved in d. solani adaptation to the potato plant host.


RESULTS
d. solani  <dig> exhibits a  <dig>  mb circular genome that is characterized by a low content in mobile elements with the identification of only two full length insertion sequences. a genomic comparison with the deeply-annotated model d. dadantii  <dig> strain was performed. while a large majority of dickeya virulence genes are shared by both strains, a few hundreds genes of d. solani  <dig>  mostly regrouped in  <dig> genomic regions, are distinctive to d. dadantii  <dig>  these genomic regions are present in the other available draft genomes of d. solani strains and interestingly some of them were not found in the sequenced genomes of the other dickeya species. these genomic regions regroup metabolic genes and are often accompanied by genes involved in transport systems. a metabolic analysis correlated some metabolic genes with distinctive functional traits of both d. solani  <dig> and d. dadantii  <dig>  three identified d. solani genomic regions also regroup nrps/pks encoding genes. in addition, d. solani encodes a distinctive arsenal of t5ss and t6ss-related toxin-antitoxin systems. these genes may contribute to bacteria-bacteria interactions and to the fitness of d. solani to the plant environment.


CONCLUSIONS
this study highlights the genomic specific traits of the emerging pathogen d. solani and will provide the basis for studying those that are involved in the successful adaptation of this emerging pathogen to the potato plant host.

pksnrpscdirhsdickeya dadantiidickeya solaniplant pathogen interactions

