BACKGROUND
wingless gene  plays a fundamental role in regulating the segment polarity and wing imaginal discs of insects. the rice planthoppers have an obvious wing dimorphism, and the long- and short-winged forms exist normally in natural populations. however, the molecular characteristics and functions of wg in rice planthoppers are poorly understood, and the relationship between expression level of wg and wing dimorphism has not been clarified.


RESULTS
in this study, wingless gene  was cloned from three species of rice planthopper, sogatella furcifera, laodelphgax striatellus and nilaparvata lugens, and its characteristics and role in determining the wing dimorphism of s. furcifera were explored. the results showed that only three different amino acid residuals encoded by wg were found between s. furcifera and l. striatellus, but more than  <dig> residuals in n. lugens were different with l. striatellus and s. furcifera. the sequences of amino acids encoded by wg showed a high degree of identity between these three species of rice planthopper that belong to the same family, delphacidae. the macropterous and brachypterous lineages of s. furcifera were established by selection experiment. the wg mrna expression levels in nymphs were significantly higher in the macropterous lineage than in the brachypterous lineage of s. furcifera. in macropterous adults, the wg was expressed mainly in wings and legs, and less in body segments. ingestion of 100 ng/μl double-stranded rna of wg from second instar nymphs led to a significant decrease of expression level of wg during nymphal stage and of body weight of subsequent adults. moreover, rnai of wg resulted in significantly shorter and deformative wings, including shrunken and unfolded wings.


CONCLUSIONS
wg has high degree of identity among three species of rice planthopper. wg is involved in the development and growth of wings in s. furcifera. expression level of wg during the nymphal stage manipulates the size and pattern of wings in s. furcifera.

rice planthoppersogatella furciferawingless genewing deformationwing length

