BACKGROUND
the reliability and reproducibility of experimental procedures is a cornerstone of scientific practice. there is a pressing technological need for the better representation of biomedical protocols to enable other agents  to better reproduce results. a framework that ensures that all information required for the replication of experimental protocols is essential to achieve reproducibility.

methods
we have developed the ontology exact <dig>  that is designed to capture the full semantics of biomedical protocols required for their reproducibility.

to construct exact <dig> we manually inspected hundreds of published and commercial biomedical protocols from several areas of biomedicine. after establishing a clear pattern for extracting the required information we utilized text-mining tools to translate the protocols into a machine amenable format. we have verified the utility of exact <dig> through the successful processing of previously 'unseen'  protocols.


RESULTS
the paper reports on a fundamentally new version exact <dig> that supports the semantically-defined representation of biomedical protocols. the ability of exact <dig> to capture the semantics of biomedical procedures was verified through a text mining use case. in this exact <dig> is used as a reference model for text mining tools to identify terms pertinent to experimental actions, and their properties, in biomedical protocols expressed in natural language. an exact2-based framework for the translation of biomedical protocols to a machine amenable format is proposed.


CONCLUSIONS
the exact <dig> ontology is sufficient to record, in a machine processable form, the essential information about biomedical protocols. exact <dig> defines explicit semantics of experimental actions, and can be used by various computer applications. it can serve as a reference model for for the translation of biomedical protocols in natural language into a semantically-defined format.

16- <dig> october  <dig> nettab 2013: 13th network tools and applications in biology workshop on  venice, italy

