BACKGROUND
the major function of the ovary is to produce oocytes for fertilisation. oocytes mature in follicles surrounded by nurturing granulosa cells and all are enclosed by a basal lamina. during growth, granulosa cells replicate and a large fluid-filled cavity  develops in the centre. only follicles that have enlarged to over  <dig> mm can ovulate in cows. in mammals, the number of primordial follicles far exceeds the numbers that ever ovulate and atresia or regression of follicles is a mechanism to regulate the number of oocytes ovulated and to contribute to the timing of ovulation. to better understand the molecular basis of follicular atresia, we undertook transcriptome profiling of granulosa cells from healthy  and atretic  bovine follicles at early antral stages .


RESULTS
principal component analysis  and hierarchical classification of the signal intensity plots for the arrays showed primary clustering into two groups, healthy and atretic. these analyses and size-frequency plots of coefficients of variation of signal intensities revealed that the healthy follicles were more heterogeneous. examining the differentially-expressed genes the most significantly affected functions in atretic follicles were cell death, organ development, tissue development and embryonic development. the overall processes influenced by transcription factor gene tp <dig> were predicted to be activated, whereas those of myc were inhibited on the basis of known interactions with the genes in our dataset. the top ranked canonical pathway contained signalling molecules common to various inflammatory/fibrotic pathways such as the transforming growth factor-β and tumour necrosis factor-α pathways. the two most significant networks also reflect this pattern of tissue remodelling/fibrosis gene expression. these networks also contain molecules which are present in the canonical pathways of hepatic fibrosis/hepatic stellate cell activation and transforming growth factor-β signalling and were up regulated.


CONCLUSIONS
small healthy antral follicles, which have a number of growth outcomes, exhibit greater variability in gene expression, particularly in genes associated with cell division and other growth-related functions. atresia, on the other hand, not only involves cell death but clearly is an active process similar to wound healing.

ovarymicroarray analysisbovinegranulosa cellsatresiafollicles

