BACKGROUND
the amount of non-unique sequence  in a genome directly affects the difficulty of read alignment to a reference assembly for high throughput-sequencing data. although a longer read is more likely to be uniquely mapped to the reference genome, a quantitative analysis of the influence of read lengths on mappability has been lacking. to address this question, we evaluate the k-mer distribution of the human reference genome. the k-mer frequency is determined for k ranging from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp.


RESULTS
we observe that the proportion of non-singletons k-mers decreases slowly with increasing k, and can be fitted by piecewise power-law functions with different exponents at different ranges of k. a slower decay at greater values for k indicates more limited gains in mappability for read lengths between  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp. the frequency distributions of k-mers exhibit long tails with a power-law-like trend, and rank frequency plots exhibit a concave zipf’s curve. the most frequent 1000-mers comprise  <dig> regions, which include four large stretches on chromosomes  <dig> and x, containing genes of biomedical relevance. comparison with other databases indicates that the  <dig> regions can be broadly classified into two types: those containing line transposable elements and those containing segmental duplications.


CONCLUSIONS
read mappability as measured by the proportion of singletons increases steadily up to the length scale around  <dig> bp. when read length increases above  <dig> bp, smaller gains in mappability are expected. moreover, the proportion of non-singletons decreases with read lengths much slower than linear. even a read length of  <dig> bp would not allow the unique alignment of reads for many coding regions of human genes. a mix of techniques will be needed for efficiently producing high-quality data that cover the complete human genome.

next-generation sequencingread alignmentrepeat sequencesgenome redundancylong-tail distributionk-mers

