BACKGROUND
the supplementation of fat to lactating dairy cows has long been used as a management tool to increase dietary energy density for improving cow production, reproduction and to alleviate negative energy balance. attempts have been made to investigate the effect of canola meal on plasma metabolites in lactating cows, but the results have been diverse and inconsistent. to our current knowledge, there is a dearth of published information on the utilization of crude degummed canola oil  in pasture-based dairy systems. therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate the changes in plasma metabolite profiles of pasture-based, primiparous, holstein-friesian cows supplemented with varying dietary levels of cdco for eight weeks. the study tested the hypothesis that feeding grazing primiparous holstein-friesian cows for eight weeks with incremental levels of cdco supplement will decrease plasma non-esterified fatty acids  and β-hydroxybutyrate , but increase plasma cholesterol and glucose metabolites.


RESULTS
twenty lactating primiparous holstein-friesian cows 40 days in milk were randomly allotted into four treatment groups that consisted of a wheat-based, pelleted basal diet with no supplemental cdco , basal diet with cdco added at 25 ml/kgdm  , 35 ml/kgdm  and 50 ml/kgdm  in an eight-week feeding trial, after two weeks of adjustment. treatment influenced bhba but had no effect on plasma nefa, cholesterol and glucose metabolite profiles . however, week of supplementation had a significant effect  on bhba, nefa and glucose concentrations.


CONCLUSIONS
we concluded that with the exception of bhba, cdco at current levels of supplementation does not alter the plasma metabolite profiles of grazing primiparous cows. the lack of significant differences across treatments seems to indicate that higher levels of cdco than the current levels used in this study, are probably needed. furthermore, the duration of supplementation with cdco had a greater impact on plasma metabolites than the levels of supplementation. our findings also suggest that primiparous cows grazing high quality pastures during spring have sufficient energy intakes to prevent negative energy balance at 40 days in milk without the need for added fat supplements.

keywords
primiparous holstein-friesianscrude degummed canola oilsupplementplasma metabolitesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

