BACKGROUND
insertion sequences  and their non-autonomous derivatives  are important components of prokaryotic genomes inducing duplication, deletion, rearrangement or lateral gene transfers. although iss and mites are relatively simple and basic genetic elements, their detection remains a difficult task due to their remarkable sequence diversity. with the advent of high-throughput genome and metagenome sequencing technologies, the development of fast, reliable and sensitive methods of iss and mites detection become an important challenge. so far, almost all studies dealing with prokaryotic transposons have used classical blast-based detection methods against reference libraries. here we introduce alternative methods of detection either taking advantages of the structural properties of the elements  or using an additional library-based method using profile hmm searches.


RESULTS
in this study, we have developed three different work flows dedicated to iss and mites detection: the first two use de novo methods detecting either repeated sequences or presence of inverted repeats; the third one use  <dig> in-house transposase alignment profiles with hmm search methods. we have compared the respective performances of each method using a reference dataset of  <dig> archaeal and  <dig> bacterial genomes in addition to simulated and real metagenomes. compared to a blast-based method using isfinder as library, de novo methods significantly improve iss and mites detection. for example, in the  <dig> archaeal genomes, we discovered  <dig> new elements  in addition to the  <dig> multi-copies elements already detected by the blast approach. many of the new elements correspond to iss belonging to unknown or highly divergent families. the total number of mites has even doubled with the discovery of elements displaying very limited sequence similarities with their respective autonomous partners . concerning metagenomes, with the exception of short reads data  for which both techniques seem equally limited, profile hmm searches considerably ameliorate the detection of transposase encoding genes  generating low level of false positives compare to blast-based methods.


CONCLUSIONS
compared to classical blast-based methods, the sensitivity of de novo and profile hmm methods developed in this study allow a better and more reliable detection of transposons in prokaryotic genomes and metagenomes. we believed that future studies implying iss and mites identification in genomic data should combine at least one de novo and one library-based method, with optimal results obtained by running the two de novo methods in addition to a library-based search. for metagenomic data, profile hmm search should be favored, a blast-based step is only useful to the final annotation into groups and families.

insertion sequence miniature inverted repeat transposable element data mininggenome and metagenomeprofile hmm

