BACKGROUND
because of their functional significance, the major histocompatibility complex  class i and ii genes have been the subject of continuous interest in the fields of ecology, evolution and conservation. in some vertebrate groups mhc consists of multiple loci with similar alleles; therefore, the multiple loci must be genotyped simultaneously. in such complex systems, understanding of the evolutionary patterns and their causes has been limited due to challenges posed by genotyping.


RESULTS
here we used  <dig> amplicon sequencing to characterize mhc class iib exon  <dig> variation in the collared flycatcher, an important organism in evolutionary and immuno-ecological studies. on the basis of over  <dig>  sequencing reads we identified  <dig> putative alleles in  <dig> individuals. we found an extreme complexity of the mhc class iib in the collared flycatchers, with our estimates pointing to the presence of at least nine expressed loci and a large, though difficult to estimate precisely, number of pseudogene loci. many similar alleles occurred in the pseudogenes indicating either a series of recent duplications or extensive concerted evolution. the expressed alleles showed unambiguous signals of historical selection and the occurrence of apparent interlocus exchange of alleles. placing the collared flycatcher's mhc sequences in the context of passerine diversity revealed transspecific mhc class ii evolution within the muscicapidae family.


CONCLUSIONS
 <dig> amplicon sequencing is an effective tool for advancing our understanding of the mhc class ii structure and evolutionary patterns in passeriformes. we found a highly dynamic pattern of evolution of mhc class iib genes with strong signals of selection and pronounced sequence divergence in expressed genes, in contrast to the apparent sequence homogenization in pseudogenes. we show that next generation sequencing offers a universal, affordable method for the characterization and, in perspective, genotyping of mhc systems of virtually any complexity.

