BACKGROUND
canine babesiosis is caused by species of the babesia genus and has become an emerging disease worldwide. to the authors’ knowledge there are no reports in which antioxidants have been analyzed in different presentations of canine babesiosis or in which the prognostic value of antioxidants has been studied. the aim of this study was to evaluate whether oxidative stress could be related to the severity and outcome of canine babesiosis. for this purpose a profile consisting of four antioxidant biomarkers  and malondialdehyde - mda as an oxidant biomarker  were evaluated in dogs with canine babesiosis of different clinical severity and outcomes.


RESULTS
the study was conducted with a sample of  <dig> dogs suffering from babesiosis  and  <dig> healthy dogs . additionally, the babesiosis group was divided according to the anaemia into non-anaemic, mildly anaemic, moderately anaemic and severely anaemic dogs. the results of our study showed significantly decreased sod, catalase and tas values in diseased dogs compared to controls, while there were no significant differences in gpx between these groups. dogs that developed mods showed lower activities of sod and gpx and higher mda values compared to dogs with uncomplicated babesiosis as well as with dogs that developed one complication. superoxide dismutase, catalase and gpx were negatively correlated whereas mda was positively correlated with the lethal outcome of the disease. furthermore, this study detected more pronounced decrease in antioxidant biomarkers  in dogs with moderate anaemia compared to those with mild anaemia.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study showed changes in biomarkers related to the antioxidant status of dogs naturally infected with b. canis canis. these biomarkers could be used as indicators of disease severity and outcome in dogs suffering from babesiosis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
babesiosisdogantioxidant statusglutathione peroxidase superoxide dismutase catalasetotal antioxidant status fp <dig> era chair project ''vetmedzg''.grant agreement no 621394mrljak vladimir issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

