BACKGROUND
the german cdna consortium has been cloning full length cdnas and continued with their exploitation in protein localization experiments and cellular assays. however, the efficient use of large cdna resources requires the development of strategies that are capable of a speedy selection of truly useful cdnas from biological and experimental noise. to this end we have developed a new high-throughput analysis tool, caftan, which simplifies these efforts and thus fills the gap between large-scale cdna collections and their systematic annotation and application in functional genomics.


RESULTS
caftan is built around the mapping of cdnas to the genome assembly, and the subsequent analysis of their genomic context. it uses sequence features like the presence and type of polya signals, inner and flanking repeats, the gc-content, splice site types, etc. all these features are evaluated in individual tests and classify cdnas according to their sequence quality and likelihood to have been generated from fully processed mrnas. additionally, caftan compares the coordinates of mapped cdnas with the genomic coordinates of reference sets from public available resources . this provides detailed information about overlapping exons and the structural classification of cdnas with respect to the reference set of splice variants.

the evaluation of caftan showed that is able to correctly classify more than 85% of  <dig> selected "known protein-coding" vega cdnas as high quality multi- or single-exon. it identified as good  <dig>  % of the single exon cdnas and  <dig> % of the multiple exon cdnas.

the program is written in perl and in a modular way, allowing the adoption of this strategy to other tasks like est-annotation, or to extend it by adding new classification rules and new organism databases as they become available. we think that it is a very useful program for the annotation and research of unfinished genomes.


CONCLUSIONS
caftan is a high-throughput sequence analysis tool, which performs a fast and reliable quality prediction of cdnas. several thousands of cdnas can be analyzed in a short time, giving the curator/scientist a first quick overview about the quality and the already existing annotation of a set of cdnas. it supports the rejection of low quality cdnas and helps in the selection of likely novel splice variants, and/or completely novel transcripts for new experiments.

