BACKGROUND
idiopathic interstitial pneumonias  are a group of heterogeneous, somewhat unpredictable diseases characterized by progressive scarring of the interstitium. since lung function is a key determinant of survival, we reasoned that the transcriptional profile in iip lung tissue would be associated with measures of lung function, and could enhance prognostic approaches to iips.


RESULTS
using gene expression profiling of  <dig> lung tissue specimens with iip diagnosis and  <dig> control lungs, we identified genes whose expression is associated with changes in lung function  modeled as categorical  or continuous variables while adjusting for smoking status and iip subtype; false discovery rate  approach was used to correct for multiple comparisons. this analysis identified  <dig> transcripts that are associated with mild vs severe disease , including those with established role in fibrosis  as well as novel iip candidate genes such as rhotekin  <dig>  and peptidase inhibitor  <dig> . protein-protein interactome analysis of  <dig> genes whose expression is significantly associated with lung function when modeled as continuous variables demonstrates that more severe presentation of iips is characterized by an increase in cell cycle progression and apoptosis, increased hypoxia, and dampened innate immune response. our findings were validated in an independent cohort of  <dig> iips and  <dig> controls at the mrna level and for one gene  at the protein level by immunohistochemistry in a subset of samples.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified commonalities and differences in gene expression among different subtypes of iips. disease progression, as characterized by lower measures of fvc and dlco, results in marked changes in expression of novel and established genes and pathways involved in iips. these genes and pathways represent strong candidates for biomarker studies and potential therapeutic targets for iip severity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

