BACKGROUND
cereal cyst nematode heterodera avenae, an important soil-borne pathogen in wheat, causes numerous annual yield losses worldwide, and use of resistant cultivars is the best strategy for control. however, target genes are not readily available for breeding resistant cultivars. therefore, comparative transcriptomic analyses were performed to identify more applicable resistance genes for cultivar breeding.

methods
the developing nematodes within roots were stained with acid fuchsin solution. transcriptome assemblies and redundancy filteration were obtained by trinity, tgi clustering tool and blastn, respectively. gene ontology annotation was yielded by blast2go program, and metabolic pathways of transcripts were analyzed by path_finder. the ros levels were determined by luminol-chemiluminescence assay. the transcriptional gene expression profiles were obtained by quantitative rt-pcr.


RESULTS
the rna-sequencing was performed using an incompatible wheat cultivar vp <dig> and a compatible control cultivar wen <dig> infected with h. avenae at 24 h,  <dig> d and  <dig> d. infection assays showed that vp <dig> failed to block penetration of h. avenae but disturbed the transition of developmental stages, leading to a significant reduction in cyst formation. two types of expression profiles were established to predict candidate resistance genes after developing a novel strategy to generate clean rna-seq data by removing the transcripts of h. avenae within the raw data before assembly. using the uncoordinated expression profiles with transcript abundance as a standard,  <dig> candidate resistance genes were identified, including  <dig> overlapping genes and  <dig> vp1620-specific genes. genes with similar expression patterns were further classified according to the scales of changed transcript abundances, and  <dig> genes were rescued as supplementary candidate resistance genes. functional characterizations revealed that diverse defense-related pathways were responsible for wheat resistance against h. avenae. moreover, phospholipase was involved in many defense-related pathways and localized in the connection position. furthermore, strong bursts of reactive oxygen species  within vp <dig> roots infected with h. avenae were induced at 24 h and  <dig> d, and eight ros-producing genes were significantly upregulated, including three class iii peroxidase and five lipoxygenase genes.


CONCLUSIONS
large-scale identification of wheat resistance genes were processed by comparative transcriptomic analysis. functional characterization showed that phospholipases associated with ros production played vital roles in early defense responses to h. avenae via involvement in diverse defense-related pathways as a hub switch. this study is the first to investigate the early defense responses of wheat against h. avenae, not only provides applicable candidate resistance genes for breeding novel wheat cultivars, but also enables a better understanding of the defense mechanisms of wheat against h. avenae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cereal cyst nematodeheterodera avenaetriticum aestivumrna-sequencingtranscripts filtrationexpression profileresistance genesdefense responseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

