BACKGROUND
to understand variation in resistance to parasites within host populations, researchers have examined conditions under which immunity is induced and/or is costly. both host sex and age have been found to influence immune expression and subsequently are likely factors influencing the costs of resistance. the purpose of this study was to examine immune expression and associated survival costs for two age groups  of the damselfly, enallagma boreale selys. survival was assessed for experimentally challenged and control damselflies, housed initially at 22째c and then subjected to low temperatures  associated with reduced foraging activity and food deprivation. experimental conditions emulated natural local variation in bouts of good weather followed by inclement weather .


RESULTS
at least one of three immune traits was induced to higher levels for both newly emerged and mature e. boreale challenged by lippopolysaccharide  relative to saline-injected controls, when housed at 22째c. the immune traits assayed included haemocyte concentration, phenoloxidase activity and antibacterial activity and their induction varied among ages and between males and females. for matures, those injected with lps had lowered survivorship compared to saline-injected controls that were housed initially at 22째c and subsequently at 15째c. newly emerged lps-injected damselflies did not show reduced survivorship relative to newly-emerged controls, despite showing immune induction.


CONCLUSIONS
reduced longevity following induction of immunity was observed for reproductively mature damselflies, but not for newly emerged damselflies. costs of resistance depend only partly on the immune trait induced and more on the age  of the host. in four years, we often observed bouts of inclement weather following good days and these bouts occurred primarily during the emergence periods, but also during the flight periods, of e. boreale. the duration of these bouts appear sufficient to compromise survival of mature damselflies that responded immunologically to lps challenge. we further suggest the environmental conditions likely experienced by different ages of damselflies, following resistance expression, has influenced optimal immune investment by individuals in different age classes and the likelihood of detecting costs of resistance.

