BACKGROUND
the main transmission route of leishmania infantum is through the bites of sand flies. however, alternative mechanisms are being investigated, such as through the bites of ticks, which could have epidemiological relevance. the objective of this work was to verify the presence of leishmania spp. in rhipicephalus sanguineus sensu lato collected from naturally infected dogs in the federal district of brazil.

methods
ticks were dissected to remove their intestines and salivary glands for dna extraction and the subsequent amplification of the conserved region of 120 bp of kdna and 234 bp of the hsp <dig> gene of leishmania spp. the amplified kdna products were digested with endonucleases haeiii and bstui and were submitted to dna sequencing. isolated leishmania parasites from these ticks were analyzed by multilocus enzyme electrophoresis, and the dna obtained from this culture was subjected to microsatellite analyses.


RESULTS
overall,  <dig> specimens of r. sanguineus were collected from  <dig> dogs. leishmania spp. were successfully isolated in culture from five pools of salivary glands and the intestines of ticks collected from four dogs. the amplified kdna products from the dog blood samples and from the tick cultures, when digested by haeiii and bstui, revealed the presence of l. braziliensis and l. infantum. one strain was cultivated and characterized as l. infantum by enzyme electrophoresis. the amplified kdna products from the blood of one dog showed a sequence homology with l. braziliensis; however, the amplified kdna from the ticks collected from this dog showed a sequence homology to l. infantum.


CONCLUSIONS
the results confirm that the specimens of r. sanguineus that feed on dogs naturally infected by l. infantum contain the parasite dna in their intestines and salivary glands, and viable l. infantum can be successfully isolated from these ectoparasites.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
leishmania infantumrhipicephalus sanguineuspcrcanis familiarisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

