BACKGROUND
survival analysis is an important element of reasoning from data. applied in a number of fields, it has become particularly useful in medicine to estimate the survival rate of patients on the basis of their condition, examination results, and undergoing treatment. the recent developments in the next generation sequencing open new opportunities in survival study as they allow vast amount of genome-, transcriptome-, and proteome-related features to be investigated. these include single nucleotide and structural variants, expressions of genes and micrornas, dna methylation, and many others.


RESULTS
we present lr-rules, a new algorithm for rule induction from survival data. it works according to the separate-and-conquer heuristics with a use of log-rank test for establishing rule body. extensive experiments show lr-rules to generate models of superior accuracy and comprehensibility. the detailed analysis of rules rendered by the presented algorithm on four medical datasets concerning leukemia as well as breast, lung, and thyroid cancers, reveals the ability to discover true relations between attributes and patients’ survival rate. two of the case studies incorporate features obtained with a use of high throughput technologies showing the usability of the algorithm in the analysis of bioinformatics data.


CONCLUSIONS
lr-rules is a viable alternative to existing approaches to survival analysis, particularly when the interpretability of a resulting model is crucial. presented algorithm may be especially useful when applied on the genomic and proteomic data as it may contribute to the better understanding of the background of diseases and support their treatments.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
survival analysisseparate-and-conquerrule inductionlog-rank testhigh throughput sequencingcancernarodowe centrum badan i rozwoju strategmed3/304586/5/ncbr/2017narodowe centrum badan i rozwoju poig. <dig> .01-24-099/13issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

