BACKGROUND
many studies report about detection and functional characterization of cis-regulatory motifs in untranslated regions  of mrnas but little is known about the nature and functional role of their distribution. to address this issue we have developed a computational approach based on the use of data mining techniques. the idea is that of mining frequent combinations of translation regulatory motifs, since their significant co-occurrences could reveal functional relationships important for the post-transcriptional control of gene expression. the experimentation has been focused on targeted mitochondrial transcripts to elucidate the role of translational control in mitochondrial biogenesis and function.


RESULTS
the analysis is based on a two-stepped procedure using a sequential pattern mining algorithm. the first step searches for frequent patterns  of motifs without taking into account their spatial displacement. in the second step, frequent sequential patterns  of spaced motifs are generated by taking into account the conservation of spacers between each ordered pair of co-occurring motifs. the algorithm makes no assumption on the relation among motifs and on the number of motifs involved in a pattern. different fsps can be found depending on different combinations of two parameters, i.e. the threshold of the minimum percentage of sequences supporting the pattern, and the granularity of spacer discretization. results can be retrieved at the utrminer web site: . the discovered fps of motifs amount to  <dig> in the overall dataset and to  <dig> in the human subset. for each fp, the system provides information on the discovered fsps, if any. a variety of search options help users in browsing the web resource. the list of sequence ids supporting each pattern can be used for the retrieval of information from the utrminer database.


CONCLUSIONS
computational prediction of structural properties of regulatory sequences is not trivial. the presented data mining approach is able to overcome some limits observed in other competitive tools. preliminary results on utr sequences from nuclear transcripts targeting mitochondria are promising and lead us to be confident on the effectiveness of the approach for future developments.

18– <dig> september  <dig> european molecular biology network  conference 2008: 20th anniversary celebration martina franca, italy

