BACKGROUND
in the postgenomic era, high throughput protein expression and protein microarray technologies have progressed markedly permitting screening of therapeutic reagents and discovery of novel protein functions. hexa-histidine is one of the most commonly used fusion tags for protein expression due to its small size and convenient purification via immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography . this purification process has been adapted to the protein microarray format, but the quality of in situ his-tagged protein purification on slides has not been systematically evaluated. we established methods to determine the level of purification of such proteins on metal chelate-modified slide surfaces. optimized in situ purification of his-tagged recombinant proteins has the potential to become the new gold standard for cost-effective generation of high-quality and high-density protein microarrays.


RESULTS
two slide surfaces were examined, chelated cu2+ slides suspended on a polyethylene glycol  coating and chelated ni2+ slides immobilized on a support without peg coating. using peg-coated chelated cu2+ slides, consistently higher purities of recombinant proteins were measured. an optimized wash buffer  composed of  <dig> mm phosphate buffer,  <dig>  mm kcl,  <dig> mm nacl and  <dig> % tween  <dig>  ph  <dig> , further improved protein purity levels. using escherichia coli cell lysates expressing  <dig> recombinant streptococcus pneumoniae proteins,  <dig> proteins were successfully immobilized, and  <dig> proteins were in situ purified with greater than 90% purity. we identified several antigens among the in situ-purified proteins via assays with anti-s. pneumoniae rabbit antibodies and a human patient antiserum, as a demonstration project of large scale microarray-based immunoproteomics profiling. the methodology is compatible with higher throughput formats of in vivo protein expression, eliminates the need for resin-based purification and circumvents protein solubility and denaturation problems caused by buffer exchange steps and freeze-thaw cycles, which are associated with resin-based purification, intermittent protein storage and deposition on microarrays.


CONCLUSIONS
an optimized platform for in situ protein purification on microarray slides using his-tagged recombinant proteins is a desirable tool for the screening of novel protein functions and protein-protein interactions. in the context of immunoproteomics, such protein microarrays are complimentary to approaches using non-recombinant methods to discover and characterize bacterial antigens.

