BACKGROUND
attention provides vital contribution to everyday functioning, and deficits in attention feature in many psychological disorders. improved understanding of attention may eventually be critical to early identification and treatment of attentional deficits. one step in that direction is to acquire a better understanding of genetic associations with performance on a task measuring reflexive  visual attention. reflexive attention is an important component of overall attention because  it participates in determining where attention is allocated and how susceptible to distractors the subject might be. the task that we used involves the presentation of a target that is preceded by one of several different types of cues . we used several different outcome measures depending on the cue presented. we have previously studied the relationship between selected genes and mean response time . here we report on the contributions of genetic markers to rt increases or decreases over the course of the task .


RESULTS
specifically, we find that rt slope for a variety of reflexive attention outcome measures is dependent on dat <dig> genotype. drd <dig> was near significant for one outcome measure in the final  model. apoe, comt, and dbh were not significant in any models.


CONCLUSIONS
it is especially interesting that genotype predicts linear changes in rt across trials . dat <dig> is a gene that produces a protein involved in the transport of dopamine from the synapse. to our knowledge, this is the first study that has associated neurotransmitter genotypes with rt slope on a reflexive attention experiment. the direction of these effects is consistent with genetic risk for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder . that is, those with two risk alleles for adhd  either got slower as the task progressed or had the least improvement. those with no risk alleles  had the most improvement in rt as the task progressed.

keywords
exogenous orientingreflexive attentioncandidate genert slopelinear trendissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

