BACKGROUND
edible dry beans  that darken during postharvest storage are graded lower and are less marketable than their non-darkened counterparts. seed coat darkening in susceptible genotypes is dependent upon the availability of proanthocyanidins, and their subsequent oxidation to reactive quinones. mature cranberry beans lacking this postharvest darkening trait tend to be proanthocyanidin-deficient, although the underlying molecular and biochemical determinants for this metabolic phenomenon are unknown.


RESULTS
seed coat proanthocyanidin levels increased with plant maturation in a darkening-susceptible cranberry bean recombinant inbred line , whereas these metabolites were absent in seeds of the non-darkening ril plants. rna sequencing  analysis was used to monitor changes in the seed coat transcriptome as a function of bean development, where transcript levels were measured as fragments per kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped. a total of  <dig> genes were differentially expressed between darkening and non-darkening cranberry bean rils. structural and regulatory genes of the proanthocyanidin biosynthesis pathway were upregulated in seed coats of the darkening ril. a principal component analysis determined that changes in transcript levels for two genes of unknown function and three proanthocyanidin biosynthesis genes, flavanone 3-hydroxylase  <dig>  dihydroflavonol 4-reductase  <dig> and anthocyanidin reductase  <dig>  were highly correlated with proanthocyanidin accumulation in seed coats of the darkening-susceptible cranberry bean ril. hplc-dad analysis revealed that in vitro activity of a recombinant pvanr <dig> was nadph-dependent and assays containing cyanidin yielded epicatechin and catechin; high cyanidin substrate levels inhibited the formation of both of these products.


CONCLUSIONS
proanthocyanidin oxidation is a pre-requisite for postharvest-related seed coat darkening in dicotyledonous seeds. in model plant species, the accumulation of proanthocyanidins is dependent upon upregulation of biosynthetic genes. in this study, proanthocyanidin production in cranberry bean seed coats was strongly associated with an increase in pvanr <dig> transcripts during seed maturation. in the presence of nadph, pvanr <dig> converted the physiologically relevant substrate cyanidin to epicatechin and catechin.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
anthocyanidin reductasephaseolus vulgarisproanthocyanidinrna-seqseed coat darkeningtranscriptomethe natural sciences and engineering research council of canada 371897-2009bozzo gale g. ontario ministry of research and innovationorf-re 04-043pauls k. peter ontario bean producers marketing boardontario coloured bean growershensall district co-operativepulse canadahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000094ontario ministry of agriculture, food and rural affairs highly qualified personnel scholarshipfreixas coutin josé a. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

