BACKGROUND
cyanobacteria are photoautotrophic prokaryotes with wide variations in genome sizes and ecological habitats. peroxiredoxin  is an important protein that plays essential roles in protecting own cells against reactive oxygen species . prxs have been identified from mammals, fungi and higher plants. however, knowledge on cyanobacterial prxs still remains obscure. with the availability of  <dig> sequenced cyanobacterial genomes, we performed a comprehensive comparative analysis of prxs and explored their diversity, distribution, domain structure and evolution.


RESULTS
overall  <dig> putative prx genes were identified, which were abundant in filamentous diazotrophic cyanobacteria, acaryochloris marina mbic  <dig>  and unicellular cyanobacteria inhabiting freshwater and hot-springs, while poor in all prochlorococcus and marine synechococcus strains. among these putative genes,  <dig> open reading frames  encoding hypothetical proteins were identified as prx gene family members and the others were already annotated as prx genes. all  <dig> putative prxs were classified into five major subfamilies  according to their domain structures. the catalytic motifs of the cyanobacterial prxs were similar to those of eukaryotic prxs and highly conserved in all but the prx-like subfamily. classical motif  of thioredoxin was detected in protein sequences from the prx-like subfamily. phylogenetic tree constructed of catalytic domains coincided well with the domain structures of prxs and the phylogenies based on 16s rrna.


CONCLUSIONS
the distribution of genes encoding prxs in different unicellular and filamentous cyanobacteria especially those sub-families like prx-like or 1-cys prx correlate with the genome size, eco-physiology, and physiological properties of the organisms. cyanobacterial and eukaryotic prxs share similar conserved motifs, indicating that cyanobacteria adopt similar catalytic mechanisms as eukaryotes. all cyanobacterial prx proteins share highly similar structures, implying that these genes may originate from a common ancestor. in this study, a general framework of the sequence-structure-function connections of the prxs was revealed, which may facilitate functional investigations of prxs in various organisms.

peroxiredoxinstructurephylogeny and evolutioncomparative genomicscyanobacteria

