BACKGROUND
beef suckler farms  were assessed once with housed cattle and once with cattle at grass using an animal welfare index . twenty-three of the  <dig> farms were revisited a year later and re-evaluated using the awi and the tier-gerechtheits-index 35l/ <dig> . thirty-three indicators were collected in five categories: locomotion ; social interactions  , flooring , environment  and stockpersonship . three indicators relating to the size of the farm were also collected.

improving animal welfare is an increasingly important aspect of livestock production systems predominantly due to increased consumer concern about the source of animal products. the objectives were  to evaluate animal welfare of irish beef suckler herds using an animal welfare index ,  to examine correlations between parameters, how they influence the awi and investigate the applicability of the parameters used,  to investigate the impact of the activity of the farmer , the interest of the farmer and the number of animals on the awi.


RESULTS
the mean awi was 65% and ranged from 54% to 83%. the grazing period represented  <dig> % of the total points of the awi. seventy percent of the farms were rated as "very good" or "excellent". there was no difference  in awi between full-time and part-time farmers. part-time farmers had greater  "social interactions": calving  and weaning  scores. full-time farmers had cleaner animals  and their animals had less lameness . the number of animals on-farm and the interest of the stockperson were negatively and positively correlated , respectively, with the awi. a hierarchical classification was performed to examine how the indicators influenced the awi.


CONCLUSIONS
the awi was easily applicable for an on-farm evaluation of welfare. the stockpersonship was an important factor in determining the awi  more specifically, the interest of the farmer. part and full-time farming did not differ  in awi scores. this method could, with further development, be used in countries with both intensive and/or extensive production systems and would require substantially less resources than animal-based methods.

