BACKGROUND
promoters with tissue-specificity are desirable to drive expression of transgenes in crops to avoid accumulation of foreign proteins in edible tissues/organs. several photosynthetic promoters have been shown to be strong regulators of expression of transgenes in light-responsive tissues and would be good candidates for leaf and immature fruit tissue-specificity, if expression in the mature fruit were minimized.


RESULTS
a minimal peach chlorophyll a/b-binding protein gene  promoter  was isolated and fused to an uida  gene containing the piv <dig> intron. a control vector carrying an enhanced mas35s camv promoter fused to uida was also constructed. two different orientations of the cab19::gus fusion relative to the left t-dna border of the binary vector were transformed into tomato. ten independent regenerants of each construct and an untransformed control line were assessed both qualitatively and quantitatively for gus expression in leaves, fruit and flowers, and quantitatively in roots.


CONCLUSIONS
the minimal cab <dig> promoter conferred gus activity primarily in leaves and green fruit, as well as in response to light. gus activity in the leaves of both cab <dig> constructs averaged about 2/ <dig> that observed with mas35s::gus controls. surprisingly, gus activity in transgenic green fruit was considerably higher than leaves for all promoter constructs; however, in red, ripe fruit activities were much lower for the cab <dig> promoter constructs than the mas35s::gus. although gus activity was readily detectable in flowers and roots of mas35s::gustransgenic plants, little activity was observed in plants carrying the cab <dig> promoter constructs. in addition, the light-inducibility of the cab19::gus constructs indicated that all the requisite cis-elements for light responsiveness were contained on the cab <dig> fragment. the minimal cab <dig> promoter retains both tissue-specificity and light regulation and can be used to drive expression of foreign genes with minimal activity in mature, edible fruit.

