BACKGROUND
chinese cabbage is an important leaf vegetable that experienced long-term cultivation and artificial selection. dof  transcription factors, with a highly conserved dof domain, are members of a major plant-specific transcription factor family that play important roles in many plant biological processes. the dof family transcription factors, one of the most important families of transcriptional regulators in higher plants, are involved in massive aspects of plant growth, development, and response to abiotic stresses. our study will supply resources for understanding how dof transcription factors respond to abiotic stress and the interaction network of these genes in tolerance mechanism.


RESULTS
in this study, we performed a comprehensive analysis of dof family factors in chinese cabbage. in total,  <dig> genes encoding bradof family transcription factor were identified from chinese cabbage, and those bradof factors were divided into nine classes. fifteen motifs were found based on dof amino acid sequence alignments. chromosome locations and gene duplications of bradof family genes were also analyzed. ten duplicate events of bradof genes were discovered in chinese cabbage chromosomes. the uneven distribution of bradof genes in brassica chromosomes may cause the expansion of bradof genes. in the dof family,  <dig> and  <dig> orthologous genes were identified between chinese cabbage and arabidopsis and between chinese cabbage and oryza sativa, respectively. the interaction networks of dof factors in chinese cabbage were also constructed. expression profiles of nine selected genes from different nine classes subjected to four abiotic stresses  were further investigated by quantitative real-time pcr to obtain a better understanding of the functions and regulation mechanisms of bradof family transcription factors in two chinese cabbage varieties, ‘lubaisanhao’ and ‘qingdao 87-114’.


CONCLUSIONS
dof-family transcription factors were analyzed in genome of chinese cabbage. chromosomal locations showed that duplication might result in expansion. response to abiotic stresses was elucidated in chinese cabbage varieties. the results provide novel insights into the stress responses of bradof genes and promote a better understanding of the construction and function of dofs in chinese cabbage.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
doftranscription factorchromosomal locationgene duplicationqrt-pcrchinese cabbageissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

