BACKGROUND
micrornas  are small endogenous non-coding rnas that control genes at post-transcriptional level. they are essential for development and tissue differentiation, and such altered mirna expression patterns are linked to the pathogenesis of inflammation and cancer. there is evidence that mirna expression is genetically controlled similar to the transcription of protein-coding genes and previous studies identified quantitative trait loci  for mirna expression in the liver. so far, little attention has been paid to mirna expression in the skin. moreover, epistatic control of mirna expression remains unknown. in this study, we characterize genetic regulation of cutaneous mirna and their correlation with skin inflammation using a previously established murine autoimmune-prone advanced intercross line.


RESULTS
we identified in silico  <dig> eqtl controlling the expression of  <dig> cutaneous mirnas and furthermore found two chromosomal hot-spots on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> that control the expression of multiple mirnas. moreover, for  <dig> mirnas an interacting effect from pairs of snps was observed. combining the constraints on genes from the statistical interaction of their loci and further using curated protein interaction networks, the number of candidate genes for association of mirnas was reduced to a set of several genes. a cluster analysis identified mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> to be associated with eba severity/onset, where mir- <dig> was observed to be associated to loci on chromosome  <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
the murine advanced intercross line allowed us to identify the genetic loci regulating multiple mirna in skin. the recurrence of trans-eqtl and epistasis suggest that cutaneous mirnas are regulated by yet an unexplored complex gene networks. further, using co-expression analysis of mirna expression levels we showed that multiple mirna contribute to multiple pathways that might be involved in pathogenesis of autoimmune skin blistering disease. specifically, we provide evidence that mirna such as mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> may play critical role in disease progression and severity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
micrornaexpression qtlepistasisautoimmune skin blistering diseaseco-expression analysisgenes, environment and inflammationgrk 1743/1ibrahim saleh m. modulation of autoimmunitygrk1727/1zillikens detlef excellence cluster inflammation at interfacesexc 306/2ibrahim saleh m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

