BACKGROUND
critical to advancing the systems-level evaluation of complex biological processes is the development of comprehensive networks and computational methods to apply to the analysis of systems biology data . ideally, these networks will be specifically designed to capture the normal, non-diseased biology of the tissue or cell types under investigation, and can be used with experimentally generated systems biology data to assess the biological impact of perturbations like xenobiotics and other cellular stresses. lung cell proliferation is a key biological process to capture in such a network model, given the pivotal role that proliferation plays in lung diseases including cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , and fibrosis. unfortunately, no such network has been available prior to this work.


RESULTS
to further a systems-level assessment of the biological impact of perturbations on non-diseased mammalian lung cells, we constructed a lung-focused network for cell proliferation. the network encompasses diverse biological areas that lead to the regulation of normal lung cell proliferation , and contains a total of  <dig> nodes  and  <dig> edges . the network was verified using four published gene expression profiling data sets associated with measured cell proliferation endpoints in lung and lung-related cell types. predicted changes in the activity of core machinery involved in cell cycle regulation  are statistically supported across multiple data sets, underscoring the general applicability of this approach for a network-wide biological impact assessment using systems biology data.


CONCLUSIONS
to the best of our knowledge, this lung-focused cell proliferation network provides the most comprehensive connectivity map in existence of the molecular mechanisms regulating cell proliferation in the lung. the network is based on fully referenced causal relationships obtained from extensive evaluation of the literature. the computable structure of the network enables its application to the qualitative and quantitative evaluation of cell proliferation using systems biology data sets. the network is available for public use.

