BACKGROUND
dna encoding for ribosomal rna  is arranged in tandemly-repeated subunits, each containing ribosomal genes and non-coding spacers. because tandemly-repeated, rdna evolves under a balanced influence of selection and "concerted evolution", which homogenizes rdna variants over the genome  and the population .


RESULTS
in this paper we analyzed the igs-ets of the automictic parthenogen bacillus atticus and the bisexual b. grandii, two closely related stick-insect species. both species share the same igs-ets structure and sequence, including a peculiar head-to-tail array of putative transcription enhancers, here named bag <dig>  sequence variability of both igs-ets and bag <dig> evidenced a neat geographic and subspecific clustering in b. grandii, while b. atticus shows a little but evident geographic structure. this was an unexpected result, since the parthenogen b. atticus should lack sequence fixation through sexuality. in b. atticus a new variant might spread in a given geographic area through colonization by an all-female clone, but we cannot discard the hypothesis that b. atticus was actually a bisexual taxon in that area at the time the new variant appeared. moreover, a gene conversion event between two bag <dig> variants of b. grandii benazzii and b. grandii maretimi suggested that rrna might evolve according to the so-called "library hypothesis" model, through differential amplification of rdna variants in different taxa.


CONCLUSIONS
on the whole, bacillus rdna evolution appears to be under a complex array of interacting mechanisms: homogenization may be achieved through genomic turnover that stabilizes dna-binding protein interactions but, simultaneously, new sequence variants can be adopted, either by direct appearance of newly mutated repeats, or by competition among repeats, so that both dna-binding proteins and repeat variants drive each other's evolution. all this, coupled with chromosome reshuffling due to sexuality , might drive a quick fixation of new rdna variants in the populations.

