BACKGROUND
ndgr is an iclr-type transcription factor that regulates leucine biosynthesis and other metabolic pathways in streptomyces coelicolor. recent study revealed that ndgr is one of the regulatory targets of sigr, an oxidative stress response sigma factor, suggesting that the ndgr plays an important physiological role in response to environmental stresses. although the regulatory functions of ndgr were partly characterized, determination of its regulon is required for better understanding of the transcriptional regulatory network related with the oxidative stress response.


RESULTS
we determined genome-wide binding loci of ndgr by using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with sequencing  and explored its physiological roles. the chip-seq profiles revealed  <dig> direct binding loci with a 15-bp imperfect palindromic motif, including  <dig> genes in their transcription units. most genes in branched-chain amino acid and cysteine biosynthesis pathways were involved in the ndgr regulon. we proved that ndgr is induced by sigr under the thiol oxidation, and that an ndgr mutant strain is sensitive to the thiol oxidizing agent, diamide. through the expression test of ndgr and the target genes for ndgr under diamide treatment, regulatory motifs were suggested. interestingly, ndgr constitutes two regulatory motifs, coherent and incoherent feed-forward loops , in order to control its regulon under the diamide treatment. using the regulatory motifs, ndgr regulates cysteine biosynthesis in response to thiol oxidative stress, enabling cells to maintain sulfur assimilation with homeostasis under stress conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
our analysis revealed that ndgr is a global transcriptional regulator involved in the regulation of branched-chain amino acids biosynthesis and sulphur assimilation. the identification of the ndgr regulon broadens our knowledge regarding complex regulatory networks governing amino acid biosynthesis in the context of stress responses in s. coelicolor.

keywords
chip-seqstreptomyces coelicolorndgrtranscriptional regulationoxidative stressissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

