BACKGROUND
as an intracellular human pathogen, mycobacterium tuberculosis  is facing multiple stressful stimuli inside the macrophage and the granuloma. understanding mtb responses to stress is essential to identify new virulence factors and pathways that play a role in the survival of the tubercle bacillus. the main goal of this study was to map the regulatory networks of differentially expressed  transcripts in mtb upon various forms of genotoxic stress. we exposed mtb cells to oxidative , nitrosative , or alkylation  stress or mitomycin c, inducing double-strand breaks in the dna. total rna was isolated from treated and untreated cells and subjected to high-throughput deep sequencing. the data generated was analysed to identify de genes encoding mrnas, non-coding rnas , and the genes potentially targeted by ncrnas.


RESULTS
the most significant transcriptomic alteration with more than  <dig> de genes was seen under nitrosative stress. in addition to genes that belong to the replication, recombination and repair  group, mainly found under mitomycin c stress, we identified de genes important for bacterial virulence and survival, such as genes of the type vii secretion system  and the proline-glutamic acid/proline-proline-glutamic acid  family. by predicting the structures of hypothetical proteins  encoded by de genes, we found that some of these hps might be involved in mycobacterial genome maintenance. we also applied a state-of-the-art method to predict potential target genes of the identified ncrnas and found that some of these could regulate several genes that might be directly involved in the response to genotoxic stress.


CONCLUSIONS
our study reflects the complexity of the response of mtb in handling genotoxic stress. in addition to genes involved in genome maintenance, other potential key players, such as the members of the t7ss and pe/ppe gene family, were identified. this plethora of responses is detected not only at the level of de genes encoding mrnas but also at the level of ncrnas and their potential targets.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mycobacterium tuberculosistranscriptomicsgenotoxic stressrna deep-sequencingnon-coding rna research council of norway globvac234506tønjum tone http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100005366universitetet i oslouniforbalasingham seetha v. research council of norway, frimed204747tønjum tone issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

