BACKGROUND
mito-nuclear gene interactions regulate energy conversion, and are fundamental to eukaryotes. generally, mito-nuclear coadaptation would be most efficient if the interacting nuclear genes were x-linked, because this maximizes the probability of favorable mito-nuclear allelic combinations co-transmitting across generations. thus, under a coadaptation  hypothesis, nuclear genes essential for mitochondrial function might be under selection to relocate to the x-chromosome. however, maternal inheritance predisposes the mitochondrial dna  to accumulate variation that, while male-harming, is benign to females. numerous nuclear genes were recently reported in drosophila melanogaster, which exhibit male-specific patterns of differential expression when placed alongside different mtdna haplotypes, suggesting that nuclear genes are sensitive to an underlying male-specific mitochondrial mutation load. these genes are thus candidates for involvement in mito-nuclear interactions driven by sexual conflict , and selection might have moved them off the x-chromosome to facilitate an optimal evolutionary counter-response, through males, to the presence of male-harming mtdna mutations. furthermore, the presence of male-harming mtdna mutations could exert selection for modifiers on the y-chromosome, thus placing these mito-sensitive nuclear genes at the center of an evolutionary tug-of-war between mitochondrion and y-chromosome.

we test these hypotheses by examining the chromosomal distributions of three distinct sets of mitochondrial-interacting nuclear genes in d. melanogaster; the first is a list of genes with mitochondrial annotations by gene ontologies, the second is a list comprising the core evolutionary-conserved mitochondrial proteome, and the third is a list of genes involved in male-specific responses to maternally-inherited mitochondrial variation and which might be putative targets of y-chromosomal regulation.


RESULTS
genes with mitochondrial annotations and genes representing the mitochondrial proteome do not exhibit statistically-significant biases in chromosomal representation. however, genes exhibiting sex-specific sensitivity to mtdna are under-represented on the x-chromosome, over-represented among genes known to be sensitive to y-chromosomal variation, and among genes previously associated with male fitness, but under-represented among genes associated with direct sexual antagonism.


CONCLUSIONS
our results are consistent with the sc hypothesis, suggesting that mitochondrial mutational pressure selects for gene movement off-the-x, hence enabling mito-nuclear coadaptation to proceed along trajectories that result in optimized fitness in both sexes.

keywords
gene expressionsexual selectionsexual conflictgenomic conflictmtdnagenome evolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

