BACKGROUND
following infection and initial multiplication in the gut lumen, salmonella typhimurium crosses the intestinal epithelial barrier and comes into contact with cells of the host immune system. mononuclear phagocytes which comprise macrophages and dendritic cells  are of key importance for the outcome of salmonella infection. although macrophages and dc may differentiate from a common precursor, their capacities to process and present antigen differ significantly. in this study, we therefore compared the response of porcine macrophages and dc differentiated from peripheral blood monocytes to s. typhimurium and one of the most potent bacterial pathogen associated molecular patterns, bacterial lipopolysaccharide. to avoid any bias, the expression was determined by protein lc-ms/ms and verified at the level of transcription by quantitative rt-pcr.


RESULTS
within 4 days of culture, peripheral blood monocytes differentiated into two populations with distinct morphology and expression of mhc ii. mass spectrometry identified  <dig> proteins in macrophages and  <dig> in dc. out of these,  <dig> proteins were inducible in macrophages either after infection with s. typhimurium or lps exposure and  <dig> proteins were inducible in dc. the expression of the  <dig> most inducible proteins was verified at the level of transcription and the differential expression was confirmed in  <dig> of them. out of these,  <dig> genes were induced in both cell types,  <dig> genes  were significantly induced in macrophages only and oldlr <dig> and cdc <dig> were induced exclusively in dc. thirteen out of  <dig> up-regulated genes contained the nf-kappab binding site in their promoters and could be considered as either part of the nf-kappab feedback loop  or as nf-kappab targets .


CONCLUSIONS
the difference in the response of monocyte derived macrophages and dc was quantitative rather than qualitative. despite the similarity of the responses, compared to dc, the macrophages responded in a more pro-inflammatory fashion.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
macrophagedendritic cellporcinelpssalmonellaresponseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

