BACKGROUND
the identification of immunogenic regions on the surface of antigens, which are able to be recognized by antibodies and to trigger an immune response, is a major challenge for the design of new and effective vaccines. the prediction of such regions through computational immunology techniques is a challenging goal, which will ultimately lead to a drastic limitation of the experimental tests required to validate their efficiency. however, current methods are far from being sufficiently reliable and/or applicable on a large scale.


RESULTS
we developed sepia, a b-cell epitope predictor from the protein sequence, which is sufficiently fast to be applicable on a large scale. the originality of sepia lies in the combination of two classifiers, a naïve bayesian and a random forest classifier, through a voting algorithm that exploits the advantages of both. it is based on  <dig> sequence-based features, whose values in a 9-residue sequence window are compiled to predict the epitope/non-epitope state of the central residue. the features are related to the type of amino acid, its conservation in homologous proteins, and its tendency of being exposed to the solvent, soluble, flexible, and disordered. the highest signal is obtained from statistical amino acid preferences, but all  <dig> features contribute non-negligibly in the predictor. sepia’s average prediction accuracy is limited, with an auc score  that reaches  <dig>  both in 10-fold cross-validation and on an independent test set. it is nevertheless slightly higher than that of other methods evaluated on the same test set.


CONCLUSIONS
sepia was applied to a test protein whose epitopes are known, human β <dig> adrenergic g-protein-coupled receptor, with promising results. although the actual auc score is rather low, many of the predicted epitopes cluster together and overlap the experimental epitope region. the reasons underlying the limitations of sepia and of all other b-cell epitope predictors are discussed.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
immunoinformaticsmachine learningantigen-antibody complexesb-cell epitopesstatistical potentialsphysicochemical propertiesbioinformatics predictorβ <dig> adrenergic g-protein-coupled receptorhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002661fonds de la recherche scientifique - fnrsfirst-international walloon region issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

