BACKGROUND
a high-throughput genotyping platform is needed to enable marker-assisted breeding in the allo-octoploid cultivated strawberry fragaria × ananassa. short-read sequences from one diploid and  <dig> octoploid accessions were aligned to the diploid fragaria vesca ‘hawaii 4’ reference genome to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms  and indels for incorporation into a 90 k affymetrix® axiom® array. we report the development and preliminary evaluation of this array.


RESULTS
about  <dig> million sequence variants were identified in a  <dig> member, octoploid germplasm panel. strategies and filtering pipelines were developed to identify and incorporate markers of several types: di-allelic snps , multi-allelic snps , indels , and ploidy-reducing “haplosnps” . the remaining snps included those discovered in the diploid progenitor f. iinumae , and speculative “codon-based” snps . in genotyping  <dig> octoploid accessions, snps were assigned to six classes with affymetrix’s “snpolisher” r package. the highest quality classes, polyhigh resolution , no minor homozygote , and off-target variant  comprised 25%, 38%, and 1% of array markers, respectively. these markers were suitable for genetic studies as demonstrated in the full-sib family ‘holiday’ × ‘korona’ with the generation of a genetic linkage map consisting of  <dig>  phr snps evenly distributed across  <dig> chromosomes with an average density of approximately one marker per  <dig>  cm, thus exceeding our goal of one marker per cm.


CONCLUSIONS
the affymetrix istraw <dig> axiom array is the first high-throughput genotyping platform for cultivated strawberry and is commercially available to the worldwide scientific community. the array’s high success rate is likely driven by the presence of naturally occurring variation in ploidy level within the nominally octoploid genome, and by effectiveness of the employed array design and ploidy-reducing strategies. this array enables genetic analyses including generation of high-density linkage maps, identification of quantitative trait loci for economically important traits, and genome-wide association studies, thus providing a basis for marker-assisted breeding in this high value crop.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fragariagenotyping arrayplant breedingpolyploidystrawberrysingle nucleotide polymorphismreduced ploidyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

