BACKGROUND
low oxygen availability has been shown previously to stimulate m. tuberculosis to establish non-replicative persistence in vitro. the two component sensor/regulator dosrs is a major mediator in the transcriptional response of m. tuberculosis to hypoxia and controls a regulon of approximately  <dig> genes that are induced under this condition.

the aim of this study was to determine whether the induction of the entire dosr regulon is triggered as a synchronous event or if induction can unfold as a cascade of events as the differential expression of subsets of genes is stimulated by different oxygen availabilities.


RESULTS
a novel aspect of our work is the use of chemostat cultures of m. tuberculosis which allowed us to control environmental conditions very tightly. we exposed m. tuberculosis to a sudden drop in oxygen availability in chemostat culture and studied the transcriptional response of the organism during the transition from a high oxygen level  to a low oxygen level  using dna microarrays. we developed a bayesian change point analysis method that enabled us to detect subtle shifts in the timing of gene induction. it results in probabilities of a change in gene expression at certain time points. a computational analysis of potential binding sites upstream of the dosr-controlled genes shows how the transcriptional responses of these genes are influenced by the affinity of these binding sites to dosr. our study also indicates that a subgroup of dosr-controlled genes is regulated indirectly.


CONCLUSIONS
the majority of the dosr-dependent genes were up-regulated at  <dig> % dot, which confirms previous findings that these genes are triggered by hypoxic environments. however, our change point analysis also highlights genes which were up-regulated earlier at levels of about 8% dot indicating that they respond to small fluctuations in oxygen availability. our analysis shows that there are pairs of divergent genes where one gene in the pair is up-regulated before the other, presumably for a flexible response to a constantly changing environment in the host.

