BACKGROUND
most tumors are the result of accumulated genomic alterations in somatic cells. the emerging spectrum of alterations in tumors is complex and the identification of relevant genes and pathways remains a challenge. furthermore, key cancer genes are usually found amplified or deleted in chromosomal regions containing many other genes. point mutations, on the other hand, provide exquisite information about amino acid changes that could be implicated in the oncogenic process. current large-scale genomic projects provide high throughput genomic data in a large number of well-characterized tumor samples.

methods
we define a bayesian approach designed to identify candidate cancer genes by integrating copy number and point mutation information. our method exploits the concept that small and recurrent alterations in tumors are more informative in the search for cancer genes. thus, the algorithm  seeks focal copy number alterations and recurrent point mutations within high throughput data from large panels of tumor samples.


RESULTS
we apply mutcomfocal to diffuse large b-cell lymphoma  data from four different high throughput studies, totaling  <dig> samples assessed for copy number alterations by single nucleotide polymorphism  array analysis and  <dig> samples assayed for protein changing point mutations by whole exome/whole transcriptome sequencing. in addition to recapitulating known alterations, mutcomfocal identifies arid1b, robo <dig> and mrs <dig> as candidate tumor suppressors and klhl <dig>  il <dig> and lrp <dig> as putative oncogenes in dlbcl.


CONCLUSIONS
we present a bayesian approach for the identification of candidate cancer genes by integrating data collected in large number of cancer patients, across different studies. when trained on a well-studied dataset, mutcomfocal is able to identify most of the reported characterized alterations. the application of mutcomfocal to large-scale cancer data provides the opportunity to pinpoint the key functional genomic alterations in tumors.

tumorigenic mutationsdriver genesdata integration

