BACKGROUND
lysine plays an important role in streptomyces clavuligerus metabolism; it takes part in its catabolism, via cadaverine, and in its secondary metabolism, in which lysine is converted via 1-piperideine-6-carboxylate to alpha-aminoadipic acid, a beta-lactam antibiotic precursor. the role of lysine as an enhancer of cephamycin c production, when added to production medium at concentrations above 50 mmol l- <dig>  has already been reported in the literature, with some studies attributing a positive influence to multifunctional diamines, among other compounds. however, there is a lack of research on the combined effect of these compounds on antibiotic production.


RESULTS
results from experimental design-based tests were used to conduct response surface-based optimization studies in order to investigate the synergistic effect of combining lysine with cadaverine, putrescine,  <dig> -diaminopropane, or alpha-aminoadipic acid on cephamycin c volumetric production. lysine combined with cadaverine influenced production positively, but only at low lysine concentrations. on the whole, higher putrescine concentrations  affected negatively cephamycin c volumetric production. in comparison to culture media containing only lysine as additive, combinations of this amino acid with alpha-aminoadipic acid or  <dig> -diaminopropane increased cephamycin c production by more than 100%.


CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrated that different combinations of lysine with diamines or lysine with alpha-aminoadipic acid engender significant differences with respect to antibiotic volumetric production, with emphasis on the benefits observed for lysine combined with alpha-aminoadipic acid or  <dig> -diaminopropane. this increase is explained by mathematical models and demonstrated by means of bioreactor cultivations. moreover, it is consistent with the positive influence of these compounds on lysine conversion to alpha-aminoadipic acid, a limiting step in cephamycin c production.

streptomyces clavuligeruscephamycin clysinediaminesalpha-aminoadipic acidresponse surface

