BACKGROUND
aerobic gammaproteobacteria affiliated to the om60/nor <dig> clade are widespread in saline environments and of ecological importance in several marine ecosystems, especially the euphotic zone of coastal areas. within this group a close relationship between aerobic anoxygenic photoheterotrophs and non-phototrophic members has been found.


RESULTS
several strains of aerobic red-pigmented bacteria affiliated to the om60/nor <dig> clade were obtained from tidal flat sediment samples at the island of sylt . two of the novel isolates, rap1red and ivo14t, were chosen for an analysis in detail. strain rap1red shared a 16s rrna sequence identity of 99% with the type strain of congregibacter litoralis and was genome-sequenced to reveal the extent of genetic microheterogeneity among closely related strains within this clade. in addition, a draft genome sequence was obtained from the isolate ivo14t, which belongs to the environmental important nor5- <dig> lineage that contains so far no cultured representative with a comprehensive description. strain ivo14t was characterized using a polyphasic approach and compared with other red-pigmented members of the om60/nor <dig> clade, including congregibacter litoralis dsm 17192t, haliea rubra dsm 19751t and chromatocurvus halotolerans dsm 23344t. all analyzed strains contained bacteriochlorophyll a and spirilloxanthin as photosynthetic pigments. besides a detailed phenotypic characterization including physiological and chemotaxonomic traits, sequence information based on protein-coding genes and a comparison of draft genome data sets were used to identify possible features characteristic for distinct taxa within this clade.


CONCLUSIONS
comparative sequence analyses of the puflm genes of genome-sequenced representatives of the om60/nor <dig> clade indicated that the photosynthetic apparatus of these species was derived from a common ancestor and not acquired by multiple horizontal gene transfer from phylogenetically distant species. an affiliation of the characterized bacteriochlorophyll a-containing strains to different genera was indicated by significant phenotypic differences and puflm nucleotide sequence identity values below 82%. the revealed high genotypic and phenotypic diversity of closely related strains within this phylogenetic group reflects a rapid evolution and frequent niche separation in the om60/nor <dig> clade, which is possibly driven by the necessities of an adaptation to oligotrophic marine habitats.

phylogenyaerobic anoxygenic photoheterotrophproteorhodopsinmixotrophpicoplanktoncoastal marine environment

