BACKGROUND
the agriculturally important pasture grass tall fescue  darbysh.) is an outbreeding allohexaploid, that may be more accurately described as a species complex consisting of three major  morphotypes. observation of hybrid infertility in some crossing combinations between morphotypes suggests the possibility of independent origins from different diploid progenitors. this study aims to clarify the evolutionary relationships between each tall fescue morphotype through phylogenetic analysis using two low-copy nuclear genes , the nuclear ribosomal dna internal transcribed spacer  and the chloroplast dna  genome-located matk gene. other taxa within the closely related lolium-festuca species complex were also included in the study, to increase understanding of evolutionary processes in a taxonomic group characterised by multiple inter-specific hybridisation events.


RESULTS
putative homoeologous sequences from both nuclear genes were obtained from each polyploid species and compared to counterparts from  <dig> diploid taxa. phylogenetic reconstruction confirmed f. pratensis and f. arundinacea var. glaucescens as probable progenitors to continental tall fescue, and these species are also likely to be ancestral to the rhizomatous morphotype. however, these two morphotypes are sufficiently distinct to be located in separate clades based on the its-derived data set. all four of the generated data sets suggest independent evolution of the mediterranean and continental morphotypes, with minimal affinity between cognate sequence haplotypes. no obvious candidate progenitor species for mediterranean tall fescues were identified, and only two putative sub-genome-specific haplotypes were identified for this morphotype.


CONCLUSIONS
this study describes the first phylogenetic analysis of the festuca genus to include representatives of each tall fescue morphotype, and to use low copy nuclear gene-derived sequences to identify putative progenitors of the polyploid species. the demonstration of distinct tall fescue lineages has implications for both taxonomy and molecular breeding strategies, and may facilitate the generation of morphotype and/or sub-genome-specific molecular markers.

