BACKGROUND
sulphur mustard gas,  <dig>  2'-dichlorodiethyl sulphide , is a chemical warfare agent. both mustard gas and its monofunctional analogue, 2-chloroethyl ethyl sulphide , are alkylating agents that react with and diminish cellular thiols and are highly toxic. previously, we reported that lipopolysaccharide  significantly enhances the cytotoxicity of cees in murine raw  <dig>  macrophages and that cees transiently inhibits nitric oxide  production via suppression of inducible no synthase  protein expression. no generation is an important factor in wound healing. in this paper, we explored the hypotheses that lps increases cees toxicity by increasing oxidative stress and that treatment with n-acetyl-l-cysteine  would block lps induced oxidative stress and protect against loss of no production. nac stimulates glutathione  synthesis and also acts directly as a free radical scavenger. the potential therapeutic use of the antibiotic, polymyxin b, was also evaluated since it binds to lps and could thereby block the enhancement of cees toxicity by lps and also inhibit the secondary infections characteristic of hd/cees wounds.


RESULTS
we found that  <dig> mm nac, when administered simultaneously or prior to treatment with  <dig> μm cees, increased the viability of lps stimulated macrophages. surprisingly, nac failed to protect lps stimulated macrophages from cees induced loss of no production. macrophages treated with both lps and cees show increased oxidative stress parameters . nac effectively protected raw  <dig>  cells simultaneously treated with cees and lps from gsh loss and oxidative stress. polymyxin b was found to partially block nitric oxide production and diminish cees toxicity in lps-treated macrophages.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study shows that oxidative stress is an important mechanism contributing to cees toxicity in lps stimulated macrophages and supports the notion that antioxidants could play a therapeutic role in preventing mustard gas toxicity. although nac reduced oxidative stress in lps stimulated macrophages treated with cees, it did not reverse cees-induced loss of no production. nac and polymyxin b were found to help prevent cees toxicity in lps-treated macrophages.

