BACKGROUND
genomic information allows population relatedness to be inferred and selected genes to be identified. single nucleotide polymorphism microarray  data, a proxy for genome composition, contains patterns in allele order and proportion. these patterns can be quantified by compression efficiency . in principle, the composition of an entire genome can be represented by a ce number quantifying allele representation and order.


RESULTS
we applied a compression algorithm  to genome-wide high-density snp data from  <dig>  human,  <dig>  cattle,  <dig>  sheep,  <dig> dogs and  <dig> mice samples. all human ethnic groups can be clustered by ce and the clusters recover phylogeography based on traditional fixation index  analyses. ce analysis of other mammals results in segregation by breed or species, and is sensitive to admixture and past effective population size. this clustering is a consequence of individual patterns such as runs of homozygosity. intriguingly, a related approach can also be used to identify genomic loci that show population-specific ce segregation. a high resolution ce ‘sliding window’ scan across the human genome, organised at the population level, revealed genes known to be under evolutionary pressure. these include slc24a <dig> , herc <dig> , lct  and edar . we also identified a set of previously unidentified loci with high population-specific ce scores including the chromatin remodeler scmh <dig> in africans and eda2r in asians. closer inspection reveals that these prioritised genomic regions do not correspond to simple runs of homozygosity but rather compositionally complex regions that are shared by many individuals of a given population. unlike fst, ce analyses do not require ab initio population comparisons and are amenable to the hemizygous x chromosome.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude with a discussion of the implications of ce for a complex systems science view of genome evolution. ce allows one to clearly visualise the evolution of individual genomes and populations through a formal, mathematically-rigorous information space. overall, ce makes a set of biological predictions, some of which are unique and await functional validation.

information compressionphylogeographyselection signatures

