BACKGROUND
ethylene is a phytohormone known for inducing a triple response in seedlings, leaf abscission and other responses to various stresses. several studies in model plants have evaluated the importance of this hormone in crosstalk signaling with different metabolic pathways, in addition to responses to biotic stresses. however, the mechanism of action in plants of agricultural interest, such as soybean, and its participation in abiotic stresses remain unclear.


RESULTS
the studies presented in this work allowed for the identification of  <dig> soybean genes described elsewhere for ethylene biosynthesis  and signal transduction . a model to predict these routes in soybean was proposed, and it had great representability compared to those described for arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa. furthermore, analysis of putative gene promoters from soybean gene orthologs permitted the identification of  <dig> families of cis-acting elements. these elements are essential for ethylene-mediated regulation and its possible crosstalk with other signaling pathways mediated by other plant hormones.

from genes that are differentially expressed in the transcriptome database, we analyzed the relative expression of some selected genes in resistant and tolerant soybean plants subjected to water deficit. the differential expression of a set of five soybean ethylene-related genes  was validated with rt-qpcr experiments, which confirmed variations in the expression of these soybean target genes, as identified in the transcriptome database. in particular, two families of ethylene biosynthesis genes  were upregulated under these experimental conditions, whereas ctr  was downregulated. in the same samples, high levels of ethylene production were detected and were directly correlated with the free fraction levels of ethylene’s precursor. thus, the combination of these data indicated the involvement of ethylene biosynthesis and signaling in soybean responses to water stress.


CONCLUSIONS
the in silico analysis, combined with the quantification of ethylene production  and rt-qpcr experiments, allowed for a better understanding of the importance of ethylene at a molecular level in this crop as well as its role in the response to abiotic stresses. in summary, all of the data presented here suggested that soybean responses to water stress could be regulated by a crosstalk network among different signaling pathways, which might involve various phytohormones, such as auxins, aba and jasmonic acid. the integration of in silico and physiological data could also contribute to the application of biotechnological strategies to the development of improved cultivars with regard to different stresses, such as the isolation of stress-specific plant promoters.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

