BACKGROUND
the classical  mikc-type mads-box transcription factors comprise one gene family that plays diverse roles in the flowering process ranging from floral initiation to the development of floral organs. despite their importance in regulating developmental processes that impact crop yield, they remain largely unexplored in the major legume oilseed crop, soybean.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> mikcc-type transcription factors from soybean and determined the in silico gene expression profiles of the soybean mikcc-type genes across different tissues. our study implicates three mikcc-type transcription factors as novel members of the agamous like  <dig>  subfamily of the mikcc-type mads-box genes, and we named this sister clade psmads <dig>  while similar genes were identified in other legume species, poplar and grape, no such gene is represented in arabidopsis thaliana or rice. rt-pcr analysis on these three soybean psmads <dig> genes during early floral initiation processes revealed their temporal expression similar to that of apetala <dig>  a gene known to function as a floral meristem identity gene. however, rna in situ hybridisation showed that their spatial expression patterns are markedly different from those of apetala <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
legume flower development system differs from that in the model plant, arabidopsis. there is an overlap in the initiation of different floral whorls in soybean, and inflorescent meristems can revert to leaf production depending on the environmental conditions. mikcc-type mads-box genes have been shown to play key regulatory roles in different stages of flower development. we identified members of the psmads <dig> sub-clade in legumes that show differential spatial expression during floral initiation, indicating their potential novel roles in the floral initiation process. the results from this study will contribute to a better understanding of legume-specific floral developmental processes.

developmentfloral meristemmads-box transcription factorsoybean

