BACKGROUND
the carotenoids are pure isoprenoids that are essential components of the photosynthetic apparatus and are coordinately synthesized with chlorophylls in chloroplasts. however, little is known about the mechanisms that regulate carotenoid biosynthesis or the mechanisms that coordinate this synthesis with that of chlorophylls and other plastidial synthesized isoprenoid-derived compounds, including quinones, gibberellic acid and abscisic acid. here, a comprehensive transcriptional analysis of individual carotenoid and isoprenoid-related biosynthesis pathway genes was performed in order to elucidate the role of transcriptional regulation in the coordinated synthesis of these compounds and to identify regulatory components that may mediate this process in arabidopsis thaliana.


RESULTS
a global microarray expression correlation analysis revealed that the phytoene synthase gene, which encodes the first dedicated and rate-limiting enzyme of carotenogenesis, is highly co-expressed with many photosynthesis-related genes including many isoprenoid-related biosynthesis pathway genes. chemical and mutant analysis revealed that induction of the co-expressed genes following germination was dependent on gibberellic acid and brassinosteroids  but was inhibited by abscisic acid . mutant analyses further revealed that expression of many of the genes is suppressed in dark grown plants by phytochrome interacting transcription factors  and activated by photoactivated phytochromes, which in turn degrade pifs and mediate a coordinated induction of the genes. the promoters of psy and the co-expressed genes were found to contain an enrichment in putative br-auxin response elements and g-boxes, which bind pifs, further supporting a role for brs and pifs in regulating expression of the genes. in osmotically stressed root tissue, transcription of calvin cycle, methylerythritol 4-phosphate pathway and carotenoid biosynthesis genes is induced and uncoupled from that of chlorophyll biosynthesis genes in a manner that is consistent with the increased synthesis of carotenoid precursors for aba biosynthesis. in all tissues examined, induction of β-carotene hydroxylase transcript levels are linked to an increased demand for aba.


CONCLUSIONS
this analysis provides compelling evidence to suggest that coordinated transcriptional regulation of isoprenoid-related biosynthesis pathway genes plays a major role in coordinating the synthesis of functionally related chloroplast localized isoprenoid-derived compounds.

