BACKGROUND
the agrichemical 4-aminopyridine is used as a bird repellent in crop fields and has an epileptogenic action in a variety of animals, including man and mouse. 4-aminopyridine is biodegraded in the environment through an unknown mechanism.


RESULTS
a 4-aminopyridine-degrading enrichment culture utilized 4-aminopyridine as a carbon, nitrogen, and energy source, generating 4-amino-3-hydroxypyridine,  <dig> -dihydroxypyridine, and formate as intermediates. 4-amino-3-hydroxypyridine could not be further metabolized and probably accumulated as a dead-end product in the culture. biodegradability tests and partial sequence analysis of the enrichment culture indicated that 4-aminopyridine was mainly degraded via  <dig> -dihydroxypyridine and that the metabolite is probably cleaved by 3-hydroxy-4-pyridone dioxygenase. seven culturable predominant bacterial strains  were isolated on nutrient agar plates. changes in the bacterial populations of 4-aminopyridine,  <dig> -dihydroxypyridine, or formate/ammonium chloride enrichment cultures were monitored by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis  profiling of pcr-amplified 16s rrna gene fragments. sequence analysis of the 16s rrna gene fragments derived from predominant dgge bands indicated that pseudomonas nitroreducens 4ap-a and enterobacter sp. 4ap-g were predominant in the three tested enrichment cultures and that the unculturable strains hyphomicrobium sp. 4ap-y and elizabethkingia sp. 4ap-z were predominant in 4-aminopyridine and formate/ammonium chloride enrichment cultures and in the  <dig> -dihydroxypyridine enrichment culture, respectively. among the culturable strains, strain 4ap-a could utilize  <dig> -dihydroxypyridine as a growth substrate. although we could not isolate strain 4ap-y on several media, pcr-dgge analysis and microscopy indicated that the unique bi-polar filamentous bacterial cells gradually became more dominant with increasing 4-aminopyridine concentration in the medium.


CONCLUSIONS
hyphomicrobium sp. 4ap-y, p. nitroreducens 4ap-a, and elizabethkingia sp. 4ap-z probably play important roles in 4-aminopyridine degradation in crop fields. in the enrichment culture,  <dig> -dihydroxypyridine and its metabolites including formate might be shared as growth substrates and maintain the enrichment culture, including these indispensable strains.

4-aminopyridine4-amino-3-hydroxypyridine <dig> -dihydroxypyridinehyphomicrobiumpseudomonas nitroreducenselizabethkingia

