BACKGROUND
micrornas  have emerged as important post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression in a wide variety of physiological processes. they can control both temporal and spatial gene expression and are believed to regulate  <dig> to 70 % of the genes. data are however limited for fish species, with only  <dig> out of the  <dig>  fish species present in mirbase. the aim of the current study was to discover and characterize rainbow trout  mirnas in a large number of tissues using next-generation sequencing in order to provide an extensive repertoire of rainbow trout mirnas.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> different samples corresponding to  <dig> different tissues or organs were individually sequenced and analyzed independently in order to identify a large number of mirnas with high confidence. this led to the identification of  <dig> mirna loci in the rainbow trout genome, including  <dig> already known mirnas. differential expression analysis was performed in order to identify mirnas exhibiting specific or preferential expression among the  <dig> analyzed tissues. in most cases, mirnas exhibit a specific pattern of expression in only a few tissues. the expression data from srna sequencing were confirmed by rt-qpcr. in addition, novel mirnas are described in rainbow trout that had not been previously reported in other species.


CONCLUSIONS
this study represents the first characterization of rainbow trout mirna transcriptome from a wide variety of tissue and sets an extensive repertoire of rainbow trout mirnas. it provides a starting point for future studies aimed at understanding the roles of mirnas in major physiological process such as growth, reproduction or adaptation to stress. these rainbow trout mirnas repertoire provide a novel resource to advance genomic research in salmonid species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
micrornarainbow troutrepertoiretissue expressiongene regulationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

