BACKGROUND
fish reared under intensive conditions are repeatedly exposed to stress, which negatively impacts growth. although most fish follow a conserved pattern of stress response, with increased concentrations of cortisol, each species presents specificities in the cell response and stress tolerance. therefore, culturing new species requires a detailed knowledge of these specific responses. the red cusk-eel  is a new economically important marine species for the chilean aquaculture industry. however, there is no information on the stress- and cortisol-induced mechanisms that decrease skeletal muscle growth in this teleost.


RESULTS
using illumina rna-seq technology, skeletal muscle sequence reads for g. chilensis were generated under control and handling stress conditions. reads were mapped onto a reference transcriptome, resulting in the in silico identification of  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated transcripts. gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed a significant up-regulation of catabolic genes associated with skeletal muscle atrophy. these results were validated by rt-qpcr analysis for ten candidates genes involved in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, autophagy and skeletal muscle growth. additionally, using a primary culture of fish skeletal muscle cells, the effect of cortisol was evaluated in relation to red cusk-eel skeletal muscle atrophy.


CONCLUSIONS
the present data demonstrated that handling stress promotes skeletal muscle atrophy in the marine teleost g. chilensis through the expression of components of the ubiquitin-proteasome and autophagy-lysosome systems. furthermore, cortisol was a powerful inductor of skeletal muscle atrophy in fish myotubes. this study is an important step towards understanding the atrophy system in non-model teleost species and provides novel insights on the cellular and molecular mechanisms that control skeletal muscle growth in early vertebrates.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genypterus chilensisred cusk-eelmrna-seqhandling stressskeletal muscle atrophycortisolissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

