BACKGROUND
the parasite echinococcus canadensis   is one of the causative agents of echinococcosis. echinococcosis is a worldwide chronic zoonosis affecting humans as well as domestic and wild mammals, which has been reported as a prioritized neglected disease by the world health organisation. no genomic data, comparative genomic analyses or efficient therapeutic and diagnostic tools are available for this severe disease. the information presented in this study will help to understand the peculiar biological characters and to design species-specific control tools.


RESULTS
we sequenced, assembled and annotated the 115-mb genome of e. canadensis . comparative genomic analyses using whole genome data of three echinococcus species not only confirmed the status of e. canadensis  as a separate species but also demonstrated a high nucleotide sequences divergence in relation to e. granulosus . the e. canadensis  genome contains  <dig>  genes with a core set of  <dig> orthologs shared among five cestode species. comparative genomics revealed that there are more single nucleotide polymorphisms  between e. canadensis  and e. granulosus  than between e. canadensis  and e. multilocularis. this result was unexpected since e. canadensis  and e. granulosus  were considered to belong to the species complex e. granulosus sensu lato. we described snps in known drug targets and metabolism genes in the e. canadensis  genome. regarding gene regulation, we analysed three particular features: cpg island distribution along the three echinococcus genomes, dna methylation system and small rna pathway. the results suggest the occurrence of yet unknown gene regulation mechanisms in echinococcus.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first work that addresses echinococcus comparative genomics. the resources presented here will promote the study of mechanisms of parasite development as well as new tools for drug discovery. the availability of a high-quality genome assembly is critical for fully exploring the biology of a pathogenic organism. the e. canadensis  genome presented in this study provides a unique opportunity to address the genetic diversity among the genus echinococcus and its particular developmental features. at present, there is no unequivocal taxonomic classification of echinococcus species; however, the genome-wide snps analysis performed here revealed the phylogenetic distance among these three echinococcus species. additional cestode genomes need to be sequenced to be able to resolve their phylogeny.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
echinococcus genomesnpsdrug targetshelminth parasitescomparative genomicshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003033ministerio de ciencia, tecnología e innovación productivaconicet  <dig> pip 114capg-ba 070-13kamenetzky laura http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006668fondo para la investigación científica y tecnológicapict cabbio  <dig> 3044pict  <dig> 2121rosenzvit mara kamenetzky laura issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

