BACKGROUND
the parahox genes are thought to be major players in patterning the gut of several bilaterian taxa. though this is a fundamental role that these transcription factors play, their activities are not limited to the endoderm and extend to both ectodermal and mesodermal tissues. three genes compose the parahox group: gsx, xlox and cdx. in some taxa  the three genes are arranged into a genomic cluster, in a similar fashion to what has been shown for the better-known hox genes. sea urchins possess the full complement of parahox genes but they are all dispersed throughout the genome, an arrangement that, perhaps, represented the primitive condition for all echinoderms. in order to understand the evolutionary history of this group of genes we cloned and characterized all parahox genes, studied their expression patterns and identified their genomic loci in a member of an earlier branching group of echinoderms, the asteroid patiria miniata.


RESULTS
we identified the three parahox orthologs in the genome of p. miniata. while one of them, pmgsx is provided as maternal message, with no zygotic activation afterwards, the other two, pmlox and pmcdx are expressed during embryogenesis, within restricted domains of both endoderm and ectoderm. screening of a patiria bacterial artificial chromosome  library led to the identification of a clone containing the three genes. the transcriptional directions of pmgsx and pmlox are opposed to that of the pmcdx gene within the cluster.


CONCLUSIONS
the identification of p. miniata parahox genes has revealed the fact that these genes are clustered in the genome, in contrast to what has been reported for echinoids. since the presence of an intact cluster, or at least a partial cluster, has been reported in chordates and polychaetes respectively, it becomes clear that within echinoderms, sea urchins have modified the original bilaterian arrangement. moreover, the sea star parahox domains of expression show chordate-like features not found in the sea urchin, confirming that the dynamics of gene expression for the respective genes and their putative regulatory interactions have clearly changed over evolutionary time within the echinoid lineage.

patiria miniataasteroidparahoxclustergsxxloxcdxcolinearitygut

