BACKGROUND
abiotic stresses which include drought and heat are amongst the main limiting factors for plant growth and crop productivity. in the field, these stress types are rarely presented individually and plants are often subjected to a combination of stress types. sorghum bicolor is a cereal crop which is grown in arid and semi-arid regions and is particularly well adapted to the hot and dry conditions in which it originates and is now grown as a crop. in order to better understand the mechanisms underlying combined stress tolerance in this important crop, we have used microarrays to investigate the transcriptional response of sorghum subjected to heat and drought stresses imposed both individually and in combination.


RESULTS
microarrays consisting of  <dig> gene probes identified gene expression changes equating to ~4% and 18% of genes on the chip following drought and heat stresses respectively. in response to combined stress ~20% of probes were differentially expressed. whilst many of these transcript changes were in common with those changed in response to heat or drought alone, the levels of  <dig> specific transcripts  were found to only be changed following the combined stress treatment. ontological analysis of these ‘unique’ transcripts identified a potential role for specific transcription factors including myb <dig> and ataf <dig>  chaperones including unique heat shock proteins  and metabolic pathways including polyamine biosynthesis in the sorghum combined stress response.


CONCLUSIONS
these results show evidence for both cross-talk and specificity in the sorghum response to combined heat and drought stress. it is clear that some aspects of the combined stress response are unique compared to those of individual stresses. a functional characterization of the genes and pathways identified here could lead to new targets for the enhancement of plant stress tolerance, which will be particularly important in the face of climate change and the increasing prevalence of these abiotic stress types.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
combined stressdroughtheatmicroarraysorghumtranscriptomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

