BACKGROUND
single nucleotide polymorphism  markers have a wide range of applications in crop genetics and genomics. due to their polyploidy nature, many important crops, such as wheat, cotton and rapeseed contain a large amount of repeat and homoeologous sequences in their genomes, which imposes a huge challenge in high-throughput genotyping with sequencing and/or array technologies. allotetraploid brassica napus  comprises of two highly homoeologous sub-genomes derived from its progenitor species b. rapa  and b. oleracea , and is an ideal species to exploit methods for reducing the interference of extensive inter-homoeologue polymorphisms  between closely related sub-genomes.


RESULTS
based on a recent b. napus 6k snp array, we developed a bi-filtering procedure to identify unauthentic lines in a dh population, and mhemi-snps and pseudo-simple snps in an array data matrix. the procedure utilized both monomorphic and polymorphic snps in the dh population and could effectively distinguish the mhemi-snps and pseudo-simple snps that resulted from superposition of the signals from multiple snps. compared with conventional procedure for array data processing, the bi-filtering method could minimize the pseudo linkage relationship caused by the mhemi-snps and pseudo-simple snps, thus improving the quality of snp genetic map. furthermore, the improved genetic map could increase the accuracies of mapping of qtls as demonstrated by the ability to eliminate non-real qtls in the mapping population.


CONCLUSIONS
the bi-filtering analysis of the snp array data represents a novel approach to effectively assigning the multi-loci snp genotypes in polyploid b. napus and may find wide applications to snp analyses in polyploid crops.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
brassica napuspolyploidsnp arraybi-filtering analysisgenetic mapqtl mappingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

