BACKGROUND
salt tolerance in plants is rare, yet it is found across a diverse set of taxonomic groups. this suggests that, although salt tolerance often involves a set of complex traits, it has evolved many times independently in different angiosperm lineages. however, the pattern of evolution of salt tolerance can vary dramatically between families. a recent phylogenetic study of the chenopodiaceae  concluded that salt tolerance has a conserved evolutionary pattern, being gained early in the evolution of the lineage then retained by most species in the family. conversely, a phylogenetic study of the poaceae  suggested over  <dig> independent gains of salt tolerance, most giving rise to only one or a few salt tolerant species. here, we use a phylogenetic approach to explore the macroevolutionary patterns of salt tolerance in a sample of angiosperm families, in order to ask whether either of these two patterns – deep and conserved or shallow and labile - represents a common mode of salt tolerance evolution. we analyze the distribution of halophyte species across the angiosperms and identify families with more or less halophytes than expected under a random model. then, we explore the phylogenetic distribution of halophytes in  <dig> families using phylogenetic comparative methods.


RESULTS
we find that salt tolerance species have been reported from over one-third of angiosperm families, but that salt tolerant species are not distributed evenly across angiosperm families. we find that salt tolerance has been gained hundreds of times over the history of the angiosperms. in a few families, we find deep and conserved gains of salt tolerance, but in the majority of families analyzed, we find that the pattern of salt tolerant species is best explained by multiple independent gains that occur near the tips of the phylogeny and often give rise to only one or a few halophytes.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that the pattern of many independent gains of salt tolerance near the tips of the phylogeny is found in many angiosperm families. this suggests that the pattern reported in the grasses of high evolutionary lability may be a common feature of salt tolerance evolution in angiosperms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
angiospermscomparative methodhalophytemacroevolutionrepeated evolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

