BACKGROUND
in addition to messenger rna , noncoding rnas  are essential components in cellular machineries for translation and splicing. besides their housekeeping functions, ncrnas are involved in cell type-specific regulation of translation, mrna stability, genome structure, and accessibility. to have a comprehensive understanding of the identities and functions of different cell types, a method to comprehensively quantify both mrna and ncrna in a sensitive manner is highly desirable.

methods
here we tried to develop a system capable of concurrently profiling both mrna and ncrna by polyadenylating rna in samples before reverse transcription. the sensitivity of the system was maximized by avoiding purification from cell lysis to amplified cdna and by optimizing the buffer conditions. the single-tube amplification  system was applied to single to  <dig> cells of 293t cells, human pluripotent stem cells  and their differentiated endothelial progenies to validate its quantitative power and sensitivity by qpcr and high-throughput sequencing.


RESULTS
using microrna  as an example, we showed that complementary dna  from ncrnas could be amplified and specifically detected from a few cells within a single tube. the sensitivity of the system was maximized by avoiding purification from cell lysis to amplified cdna and by optimizing the buffer conditions. with  <dig> human embryonic stem cells  and their differentiated endothelial cells as input for high-throughput sequencing, the single-tube amplification  system revealed both well-known and other mirnas selectively enriched in each cell type. the selective enrichment of the mirnas was further verified by qpcr with 293ft cells and a human induced pluripotent stem cell  line. in addition, the detection of other non-mirna transcripts indicated that the sta target was not limited to mirna, but extended to other ncrnas and mrnas as well. finally, the sta system was capable of detecting mirna and mrna expression down to single cells, albeit with some loss of sensitivity and power.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, sta offered a simple and sensitive way to concurrently quantify both mrna and ncrna expression in low-cell-number samples for both qpcr and high-throughput sequencing.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptome sequencinglow cell numbertotal rnapluripotent stem cellsendotheliumhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004663ministry of science and technology, taiwan104-2314-b- <dig> - <dig> -my3chiang po-min issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

