BACKGROUND
penicillium expansum is a destructive phytopathogen that causes decay in deciduous fruits during postharvest handling and storage. during colonization the fungus secretes d-gluconic acid , which modulates environmental ph and regulates mycotoxin accumulation in colonized tissue. till now no transcriptomic analysis has addressed the specific contribution of the pathogen's ph regulation to the p. expansum colonization process. for this purpose total rna from the leading edge of p. expansum-colonized apple tissue of cv. 'golden delicious' and from fungal cultures grown under ph  <dig> or  <dig> were sequenced and their gene expression patterns were compared.


RESULTS
we present a large-scale analysis of the transcriptome data of p. expansum and apple response to fungal colonization. the fungal analysis revealed nine different clusters of gene expression patterns that were divided among three major groups in which the colonized tissue showed, respectively:  differing transcript expression patterns between mycelial growth at ph  <dig> and ph 7;  similar transcript expression patterns of mycelial growth at ph 4; and  similar transcript expression patterns of mycelial growth at ph  <dig>  each group was functionally characterized in order to decipher genes that are important for ph regulation and also for colonization of apple fruits by penicillium. furthermore, comparison of gene expression of healthy apple tissue with that of colonized tissue showed that differentially expressed genes revealed up-regulation of the jasmonic acid and mevalonate pathways, and also down-regulation of the glycogen and starch biosynthesis pathways.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, we identified important genes and functionalities of p. expansum that were controlled by the environmental ph. differential expression patterns of genes belonging to the same gene family suggest that genes were selectively activated according to their optimal environmental conditions  to enable the fungus to cope with varying conditions and to make optimal use of available enzymes. comparison between the activation of the colonized host's gene responses by alkalizing colletotrichum gloeosporioides and acidifying p. expansum pathogens indicated similar gene response patterns, but stronger responses to p. expansum, suggesting the importance of acidification by p. expansum as a factor in its increased aggressiveness.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcription profilingpenicillium expansumrna-seqgene expressionph regulationpathogenicityph-regulated genesfungal genes regulated by phapple genes regulated by phhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100006031united states - israel binational agricultural research and development fundis-4773-14issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

