BACKGROUND
the polysaccharide capsule is a major virulence factor of the important human pathogen streptococcus pneumoniae. however, s. pneumoniae strains lacking capsule do occur.


RESULTS
here, we report a nasopharyngeal isolate of streptococcus pneumoniae composed of a mixture of two phenotypes; one encapsulated  and the other nonencapsulated, determined by serotyping, electron microscopy and fluorescence isothiocyanate dextran exclusion assay.

by whole genome sequencing, we demonstrated that the phenotypes differ by a single nucleotide base pair in capsular gene cpse  predicted to result in amino acid change from arginine to glycine at position  <dig>  located in the cytoplasmic, enzymatically active, region of this transmembrane protein. this snp is responsible for loss of capsule production as the phenotype is transferred with the capsule operon. the nonencapsulated variant is superior in growth in vitro and is also 117-fold more adherent to and more invasive into detroit  <dig> human epithelial cells than the encapsulated variant.

expression of six competence pathway genes and one competence-associated gene was  <dig> to 34-fold higher in the nonencapsulated variant than the encapsulated and transformation frequency was  <dig> -fold greater.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified a new single point mutation in capsule gene cpse of a clinical s. pneumoniae serotype 18c isolate sufficient to cause loss of capsule expression resulting in the co-existence of the encapsulated and nonencapsulated phenotype. the mutation caused phenotypic changes in growth, adherence to epithelial cells and transformability. mutation in capsule gene cpse may be a way for s. pneumoniae to lose its capsule and increase its colonization potential.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
streptococcus pneumoniaecpsecapsulenonencapsulatedsnpissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

