BACKGROUND
shewanella oneidensis mr- <dig> exhibits diverse metal ion-reducing capabilities and thus is of potential utility as a bioremediation agent. knowledge of the molecular components and regulatory mechanisms dictating cellular responses to heavy metal stress, however, remains incomplete. in a previous work, the s. oneidensis so <dig> gene, annotated as a dna-binding response regulator, was demonstrated to be specifically responsive at both the transcript and protein levels to acute chromate  challenge. to delineate the cellular function of so <dig> and its contribution to metal stress response, we integrated genetic and physiological approaches with a genome-wide screen for target gene candidates comprising the so <dig> regulon.


RESULTS
inactivation of so <dig> by an in-frame deletion resulted in enhanced chromate sensitivity and a reduced capacity to remove extracellular cr relative to the parental strain. time-resolved microarray analysis was used to compare transcriptomic profiles of wild-type and so2426-deficient mutant s. oneidensis under conditions of chromate exposure. in total,  <dig> genes  were up- or downregulated at least twofold in the Δso <dig> mutant for at least one of six time-point conditions. hierarchical cluster analysis of temporal transcriptional profiles identified a distinct cluster  comprised of co-ordinately regulated genes exhibiting significant downregulated expression  over time. thirteen of these genes encoded proteins associated with transport and binding functions, particularly those involved in fe transport and homeostasis . a conserved hypothetical operon , previously identified as a potential target of fur-mediated repression, as well as a putative bicyclomycin resistance gene  and cation efflux family protein gene  also were repressed in the so <dig> deletion mutant. furthermore, the temporal expression profiles of four regulatory genes including a cpxr homolog were perturbed in the chromate-challenged mutant.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings suggest a previously unrecognized functional role for the response regulator so <dig> in the activation of genes required for siderophore-mediated fe acquisition, fe storage, and other cation transport mechanisms. so <dig> regulatory function is involved at a fundamental molecular level in the linkage between fe homeostasis and the cellular response to chromate-induced stress in s. oneidensis.

