BACKGROUND
micrornas  are a class of small, endogenous rnas that take part in regulating genes through mediating gene expressions at the post-transcriptional level in plants. previous studies have reported mirna identification in various plants ranging from model plants to perennial fruit trees. however, the role of mirnas in pear  fruit development is not clear. here, we investigated the mirna profiles of pear fruits from different time stages during development with illumina hiseq  <dig> platform and bioinformatics analysis. quantitative real-time pcr was used to validate the expression levels of mirnas.


RESULTS
both conserved and species-specific mirnas in pear have been identified in this study. total reads, ranging from  <dig> , <dig> to  <dig> , <dig>  were obtained from six small rna libraries constructed for different stages of fruit development after flowering. comparative profiling showed that an average of  <dig> mirnas was expressed with significant differences between various developmental stages. kegg pathway analysis on  <dig>  target genes of  <dig> known mirnas and  <dig>  target genes of  <dig> novel mirnas showed that mirnas are widely involved in the regulation of fruit development. among these, a total of eleven mirnas putatively participate in the pathway of lignin biosynthesis, nine mirnas were identified to take part in sugar and acid metabolism, and mir <dig> was identified to regulate auxin response factor.


CONCLUSIONS
comparative analysis of mirnaomes during pear fruit development is presented, and mirnas were proved to be widely involved in the regulation of fruit development and formation of fruit quality, for example through lignin synthesis, sugar and acid metabolism, and hormone signaling. combined with computational analysis and experimental confirmation, the research contributes valuable information for further functional research of microrna in fruit development for pear and other species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pearfruit developmenthigh-throughput sequencingmirnalignin synthesissugar and acidissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

