BACKGROUND
fear concerning stressful medical or dental procedures is one of the major factors that distance patients from health care. fear and avoidance of dental treatments can be shaped by a patient’s prior experience with receiving dental procedures or by imagining the procedures.

methods
we performed two functional magnetic resonance imaging  experiments to investigate the role of the anterior insula  and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex , which are both critical to threat perception, in dental avoidance. dental avoidance based on both prior treatment experience and imagination was assessed using a customized questionnaire. in an fmri task-based study, we investigated brain activation in  <dig> healthy participants when they viewed images depicting dental procedures that evoked a moderate degree of fear. region-of-interest analysis was performed to assess the association between dental avoidance and ains as well as dacc activation. in a resting state fmri study, we investigated  <dig> healthy participants for the association between the intrinsic functional connectivity of the ains and dacc and dental avoidance.


RESULTS
we found that  the participants showed a higher activation of the right ains and bilateral dacc when they viewed images of dental procedures compared with the brain activation observed when they viewed scrambled images .  the avoidance ratings based on prior experience of dental treatment were significantly positively correlated with the activation in the right ains , right dacc  and left dacc .  the intrinsic functional connectivity between the ains and the orbitofrontal cortex was positively correlated with the avoidance ratings based on experience .


CONCLUSIONS
the findings highlight prior experience of dental treatment as a predominant factor in shaping patients’ avoidance behavior. individual differences in threat perception may play a key role in the development of dental avoidance.

keywords
fmrianterior insulaanterior cingulate cortexdental feardental avoidancenational science council of taiwannsc 102-2314-b-010-049lin chia-shu issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

