BACKGROUND
bovine respiratory disease  is a costly feature of modern cattle production. early and accurate detection of brd may prove useful in the successful management of this disease. the primary objective of the study was to define the time course of covalent complexes of neutrophil, haptoglobin  and matrix metalloproteinase  <dig>  in serum after intravenous lipopolysaccharide  in comparison to traditional markers. our hypothesis was that serum concentrations of neutrophil hp-mmp  <dig> provides information distinct from traditional acute phase protein markers. to characterize the neutrophil responses to lipopolysaccharide , nine healthy, jersey calves  were challenged and physiologic parameters, peripheral blood cell counts and serum cortisol , hp-mmp  <dig>  hp, alpha1-acid glycoprotein , serum amyloid a  were obtained starting 24 hours before to 96 hours post-lps challenge.


RESULTS
physiologic parameters  and attitude assessed at each time point indicated that lps challenge resulted in rapid onset of depression, tachypnea, leukopenia, neutropenia and lymphopenia within 1 hour. serum c concentrations were significantly increased by 1 hour post-lps. serum hp-mmp  <dig> complexes were detectable in serum by  <dig>  hours and peaked at 16 h, serum total hp remained <10 μg/ml until 8 hours post lps infusion and were significantly greater than baseline by 12 hours post-lps infusion. serum amyloid a concentrations increased significantly by 8 hours post lps. serum concentrations of agp increased significantly by 16 hours post lps. serum concentrations of hp, saa and agp remained significantly greater than baseline out to 96 hours post-lps. the total systemic exposure to traditional makers is significantly greater than from hp-mmp 9


CONCLUSIONS
using a well described model for acute phase protein responses, the data demonstrate that serum neutrophil hp-mmp  <dig> complexes appear sooner and decline more rapidly than other acute phase proteins . since hp-mmp <dig> is stored pre-formed, it provides information specifically addressing the lps-induced activation of bovine neutrophils. contributions of hp-mmp  <dig> to the serum acute phase protein response may provide useful information, independent of hepatic responses, in diagnosis of acute inflammation.

keywords
bovineneutrophilhaptoglobin-mmp  <dig> complexesacute phase responsecortisolissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

