BACKGROUND
maternal or uniparental inheritance  of mitochondria is generally observed in sexual eukaryotes, however, the underlying mechanisms are diverse and largely unknown. recently, based on the use of mutants blocked in autophagy, it has been demonstrated that autophagy is required for strict maternal inheritance in the nematode caenorhabditis elegans. uniparental mitochondrial dna  inheritance has been well documented for numerous fungal species, and in particular, has been shown to be genetically governed by the mating-type loci in the isogamous species cryptococcus neoformans, phycomyces blakesleeanus and ustilago maydis. previously, we have shown that the a <dig> mating-type locus gene lga <dig> is decisive for upi during sexual development of u. maydis. in axenic culture, conditional overexpression of lga <dig> triggers efficient loss of mtdna as well as mitophagy. to assess a functional relationship, we have investigated upi in u. maydis Δatg <dig> mutants, which are blocked in mitophagy.


RESULTS
this study has revealed that Δatg <dig> mutants are not affected in pathogenic development and this has allowed us to analyse upi under comparable developmental conditions between mating-compatible wild-type and mutant strain combinations. explicitly, we have examined two independent strain combinations that gave rise to different efficiencies of upi. we demonstrate that in both cases upi is atg11-independent, providing evidence that mitophagy is not critical for upi in u. maydis, even under conditions of strict upi.


CONCLUSIONS
until now, analysis of a role of mitophagy in upi has not been reported for microbial species. our study suggests that selective autophagy does not contribute to upi in u. maydis, but is rather a consequence of selective mtdna elimination in response to mitochondrial damage.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mitophagyuniparental mitochondrial inheritancemtdnaustilago maydisfungiatg11issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

