BACKGROUND
the microtubule associated protein tau  promotes assembly and interaction of microtubules with the cytoskeleton, impinging on axonal transport and synaptic plasticity. its neuronal expression and intrinsic disorder implicate it in some  <dig> tauopathies such as alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia. these pathophysiological studies have yet to be complemented by computational analyses of its molecular evolution and structural models of all its functional domains to explain the molecular basis for its conservation profile, its site-specific interactions and the propensity to conformational disorder and aggregate formation.


RESULTS
we systematically annotated public sequence data to reconstruct unspliced mapt, map <dig> and map <dig> transcripts spanning all represented genomes. bayesian and maximum likelihood phylogenetic analyses, genetic linkage maps and domain architectures distinguished a nonvertebrate outgroup from the emergence of map <dig> and its subsequent ancestral duplication to map <dig> and mapt. these events were coupled to other linked genes such as kansl1l and kansl and may thus be consequent to large-scale chromosomal duplications originating in the extant vertebrate genomes of hagfish and lamprey. profile hidden markov models , clustered subalignments and 3d structural predictions defined potential interaction motifs and specificity determining sites to reveal distinct signatures between the four homologous microtubule binding domains and independent divergence of the amino terminus.


CONCLUSIONS
these analyses clarified ambiguities of mapt nomenclature, defined the order, timing and pattern of its molecular evolution and identified key residues and motifs relevant to its protein interaction properties and pathogenic role. additional unexpected findings included the expansion of cysteine-containing, microtubule binding domains of mapt in cold adapted antarctic icefish and the emergence of a novel multiexonic saitohin  gene from repetitive elements in mapt intron  <dig> of certain primate genomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
microtubule associated protein tau microtubule binding domaingene phylogenymolecular evolutionprofile hidden markov modelssaitohin domain architecturestructure-function predictionministerio de educación y cienciabfu2007-67876morgan reginald o. principado de asturias sv-pa-13-ecoemp- <dig> and grupin14-097sündermann frederik daad ipid sündermann frederik lichtenbergpredoctoral fellowshipsündermann frederik issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

