BACKGROUND
as the major histocompatibility complex , human leukocyte antigens  are one of the most polymorphic genes in humans. patients carrying certain hla alleles may develop adverse drug reactions  after taking specific drugs. peptides play an important role in hla related adrs as they are the necessary co-binders of hlas with drugs. many experimental data have been generated for understanding hla-peptide binding. however, efficiently utilizing the data for understanding and accurately predicting hla-peptide binding is challenging. therefore, we developed a network analysis based method to understand and predict hla-peptide binding.

methods
qualitative class i hla-peptide binding data were harvested and prepared from four major databases. an hla-peptide binding network was constructed from this dataset and modules were identified by the fast greedy modularity optimization algorithm. to examine the significance of signals in the yielded models, the modularity was compared with the modularity values generated from  <dig>  random networks. the peptides and hlas in the modules were characterized by similarity analysis. the neighbor-edges based and unbiased leverage algorithm  was developed for predicting hla-peptide binding. leave-one-out  validations and two-fold cross-validations were conducted to evaluate the performance of nebula using the constructed hla-peptide binding network.


RESULTS
nine modules were identified from analyzing the hla-peptide binding network with a highest modularity compared to all the random networks. peptide length and functional side chains of amino acids at certain positions of the peptides were different among the modules. hla sequences were module dependent to some extent. nebula archived an overall prediction accuracy of  <dig>  in the loo validations and average accuracy of  <dig>  in the two-fold cross-validations and outperformed the method reported in the literature.


CONCLUSIONS
network analysis is a useful approach for analyzing large and sparse datasets such as the hla-peptide binding dataset. the modules identified from the network analysis clustered peptides and hlas with similar sequences and properties of amino acids. nebula performed well in the predictions of hla-peptide binding. we demonstrated that network analysis coupled with nebula is an efficient approach to understand and predict hla-peptide binding interactions and thus, could further our understanding of adrs.

hlapeptidenetworknebulabindingmodulepredictionmhc13- <dig> march  <dig> 12th annual mcbios conference little rock, ar, usa

