BACKGROUND
lake tanganyika  is the oldest of the african rift lakes and is one of the richest freshwater ecosystems on earth, with high levels of faunal diversity and endemism. the endemic species flocks that occur in this lake, such as cichlid fishes, gastropods, catfish and crabs, provide unique comparative systems for the study of patterns and processes of speciation. mastacembelid eels  are a predominately riverine family of freshwater fish, occurring across africa and asia, but which also form a small species flock in lt.

methods
including  <dig> species across africa, plus asian representatives as outgroups, we present the first molecular phylogenetic analysis for the group, focusing particularly on the evolutionary history and biodiversity of lt mastacembelid eels. a combined matrix of nuclear and mitochondrial genes based on  <dig> bp are analysed implementing different phylogenetic methods, including bayesian inference and maximum likelihood.


RESULTS
lt mastacembelus are recovered as monophyletic, and analyses reveal the rapid diversification of five main lt lineages. relaxed molecular clock dates provide age estimates for the lt flock at ~7- <dig> myr, indicating intralacustrine diversification, with further speciation events coinciding with periods of lower lake level. our analyses also reveal as yet undescribed diversity of lacustrine and riverine species. a southern-eastern african clade, that is younger than the lt flock, is also recovered, while west african taxa are basal members of the african mastacembelid clade.


CONCLUSIONS
that the lt species flock of mastacembelid eels appears to have colonised and immediately diversified soon after the formation of the lake, supports the view of lt as an evolutionary hotspot of diversification. we find evidence for biogeographic clades mirroring a similar pattern to other ichthyological faunas. in addition, our analyses also highlight a split of african and asian mastacembelid eels at ~ <dig> myr that is considerably younger than the split between their associated continents, suggesting a dispersal scenario for their current distribution.

