BACKGROUND
on account of repeated exposure and submergence of the east china sea  land bridge, sea level fluctuation played an important role in shaping the population structure of many temperate species across the ecs during the glacial period. the flower bug amphiareus obscuriceps   is an invasive species native to the sino-japanese region  of east asia. we tested the hypothesis of the ecs land bridge acting as a dispersal corridor or filter for a. obscuriceps during the glacial period. specifically, we tested whether and the extent to which dispersal ability and host plant habitat requirement influenced the genetic structure of a. obscuriceps during the exposure of the ecs land bridge.


RESULTS
phylogenetic and network analyses indicated that a. obscuriceps is composed of two major lineages, i.e., china and japan. divergence time on both sides of the ecs was estimated to be approximately  <dig>   ma, which was about the same period that the sea level increased. no significant isolation by distance  relationship was found between Фst and euclidean distances in the mantel tests, which is consistent with the hypothesis that this species has a good dispersal ability. our last glacial maximum  niche modeling of plants that constitute preferred habitats for a. obscuriceps exhibited a similar habitat gap on the exposed ecs continental shelf between china and japan, but showed a continuous distribution across the taiwan strait.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that ecological properties , together with sea level fluctuation during the pleistocene across the ecs, have shaped the genetic structure and demographic history of a. obscuriceps in its native area. the host plant habitat requirement could also be a key to the colonization of the a. obscuriceps species during the exposure of the ecs land bridge. our findings will shed light on the potential role of habitat requirement in the process of biological invasion in future studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dispersal abilityeast china seacological niche modelinggenetic structurehabitat requirementlast glacial maximumland bridgenational basic research program of china2013cb127600bu wenjun http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of chinanos.  <dig>  j <dig>  and 31501853bu wenjun postdoctoral science foundation of china2015m570225ye zhen issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

