BACKGROUND
biofilms produced by candida albicans  are intrinsically resistant to fungicidal agents, which are a main cause of the pathogenesis of catheter infections. several lines of evidence have demonstrated that calcineurin inhibitor fk <dig> or cyclosporine a  can remarkably enhance the antifungal activity of fluconazole  against biofilm-producing c. albicans strain infections. the aim of present study is thus to interrogate the mechanism underpinning the synergistic effect of flc and calcineurin inhibitors.


RESULTS
twenty four clinical c. albicans strains isolated from bloodstream showed a distinct capacity of biofilm formation. a combination of calcineurin inhibitor csa and flc exhibited a dose-dependent synergistic antifungal effect on the growth and biofilm formation of c. albicans isolates as determined by a xtt assay and fluorescent microscopy assay. the synergistic effect was accompanied with a significantly down-regulated expression of adhesion-related genes als <dig>  hypha-related genes hwp <dig>  abc transporter drug-resistant genes cdr <dig> and mdr <dig>  and flc targeting gene, encoding sterol 14alpha-demethylase  in clinical c. albicans isolates. furthermore, an addition of csa significantly reduced the cellular surface hydrophobicity but increased intracellular calcium concentration as determined by a flow cytometry assay .


CONCLUSIONS
the results presented in this report demonstrated that the synergistic effect of csa and flc on inhibited c. albicans biofilm formation and enhanced susceptibility to flc was in part through a mechanism involved in suppressing the expression of biofilm related and drug-resistant genes, and reducing cellular surface hydrophobicity, as well as evoking intracellular calcium concentration.

keywords
candida albicansbiofilmcalcineurin inhibitorcyclosporine afluconazolecompeting grants from the ningxia key laboratory of clinical and pathogenic microbiologylcpm201502-1pcpm-201501-1jia wei wei jun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

