BACKGROUND
cetaceans  are a group of adapted marine mammals with an enigmatic history of transition from terrestrial to full aquatic habitat and rapid radiation in waters around the world. throughout this evolution, the pathogen stress-response proteins must have faced challenges from the dramatic change of environmental pathogens in the completely different ecological niches cetaceans occupied. for this reason, cetaceans could be one of the most ideal candidate taxa for studying evolutionary process and associated driving mechanism of vertebrate innate immune systems such as toll-like receptors , which are located at the direct interface between the host and the microbial environment, act at the first line in recognizing specific conserved components of microorganisms, and translate them rapidly into a defense reaction.


RESULTS
we used tlr <dig> as an example to test whether this traditionally regarded pattern recognition receptor molecule was driven by positive selection across cetacean evolutionary history. overall, the lineage-specific selection test showed that the dn/ds  values along most  examined cetartiodactylan lineages were less than  <dig>  suggesting a common effect of functional constraint. however, some specific codons made radical changes, fell adjacent to the residues interacting with lipopolysaccharides , and showed parallel evolution between independent lineages, suggesting that tlr <dig> was under positive selection. especially, strong signatures of adaptive evolution on tlr <dig> were identified in two periods, one corresponding to the early evolutionary transition of the terrestrial ancestors of cetaceans from land to semi-aquatic  and from semi-aquatic to full aquatic  habitat, and the other to the rapid diversification and radiation of oceanic dolphins.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study thus far to characterize the tlr gene in cetaceans. our data present evidences that cetacean tlr <dig> has undergone adaptive evolution against the background of purifying selection in response to the secondary aquatic adaptation and rapid diversification in the sea. it is suggested that microbial pathogens in different environments are important factors that promote adaptive changes at cetacean tlr <dig> and new functions of some amino acid sites specialized for recognizing pathogens in dramatically contrasted environments to enhance the fitness for the adaptation and survival of cetaceans.

