BACKGROUND
in order to understand the effects of fes cluster attachment in  hydrogenase, we undertook a study to substitute all  <dig> amino acid positions normally ligating the three fes clusters in the hydrogenase small subunit. using the hydrogenase from alteromonas macleodii “deep ecotype” as a model, we substituted one of four amino acids  at each of the  <dig> ligating positions because these amino acids are alternative coordinating residues in otherwise conserved-cysteine positions found in a broad survey of nife hydrogenase sequences. we also hoped to discover an enzyme with elevated hydrogen evolution activity relative to a previously reported “g1”  improved enzyme in which the medial fes cluster pro and the distal fes cluster his were each substituted for cys.


RESULTS
among all the substitutions screened, aspartic acid substitutions were generally well-tolerated, and examination suggests that the observed deficiency in enzyme activity may be largely due to misprocessing of the small subunit of the enzyme. alignment of hydrogenase sequences from sequence databases revealed many rare substitutions; the five substitutions present in databases that we tested all exhibited measurable hydrogen evolution activity. select substitutions were purified and tested, supporting the results of the screening assay. analysis of these results confirms the importance of small subunit processing. normalizing activity to quantity of mature small subunit, indicative of total enzyme maturation, weakly suggests an improvement over the “g1” enzyme.


CONCLUSIONS
we have comprehensively screened  <dig> amino acid substitutions of the hydrogenase from a. macleodii “deep ecotype”, to understand non-canonical ligations of amino acids to fes clusters and to improve hydrogen evolution activity of this class of hydrogenase. our studies show that non-canonical ligations can be functional and also suggests a new limiting factor in the production of active enzyme.

 hydrogenaseiron-sulfur clusteralteromonas macleodii deep ecotype

