BACKGROUND
in climacteric fruit-bearing species, the onset of fruit ripening is marked by a transient rise in respiration rate and autocatalytic ethylene production, followed by rapid deterioration in fruit quality. in non-climacteric species, there is no increase in respiration or ethylene production at the beginning or during fruit ripening. melon is unusual in having climacteric and non-climacteric varieties, providing an interesting model system to compare both ripening types. transcriptomic analysis of developing melon fruits from védrantais and dulce  and piel de sapo and pi  <dig>  varieties was performed to understand the molecular mechanisms that differentiate the two fruit ripening types.


RESULTS
fruits were harvested at  <dig>   <dig>  35 days after pollination and at fruit maturity. transcript profiling was performed using an oligo-based microarray with 75 k probes. genes linked to characteristic traits of fruit ripening were differentially expressed between climacteric and non-climacteric types, as well as several transcription factor genes and genes encoding enzymes involved in sucrose catabolism. the expression patterns of some genes in pi  <dig> fruits were either intermediate between. piel de sapo and the climacteric varieties, or more similar to the latter. pi  <dig> fruits also accumulated some carotenoids, a characteristic trait of climacteric varieties.


CONCLUSIONS
simultaneous changes in transcript abundance indicate that there is coordinated reprogramming of gene expression during fruit development and at the onset of ripening in both climacteric and non-climacteric fruits. the expression patterns of genes related to ethylene metabolism, carotenoid accumulation, cell wall integrity and transcriptional regulation varied between genotypes and was consistent with the differences in their fruit ripening characteristics. there were differences between climacteric and non-climacteric varieties in the expression of genes related to sugar metabolism suggesting that they may be potential determinants of sucrose content and post-harvest stability of sucrose levels in fruit. several transcription factor genes were also identified that were differentially expressed in both types, implicating them in regulation of ripening behaviour. the intermediate nature of pi  <dig> suggested that classification of melon fruit ripening behaviour into just two distinct types is an over-simplification, and that in reality there is a continuous spectrum of fruit ripening behaviour.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
carotenoidsfruit ripeningethylenefruit developmentmicroarraysucroseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

