BACKGROUND
understanding genetic control of tassel and ear architecture in maize  is important due to their relationship with grain yield. high resolution qtl mapping is critical for understanding the underlying molecular basis of phenotypic variation. advanced populations, such as recombinant inbred lines, have been broadly adopted for qtl mapping; however, construction of large advanced generation crop populations is time-consuming and costly. the rapidly declining cost of genotyping due to recent advances in next-generation sequencing technologies has generated new possibilities for qtl mapping using large early generation populations.


RESULTS
a set of  <dig> f <dig> progeny derived from inbreds chang7- <dig> and  <dig> were generated and genotyped by whole genome low-coverage genotyping-by-sequencing method . a genetic map containing  <dig>  bin-markers was constructed based on the parental snps and a sliding-window method, spanning a total genetic distance of  <dig>  cm. the high quality and accuracy of this map was validated by the identification of two well-studied genes, r <dig>  a qualitative trait locus for color of silk  and ba <dig> for tassel branch number . three traits of tassel and ear architecture were evaluated in this population, a total of  <dig> qtl were detected using a permutation-based-significance threshold, seven of which overlapped with reported qtl. three genes  encoding mads-box domain proteins and a btb/poz domain protein were located in the small intervals of qtbn <dig> and qtbn <dig>  and may be involved in patterning of tassel architecture. the small physical intervals of most qtl indicate high-resolution mapping is obtainable with this method.


CONCLUSIONS
we constructed an ultra-high-dentisy linkage map for the large early generation population in maize. our study provides an efficient approach for fast detection of quantitative loci responsible for complex trait variation with high accuracy, thus helping to dissect the underlying molecular basis of phenotypic variation and accelerate improvement of crop breeding in a cost-effective fashion.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
quantitative trait locigenotyping by sequencingnext generation sequencerbreedingmaizeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

