BACKGROUND
down syndrome , caused by trisomy of human chromosome  <dig> , is the most common genetic cause of mental retardation in humans. among complex phenotypes, it displays a number of neural pathologies including smaller brain size, reduced numbers of neurons, reduced dendritic spine density and plasticity, and early alzheimer-like neurodegeneration. mouse models for ds show behavioural and cognitive defects, synaptic plasticity defects, and reduced hippocampal and cerebellar neuron numbers. early postnatal development of both human and mouse-model ds shows the reduced capability of neuronal precursor cells to generate neurons. the exact molecular cause of this reduction, and the role played by increased dosage of individual hsa <dig> genes, remain unknown.


RESULTS
we have subcutaneously injected mouse pluripotent es cells containing a single freely segregating supernumerary human chromosome  <dig>  into syngeneic mice, to generate transchromosomic teratomas. transchromosomic cells and parental control cells were injected into opposite flanks of thirty mice in three independent experiments. tumours were grown for  <dig> days, a time-span equivalent to combined intra-uterine, and early post-natal mouse development. when paired teratomas from the same animals were compared, transchromosomic tumours showed a three-fold lower percentage of neuroectodermal tissue, as well as significantly reduced mrna levels for neuron specific  and glia specific  genes, relative to euploid controls. two thirds of transchromosomic tumours also showed a lack of pcr amplification with multiple primers specific for hsa <dig>  which were present in the es cells at the point of injection, thus restricting a commonly retained trisomy to less than a third of hsa <dig> genes.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that a supernumerary chromosome  <dig> causes inhibition of neuroectodermal differentiation  of pluripotent es cells. the data suggest that trisomy of less than a third of hsa <dig> genes, in two chromosomal regions, might be sufficient to cause this effect.

