BACKGROUND
biofilms are a highly structured consortia of microorganisms that adhere to a substrate and are encased within an extracellular matrix  that is produced by the organisms themselves. aspergillus fumigatus is a biotechnological fungus that has a medical and phytopathogenic significance, and its biofilm occurs in both natural and artificial environments; therefore, studies on the stages observed in biofilm formation are of great significance due to the limited knowledge that exists on this specific topic and because there are multiple applications that are being carried out.


RESULTS
growth curves were obtained from the soil and clinical isolates of the a. fumigatus biofilm formation. the optimal conditions for both of the isolates were inocula of 1 ×  <dig> conidia/ml, incubated at 28 °c during 24 h; these showed stages similar to those described in classic microbial growth: the lag, exponential, and stationary phases. however, the biofilms formed at 37 °c were uneven.

the a. fumigatus biofilm was similar regardless of the isolation source, but differences were presented according to the incubation temperature. the biofilm stages included the following: 1) adhesion to the plate surface , cell co-aggregation and exopolymeric substance  production; 2) conidial germination into hyphae , development, hyphal elongation, and expansion with channel formation ; and 3) biofilm maturation as follows: mycelia development, hyphal layering networks, and channels formation, and high structural arrangement of the mycelia that included hyphal anastomosis and an extensive production of ecm ; the ecm covered, surrounded and strengthened the mycelial arrangements, particular at 37 °c. in the clinical isolate, irregular fungal structures, such as microhyphae that are short and slender hyphae, occurred; 4) in cell dispersion, the soil isolate exhibited higher conidia than the clinical isolate, which had the capacity to germinate and generate new mycelia growth . in addition, we present images on the biofilm’s structural arrangement and chemical composition using fluorochromes to detect metabolic activity  and mark molecules, such as chitin, dna, mannose, glucose and proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, this is the first time that, in vitro, scanning electronic microscopy  images of the stages of a. fumigatus biofilm formation have been presented with a particular emphasis on the high hyphal organization and in diverse ecm to observe biofilm maturation.

keywords
aspergillus fumigatus biofilmstages of biofilmscanning electronic microscopy microhyphaesecretaría de investigación y posgrado and cofaa-ipn grants instituto politécnico nacional , ciudad de méxico, méxico.sip  <dig>  sip 20161239http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007161secretaría de investigación y posgrado, instituto politécnico nacionalsip 20161552issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

