BACKGROUND
acariformes is the most species-rich and morphologically diverse radiation of chelicerate arthropods, known from the oldest terrestrial ecosystems. it is also a key lineage in understanding the evolution of this group, with the most vexing question whether mites, or acari  is monophyletic. previous molecular studies recovered acari either as monophyletic or non-monophyletic, albeit with a limited taxon sampling. similarly, relationships between basal acariform groups  and major lineages of acariformes  are virtually unknown. we infer phylogeny of chelicerate arthropods, using a large and representative dataset, comprising all main in- and outgroups . basal diversity of acariformes is particularly well sampled. with this dataset, we conduct a series of phylogenetically explicit tests of chelicerate and acariform relationships and present a phylogenetic framework for internal relationships of acariform mites.


RESULTS
our molecular data strongly support a diphyletic acari, with acariformes as the sister group to solifugae , the so called poecilophysidea. among acariformes, some representatives of the basal group endeostigmata  were recovered as sister-groups to the remaining acariformes . desmonomatan oribatid mites  were recovered as the monophyletic sister group of astigmata . trombidiformes  is strongly supported . labidostommatina was inferred as the basal lineage of prostigmata. eleutherengona  and parasitengona  were recovered as monophyletic. by contrast, eupodina  was not. marine mites  were traditionally regarded as the sister-group to bdelloidea , but our analyses show their close relationships to parasitengona.


CONCLUSIONS
non-trivial relationships recovered by our analyses with high support  had been  proposed by previous underappreciated morphological studies. thus, we update currently the accepted taxonomic classification to reflect these results: the superfamily halacaroidea murray,  <dig> is moved from the infraorder eupodina krantz,  <dig> to anystina van der hammen, 1972; and the subfamily erythracarinae oudemans,  <dig>  is elevated to family rank, erythracaridae stat. ressur., leaving anystidae only with the nominal subfamily. our study also shows that a clade comprising early derivative endeostigmata  should be treated as a taxon with the same rank as sarcoptiformes and trombidiformes, and the scope of the superfamily bdelloidea should  be changed. before turning those findings into nomenclatural changes, however, we consider that our study calls for  finding shared apomorphies of the early derivative endeostigmata clade and the clade including the remaining acariformes;  a well-supported hypothesis  for alicorhagiidae placement;  sampling the families proterorhagiidae, proteonematalycidae and grandjeanicidae not yet included in molecular analyses;  undertake a denser sampling of clades traditionally placed in eupodina, anystina  and palaeosomata , since consensus networks and internode certainty  and ic all  indices indicate high levels of conflict in these tree regions. our study shows that regions of ambiguous alignment may provide useful phylogenetic signal when secondary structure information is used to guide the alignment procedure and provides an r implementation to the bayesian relative rates test.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

fapesp2010/00114-8pepato a r capes <dig> /2014-01pepato a r u.s. department of agriculture14-8130-0466-caklimov p b russian foundation for basic research15-04- <dig> aklimov p b issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

