BACKGROUND
reproductive character displacement  is a common and taxonomically widespread pattern. in marine broadcast spawning organisms, behavioral and mechanical isolation are absent and prezygotic barriers between species often operate only during the fertilization process. such barriers are usually a consequence of differences in the way in which sperm and egg proteins interact, so rcd can be manifest as faster evolution of these proteins between species in sympatry than allopatry. rapid evolution of these proteins often appears to be a consequence of positive  selection. here, we identify a set of candidate gamete recognition proteins  in the ascidian ciona intestinalis and showed that these grps evolve more rapidly than control proteins . choosing a subset of these gamete recognition proteins that show evidence of positive selection , we then directly test the rcd hypothesis by comparing divergence  and polymorphism  statistics in sympatric and allopatric populations of two distinct forms of c. intestinalis  between which there are strong post-zygotic barriers.


RESULTS
candidate gamete recognition proteins from two lineages of c. intestinalis  are evolving more rapidly than control proteins, consistent with patterns seen in insects and mammals. however, ω  is not significantly different between the sympatric and allopatric populations, and none of the polymorphism statistics show significant differences between sympatric and allopatric populations.


CONCLUSIONS
enhanced prezygotic isolation in sympatry has become a well-known feature of gamete recognition proteins in marine broadcast spawners. but in most cases the evolutionary process or processes responsible for this pattern have not been identified. although gamete recognition proteins in c. intestinalis do appear to evolve more rapidly, on average, than proteins with other functions, rates of evolution are not different in allopatric and sympatric populations of the two reproductively isolated forms. that sympatry is probably human-mediated, and therefore recent, may explain the absence of rcd.

