BACKGROUND
proteins are composed of one or more amino acid chains and exhibit several structure levels. idps  represent a class of proteins that do not fold into any particular conformation and exist as dynamic ensembles in their native state. due to their intrinsic adaptability, idps participate in many regulatory biological processes, including parasite immune escape. using the information from trypanosomatids proteomes, we developed a pipeline for the identification, characterization and analysis of idps. the pipeline employs six disorder prediction methodologies and integrates structural and functional annotation information, subcellular location prediction and physicochemical properties. at the core of the idp pipeline, there is a relational database that describes the protein disorder knowledge in a logically consistent manner.


RESULTS
the results obtained from the idp pipeline showed that leishmania and trypanosoma species have approximately 70% and 55% idps, respectively. our results indicate that idps in trypanosomatids contain disorder-promoting amino acids and order-promoting amino acids. the functional annotation analysis demonstrated enrichment of selected gene ontology terms. a relevant association was observed between the disordered residue numbers within predicted idps and their subcellular location, lack of transmembrane domains and lack of predicted function. we validated our computational findings with 2d electrophoresis designed for idp identification and found that 100% of the identified protein spots were predicted in silico.


CONCLUSIONS
because there is no pipeline or database addressing idps in trypanosomatids, the pipeline described here represents the first attempt to establish possible correlations between protein function and structural disorder in these eukaryotes. interestingly, all significant associations detected in the contingency analysis were observed when the protein disorder content reached approximately 40%. the exploratory data analysis allowed us to develop hypotheses regarding the idps’ association with key biological features of these parasites, including transcription and transcriptional regulation, rna processing and splicing, and cytoskeleton.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
intrinsically disordered proteins trypanosomatidsidp predictionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

