BACKGROUND
h. sapiens-m. tuberculosis h37rv protein-protein interaction  data are very important information to illuminate the infection mechanism of m. tuberculosis h37rv. but current h. sapiens-m. tuberculosis h37rv ppi data are very scarce. this seriously limits the study of the interaction between this important pathogen and its host h. sapiens. computational prediction of h. sapiens-m. tuberculosis h37rv ppis is an important strategy to fill in the gap. domain-domain interaction  based prediction is one of the frequently used computational approaches in predicting both intra-species and inter-species ppis. however, the performance of ddi-based host-pathogen ppi prediction has been rather limited.


RESULTS
we develop a stringent ddi-based prediction approach with emphasis on  differences between the specific domain sequences on annotated regions of proteins under the same domain id and  calculation of the interaction strength of predicted ppis based on the interacting residues in their interaction interfaces.

we compare our stringent ddi-based approach to a conventional ddi-based approach for predicting ppis based on gold standard intra-species ppis and coherent informative gene ontology terms assessment. the assessment results show that our stringent ddi-based approach achieves much better performance in predicting ppis than the conventional approach. using our stringent ddi-based approach, we have predicted a small set of reliable h. sapiens-m. tuberculosis h37rv ppis which could be very useful for a variety of related studies.

we also analyze the h. sapiens-m. tuberculosis h37rv ppis predicted by our stringent ddi-based approach using cellular compartment distribution analysis, functional category enrichment analysis and pathway enrichment analysis. the analyses support the validity of our prediction result. also, based on an analysis of the h. sapiens-m. tuberculosis h37rv ppi network predicted by our stringent ddi-based approach, we have discovered some important properties of domains involved in host-pathogen ppis. we find that both host and pathogen proteins involved in host-pathogen ppis tend to have more domains than proteins involved in intra-species ppis, and these domains have more interaction partners than domains on proteins involved in intra-species ppi.


CONCLUSIONS
the stringent ddi-based prediction approach reported in this work provides a stringent strategy for predicting host-pathogen ppis. it also performs better than a conventional ddi-based approach in predicting ppis. we have predicted a small set of accurate h. sapiens-m. tuberculosis h37rv ppis which could be very useful for a variety of related studies.

protein-protein interaction h. sapiens-m. tuberculosish37rv ppisdomain-domain interaction 16- <dig> december  <dig> 24th international conference on genome informatics  singapore, singapore

