BACKGROUND
how are morphological evolution and developmental changes related? this rather old and intriguing question had a substantial boost after the 70s within the framework of heterochrony  and nowadays has the potential to make another major leap forward through the combination of approaches: molecular biology, developmental experimentation, comparative systematic studies, geometric morphometrics and quantitative genetics. here i take an integrated approach combining life-history comparative analyses, classical and geometric morphometrics applied to ontogenetic series to understand changes in size and shape which happen during the evolution of two new world monkeys  sister genera.


RESULTS
cebus and saimiri share the same basic allometric patterns in skull traits, a result robust to sexual and ontogenetic variation. if adults of both genera are compared in the same scale  most differences are small and not statistically significant. these results are consistent using both approaches, classical and geometric morphometrics. cebus is a genus characterized by a number of peramorphic traits  while saimiri is a genus with paedomorphic  traits. yet, the whole clade cebinae is characterized by a unique combination of very high pre-natal growth rates and relatively slow post-natal growth rates when compared to the rest of the nwm. morphologically cebinae can be considered paedomorphic in relation to the other nwm. geometric morphometrics allows the precise separation of absolute size, shape variation associated with size , and shape variation non-associated with size. interestingly, and despite the fact that they were extracted as independent factors , evolutionary allometry  and ontogenetic allometry  are correlated within these two genera. furthermore, morphological differences produced along these two axes are quite similar. cebus and saimiri are aligned along the same evolutionary allometry and have parallel ontogenetic allometry trajectories.


CONCLUSIONS
the evolution of these two platyrrhini monkeys is basically due to a size differentiation . many life-history changes are correlated or may be the causal agents in such evolution, such as delayed on-set of reproduction in cebus and larger neonates in saimiri.

