BACKGROUND
gene expression data are noisy due to technical and biological variability. consequently, analysis of gene expression data is complex. different statistical methods produce distinct sets of genes. in addition, selection of expression p-value  threshold is somewhat arbitrary. in this study, we aimed to develop novel literature based approaches to integrate functional information in analysis of gene expression data.

methods
functional relationships between genes were derived by latent semantic indexing  of medline abstracts and used to calculate the function cohesion of gene sets. in this study, literature cohesion was applied in two ways. first, literature-based functional significance  method was developed to calculate a p-value for the cohesion of differentially expressed genes  in order to objectively evaluate the overall biological significance of the gene expression experiments. second, literature aided statistical significance threshold  was developed to determine the appropriate expression p-value threshold for a given experiment.


RESULTS
we tested our methods on three different publicly available datasets. lbfs analysis demonstrated that only two experiments were significantly cohesive. for each experiment, we also compared the lbfs values of degs generated by four different statistical methods. we found that some statistical tests produced more functionally cohesive gene sets than others. however, no statistical test was consistently better for all experiments. this reemphasizes that a statistical test must be carefully selected for each expression study. moreover, lasst analysis demonstrated that the expression p-value thresholds for some experiments were considerably lower , suggesting that the arbitrary p-values and false discovery rate thresholds that are commonly used in expression studies may not be biologically sound.


CONCLUSIONS
we have developed robust and objective literature-based methods to evaluate the biological support for gene expression experiments and to determine the appropriate statistical significance threshold. these methods will assist investigators to more efficiently extract biologically meaningful insights from high throughput gene expression experiments.

22- <dig> april  <dig> the international conference on intelligent biology and medicine  nashville, tn, usa

