BACKGROUND
compression wood  forms on the underside of tilted stems of coniferous gymnosperms and opposite wood  on the upperside. the tracheid walls of these wood types differ structurally and chemically. although much is known about the most severe form of cw, severe cw , mild cws , also occur, but less is known about them. in this study, tracheid wall structures and compositions of two grades of mcws  and scw were investigated and compared with ow in slightly tilted radiata pine  stems.


RESULTS
the four wood types were identified by the distribution of lignin in their tracheid walls. only the tracheid walls of ow and mcw <dig> had a s <dig> layer and this was thin in mcw <dig>  the tracheid walls of only scw had a s <dig> layer with helical cavities in the inner region . using immunomicroscopy, -β-d-galactans and -β-d-glucans were detected in the tracheid walls of all cws, but in only trace amounts in ow. the -β-d-galactans were located in the outer region of the s <dig> layer, whereas the -β-d-glucans were in the inner s2i region. the areas and intensities of labelling increased with cw severity. the antibody for -β-d-galactans was also used to identify the locations and relative amounts of these galactans in whole stem cross sections based on the formation of an insoluble dye. areas containing the four wood types were clearly differentiated depending on colour intensity. the neutral monosaccharide compositions of the non-cellulosic polysaccharides of these wood types were determined on small, well defined discs, and showed the proportion of galactose was higher for cws and increased with severity.


CONCLUSIONS
the presence of an s <dig> wall layer is a marker for very mcw and the presence of helical cavities in the s <dig> wall layer for scw. the occurrence and proportions of -β-d-galactans and -β-d-glucans can be used as markers for cw and its severity. the proportions of galactose were consistent with the labelling results for -β-d-galactans.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
immunomicroscopymonoclonal antibodiesopposite wood mild compression wood neutral monosaccharide compositionsnon-cellulosic polysaccharidesplant cell wallsreaction woodsevere compression wood http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003524ministry of business, innovation and employmentproj-12401-pps_uocissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

