BACKGROUND
among the cold-adapted antarctic notothenioid fishes, the high-latitude bald notothen pagothenia borchgrevinki is particularly notable as the sole cryopelagic species, exploiting the coldest and iciest waters of the southern ocean. because p. borchgrevinki is a frequent model for investigating notothenioid cold-adaptation and specialization, it is imperative that “omic” tools be developed for this species. in the absence of a sequenced genome, a well annotated reference transcriptome of the bald notothen will serve as a model of gene expression in the coldest and harshest of all polar marine environments, useful for future comparative studies of cold adaptation and thermal responses in polar teleosts and ectotherms.


RESULTS
we sequenced and annotated a reference transcriptome for p. borchgrevinki, with added attention to capturing the transcriptional responses to acute and chronic heat exposures. we sequenced by roche  <dig> a normalized cdna library constructed from pooled mrna encompassing multiple tissues taken from environmental, warm acclimating, and acute heat stressed specimens. the resulting reads were assembled into  <dig>  contigs,  <dig>  of which could be annotated. we utilized this annotated portion of the reference transcriptome to map short illumina reads sequenced from the gill and liver of environmental specimens, and also compared the gene expression profiles of these two tissue transcriptomes with those from the temperate model fish danio rerio. from this, we identified a conserved group of  <dig> go terms, in which terms related to transcription and its regulation, ubiquitin-protein ligase activity, protein ubiquitination, and protein binding among others are more prevalent in the bald notothen, suggesting the pertinent genes play essential roles in cold temperature functioning.


CONCLUSIONS
we sequenced multiple tissue transcriptomes from native and heat-exposed experimental specimens of the high antarctic, cryopelagic notothenioid p. borchgrevinki to construct a reference transcriptome. in a proof of concept, we utilized the annotated reference transcriptome to profile the gene expression patterns of gill and liver, and identified a suite of over and under-represented go terms when compared to the tropical water zebrafish suggesting these functions may be important for surviving in freezing waters. the transcriptome resource from this study will aid future investigations of cold adaptation and thermal response of polar ectothermic species.

notothenioideiantarctic fishtranscriptomeheat tolerancecold adaptationcold specialization

