BACKGROUND
sand fly saliva plays an important role in blood feeding and leishmania transmission as it was shown to increase parasite virulence. on the other hand, immunity to salivary components impedes the establishment of infection. therefore, it is most desirable to gain a deeper insight into the composition of saliva in sand fly species which serve as vectors of various forms of leishmaniases. in the present work, we focused on phlebotomus  arabicus, which was recently shown to transmit leishmania tropica, the causative agent of cutaneous leishmaniasis in israel.


RESULTS
a cdna library from salivary glands of p. arabicus females was constructed and transcripts were sequenced and analyzed. the most abundant protein families identified were sp15-like proteins, parsp25-like proteins, d7-related proteins, yellow-related proteins, ppsp32-like proteins, antigen 5-related proteins, and  <dig> kda-like proteins. sequences coding for apyrases, hyaluronidase and other putative secreted enzymes were also represented, including endonuclease, phospholipase, pyrophosphatase, amylase and trehalase. mass spectrometry analysis confirmed the presence of  <dig> proteins predicted to be secreted in the salivary proteome. humoral response of mice bitten by p. arabicus to salivary antigens was assessed and many salivary proteins were determined to be antigenic.


CONCLUSIONS
this transcriptomic analysis of p. arabicus salivary glands is the first description of salivary proteins of a sand fly in the subgenus adlerius. proteomic analysis of p. arabicus salivary glands produced the most comprehensive account in a single sand fly species to date. detailed information and phylogenetic relationships of the salivary proteins are provided, expanding the knowledge base of molecules that are likely important factors of sand fly-host and sand fly-leishmania interactions. enzymatic and immunological investigations further demonstrate the value of functional transcriptomics in advancing biological and epidemiological research that can impact leishmaniasis.

