BACKGROUND
previously, we have shown that transgenic cells bearing the gdnf gene with deleted pre- and pro-regions  can release transgenic gdnf. the medium conditioned by transgenic cells with mgdnf induced axonal growth in rat embryonic spinal ganglion in vitro. here we demonstrate a neurotrophic effect of mgdnf on pc <dig> cells in vitro as well as its neuroprotective effect on dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta in vivo as indicated by improved motor coordination and sleep-wakefulness cycle in the mptp mouse model of parkinson’s disease.


RESULTS
hek <dig> cells were transfected with a vector encoding an isoform of the human gdnf gene with deleted pre- and pro-regions . this factor in the medium conditioned by the transfected cells was shown to induce axonal growth in pc <dig> cells. the early parkinson’s disease model was established by injection of the dopaminergic pro-neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl- <dig> , <dig> -tetrahydropyridine  into c57bl/ <dig> mice. transgenic hek293/mgdnf/gfp cells were transplanted into the striatum  of experimental mice. the sleep-wakefulness cycle was studied by continuous eeg and motor activity monitoring  <dig> and 2 weeks after mptp injection. after the experiment, the motor coordination of experimental animals was evaluated in the rotarod test, and dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta were counted in cross-sections of the midbrain. mptp administration lowered the number of tyrosine hydroxylase immunopositive cells in the substantia nigra pars compacta, decreased motor coordination, and increased the total wake time during the dark period. the transplantation of hek293/mgdnf cells into the caudate-putamen 3 days prior to mptp injection smoothed these effects, while the control transplantation of hek <dig> cells showed no notable impact.


CONCLUSIONS
transplantation of transgenic cells with the gdnf gene lacking the pre- and pro-sequences can protect dopaminergic neurons in the mouse midbrain from the subsequent administration of the pro-neurotoxin mptp, which is confirmed by polysomnographic, behavioral and histochemical data. hence it is released from transfected cells and preserves the differentiation activity and neuroprotective properties.

keywords
neurotrophic factorgdnfparkinson’s diseasesleep-wakefulness cyclesubstantia nigrarussian science foundation 14-15-00942pavlova g. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

