BACKGROUND
oriental river prawn, macrobrachium nipponense, is a commercially important species found in brackish and fresh waters throughout china. chronic hypoxia is a major physiological challenge for prawns in culture, and the hepatopancreas, muscle and gill tissues play important roles in adaptive processes. however, the effects of dissolved oxygen availability on gene expression and physiological functions of those tissues of prawns are unknown. adaptation to hypoxia is a complex process, to help us understand stress-sensing mechanism and ultimately permit selection for hypoxia- tolerant prawns, we performed transcriptomic analysis of juvenile m. nipponense hepatopancreas, gill and muscle tissues by rna-seq.


RESULTS
approximately  <dig> ,741;  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> raw sequence reads were generated from hepatopancreas, muscle and gill tissues, respectively. a total of  <dig>  unigenes were generated, of the assembled unigenes, we identified  <dig>  genes that were significantly up-regulated, while  <dig>  genes were significantly down-regulated in response to chronic hypoxia. genes from well known functional categories and signaling pathways associated with stress responses and adaptation to extreme environments were significantly enriched, including genes in the functional categories “response to stimulus”, “transferase activity” and “oxidoreductase activity”, and the signaling pathways “oxidative phosphorylation”, “glycolysis/gluconeogenesis” and “mapk signaling”. the expression patterns of  <dig> degs involved in hypoxic regulation of m. nipponense were validated by quantitative real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reactions . in addition, the hepatopancreas and gills exhibited histological differences between hypoxia and normoxia groups. these structural alterations could affect the vital physiological functions of prawns in response to chronic hypoxia, which could adversely affect growth and survival of m. nipponense.


CONCLUSIONS
gene expression changes in tissues from the oriental river prawn provide a preliminary basis to better understand the molecular responses of m. nipponense to chronic hypoxia. the differentially expressed genes  identified in m. nipponense under hypoxia stress may be important for future genetic improvement of cultivated prawns or other crustaceans through transgenic approaches aimed at increasing hypoxia tolerance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
macrobrachium nipponenserna-seqgene expressionhypoxiaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

