BACKGROUND
expression vector engineering technology is one of the most convenient and timely method for cell line development to meet the rising demand of novel production cell line with high productivity. destabilization of dihydrofolate reductase  selection marker by addition of au-rich elements and murine ornithine decarboxylase pest region was previously shown to improve the specific productivities of recombinant human interferon gamma in cho-dg <dig> cells. in this study, we evaluated novel combinations of engineered motifs for further selection marker attenuation to improve recombinant human alpha-1-antitrypsin  production. motifs tested include tandem pest elements to promote protein degradation, internal ribosome entry site  mutations to impede translation initiation, and codon-deoptimized dhfr selection marker to reduce translation efficiency.


RESULTS
after a 2-step methotrexate  amplification to  <dig> nm that took less than 3 months, the expression vector with ires point mutation and dhfr-pest gave a maximum titer of  <dig>  g/l with the top producer cell pool. further mtx amplification to  <dig> nm mtx gave a maximum titer of  <dig>  g/l. relative transcript copy numbers and dhfr protein expression in the cell pools were also analysed to demonstrate that the transcription of rha1at and dhfr genes were correlated due to the ires linkage, and that the strategies of further attenuating dhfr protein expression with the use of a mutated ires and tandem pest, but not codon deoptimization, were effective in reducing dhfr protein levels in suspension serum free culture.


CONCLUSIONS
novel combinations of engineered motifs for further selection marker attenuation were studied to result in the highest reported recombinant protein titer to our knowledge in shake flask batch culture of stable mammalian cell pools at  <dig>  g/l, highlighting applicability of expression vector optimization in generating high producing stable cells essential for recombinant protein therapeutics production. our results also suggest that codon usage of the selection marker should be considered for applications that may involve gene amplification and serum free suspension culture, since the overall codon usage and thus the general expression and regulation of host cell proteins may be affected in the surviving cells.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
expression vectorselection stringencydihydrofolate reductasealpha1-antitrypsininternal ribosome entry sitecodon deoptimizationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

