BACKGROUND
mixtures of chemicals present in aquatic environments may elicit toxicity due to additive or synergistic effects among the constituents or, vice versa, the adverse outcome may be reduced by antagonistic interactions. deviations from additivity should be explained either by the perturbations of toxicokinetic parameters and/or chemical toxicodynamics. we addressed this important question in marine mussels exposed subchronically to a binary mixture made of two wide-spread pollutants: the heavy metal nickel and the organic phosphorus pesticide chlorpyrifos. to this aim, we carried out in tissues of mytius galloprovincialis  a systems approach based on the evaluation and integration of different disciplines, i.e. high throughput gene expression profiling, functional genomics, stress biomakers and toxicokinetics.


RESULTS
cellular and tissue biomarkers, viz. digestive gland lysosomal membrane stability, lysosomal/cytosol volume ratio, neutral lipid content and gill acetylcholinesterase activity were, in general, altered by either the exposure to nickel and chlorpyrifos. however, their joint action rendered  an overall decrease of the stress syndrome level, as evaluated through an expert system integrating biomarkers and  statistically significant antagonistic deviations from the reference model systems to predict mixture toxicity. while toxicokinetic modeling did not explain mixture interactions, gene expression profiling and further gene ontology-based functional genomics analysis provided clues that the decrement of toxicity may arise from the development of specific toxicodynamics. multivariate statistics of microarray data  showed two separate patterns for the single chemicals: the one belonging to the heavy metal - <dig> differentially expressed genes  was characterized by the modulation of transcript levels involved in nucleic acid metabolism, cell proliferation and lipid metabolic processes. chlorpyrifos exposure  yielded a molecular signature which was biased towards carbohydrate catabolism  and developmental processes. the exposure to the mixture  elicited a composite complex profile which encompassed the core properties of the pesticide but also a relevant set of unique features. finally, the relative mrna abundance of twelve genes was followed by q-pcr to either confirm or complement microarray data. these results, in general, were compatible with those from arrays and indeed confirmed the association of the relative abundance of two gm- <dig> ganglioside activator genes in the development of the hyperlipidosis syndrome observed in digestive gland lysosomes of single chemical exposed mussels.


CONCLUSIONS
the transcriptomic assessment fitted with biological data to indicate the occurrence of different toxicodynamic events and, in general, a decrease of toxicity, driven by the mitigation or even abolition of lysosomal responses. furthermore, our results emphasized the importance of the application of mechanistic approaches and the power of systems assessment to study toxicological responses in ecologically relevant organisms.

