BACKGROUND
higher crustaceans  represent the most species-rich and morphologically diverse group of non-insect arthropods and many of its members are commercially important. although the crustacean dna sequence information is growing exponentially, little is known about the genome organization of malacostraca. here, we constructed a bacterial artificial chromosome  library and performed bac-end sequencing to provide genomic information for kuruma shrimp , one of the most widely cultured species among crustaceans, and found the presence of a redundant sequence in the bac library. we examined the bac clone that includes the redundant sequence to further analyze its length, copy number and location in the kuruma shrimp genome.


RESULTS
mj024a <dig> bac clone, which includes one redundant sequence, contained  <dig> putative genes and seemed to display a normal genomic dna structure. notably, of the putative genes,  <dig> genes encode homologous proteins to the inhibitor of apoptosis protein and  <dig> genes encode homologous proteins to white spot syndrome virus, a virulent pathogen known to affect crustaceans. colony hybridization and pcr analysis of  <dig> bac clones showed that almost half of the bac clones maintain dna segments whose sequences are homologous to the representative bac clone mj024a <dig>  the mj024a <dig> partial sequence was detected multiple times in the kuruma shrimp nuclear genome with a calculated copy number of at least  <dig>  microsatellites based bac genotyping clearly showed that mj024a <dig> homologous sequences were cloned from at least  <dig> different chromosomal loci. the absence of micro-syntenic relationships with the available genomic sequences of daphnia and drosophila suggests the uniqueness of these fragments in kuruma shrimp from current arthropod genome sequences.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that hyper-expansion of large dna segments took place in the kuruma shrimp genome. although we analyzed only a part of the duplicated dna segments, our result suggested that it is difficult to analyze the shrimp genome following normal analytical methodology. hence, it is necessary to avoid repetitive sequence  when studying the other unique structures in the shrimp genome.

