BACKGROUND
watercress  is an aquatic herb species that is a rich source of secondary metabolites such as glucosinolates. among these glucosinolates, watercress contains high amounts of gluconasturtiin  and its hydrolysis product, 2-phennethyl isothiocyanate, which plays a role in suppressing tumor growth. however, the use of n. officinale as a source of herbal medicines is currently limited due to insufficient genomic and physiological information.


RESULTS
to acquire precise information on glucosinolate biosynthesis in n. officinale, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the transcriptome and metabolome of different organs of n. officinale. transcriptome analysis of n. officinale seedlings yielded  <dig> , <dig> raw reads. these reads were assembled into  <dig>  transcripts,  <dig>  of which were annotated to transcripts in public databases. on the basis of the functional annotation of n. officinale, we identified  <dig> candidate genes encoding enzymes related to glucosinolate biosynthetic pathways and analyzed the expression of these genes in the leaves, stems, roots, flowers, and seeds of n. officinale. the expression of nomyb <dig> and nomyb <dig>  the main regulators of aliphatic glucosinolate biosynthesis, was highest in the stems, whereas the key regulators of indolic glucosinolate biosynthesis, such as nodof <dig> , nomyb <dig>  nomyb <dig>  and nomyb <dig>  were strongly expressed in the roots. most glucosinolate biosynthetic genes were highly expressed in the flowers. hplc analysis enabled us to detect eight glucosinolates in the different organs of n. officinale. among these glucosinolates, the level of gluconasturtiin was considerably higher than any other glucosinolate in individual organs, and the amount of total glucosinolates was highest in the flower.


CONCLUSIONS
this study has enhanced our understanding of functional genomics of n. officinale, including the glucosinolate biosynthetic pathways of this plant. ultimately, our data will be helpful for further research on watercress bio-engineering and better strategies for exploiting its anti-carcinogenic properties.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nasturtium officinalewatercresstranscriptomeglucosinolatesministry of agriculture, food, and rural affairs ipetjeon jin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

