BACKGROUND
foot-and-mouth disease virus  uses a highly conserved arg-gly-asp  triplet for attachment to host cells and this motif is believed to be essential for virus viability. previous sequence analyses of the 1d-encoding region of an fmdv field isolate  and its two derivatives indicated that two viruses, which contained an arg-asp-asp  or an arg-ser-asp  triplet instead of the rgd integrin recognition motif, were generated serendipitously upon short-term evolution of field isolate in different biological environments. to examine the influence of single amino acid substitutions in the receptor binding site of the rdd-containing fmd viral genome on virus viability and the ability of non-rgd fmdvs to cause disease in susceptible animals, we constructed an rdd-containing fmdv full-length cdna clone and derived mutant molecules with rgd or rsd receptor recognition motifs. following transfection of bsr cells with the full-length genome plasmids, the genetically engineered viruses were examined for their infectious potential in cell culture and susceptible animals.


RESULTS
amino acid sequence analysis of the 1d-coding region of different derivatives derived from the asia1/js/cha/ <dig> field isolate revealed that the rdd mutants became dominant or achieved population equilibrium with coexistence of the rgd and rsd subpopulations at an early phase of type asia <dig> fmdv quasispecies evolution. furthermore, the rdd and rsd sequences remained genetically stable for at least  <dig> passages. using reverse genetics, the rdd-, rsd-, and rgd-containing fmd viruses were rescued from full-length cdna clones, and single amino acid substitution in rdd-containing fmd viral genome did not affect virus viability. the genetically engineered viruses replicated stably in bhk- <dig> cells and had similar growth properties to the parental virus. the rdd parental virus and two non-rgd recombinant viruses were virulent to pigs and bovines that developed typical clinical disease and viremia.


CONCLUSIONS
fmdv quasispecies evolving in a different biological environment gained the capability of selecting different receptor recognition site. the rdd-containing fmd viral genome can accommodate substitutions in the receptor binding site without additional changes in the capsid. the viruses expressing non-rgd receptor binding sites can replicate stably in vitro and produce typical fmd clinical disease in susceptible animals.

