BACKGROUND
thyroid hormones  are vital in the maintenance of homeostasis and in the control of development. one postembryonic developmental process that is principally regulated by ths is amphibian metamorphosis. this process has been intensively studied at the genomic level yet very little information at the proteomic level exists. in addition, there is increasing evidence that changes in the phosphoproteome influence th action.


RESULTS
here we identify components of the proteome and phosphoproteome in the tail fin that changed within  <dig> h of exposure of premetamorphic rana catesbeiana tadpoles to  <dig> nm  <dig> ,3'-triiodothyronine . to this end, we developed a cell and protein fractionation method combined with two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and phosphoprotein-specific staining. altered proteins were identified using mass spectrometry . we identified and cloned a novel rana larval type i keratin, rlk i, which  may be a target for caspase-mediated proteolysis upon exposure to t <dig>  in addition, the rlk i transcript is reduced during t3-induced and natural metamorphosis which is consistent with a larval keratin. furthermore, gilt, a protein involved in the immune system, is changed in phosphorylation state which is linked to its activation. using a complementary ms technique for the analysis of differentially-expressed proteins, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation  revealed  <dig> additional proteins whose levels were altered upon t <dig> treatment. the success of identifying proteins whose levels changed upon t <dig> treatment with itraq was enhanced through de novo sequencing of ms data and homology database searching. these proteins are involved in apoptosis, extracellular matrix structure, immune system, metabolism, mechanical function, and oxygen transport.


CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated the ability to derive proteomics-based information from a model species for postembryonic development for which no genome information is currently available. the present study identifies proteins whose levels and/or phosphorylation states are altered within  <dig> h of the induction of tadpole tail regression prior to overt remodeling of the tail. in particular, we have identified a novel keratin that is a target for t3-mediated changes in the tail that can serve as an indicator of early response to this hormone.

