BACKGROUND
there is accumulating evidence that polymorphism in toll-like receptor  genes might be associated with disease resistance or susceptibility traits in livestock. polymorphic sites affecting tlr function should exhibit signatures of positive selection, identified as a high ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous nucleotide substitutions . phylogeny based models of codon substitution based on estimates of ω for each amino acid position can therefore offer a valuable tool to predict sites of functional relevance. we have used this approach to identify such polymorphic sites within the bovine tlr <dig> genes from ten bos indicus and bos taurus cattle breeds. by analysing tlr <dig> gene phylogeny in a set of mammalian species and a subset of ruminant species we have estimated the selective pressure on individual sites and domains and identified polymorphisms at sites of putative functional importance.


RESULTS
the ω were highest in the mammalian tlr <dig> domains thought to be responsible for ligand binding and lowest in regions responsible for heterodimerisation with other tlr-related molecules. several positively-selected sites were detected in or around ligand-binding domains. however a comparison of the ruminant subset of tlr <dig> sequences with the whole mammalian set of sequences revealed that there has been less selective pressure among ruminants than in mammals as a whole. this suggests that there have been functional changes during ruminant evolution. twenty newly-discovered non-synonymous polymorphic sites were identified in cattle. three of them were localised at positions shaped by positive selection in the ruminant dataset  and in domains involved in the recognition of ligands. his326gln is of particular interest as it consists of an exchange of differentially-charged amino acids at a position which has previously been shown to be crucial for ligand binding in human tlr <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
within bovine tlr <dig>  polymorphisms at amino acid positions  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> map to functionally important sites of tlr <dig> and should be considered as candidate snps for immune related traits in cattle. a final proof of their functional relevance requires further studies to determine their functional effect on the immune response after stimulation with relevant ligands and/or their association with immune related traits in animals.

