BACKGROUND
heterococcus is a microalgal genus of xanthophyceae  that is common and widespread in soils, especially from cold regions. species are characterized by extensively branched filaments produced when grown on agarized culture medium. despite the large number of species described exclusively using light microscopic morphology, the assessment of species diversity is hampered by extensive morphological plasticity.


RESULTS
two independent types of molecular data, the chloroplast-encoded psba/rbcl spacer complemented by rbcl gene and the internal transcribed spacer  <dig> of the nuclear rdna cistron , congruently recovered a robust phylogenetic structure. with its <dig> considerable sequence and secondary structure divergence existed among the eight species, but a combined sequence and secondary structure phylogenetic analysis confined to helix ii of its <dig> corroborated relationships as inferred from the rbcl gene phylogeny. intra-genomic divergence of its <dig> sequences was revealed in many strains. the ‘monophyletic species concept’, appropriate for microalgae without known sexual reproduction, revealed eight different species. species boundaries established using the molecular-based monophyletic species concept were more conservative than the traditional morphological species concept. within a species, almost identical chloroplast marker sequences  were repeatedly recovered from strains of different origins. at least two species had widespread geographical distributions; however, within a given species, genotypes recovered from antarctic strains were distinct from those in temperate habitats. furthermore, the sequence diversity may correspond to adaptation to different types of habitats or climates.


CONCLUSIONS
we established a method and a reference data base for the unambiguous identification of species of the common soil microalgal genus heterococcus which uses dna sequence variation in markers from plastid and nuclear genomes. the molecular data were more reliable and more conservative than morphological data.

soil algaeheterococcusxanthophyceaepsba/rbcl spacerits2systematicsmolecular phylogenyspecies concept

