BACKGROUND
t cells undergo autoimmunization following spinal cord injury  and play both protective and destructive roles during the recovery process. t cell-deficient athymic nude  rats exhibit improved functional recovery when compared to immunocompetent sprague–dawley  rats following spinal cord transection.

methods
in the present study, we evaluated locomotor recovery in sd and an rats following moderate spinal cord contusion. to explain variable locomotor outcome, we assessed whole-genome expression using rna sequencing, in the acute  and chronic  phases of recovery.


RESULTS
athymic nude rats demonstrated greater locomotor function than sd rats only at 1 week post-injury, coinciding with peak t cell infiltration in immunocompetent rats. genetic markers for t cells and helper t cells were acutely enriched in sd rats, while an rats expressed genes for th <dig> cells, cytotoxic t cells, nk cells, mast cells, il-1a, and il- <dig> at higher levels. acute enrichment of cell death-related genes suggested that sd rats undergo secondary tissue damage from t cells. additionally, sd rats exhibited increased acute expression of voltage-gated potassium  channel-related genes. however, an rats demonstrated greater chronic expression of cell death-associated genes and less expression of axon-related genes. immunostaining for macrophage markers revealed no t cell-dependent difference in the acute macrophage infiltrate.


CONCLUSIONS
we put forth a model in which t cells facilitate early tissue damage, demyelination, and kv channel dysregulation in sd rats following contusion sci. however, compensatory features of the immune response in an rats cause delayed tissue death and limit long-term recovery. t cell inhibition combined with other neuroprotective treatment may thus be a promising therapeutic avenue.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
spinal cord injuryinflammationlocomotor functionneuronal cell deathaxonal regenerationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

