BACKGROUND
flavonoid pathway is spatially and temporally controlled during plant development and the transcriptional regulation of the structural genes is mostly orchestrated by a ternary protein complex that involves three classes of transcription factors . in grapevine , several myb transcription factors have been identified but the interactions with their putative bhlh partners to regulate specific branches of the flavonoid pathway are still poorly understood.


RESULTS
in this work, we describe the effects of a single amino acid substitution  located in the r <dig> domain of vvmyb5b and predicted to affect the formation of a salt bridge within the protein. the activity of the mutated protein  was assessed in different in vivo systems: yeast, grape cell suspensions, and tobacco. in the first two systems, vvmyb5bl exhibited a modified trans-activation capability. moreover, using yeast two-hybrid assay, we demonstrated that modification of vvmyb5b transcriptional properties impaired its ability to correctly interact with vvmyc <dig>  a grape bhlh protein. these results were further substantiated by overexpression of vvmyb5br and vvmyb5bl genes in tobacco. flowers from 35s::vvmyb5bl transgenic plants showed a distinct phenotype in comparison with 35s::vvmyb5br and the control plants. finally, significant differences in transcript abundance of flavonoid metabolism genes were observed along with variations in pigments accumulation.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our findings indicate that vvmyb5bl is still able to bind dna but the structural consequences linked to the mutation affect the capacity of the protein to activate the transcription of some flavonoid genes by modifying the interaction with its co-partner. in addition, this study underlines the importance of an internal salt bridge for protein conformation and thus for the establishment of protein-protein interactions between myb and bhlh transcription factors. mechanisms underlying these interactions are discussed and a model is proposed to explain the transcriptional activity of vvmyb5l observed in the tobacco model.

