BACKGROUND
although the genetic heritage of aboriginal siberians is mostly of eastern asian ancestry, a substantial western eurasian component is observed in the majority of northern asian populations. traces of at least two migrations into southern siberia, one from eastern europe and the other from western asia/the caucasus have been detected previously in mitochondrial gene pools of modern siberians.


RESULTS
we report here  <dig> new complete mitochondrial dna  sequences that allow us to expand and re-analyze the available data sets of western eurasian lineages found in northern asian populations, define the phylogenetic status of siberian-specific subclades and search for links between mtdna haplotypes/subclades and events of human migrations. from a survey of  <dig> western eurasian mtdna genomes found in siberia we estimate that nearly 40% of them most likely have western asian and another 29% european ancestry. it is striking that  <dig> of northern asian mitogenomes, i.e. ~41%, fall into  <dig> branches and subclades which can be considered as siberian-specific being found so far only in siberian populations. from the coalescence analysis it is evident that the sequence divergence of siberian-specific subclades was relatively small, corresponding to only  <dig> - <dig>  kya  and 1– <dig> kya .


CONCLUSIONS
the phylogeographic analysis implies that the western eurasian founders, giving rise to siberian specific subclades, may trace their ancestry only to the early and mid-holocene, though some of genetic lineages may trace their ancestry back to the end of last glacial maximum . we have not found the modern northern asians to have western eurasian genetic components of sufficient antiquity to indicate traces of pre-lgm expansions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
complete mitochondrial genomeswestern eurasian mtdna lineagesphylogenywestern asian ancestryeuropean ancestrynorthern asiaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

