BACKGROUND

lycoris aurea is a medicine-valuable and ornamental herb widely distributed in china. former studied have showed that methyl jasmonate  treatment could increase the content of glanthamine-a worldwide medicine for symptomatic treatment of alzheimer’s disease in genus lycoris plants. to explore the possible role of mirnas in the regulation of jasmonic acid signaling pathway and uncover their potential correlations, we investigated the expression profiles of small rnas  and their targets in lycoris aurea, with mj treatment by using next-generation deep sequencing.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> mirnas were identified, comprising  <dig> known mirnas  and  <dig> novel mirnas. among them,  <dig> known and  <dig> novel mirnas were expressed differently under mj treatment. quantitative real-time pcr of eight selected mirnas validated the expression pattern of these loci in response to mj treatment. in addition, degradome sequencing analysis showed that  <dig> target genes were validated to be targeted by the  <dig> mirnas, respectively. gene function and pathway analyses showed that these targets such as auxin response factors , squamosa promoter-binding like  proteins, basic helix-loop-helix  proteins, and ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme e <dig> are involved in different plant processes, indicating mirnas mediated regulation might play important roles in l. aurea response to mj treatment. furthermore, several l. aurea mirnas associated with their target genes that might be involved in amaryllidaceae alkloids biosynthehsis were also analyzed.


CONCLUSIONS
a number of mirnas with diverse expression patterns, and complex relationships between expression of mirnas and targets were identified. this study represents the first transcriptome-based analysis of mirnas in lycoris and will contribute to understanding the potential roles of mirnas involved in regulation of mj response.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
amaryllidaceae alkaloidsdeep sequencingdegradomelycoris aureamethyl jasmonatemicrornahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3130179831572151xu sheng wang ren the industry-academy joint technological innovations foundation of jiangsu provinceby2014131wang ren jiangsu provincial key laboratory foundation for plant ex situ conservationqd201302jiang yumei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

