BACKGROUND
very little is known about manganese -toxicity-responsive genes in citrus plants. seedlings of ‘xuegan’  and ‘sour pummelo’  were irrigated for  <dig> weeks with nutrient solution containing  <dig> μm  or  <dig> μm  mnso <dig>  the objectives of this study were to understand the mechanisms of citrus mn-tolerance and to identify differentially expressed genes, which might be involved in mn-tolerance.


RESULTS
under mn-toxicity, the majority of mn in seedlings was retained in the roots; c. sinensis seedlings accumulated more mn in roots and less mn in shoots  than c. grandis ones and mn concentration was lower in mn-toxicity c. sinensis leaves compared to mn-toxicity c. grandis ones. mn-toxicity affected c. grandis seedling growth, leaf co <dig> assimilation, total soluble concentration, phosphorus  and magenisum  more than c. sinensis. using cdna-aflp, we isolated  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated genes in mn-toxicity c. grandis leaves. they were grouped into the following functional categories: biological regulation and signal transduction, carbohydrate and energy metabolism, nucleic acid metabolism, protein metabolism, lipid metabolism, cell wall metabolism, stress responses and cell transport. however, only  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated genes were identified in mn-toxicity c. sinensis ones. the responses of c. grandis leaves to mn-toxicity might include following several aspects:  accelerating leaf senescence;  activating the metabolic pathway related to atpase synthesis and reducing power production;  decreasing cell transport;  inhibiting protein and nucleic acid metabolisms;  impairing the formation of cell wall; and  triggering multiple signal transduction pathways. we also identified many new mn-toxicity-responsive genes involved in biological and signal transduction, carbohydrate and protein metabolisms, stress responses and cell transport.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrated that c. sinensis was more tolerant to mn-toxicity than c. grandis, and that mn-toxicity affected gene expression far less in c. sinensis leaves. this might be associated with more mn accumulation in roots and less mn accumulation in leaves of mn-toxicity c. sinensis seedlings than those of c. grandis seedlings. our findings increase our understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in the responses of plants to mn-toxicity.

cdna-aflpcitrus grandiscitrus sinensisleavesmanganese

