BACKGROUND
coleoptera is the most diverse order of insects , but its richness diminishes at increasing latitudes , particularly of phytophagous and detritivorous species. however, incomplete sampling of northern habitats and a lack of taxonomic study of some families limits our understanding of biodiversity patterns in the coleoptera. we conducted an intensive biodiversity survey from 2006– <dig> at churchill, manitoba, canada in order to quantify beetle species diversity in this model region, and to prepare a barcode library of beetles for sub-arctic biodiversity and ecological research. we employed dna barcoding to provide estimates of provisional species diversity, including for families currently lacking taxonomic expertise, and to examine the guild structure, habitat distribution, and biogeography of beetles in the churchill region.


RESULTS
we obtained dna barcodes from  <dig> specimens representing  <dig> species or provisional species  in  <dig> families of coleoptera. of the  <dig> taxa identified to the level of a linnaean species name,  <dig>  corresponded to a single motu, four  represented closely related sibling species pairs within a single motu, and ten  were divided into two or more motus suggestive of cryptic species. the most diverse families were the dytiscidae , staphylinidae , and carabidae , although the accumulation curve for staphylinidae suggests that considerable additional diversity remains to be sampled in this family. most of the species present are predatory, with phytophagous, mycophagous, and saprophagous guilds being represented by fewer species. most named species of carabidae and dytiscidae showed a significant bias toward open habitats . forest habitats, particularly dry boreal forest, although limited in extent in the region, were undersampled.


CONCLUSIONS
we present an updated species list for this region as well as a species-level dna barcode reference library. this resource will facilitate future work, such as biomonitoring and the study of the ecology and distribution of larvae.

barcode librarybarcoding biotasboreal-arctic transitioncoicytochrome c oxidase subunit idna barcodingfreshwaterterrestrialsubarctic forest

