BACKGROUND
the use of ultraviolet  signals for communication tasks is widespread in vertebrates. for instance, there is a uv component to mate choice in several species. nevertheless, it remains unclear how the signal value of the uv wave band compares to that of other regions of the animal's visible spectrum. we investigated the relative importance of uv signals compared with signals of longer wavelengths in the threespine stickleback , a species using uv wavelengths in female and male mate choice as well as in shoaling behavior. in a choice experiment, female sticklebacks were simultaneously presented with four male visual appearances manipulated by optical filters. each male lacked one wavelength range of the stickleback's visible spectrum corresponding to the spectral sensitivities of the four cone types. the resulting male appearances thus had no uv , no short-wave , no medium-wave  or no long-wave  body reflectance.


RESULTS
males without uv wavelengths and long wavelengths  were least preferred. in contrast, the removal of medium and most notably short wavelengths left male attractiveness to females rather unaffected. using color metrics, the effects of the four optical filters on stickleback perception of three male body regions were illustrated as quantal catches calculated for the four single cones.


CONCLUSIONS
the removal of uv light  considerably reduced visual attractiveness of courting males to female three-spined sticklebacks particularly in comparison to the removal of short-wave light . we thus report first experimental evidence that the uv wave band clearly outranks at least one other part of an animal's visible spectrum  in the context of communication. in addition, females were also less attracted to males presented without long wavelengths  which supports the traditionally considered strong influence of the red color component on stickleback mate choice. overall, the removal of medium wavelengths  and especially short  left male attractiveness for females rather unaffected. our work suggests that, in addition to long wavelengths , the uv wave band contains important information for visual mate choice in sticklebacks. hence, the previously suggested exclusive role of the characteristic red nuptial coloration in visual interactions between reproductively active stickleback conspecifics may be overestimated with uv wavelengths playing a more important role than previously suggested.

