BACKGROUND
the analysis of codon usage is a good way to understand the genetic and evolutionary characteristics of an organism. however, there are only a few reports related with the codon usage of the domesticated silkworm, bombyx mori . hence, the codon usage of b. mori was analyzed here to reveal the constraint factors and it could be helpful to improve the bioreactor based on b. mori.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  annotated mrna sequences from b. mori were analyzed, revealing there is only a weak codon bias. it also shows that the gene expression level is related to the gc content, and the amino acids with higher general average hydropathicity  and aromaticity . and the genes on the primary axis are strongly positively correlated with the gc content, and gc3s. meanwhile, the effective number of codons  is strongly correlated with codon adaptation index , gene length, and aromo values. however, the enc values are correlated with the second axis, which indicates that the codon usage in b. mori is affected by not only mutation pressure and natural selection, but also nucleotide composition and the gene expression level. it is also associated with aromo values, and gene length. additionally, b. mori has a greater relative discrepancy in codon preferences with drosophila melanogaster  or saccharomyces cerevisiae  than with arabidopsis thaliana , escherichia coli , or caenorhabditis elegans .


CONCLUSIONS
the codon usage bias in b. mori is relatively weak, and many influence factors are found here, such as nucleotide composition, mutation pressure, natural selection, and expression level. additionally, it is also associated with aromo values, and gene length. among them, natural selection might play a major role. moreover, the “optimal codons” of b. mori are all encoded by g and c, which provides useful information for enhancing the gene expression in b. mori through codon optimization.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bombyx moricodon usage biasnatural selectioncodon optimizationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

