BACKGROUND

salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium is one of the most common enteropathogenic bacteria found in pigs in europe. in our previous work, we demonstrated the protective effects in suckling piglets when their dams had been vaccinated with an s. typhimurium-based inactivated vaccine. this study is focused on a procedure leading to serological discrimination between vaccinated and infected pigs. as we supposed, distinct environment during natural infection and in bacterial cultures used for vaccine preparation led to a slightly different spectrum of expressed s. typhimurium proteins. the examination of porcine antibodies produced after the experimental infection with s. typhimurium or after vaccination with s. typhimurium-based inactivated vaccine by affinity chromatography and mass spectrometry revealed differences in antibody response applicable for serological differentiation of infected from vaccinated animals.


RESULTS
antibodies against salmonella sipb, sipd and sseb proteins were detected at much higher levels in post-infection sera in comparison with control and post-vaccination sera. on the other hand, proteins bamb, oppa and a fragment of flic interacted with antibodies from post-vaccination sera with a much higher intensity than from control and post-infection sera. in addition, we constructed elisa assays using post-infection antigen - sipb protein and post-vaccination antigen - flic-fragment and evaluated them on a panel of individual porcine sera.


CONCLUSIONS
the analysis of antibody response of infected and vaccinated pigs by proteomic tools enabled to identify s. typhimurium antigens useful for distinguishing infected from vaccinated animals. this approach can be utilized in other challenges where diva vaccine and a subsequent serological assay are required, especially when genetic modification of a vaccine strain is not desirable.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
porcinesalmonella typhimuriumdiva vaccinerecombinant proteinmass spectrometryhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007403národní agentura pro zemědělsk vzkumqj1210115matiasovic jan http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001823ministerstvo Školství, mládeže a tělovýchovylo1218faldyna martin http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006533ministerstvo zemědělstvíro0516faldyna martin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

