BACKGROUND
technical feasibility of rna quantification by real time rt-pcr has led to enormous utilization of this method. however, real time pcr results need to be normalized due to the high sensitivity of the method and also to eliminate technical variation. normalization against a reference gene that is constitutively transcribed and has minimum variation among samples is the ideal method. nevertheless, many studies have shown that there is no general reference gene with ideal characteristics and candidate reference genes should be tested before being used as a “normalizer” in each study.

methods
the current study investigated the effects of previous exposure of the host to experimental test antigens and culturing time on the expression of  <dig> candidate genes when blood mononuclear cells  were cultured and treated in-vitro by hen egg white lysozyme, candida albicans extract and a mitogen. mononuclear cells were isolated and cultured from  <dig> bovine blood samples representing  <dig> different immunological statuses. the expression of candidate housekeeping genes were measured by real-time rt-pcr at  <dig> and  <dig> hours post culture. the expression of candidate genes were first compared between the two time points in untreated samples. constitutively expressed genes were further tested in linear mixed effects models to examine the effect of previous host exposure and in-vitro treatments.


RESULTS
our findings showed that the expression of the most common reference genes, β-actin, and glyceraldehydes-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , are significantly decreased at 24 hours after culturing bmcs, even without any treatment. the effect of culturing time was also significantly influenced the expression of 18s ribosomal rna, β2-microglobulin, tyrosine 3-monooxygenase/tryptophan 5-monoxygenase activation protein, zeta polypeptide  in bmcs. only the expression of c-terminal binding protein  <dig>  and rad <dig> among all tested genes were consistent after treatment of cultured bmcs with c. albicans whole yeast extract and hen egg white lysozyme , respectively. in addition, expressions of ctbp <dig>  and rad <dig> were independent from previous exposure of the host to the antigen.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study demonstrated inconsistent expression of commonly used reference genes in untreated cultured bmcs over time. as this condition applies to negative controls in real time rt-pcr study designs, normalization against these genes can largely deceive the outcome, especially in kinetic studies. moreover, the potential effects of immunological memory on the expression of reference genes should be considered if bmcs are collected from different individuals under different environmental conditions and if these cells are treated in-vitro by an antigen.

keywords
reference genereal time rt-pcrblood mononuclear cellsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

