BACKGROUND
internal circadian  clocks enable organisms to maintain adaptive timing of their daily behavioral activities and physiological functions. eukaryotic clocks consist of core transcription-translation feedback loops that generate a cycle and post-translational modifiers that maintain that cycle at about 24 h. we use the pitcher-plant mosquito, wyeomyia smithii , to test whether evolutionary divergence of the circadian clock genes in this species, relative to other insects, has involved primarily genes in the core feedback loops or the post-translational modifiers. heretofore, there is no reference transcriptome or genome sequence for any mosquito in the tribe sabethini, which includes over  <dig> mainly circumtropical species.

methods
we sequenced, assembled and annotated the transcriptome of w. smithii containing nearly 95 % of conserved single-copy orthologs in animal genomes. we used the translated contigs and singletons to determine the average rates of circadian clock-gene divergence in w. smithii relative to three other mosquito genera, to drosophila, to the butterfly, danaus, and to the wasp, nasonia.


RESULTS
over  <dig>  million cdna sequence reads were obtained consisting of  <dig>  million nucleotides. their assembly produced  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons of which 62 % and 28 % are annotated as protein-coding genes, respectively, sharing homology with other animal proteomes.

discussion
the w. smithii transcriptome includes all nine circadian transcription-translation feedback-loop genes and all eight post-translational modifier genes we sought to identify . after aligning translated w. smithii contigs and singletons from this transcriptome with other insects, we determined that there was no significant difference in the average divergence of w. smithii from the six other taxa between the core feedback-loop genes and post-translational modifiers.


CONCLUSIONS
the characterized transcriptome is sufficiently complete and of sufficient quality to have uncovered all of the insect circadian clock genes we sought to identify . relative divergence does not differ between core feedback-loop genes and post-translational modifiers of those genes in a sabethine species  that has experienced a continual northward dispersal into temperate regions of progressively longer summer day lengths as compared with six other insect taxa. an associated microarray platform derived from this work will enable the investigation of functional genomics of circadian rhythmicity, photoperiodic time measurement, and diapause along a photic and seasonal geographic gradient.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptometranscription-translation feedbackpost-translational modifiersgene sequencinggene alignmentbiological clocksculicidaesabethinihttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationios-083998bradshaw william http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationios-1255628bradshaw william issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

