BACKGROUND
renal cortical echogenicity is routinely evaluated during ultrasonographic investigation of the kidneys. both in dog and cat previous ex-vivo studies have revealed a poor correlation between renal echogenicity and corresponding lesions. the aim of this study was to establish the in-vivo relationship between renal cortical echogenicity and renal histopathology.


RESULTS
thirty-eight dogs and fifteen cats euthanized for critical medical conditions were included in the study. ultrasonographic images of both kidneys were acquired ante mortem at standardized ultrasonographic settings. the echogenicity was quantified by means of mean gray value  of the renal cortex measured with imagej. a complete histopathological examination of both kidneys was performed. five kidneys were excluded because histopathology revealed neoplastic lesions. only samples affected by tubular atrophy showed statistically different values in dog, and histopathology explained 13% of the total variance. mgv was not correlated neither to the degeneration nor to the inflammation scores. however, significant differences were identified between mildly and severely degenerated samples. overall, the classification efficiency of mgv to detect renal lesions was poor with a sensitivity of 39% and a specificity of 86%.

in cats, samples affected by both tubular vacuolar degeneration and interstitial nephritis were statistically different and histopathology explained 44% of the total variance. a linear correlation was evident between degeneration and mgv, whereas no correlation with inflammation was found. statistically significant differences were evident only between normal and severely degenerated samples with a sensitivity of  <dig> % and a specificity of  <dig> % and mgv resulted scarce to discriminate renal lesions in this species.


CONCLUSIONS
renal cortical echogenicity shows low relevance in detecting chronic renal disease in dog whereas it results worth to identify severe renal damage in cat.

keywords
kidneyultrasoundimage analysispathologyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003500università degli studi di padovacpda124900/2012junior research grant 2015banzato tommaso zotti alessandro veneto region, italyfse 2105/201/27/1148/2013zotti alessandro issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

