BACKGROUND
proteins that selectively transport water across the membranes of cells are recognized as important in the normal functioning of the body systems of vertebrates. there are  <dig> known mammalian aquaporins , some of which have been shown to have unexpected cellular roles beyond transmembrane water transport. the availability of non-mammalian vertebrate animal models has the potential to provide insight into the emergence of diverse function in the aquaporins. the domesticated chicken  is the premier avian model for biological research; however, only a limited number of studies have compared chicken and mammalian aquaporins. the identification of aquaporins that share functional motifs or are expressed in the same tissues in human and chicken could allow the further functional analyses of homologous aquaporins in both species. we hypothesize that integrative analyses of protein sequences and body site expression of human, mouse, rat and chicken aquaporins has the potential to yield novel biological hypotheses about the unexpected cellular roles of aquaporins beyond transmembrane water transport.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> aquaporin transcript models derived from  <dig> aquaporin genes were obtained for human, mouse, rat and chicken. eleven body sites  were identified in which there is suggested expression of at least one mammalian and one chicken aquaporin. this study demonstrates that modern on-line analysis tools, a novel matrix integration technique, and the availability of the chicken genome for comparative genomics and expression analysis enables hypothesis generation in several important areas including:  alternative transcription and speciation effects on the conservation of functional motifs in vertebrate aquaporins;  the emergence of basolateral targeting in mammalian species;  the potential of the cysteine-rich aqp <dig> as a possible target in the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative disorders such as autism that involve purkinje cells; and  possible impairment of function of pancreas-expressed aqp <dig> during pancreatotropic necrosis in avian influenza virus infection.


CONCLUSIONS
the investigation of aquaporin function in chicken and mammalian species has the potential to accelerate the discovery of novel knowledge of aquaporins in both avian and mammalian species.

19– <dig> may  <dig> avian genomics conference and go annotation workshop starkville, ms, usa

