BACKGROUND
sensory hair cells are exquisitely sensitive to mechanical stimuli and as such, are prone to damage and apoptosis during dissections or in vitro manipulations. thiouracil -tagging is a noninvasive method to label cell type-specific transcripts in an intact organism, thereby meeting the challenge of how to analyze gene expression in hair cells without the need to sort cells. we adapted tu-tagging to zebrafish to identify novel transcripts expressed in the sensory hair cells of the developing acoustico-lateralis organs.

methods
we created a transgenic line of zebrafish expressing the t.gondii uracil phospho-ribosyltransferase  enzyme specifically in the hair cells of the inner ear and lateral line organ. rna was labeled by exposing 3 days post-fertilization  uprt transgenic larvae to  <dig>  mm 4-thiouracil  for 15 hours. following total rna isolation, poly mrna enrichment, and purification of tu-tagged rna, deep sequencing was performed on the input and tu-tagged rna samples. 


RESULTS
analysis of the rna sequencing data revealed the expression of  <dig> transcripts that were significantly enriched  in the uprt tu-tagged rna relative to the input sample. of the  <dig> tu-tagged transcripts with mammalian homologs, the expression of  <dig> had not been previously demonstrated in zebrafish hair cells. the hair cell-restricted expression for  <dig> of these transcripts was confirmed by whole mount mrna in situ hybridization in  <dig> dpf larvae.


CONCLUSIONS
the hair cell-restricted pattern of expression of these genes offers insight into the biology of this receptor cell type and may serve as useful markers to study the development and function of sensory hair cells. in addition, our study demonstrates the utility of tu-tagging to study nascent transcripts in specific cell types that are relatively rare in the context of the whole zebrafish larvae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tu-taggingzebrafishhair cellsensory hair cellstranscriptomicsgene expressiontranscriptional profilinguprtinner earlateral line neuromastissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

