BACKGROUND
though genomic-level data are becoming widely available, many of the metazoan species sequenced are laboratory systems whose natural history is not well documented. in contrast, the wide array of species with very well-characterized natural history have, until recently, lacked genomics tools. it is now possible to address significant evolutionary genomics questions by applying high-throughput sequencing to discover the majority of genes for ecologically tractable species, and by subsequently developing microarray platforms from which to investigate gene regulatory networks that function in natural systems. we used gs-flx titanium sequencing  of two normalized libraries of pooled rna samples to characterize a transcriptome of the dark-eyed junco , a north american sparrow that is a classically studied species in the fields of photoperiodism, speciation, and hormone-mediated behavior.


RESULTS
from a broad pool of rna sampled from tissues throughout the body of a male and a female junco, we sequenced a total of  <dig> million nucleotides from  <dig>  million reads that were assembled de novo into  <dig>  putative transcripts representing  <dig>  gene sets covering  <dig>  million nucleotides with 12-fold average depth of coverage. annotation of roughly half of the putative genes was accomplished using sequence similarity, and expression was confirmed for the majority with a preliminary microarray analysis. of  <dig> core bilaterian genes,  <dig>  were recovered within our characterized gene set. gene ontology, orthodb orthology groups, and kegg pathway annotation provide further functional information about the sequences, and  <dig>  potential snps were identified.


CONCLUSIONS
the extensive sequence information returned by this effort adds to the growing store of genomic data on diverse species. the extent of coverage and annotation achieved and confirmation of expression, show that transcriptome sequencing provides useful information for ecological model systems that have historically lacked genomic tools. the junco-specific microarray developed here is allowing investigations of gene expression responses to environmental and hormonal manipulations – extending the historic work on natural history and hormone-mediated phenotypes in this system.

transcriptomeavespyrosequencingmicroarrayjunco <dig> titanium cdna sequencingsingle nucleotide polymorphism.

