BACKGROUND
cyclospora cayetanensis is an apicomplexan that causes diarrhea in humans. the investigation of foodborne outbreaks of cyclosporiasis has been hampered by a lack of genetic data and poor understanding of pathogen biology. in this study we sequenced the genome of c. cayetanensis and inferred its metabolism and invasion components based on comparative genomic analysis.


RESULTS
the genome organization, metabolic capabilities and potential invasion mechanism of c. cayetanensis are very similar to those of eimeria tenella. propanoyl-coa degradation, gpi anchor biosynthesis, and n-glycosylation are some apparent metabolic differences between c. cayetanensis and e. tenella. unlike eimeria spp., there are no active ltr-retrotransposons identified in c. cayetanensis. the similar repertoire of host cell invasion-related proteins possessed by all coccidia suggests that c. cayetanensis has an invasion process similar to the one in t. gondii and e. tenella. however, the significant reduction in the number of identifiable rhoptry protein kinases, phosphatases and serine protease inhibitors indicates that monoxenous coccidia, especially c. cayetanensis, have limited capabilities or use a different system to regulate host cell nuclear activities. c. cayetanensis does not possess any cluster of genes encoding the ta4-type sag surface antigens seen in e. tenella, and may use a different family of surface antigens in initial host cell interactions.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings indicate that c. cayetanensis possesses coccidia-like metabolism and invasion components but unique surface antigens. amino acid metabolism and post-translation modifications of proteins are some major differences between c. cayetanensis and other apicomplexans. the whole genome sequence data of c. cayetanensis improve our understanding of the biology and evolution of this major foodborne pathogen and facilitate the development of intervention measures and advanced diagnostic tools.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cyclosporagenomicsgenomegeneticsevolutionapicomplexanhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3142502531229005feng yaoyu xiao lihua issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

