BACKGROUND
dinoflagellates are eukaryotes with unusual cell biology and appear to rely on translational rather than transcriptional control of gene expression. the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4e  plays an important role in regulating gene expression because eif4e binding to the mrna cap is a control point for translation. eif4e is part of an extended, eukaryote-specific family with different members having specific functions, based on studies of model organisms. dinoflagellate eif4e diversity could provide a mechanism for dinoflagellates to regulate gene expression in a post-transcriptional manner. accordingly, eif4e family members from eleven core dinoflagellate transcriptomes were surveyed to determine the diversity and phylogeny of the eif4e family in dinoflagellates and related lineages including apicomplexans, ciliates and heterokonts.


RESULTS
the survey uncovered eight to fifteen  different eif4e family members in each core dinoflagellate species. the eif4e family members from heterokonts and dinoflagellates segregated into three clades, suggesting at least three eif4e cognates were present in their common ancestor. however, these three clades are distinct from the three previously described eif4e classes, reflecting diverse approaches to a central eukaryotic function. heterokonts contain four clades, ciliates two and apicomplexans only a single recognizable eif4e clade. in the core dinoflagellates, the three clades were further divided into nine sub-clades based on the phylogenetic analysis and species representation. six of the sub-clades included at least one member from all eleven core dinoflagellate species, suggesting duplication in their shared ancestor. conservation within sub-clades varied, suggesting different selection pressures.


CONCLUSIONS
phylogenetic analysis of eif4e in core dinoflagellates revealed complex layering of duplication and conservation when compared to other eukaryotes. our results suggest that the diverse eif4e family in core dinoflagellates may provide a toolkit to enable selective translation as a strategy for controlling gene expression in these enigmatic eukaryotes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dinoflagellatestranslation initiationeif4ephylogenyalveolateheterokontissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

