BACKGROUND
a central question for understanding the evolutionary responses of plant species to rapidly changing environments is the assessment of their potential for short-term  genetic change. in our study, we consider the case of pinus pinaster aiton , a widespread mediterranean tree, and  test, under different experimental conditions , whether higher recruitment in the wild from the most successful mothers is due to better performance of their offspring; and  evaluate genetic change in quantitative traits across generations at two different life stages  that are known to be under strong selection pressure in forest trees.


RESULTS
genetic control was high for most traits  under the milder conditions of the growth chamber, but only for ontogenetic change , total height  and survival  under the more stressful semi-natural conditions. significant phenotypic selection gradients were found in mature trees for traits related to seed quality . moreover, female relative reproductive success was significantly correlated with offspring performance for specific leaf area  in the growth chamber experiment, and stem mass fraction  in the experiment under semi-natural conditions, two adaptive traits related to abiotic stress-response in pines. selection gradients based on genetic covariance of seedling traits and responses to selection at this stage involved traits related to biomass allocation  and growth  or delayed ontogenetic change, depending also on the testing environment.


CONCLUSIONS
despite the evidence of microevolutionary change in adaptive traits in maritime pine, directional or disruptive changes are difficult to predict due to variable selection at different life stages and environments. at mature-tree stages, higher female effective reproductive success can be explained by differences in their production of offspring  and, to a lesser extent, by seemingly better adapted seedlings. selection gradients and responses to selection for seedlings also differed across experimental conditions. the distinct processes involved at the two life stages  together with environment-specific responses advice caution when predicting likely evolutionary responses to environmental change in mediterranean forest trees.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
adaptive traitsresponse to selectionselection gradientsphenotypic directional selectionmediterranean forestissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

