BACKGROUND
as sex determines mammalian development, understanding the nature and developmental dynamics of the sexually dimorphic transcriptome is important. to explore this, we generated  <dig> genome-wide rna-seq profiles from mouse eight-cell embryos, late gestation and adult livers, together with  <dig> ground-state pluripotent embryonic  cell lines from which we generated both rna-seq and multiple chip-seq profiles. we complemented this with previously published data to yield  <dig> snap-shots of pre-implantation development, late-gestation placenta and somatic tissue and multiple adult tissues for integrative analysis.


RESULTS
we define a high-confidence sex-dimorphic signature of  <dig> genes in eight-cell embryos. sex-chromosome-linked components of this signature are largely conserved throughout pre-implantation development and in es cells, whilst the autosomal component is more dynamic. sex-biased gene expression is reflected by enrichment for activating and repressive histone modifications. the eight-cell signature is largely non-overlapping with that defined from fetal liver, neither was it correlated with adult liver or other tissues analysed. the number of sex-dimorphic genes increases throughout development. we identified many more dimorphic genes in adult compared to fetal liver. however, approximately two thirds of the dimorphic genes identified in fetal liver were also dimorphic in adult liver. sex-biased expression differences unique to adult liver were enriched for growth hormone-responsiveness. sexually dimorphic gene expression in pre-implantation development is driven by sex-chromosome based transcription, whilst later development is characterised by sex dimorphic autosomal transcription.


CONCLUSIONS
this systematic study identifies three distinct phases of sex dimorphism throughout mouse development, and has significant implications for understanding the developmental origins of sex-specific phenotypes and disease in mammals.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
sexual dimorphismpre-implantation embryochromatingene expressionepigeneticsdevelopmentmousemammaliansex-specificissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

