BACKGROUND
actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae is the etiological agent of porcine pleuropneumonia, a respiratory disease which causes great economic losses worldwide. many virulence factors are involved in the pathogenesis, namely capsular polysaccharides, rtx toxins, lps and many iron acquisition systems. in order to identify genes that are expressed in vivo during a natural infection, we undertook transcript profiling experiments with an a. pleuropneumoniae dna microarray, after recovery of bacterial mrnas from serotype 5b-infected porcine lungs. appchip <dig> contains  <dig> pcr amplicons based on the genomic sequence of app serotype 5b strain l <dig>  representing more than 95% of orfs greater than  <dig> bp in length.


RESULTS
transcriptional profiling of a. pleuropneumoniae recovered from the lung of a pig suffering from a natural infection or following growth of the bacterial isolate in bhi medium was performed. an rna extraction protocol combining beadbeating and hot-acid-phenol was developed in order to maximize bacterial mrna yields and quality following total rna extraction from lung lesions. nearly all a. pleuropneumoniae transcripts could be detected on our microarrays, and  <dig> genes were deemed differentially expressed in vivo during the acute phase of the infection. our results indicate that, for example, gene apxiva from an operon coding for rtx toxin apxiv is highly up-regulated in vivo, and that two genes from the operon coding for type iv fimbriae  were also up-regulated. these transcriptional profiling data, combined with previous comparative genomic hybridizations performed by our group, revealed that  <dig> out of the  <dig> up-regulated genes are conserved amongst all serotypes and that  <dig> of them code for products that are predicted outer membrane proteins  or lipoproteins . only  <dig> of  <dig> up-regulated genes had previously been identified in controled experimental infections.


CONCLUSIONS
these genes that we have identified as up-regulated in vivo, conserved across serotypes and coding for potential outer membrane proteins represent potential candidates for the development of a cross-protective vaccine against porcine pleuropneumonia.

