BACKGROUND
signals are essential for communication and play a fundamental role in the evolution and diversification of species. olfactory, visual and acoustic species-specific signals have been shown to function for species recognition in non-human primates, but the relative contributions of selection for species recognition driven by sexual selection, natural selection, or genetic drift for the diversification of these signals remain largely unexplored. this study investigates the importance of acoustic signals for species recognition in redfronted lemurs . we conducted playback experiments in both major populations of this species separated by several hundred kilometers: kirindy forest in the west and ranomafana national park in the east of madagascar. the playback stimuli were composed of species-specific loud calls of e. rufifrons, three closely related species  and one genetically more distant species  that occurs in sympatry with eastern redfronted lemurs. we tested the ability of redfronted lemurs to discriminate conspecific from heterospecific loud calls by measuring the time spent looking towards the speaker after presentation of each loud call. we also tested the difference between female and male responses because loud calls may play a role in mate choice and the avoidance of heterospecific mating.


RESULTS
redfronted lemurs in kirindy forest did not discriminate their own loud calls from those of e. albifrons, e. fulvus and e. rufus, but they discriminated loud calls of e. rubriventer from their own. the ranomafana population was tested only with three playback stimuli  and did not discriminate between their own loud calls and those of e. albifrons and e. rubriventer. the response of females and males to playbacks did not differ in both populations. however, subjects in ranomafana national park responded more strongly to playback stimuli from e. rubriventer than subjects in kirindy forest.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that in both populations individuals were not able to discriminate between loud calls of closely related species living in allopatry and that responses to more distantly related congeners are likely to be modulated by experience. subjects in ranomafana paid more attention to loud calls of syntopic e. rubriventer in comparison to the kirindy subjects, suggesting that experience is important in facilitating discrimination. because acoustic and genetic distances among eulemurs are correlated, diversification in their acoustic signals might be the result of genetic drift.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
eulemur rufifronsspecies recognitionacoustic signalsmate choicegenetic drifthttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004938deutsches primatenzentrumissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

