BACKGROUND
legumes establish with rhizobial bacteria a nitrogen-fixing symbiosis which is of the utmost importance for both plant nutrition and a sustainable agriculture. calcium is known to act as a key intracellular messenger in the perception of symbiotic signals by both the host plant and the microbial partner. regulation of intracellular free ca2+ concentration, which is a fundamental prerequisite for any ca2+-based signalling system, is accomplished by complex mechanisms including ca2+ binding proteins acting as ca2+ buffers. in this work we investigated the occurrence of ca2+ binding proteins in mesorhizobium loti, the specific symbiotic partner of the model legume lotus japonicus.


RESULTS
a soluble, low molecular weight protein was found to share several biochemical features with the eukaryotic ca2+-binding proteins calsequestrin and calreticulin, such as stains-all blue staining on sds-page, an acidic isoelectric point and a ca2+-dependent shift of electrophoretic mobility. the protein was purified to homogeneity by an ammonium sulfate precipitation procedure followed by anion-exchange chromatography on deae-cellulose and electroendosmotic preparative electrophoresis. the ca2+ binding ability of the m. loti protein was demonstrated by 45ca2+-overlay assays. esi-q-tof ms/ms analyses of the peptides generated after digestion with either trypsin or endoproteinase aspn identified the rhizobial protein as ferredoxin ii and confirmed the presence of ca2+ adducts.


CONCLUSIONS
the present data indicate that ferredoxin ii is a major ca2+ binding protein in m. loti that may participate in ca2+ homeostasis and suggest an evolutionarily ancient origin for protein-based ca2+ regulatory systems.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
calcium binding proteinscalcium homeostasisferredoxin iimesorhizobium lotinitrogen fixationrhizobium-legume symbiosisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

