BACKGROUND
common bean  is an important warm-season food legume. drought is the most important environmental stress factor affecting large areas of common bean via plant death or reduced global production. the nam, ataf1/ <dig> and cuc <dig>  domain protein family are classic transcription factors  involved in a variety of abiotic stresses, particularly drought stress. however, the nac tfs in common bean have not been characterized.


RESULTS
in the present study,  <dig> putative nac tf proteins were identified from the common bean genome database and located on  <dig> common bean chromosomes. the proteins were phylogenetically clustered into  <dig> distinct subfamilies. the gene structure and motif composition of common bean nacs were similar in each subfamily. these results suggest that nacs in the same subfamily may possess conserved functions. the expression patterns of common bean nac genes were also characterized. the majority of nacs exhibited specific temporal and spatial expression patterns. we identified  <dig> drought-related nac tfs based on transcriptome data for drought-tolerant and drought-sensitive genotypes. quantitative real-time pcr  was performed to confirm the expression patterns of the  <dig> drought-related nac genes.


CONCLUSIONS
based on the common bean genome sequence, we analyzed the structural characteristics, genome distribution, and expression profiles of nac gene family members and analyzed drought-responsive nac genes. our results provide useful information for the functional characterization of common bean nac genes and rich resources and opportunities for understanding common bean drought stress tolerance mechanisms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
common beantranscription factorsdroughtthe china agriculture research system the national key technology research and development program of the ministry of science and technology of china the agricultural science and technology innovation program  of caas. the national natural science foundation of china 31471559wang shumin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

