BACKGROUND
diatoms are able to acclimate to frequent and large light fluctuations in the surface ocean waters. however, the molecular mechanisms underlying these acclimation responses of diaotms remain elusive.


RESULTS
in this study, we investigated the mechanism of high light protection in marine diatom thalassiosira pseudonana using comparative proteomics in combination with biochemical analyses. cells treated under high light  for 10 h were subjected to proteomic analysis. we observed that  <dig> proteins were differentially expressed under high light treatment. light-harvesting complex proteins, ros scavenging systems, photorespiration, lipid metabolism and some specific proteins might be involved in light protection and acclimation of diatoms. non-photochemical quenching  and relative electron transport rate could respond rapidly to varying light intensities. high-light treatment also resulted in increased diadinoxanthin + diatoxanthin content, decreased fv/fm, increased triacylglycerol and altered fatty acid composition. under hl stress, levels of c14: <dig> and c16: <dig> increased while c20:5ω <dig> decreased.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that t. pseudonana has efficient photoprotective mechanisms to deal with hl stress. de novo synthesis of ddx/dtx and lipid accumulation contribute to utilization of the excess energy. our data will provide new clues for in-depth study of photoprotective mechanisms in diatoms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
thalassiosira pseudonanaitraq labelingquantitative proteomicslight protectionthe guangdong natural science foundation2015a <dig>  s2013010013406dong hong-po the strategic priority research program of the chinese academy of sciencesxda11020304lu song-hui the national natural science foundation of china through grant <dig>   <dig>  41206126dong hong-po general financial grant from the china postdoctoral science foundation2014m562251dong hong-po issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

