BACKGROUND
brassica napus is the third leading source of vegetable oil in the world after soybean and oil palm. the accumulation of gene sequences, especially expressed sequence tags  from plant cdna libraries, has provided a rich resource for genes discovery including potential antimicrobial peptides . in this study, we used ests including those generated from b. napus cdna libraries of seeds, pathogen-challenged leaves and deposited in the public databases, as a model, to perform in silico identification and consequently in vitro confirmation of putative amp activities through a highly efficient system of recombinant amp prokaryotic expression.


RESULTS
in total,  <dig>  were generated from cdna libraries of pathogen-challenged leaves and  <dig>  ests from seeds of b. napus, and the  <dig>  ests of b. napus were downloaded from the est database of plantgdb. they formed  <dig>  unigenes. first, all the known amps from the amp databank  were individually queried against all the unigenes using the blastx program. a total of  <dig> unigenes that matched the  <dig> known amp sequences in apd <dig> database were extracted and annotated using blast2go program. among these unigenes,  <dig> unigenes from b. napus pathogen-challenged leaves had the highest ratio  in this unigene dataset, which is  <dig> times that of the unigene datasets of b. napus seeds  and  <dig>  times that of the public est dataset. about 87 % of each est library was lipid-transfer protein  , defensin, histone, endochitinase, and gibberellin-regulated proteins. the most abundant unigenes in the leaf library were endochitinase and defensin, and ltp and histone in the pub est library. after masking of the repeat sequence,  <dig> peptides that were orthologous matched to different amp families were found. the phylogeny and conserved structural motifs of seven amps families were also analysed. to investigate the antimicrobial activities of the predicted peptides,  <dig> potential amp genes belonging to different amp families were selected to test their antimicrobial activities after bioinformatics identification. the amp genes were all optimized according to escherichia coli codon usage and synthetized through one-step polymerase chain reaction method. the results showed that  <dig> recombinant amps displayed expected antimicrobial activities against e. coli and micrococcus luteus and sclerotinia sclerotiorum strains.


CONCLUSIONS
the study not only significantly expanded the number of known/predicted peptides, but also contributed to long-term plant genetic improvement for increased resistance to diverse pathogens of b.napus. these results proved that the high-throughput method developed that combined an in silico procedure with a recombinant amp prokaryotic expression system is considerably efficient for identification of new amps from genome or est sequence databases.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
expressed sequence tagantimicrobial peptidesantimicrobial activitiesbrassica napusin silico identificationhighly efficient amp prokaryotic expression systemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

