BACKGROUND
enprocal is a high-protein micro-nutrient rich formulated supplementary food designed to meet the nutritional needs of the frail elderly and be delivered to them in every day foods. we studied the potential of enprocal to improve gut and immune health using simple and robust bioassays for gut cell proliferation, intestinal integrity/permeability, immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative activities. effects of enprocal were compared with whey protein concentrate  <dig> , heat treated skim milk powder, and other commercially available milk derived products.


RESULTS
enprocal  and digested  selectively enhanced cell proliferation in normal human intestinal epithelial cells  and showed no cytotoxicity. in a dose dependent manner enprocal induced cell death in caco- <dig> cells . digested enprocal  maintained the intestinal integrity in transepithelial resistance  assay, increased the permeability of horseradish peroxidase  and did not induce oxidative stress to the gut epithelial cells. enprocal d upregulated the surface expression of co-stimulatory , mhc i and mhc ii molecules on pma differentiated thp- <dig> macrophages in coculture transwell model, and inhibited the monocyte/lymphocyte -epithelial cell adhesion. in cytokine secretion analyses, enprocal d down-regulated the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines  and up-regulated ifn-γ, il- <dig> and il- <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that enprocal creates neither oxidative injury nor cytotoxicity, stimulates normal gut cell proliferation, up regulates immune cell activation markers and may aid in the production of antibodies. furthermore, through downregulation of proinflammatory cytokines, enprocal appears to be beneficial in reducing the effects of chronic gut inflammatory diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease . stimulation of normal human fetal intestinal cell proliferation without cell cytotoxicity indicates it may also be given as infant food particularly for premature babies.

