BACKGROUND
proteins of the mammalian pyhin  family are involved in defence against infection through recognition of foreign dna. the family member absent in melanoma  <dig>  binds cytosolic dna via its hin domain and initiates inflammasome formation via its pyrin domain. aim <dig> lies within a cluster of related genes, many of which are uncharacterised in mouse. to better understand the evolution, orthology and function of these genes, we have documented the range of pyhin genes present in representative mammalian species, and undertaken phylogenetic and expression analyses.


RESULTS
no pyhin genes are evident in non-mammals or monotremes, with a single member found in each of three marsupial genomes. placental mammals show variable family expansions, from one gene in cow to four in human and  <dig> in mouse. a single hin domain appears to have evolved in the common ancestor of marsupials and placental mammals, and duplicated to give rise to three distinct forms  in the placental mammal ancestor. phylogenetic analyses showed that aim <dig> hin-c and pyrin domains clearly diverge from the rest of the family, and it is the only pyhin protein with orthology across many species. interestingly, although aim <dig> is important in defence against some bacteria and viruses in mice, aim <dig> is a pseudogene in cow, sheep, llama, dolphin, dog and elephant. the other  <dig> mouse genes have arisen by duplication and rearrangement within the lineage, which has allowed some diversification in expression patterns.


CONCLUSIONS
the role of aim <dig> in forming the inflammasome is relatively well understood, but molecular interactions of other pyhin proteins involved in defence against foreign dna remain to be defined. the non-aim <dig> pyhin protein sequences are very distinct from aim <dig>  suggesting they vary in effector mechanism in response to foreign dna, and may bind different dna structures. the pyhin family has highly varied gene composition between mammalian species due to lineage-specific duplication and loss, which probably indicates different adaptations for fighting infectious disease. non-genomic dna can indicate infection, or a mutagenic threat. we hypothesise that defence of the genome against endogenous retroelements has been an additional evolutionary driver for pyhin proteins.

pyhinhin-200cytosolic dnaalrifi16aim2

