BACKGROUND
interaction between terminal flower  <dig>  and leafy
 seem to determine the inflorescence architecture in
arabidopsis. in a parallel way, overexpression of vvtfl1a, a
grapevine tfl <dig> homolog, causes delayed flowering and production of a
ramose cluster in the reiterated reproductive meristem  somatic variant of
cultivar carignan. to analyze the possible contribution of this gene to cluster
phenotypic variation in a diversity panel of cultivated grapevine  its nucleotide diversity was
characterized and association analyses among detected sequence polymorphisms and
phenology and cluster traits was carried out.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  kb of the vvtfl1a gene, including its promoter, was
sequenced in a core collection of  <dig> individuals designed to maximize phenotypic
variation at agronomical relevant traits. nucleotide variation for
vvtfl1a within this collection was higher in the promoter and intron
sequences than in the exon regions; where few polymorphisms were located in
agreement with a high conservation of coding sequence. characterization of the
vvtfl1a haplotype network identified three major haplogroups,
consistent with the geographic origins and the use of the cultivars that could
correspond to three major ancestral alleles or evolutionary branches, based on the
existence of mutations in linkage disequilibrium. genetic association studies with
cluster traits revealed the presence of major indel polymorphisms, explaining 16%,
13% and 25% of flowering time, cluster width and berry weight, respectively, and
also structuring the three haplogroups.


CONCLUSIONS
at least three major vvtfl1a haplogroups are present in cultivated
grapevines, which are defined by the presence of three main polymorphism ld blocks
and associated to characteristic phenotypic values for flowering time, cluster
width and berry size. phenotypic differences between haplogroups are consistent
with differences observed between eastern and western grapevine cultivars and
could result from the use of different genetic pools in the domestication process
as well as different selection pressures on the development of table and wine
cultivars, respectively. altogether, these results are coherent with previous
classifications of grapevine phenotypic diversity mainly based on cluster and
berry morphotypes as well as with recent results on the structure of genetic
diversity in cultivated grapevine.

plant reproductive developmentinflorescence structureflowering timeberry sizegrape domesticationgrapevine

