BACKGROUND
the bacterium pseudomonas fluorescens switches to an alginate-producing phenotype when the pleiotropic anti-sigma factor muca is inactivated. the inactivation is accompanied by an increased biomass yield on carbon sources when grown under nitrogen-limited chemostat conditions. a previous metabolome study showed significant changes in the intracellular metabolite concentrations, especially of the nucleotides, in muca deletion mutants compared to the wild-type. in this study, the p. fluorescens sbw <dig> wild-type and an alginate non-producing muca- Δalgc double-knockout mutant are investigated through model-based 13c-metabolic flux analysis  to explore the physiological consequences of muca inactivation at the metabolic flux level. intracellular metabolite extracts from three carbon labelling experiments using fructose as the sole carbon source are analysed for 13c-label incorporation in primary metabolites by gas and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.


RESULTS
from mass isotopomer distribution datasets, absolute intracellular metabolic reaction rates for the wild type and the mutant are determined, revealing extensive reorganisation of carbon flux through central metabolic pathways in response to muca inactivation. the carbon flux through the entner-doudoroff pathway was reduced in the muca- Δalgc mutant, while flux through the pentose phosphate pathway was increased. our findings also indicated flexibility of the anaplerotic reactions through down-regulation of the pyruvate shunt in the muca- Δalgc mutant and up-regulation of the glyoxylate shunt.


CONCLUSIONS
absolute metabolic fluxes and metabolite levels give detailed, integrated insight into the physiology of this industrially, medically and agriculturally important bacterial species and suggest that the most efficient way of using a muca- mutant as a cell factory for alginate production would be to use non-growing conditions and nitrogen deprivation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pseudomonas fluorescensanti-sigma factor mucafluxome and fluxomicscarbon labelling experimentsgc-ms/mslc-ms/ms13c-metabolic flux analysisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

