BACKGROUND
rna editing is a posttranscriptional modification process that alters the rna sequence so that it deviates from the genomic dna sequence. rna editing mainly occurs in chloroplasts and mitochondrial genomes, and the number of editing sites varies in terrestrial plants. why and how rna editing systems evolved remains a mystery. ginkgo biloba is one of the oldest seed plants and has an important evolutionary position. determining the patterns and distribution of rna editing in the ancient plant provides insights into the evolutionary trend of rna editing, and helping us to further understand their biological significance.


RESULTS
in this paper, we investigated  <dig> protein-coding genes in the chloroplast genome of g. biloba and identified  <dig> editing sites, which is the highest number of rna editing events reported in a gymnosperm. all of the editing sites were c-to-u conversions, which mainly occurred in the second codon position, biased towards to the u_a context, and caused an increase in hydrophobic amino acids. rna editing could change the secondary structures of  <dig> proteins, and create or eliminate a transmembrane region in five proteins as determined in silico. finally, the evolutionary tendencies of rna editing in different gene groups were estimated using the nonsynonymous-synonymous substitution rate selection mode.


CONCLUSIONS
the g. biloba chloroplast genome possesses the highest number of rna editing events reported so far in a seed plant. most of the rna editing sites can restore amino acid conservation, increase hydrophobicity, and even influence protein structures. similar purifying selections constitute the dominant evolutionary force at the editing sites of essential genes, such as the psa, some psb and pet groups, and a positive selection occurred in the editing sites of nonessential genes, such as most ndh and a few psb genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna editingposttranscriptional modificationginkgo bilobachloroplast genomeprotein structurefundamental research fund for the central universitiesgk201403007gk201604007he peng yu jianing http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31470295yu jianing issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

