BACKGROUND
to combat infection to biotic stress plants elicit the biosynthesis of numerous natural products, many of which are valuable pharmaceutical compounds. jasmonate is a central regulator of defense response to pathogens and accumulation of specialized metabolites. catharanthus roseus produces a large number of terpenoid indole alkaloids  and is an excellent model for understanding the regulation of this class of valuable compounds. recent work illustrates a possible role for the catharanthus wrky transcription factors  in regulating tia biosynthesis. in arabidopsis and other plants, the wrky tf family is also shown to play important role in controlling tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses, as well as secondary metabolism.


RESULTS
here, we describe the wrky tf families in response to jasmonate in arabidopsis and catharanthus. publically available arabidopsis microarrays revealed at least 30%  of wrky tfs respond to jasmonate treatments. microarray analysis identified at least six jasmonate responsive arabidopsis wrky genes  that have not been previously reported. the catharanthus wrky tf family is comprised of at least  <dig> members. phylogenetic clustering reveals  <dig> group i,  <dig> group ii, and  <dig> group iii wrky tfs. furthermore, we found that at least 25%  were jasmonate responsive, and 75%  of the jasmonate responsive crwrkys are orthologs of atwrkys known to be regulated by jasmonate.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, the crwrky family, ascertained from transcriptome sequences, contains approximately 75% of the number of wrkys found in other sequenced asterid species . microarray and transcriptomic data indicate that expression of wrky tfs in arabidopsis and catharanthus are under tight spatio-temporal and developmental control, and potentially have a significant role in jasmonate signaling. profiling of crwrky expression in response to jasmonate treatment revealed potential associations with secondary metabolism. this study provides a foundation for further characterization of wrky tfs in jasmonate responses and regulation of natural product biosynthesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
catharanthus roseusterpenoid indole alkaloidtranscriptomesecondary metabolismwrky transcription factorsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

