BACKGROUND
aeromonads make up a group of gram-negative bacteria that includes human and fish pathogens. the aeromonas salmonicida species has the peculiarity of including five known subspecies. however, few studies of the genomes of a. salmonicida subspecies have been reported to date.


RESULTS
we sequenced the genomes of additional a. salmonicida isolates, including three from india, using next-generation sequencing in order to gain a better understanding of the genomic and phylogenetic links between a. salmonicida subspecies. their relative phylogenetic positions were confirmed by a core genome phylogeny based on  <dig> gene sequences. the indian isolates, which formed a sub-group together with a. salmonicida subsp. pectinolytica, were able to grow at either at 18 °c and 37 °c, unlike the a. salmonicida psychrophilic isolates that did not grow at 37 °c. amino acid frequencies, gc content, trna composition, loss and gain of genes during evolution, pseudogenes as well as genes under positive selection and the mobilome were studied to explain this intraspecies dichotomy.


CONCLUSIONS
insertion sequences appeared to be an important driving force that locked the psychrophilic strains into their particular lifestyle in order to conserve their genomic integrity. this observation, based on comparative genomics, is in agreement with previous results showing that insertion sequence mobility induced by heat in a. salmonicida subspecies causes genomic plasticity, resulting in a deleterious effect on the virulence of the bacterium. we provide a proof-of-concept that selfish dnas play a major role in the evolution of bacterial species by modeling genomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aeromonas salmonicidaphylogenymesophilicpsychrophilicinsertion sequencehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003151fonds de recherche du québec - nature et technologiesressources aquatiques quebechttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canadade recherche et de développement en aquaculture continentaleressources aquatiques quebecministère de l'agriculture, des pêcheries et de l'alimentation du québecissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

