BACKGROUND
superficial infections of the skin and mucous membranes caused by dermatophyte fungi are amongst the most common and challenging infections to treat. previously we demonstrated the phototoxic effects of photodynamic therapy  towards trichophyton rubrum, using a green laser to photoactivate rose bengal . the aim of this study was to evaluate whether we could;  achieve a similar effect using an inexpensive light-emitting diode  to photoactivate rb and  to evaluate whether our pdt regime could be combined with standard antifungal drug therapy and increase its effectiveness.

methods
we designed and built our own inexpensive green  led source and tested its efficacy as part our rb-pdt regime in vitro against t. rubrum. we also examined the potential benefits of incorporating pdt as part of combination therapy and whether the order in which this was done had an impact. first we subjected spore suspensions to sub-inhibitory concentrations of a number of antifungal agents  for 72 hours followed by rb-pdt. secondly we subjected spore suspensions to sub-inhibitory pdt followed by drug treatment and evaluated if there were any changes to the minimum inhibitory concentrations  of the drugs tested.


RESULTS
the optimal conditions for photoinactivation of t. rubrum using rb-pdt alone were 140 μm of rb and 24 j/cm <dig> of led . these parameters also caused a 100% reduction in the viability of the pathogenic yeast candida albicans and the model fungus saccharomyces cerevisiae. by combining our rb-pdt regime as an adjunct to antifungal drugs we were able to dramatically reduce the exposure times. treatment of spore suspensions using a sub-inhibitory dose of clotrimazole  followed by rb-pdt, this order was critical, significantly reduced the exposure times required to achieve 100% inhibition of t. rubrum to 15 minutes as compared to rb-pdt alone.


CONCLUSIONS
the combination of antifungal drug and rb-pdt represents an attractive alternative to the current antifungal therapies used to treat superficial fungal diseases. our approach has the potential to reduce treatment times and drug dosages which can also reduce drug toxicity and improve patient compliance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
photodynamic therapytrichophyton rubrumantifungal therapyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

