BACKGROUND
cardiac hypertrophy is a major risk factor for morbidity and mortality in a number of cardiovascular diseases. consequently, the signaling pathways that inhibit cardiac hypertrophy are currently receiving much interest. among them, nitric oxide , signaling via cgmp and cgmp-dependent protein kinase i, has been recognized as a negative regulator of cardiac hypertrophy. the present study investigated the in-vivo effect of sildenafil as a phosphodiestrase-5a  inhibitor on the hypertrophic response of rat heart to isoproterenol and the relation of this effect to the level of myocardial cgmp and integrity of the constitutive nitric oxide synthase  activity.


RESULTS
the results showed that daily intraperitoneal administration of sildenafil per se for  <dig> days was without noticeable adverse effects on survival or myocardium. conversely, daily subcutaneous administration of isoproterenol for  <dig> days caused significant myocardial hypertrophy, cell injury and decline in survival. when sildenafil was injected daily, one hour before isoproterenol, survival was significantly improved and the myocardium didn't show significant hypertrophy or cell injury. interestingly, sildenafil was accompanied by significant rise in myocardial cgmp level, a parameter which was found in the present study to possess a significant negative correlation with cardiac hypertrophy and leak of cardiac troponin t into serum. at the same time, cgmp was found to possess a positive correlation with myocardial creatine kinase activity that reflects the efficiency of the energy utilization processes in the myocardium. however, in rats given nω-nitro-l-arginine  as a competitive inhibitor of cnos, sildenafil failed to show any favorable effect on survival or the myocardial injury parameters used to assess isoproterenol-induced injury.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study suggests that increased cardiac cgmp level by sildenafil have a cardioprotective effect probably through acting as a post-receptor negative regulator of cardiac sympathetic responsiveness. integrity of nos function was an essential prerequisite for sildenafil's mediated cardioprotection encountered in the present study.

