BACKGROUND
micrornas  are small, non-coding rnas that are important regulators of gene expression, and play major roles in plant development and their response to the environment. root extracts from panax notoginseng contain triterpene saponins as their principal bioactive constituent, and demonstrate medicinal properties. to investigate the novel and conserved mirnas in p. notoginseng, three small rna libraries constructed from 1-, 2-, and 3-year-old roots in which root saponin levels vary underwent high-throughput sequencing.

methods
p. notoginseng roots, purified from 1-, 2-, and 3-year-old roots, were extracted for rna, respectively. three small libraries were constructed and subjected to next generation sequencing.


RESULTS
sequencing of the three libraries generated  <dig> , <dig> clean reads from p. notoginseng roots. a total of  <dig> conserved mirnas  and  <dig> novel mirnas were identified. mir <dig> and mir <dig> were the largest mirna families, while mir156i and mir156g showed the highest abundance of mirna species. potential mirna target genes were predicted and annotated using cluster of orthologous groups, gene ontology, and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. comparing these mirnas between root samples revealed  <dig> that were differentially expressed between 2- and 1-year-old roots ,  <dig> differentially expressed between 3- and 1-year-old roots , and  <dig> differentially expressed between 3- and 2-year-old roots . two significantly differentially expressed mirnas and four mirnas predicted to target genes involved in the terpenoid backbone biosynthesis pathway were selected and validated by quantitative reverse transcription pcr. furthermore, the expression patterns of these six mirnas were analyzed in p. notoginseng roots, stems, and leaves at different developmental stages.


CONCLUSIONS
this study identified a large number of p. notoginseng mirnas and their target genes, functional annotations, and gene expression patterns. it provides the first known mirna profiles of the p. notoginseng root development cycle.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
panax notoginsengmicrornahigh-throughput sequencingqrt-pcrsaponinsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

