BACKGROUND
biofilm-forming candida species cause infections that can be difficult to eradicate, possibly because of antifungal drug tolerance mechanisms specific to biofilms. in spite of decades of research, the connection between biofilm and drug tolerance is not fully understood.


RESULTS
we used saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model for drug susceptibility of yeast biofilms. confocal laser scanning microscopy showed that s. cerevisiae and c. glabrata form similarly structured biofilms and that the viable cell numbers were significantly reduced by treatment of mature biofilms with amphotericin b but not voriconazole, flucytosine, or caspofungin. we showed that metabolic activity in yeast biofilm cells decreased with time, as visualized by fun- <dig> staining, and mature, 48-hour biofilms contained cells with slow metabolism and limited growth. time-kill studies showed that in exponentially growing planktonic cells, voriconazole had limited antifungal activity, flucytosine was fungistatic, caspofungin and amphotericin b were fungicidal. in growth-arrested cells, only amphotericin b had antifungal activity. confocal microscopy and colony count viability assays revealed that the response of growing biofilms to antifungal drugs was similar to the response of exponentially growing planktonic cells. the response in mature biofilm was similar to that of non-growing planktonic cells. these results confirmed the importance of growth phase on drug efficacy.


CONCLUSIONS
we showed that in vitro susceptibility to antifungal drugs was independent of biofilm or planktonic growth mode. instead, drug tolerance was a consequence of growth arrest achievable by both planktonic and biofilm populations. our results suggest that efficient strategies for treatment of yeast biofilm might be developed by targeting of non-dividing cells.

keywords
yeastbiofilmdrug toleranceantifungal agentamphotericin bvoriconazoleflucytosinecaspofunginfungicideresistanceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

