BACKGROUND
the basic helix-loop-helix  proteins are a superfamily of transcription factors that can bind to specific dna target sites. they have been well characterized in model plants such as arabidopsis and rice and have been shown to be important regulatory components in many different biological processes. however, no systemic analysis of the bhlh transcription factor family has yet been reported in tomatoes. tomato yellow leaf curl virus  threatens tomato production worldwide by causing leaf yellowing, leaf curling, plant stunting and flower abscission.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> bhlh transcription factors were identified from the entire tomato genome. phylogenetic analysis of bhlh domain sequences from arabidopsis and tomato facilitated classification of these genes into  <dig> subfamilies. the evolutionary and possible functional relationships revealed during this analysis are supported by other criteria, including the chromosomal distribution of these genes, the conservation of motifs and exon/intron structural patterns, and the predicted dna binding activities within subfamilies. distribution mapping results showed bhlh genes were localized on the  <dig> tomato chromosomes. among the  <dig> bhlh genes from the tomato genome,  <dig> bhlh genes were detected in the tylcv-susceptible and resistant tomato breeding line before  and after tylcv  infection. as anticipated, gene ontology  analysis indicated that most bhlh genes are related to the regulation of macromolecule metabolic processes and gene expression. only four bhlh genes were differentially expressed between  <dig> and  <dig> dpi. virus-induced gene silencing  of one bhlh genes slybhlh <dig> in resistant lines can lead to the cell death.


CONCLUSIONS
in the present study,  <dig> bhlh transcription factor genes were identified. one of which bhlh genes, slybhlh <dig>  was found to be involved in the tylcv infection through qrt-pcr expression analysis and vigs validation. the isolation and identification of these bhlh transcription factors facilitated clarification of the molecular genetic basis for the genetic improvement of tomatoes and the development of functional gene resources for transgenic research. in addition, these findings may aid in uncovering an unexplored mechanism during the tylcv infection in tomatoes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genome-wide analysisbhlh transcription factortylcvvigstomatoissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

