BACKGROUND
ginseng including north american ginseng  is one of the most widely used medicinal plants. its success is thought to be due to a diverse collection of ginsenosides that serve as its major bioactive compounds. however, few genomic resources exist and the details concerning its various biosynthetic pathways remain poorly understood. as the root is the primary tissue harvested commercially for ginsenosides, next generation sequencing was applied to the characterization and assembly of the root transcriptome throughout seasonal development. transcripts showing homology to ginsenoside biosynthesis enzymes were profiled in greater detail.


RESULTS
rna extracts from root samples from seven development stages of north american ginseng were subjected to  <dig> sequencing, filtered for quality and used in the de novo assembly of a collective root reference transcriptome consisting of  <dig>  transcripts. annotation efforts using a number of public databases resulted in detailed annotation information for  <dig>   transcripts. in addition,  <dig>  genes were assigned to metabolic pathways using the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. among our results, we found all of the known enzymes involved in the ginsenoside backbone biosynthesis and used co-expression analysis to identify a number of candidate sequences involved in the latter stages ginsenoside biosynthesis pathway. transcript profiles suggest ginsenoside biosynthesis occurs at distinct stages of development.


CONCLUSIONS
the assembly generated provides a comprehensive annotated reference for future transcriptomic study of north american ginseng. a collection of putative ginsenoside biosynthesis genes were identified and candidate genes predicted from the lesser understood downstream stages of biosynthesis. transcript expression profiles across seasonal development suggest a primary dammarane-type ginsenoside biosynthesis occurs just prior to plant senescence, with secondary ginsenoside production occurring throughout development. data from the study provide a valuable resource for conducting future ginsenoside biosynthesis research in this important medicinal plant.

north american ginsengtranscriptomenext generation sequencingginsenoside

