BACKGROUND
genomic islands  are genomic regions that reveal evidence of horizontal dna transfer. they can code for many functions and may augment a bacterium’s adaptation to its host or environment. gis have been identified in strain j <dig> of burkholderia cenocepacia, whereas in strain au  <dig> there has been no published works on such regions according to our text mining and keyword search in medline.


RESULTS
in this study, we identified  <dig> gis in au  <dig> by combining two computational tools. feature analyses suggested that the predictions are highly reliable and hence illustrated the advantage of joint predictions by two independent methods. based on putative virulence factors, four gis were further identified as pathogenicity islands . through experiments of gene deletion mutants in live bacteria, two putative pais were confirmed, and the virulence factors involved were identified as lipa and copr. the importance of the genes lipa  and copr  for bacterial invasion and replication indicates that they are required for the invasive properties of b. cenocepacia and may function as virulence determinants for bacterial pathogenesis and host infection.


CONCLUSIONS
this approach of in silico prediction of gis and subsequent identification of potential virulence factors in the putative island regions with final validation using wet experiments could be used as an effective strategy to rapidly discover novel virulence factors in other bacterial species and strains.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genomic islandpathogenicity islandb. cenocepacia au1054virulence factorhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31470068guo feng-biao sichuan youth science and technology foundation of china2014jq0051guo feng-biao fundamental research funds for the central universities of chinazygx2013j101zygx2015j144guo feng-biao strategic research theme fund, the university of hong kongthe croucher senior medical research fellowshipissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

