BACKGROUND
the increase in glycerol obtained as a byproduct of biodiesel has encouraged the production of new industrial products, such as  <dig> -propanediol , using biotechnological transformation via bacteria like clostridium butyricum. however, despite the increasing role of clostridium butyricum as a bio-production platform, its metabolism remains poorly modeled.


RESULTS
we reconstructed icbu <dig>  the first genome-scale metabolic  model of a pdo producer clostridium strain, which included  <dig> genes,  <dig> enzymes,  <dig> reactions, and  <dig> metabolites. we found an enzyme expression prediction of nearly 84% after comparison of proteomic data with flux distribution estimation using flux balance analysis . the remaining 16% corresponded to enzymes directionally coupled to growth, according to flux coupling findings . the fermentation data validation also revealed different phenotype states that depended on culture media conditions; for example, clostridium maximizes its biomass yield per enzyme usage under glycerol limitation. by contrast, under glycerol excess conditions, clostridium grows sub-optimally, maximizing biomass yield while minimizing both enzyme usage and atp production. we further evaluated perturbations in the gsm model through enzyme deletions and variations in biomass composition. the gsm predictions showed no significant increase in pdo production, suggesting a robustness to perturbations in the gsm model. we used the experimental results to predict that co-fermentation was a better alternative than icbu <dig> perturbations for improving pdo yields.


CONCLUSIONS
the agreement between the predicted and experimental values allows the use of the gsm model constructed for the pdo-producing clostridium strain to propose new scenarios for pdo production, such as dynamic simulations, thereby reducing the time and costs associated with experimentation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
clostridium butyricum <dig> -propanediolgenome-scale metabolic modelobjective functioncolcienciasissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

