BACKGROUND
the ability to visualise the expression of individual genes in situ is an invaluable tool for developmental and evolutionary biologists; it allows for the characterisation of gene function, gene regulation and through inter-specific comparisons, the evolutionary history of unique morphological features. for well-established model organisms  this technique has been optimised to an extent where it can be automated for high-throughput analyses. while the overall concept of in situ hybridisation is simple , there are many parameters in the technique that can significantly affect the final result. furthermore, due to variation in the biochemical and biophysical properties of different cells and tissues, an in situ technique optimised for one species is often not suitable for another, and often varies depending on the ontogenetic stage within a species.


RESULTS
using a variety of pre-hybridisation treatments we have identified a set of treatments that greatly increases both whole mount in situ hybridisation  signal intensity and consistency while maintaining morphological integrity for early larval stages of lymnaea stagnalis. these treatments function well for a set of genes with presumably significantly different levels of expression  and for colorimetric as well as fluorescent wmish. we also identify a tissue-specific background stain in the larval shell field of l. stagnalis and a treatment, which eliminates this signal.


CONCLUSIONS
this method that we present here will be of value to investigators employing l. stagnalis as a model for a variety of research themes , and brings a valuable tool to a species in a much understudied clade of animals collectively known as the spiralia.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
whole mount in situ hybridisationmollusclymnaea stagnalisgene expressionevolutiondevelopmentissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

