BACKGROUND
recently, one of the greatest challenges in genome-wide association studies is to detect gene-gene and/or gene-environment interactions for common complex human diseases. ritchie et al.  proposed multifactor dimensionality reduction  method for interaction analysis. mdr is a combinatorial approach to reduce multi-locus genotypes into high-risk and low-risk groups. although mdr has been widely used for case-control studies with binary phenotypes, several extensions have been proposed. one of these methods, a generalized mdr  proposed by lou et al. , allows adjusting for covariates and applying to both dichotomous and continuous phenotypes. gmdr uses the residual score of a generalized linear model of phenotypes to assign either high-risk or low-risk group, while mdr uses the ratio of cases to controls.

methods
in this study, we propose multivariate gmdr, an extension of gmdr for multivariate phenotypes. jointly analysing correlated multivariate phenotypes may have more power to detect susceptible genes and gene-gene interactions. we construct generalized estimating equations  with multivariate phenotypes to extend generalized linear models. using the score vectors from gee we discriminate high-risk from low-risk groups. we applied the multivariate gmdr method to the blood pressure data of the  <dig>  subjects from the korean association resource study: systolic blood pressure  and diastolic blood pressure . we compare the results of multivariate gmdr for sbp and dbp to the results from separate univariate gmdr for sbp and dbp, respectively. we also applied the multivariate gmdr method to the repeatedly measured hypertension status from  <dig>  subjects and compared its result with those of univariate gmdr at each time point.


RESULTS
results from the univariate gmdr and multivariate gmdr in two-locus model with both blood pressures and hypertension phenotypes indicate best combinations of snps whose interaction has significant association with risk for high blood pressures or hypertension. although the test balanced accuracy  of multivariate analysis was not always greater than that of univariate analysis, the multivariate bas were more stable with smaller standard deviations.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have developed multivariate gmdr method using gee approach. it is useful to use multivariate gmdr with correlated multiple phenotypes of interests.

16- <dig> december  <dig> 24th international conference on genome informatics  singapore, singapore

