BACKGROUND
haemophilus parasuis is the causative agent of glässer's disease in pigs. currently, little is known about the molecular mechanisms that contribute to disease susceptibility. this study used a porcine oligonucleotide microarray to identify genes that were differentially expressed  in the lungs of colostrum-deprived animals previously characterized as being either 'fully resistant'  or 'susceptible' to infection by h. parasuis in a bacterial challenge experiment.


RESULTS
gene expression profiles of 'fr' and 'susceptible' animals were obtained by the identification of genes that were differentially expressed between each of these groups and mock-inoculated 'control' animals. at  <dig> hours post-inoculation, a total of  <dig> and  <dig> de genes were identified in 'fr' and 'susceptible' animals respectively. at  <dig> hours, the numbers of genes were  <dig> and  <dig> respectively. 'fr' animals at  <dig> hours exhibited an increased expression of genes encoding extracellular matrix and tgf-β signalling components, possibly indicative of tissue repair following the successful early resolution of infection. the gene expression profile of 'fr' animals at  <dig> hours supported the hypothesis that higher levels of antibacterial activity were responsible for the 'fr' phenotype, possibly due to an increase in natural immunoglobulin a and decrease in signalling by the immunoregulatory transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma . the expression profile of 'susceptible' animals at both time-points was characterized by an imbalance in signalling between pro and anti-inflammatory cytokines and an increased expression of genes involved in biological processes associated with inflammation. these include the pro-inflammatory cytokine genes resistin  and interleukin 1-beta . at  <dig> hours, a reduction in the expression of genes involved in antigen presentation by both mhc class i and ii molecules was observed, which could have contributed to the inability of 'susceptible' animals to clear infection.


CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first to have identified discrete sets of de genes in pigs of differing susceptibility to h. parasuis infection. consequently, several candidate genes and pathways for disease resistance or susceptibility phenotypes have been identified. in addition, the findings have shed light on the molecular pathology associated with glässer's disease.

