BACKGROUND
virus-mediated delivery of therapeutic transgenes to the inflamed colon holds a great potential to serve as an effective therapeutic strategy for inflammatory bowel disease, since local, long-term expression of the encoded therapeutic proteins in the colorectal system is potentially achievable. viral vectors, derived from adeno-associated virus , should be very useful for such therapeutic strategies, particularly because they can establish long-term expression of transgenes. however, few studies have been carried out to investigate the ability of aav-based vectors to transduce the inflamed colon.


RESULTS
aav, derived from adeno-associated virus serotype  <dig> , showed a limited ability to transduce colonic cell lines in vitro when used in free form. no appreciable enhancement of the transduction efficiency was seen when aav <dig> particles were attached stably to the surfaces of microbeads and delivered to target cells in the form of aav2-microbead conjugates. however, the transduction efficiency of these colonic cell lines was enhanced substantially when a lectin, concanavalin a , was co-attached to the microbead surfaces, to which aav <dig> particles had been conjugated. this considerable infectivity enhancement of aav2-microbead conjugates by the co-attachment of con a may be derived from the fact that con a binds to α-d-mannosyl moieties that are commonly and abundantly present in cell-surface carbohydrate chains, allowing the conjugates to associate stably with target cells. intracolonical administration of free aav <dig> or aav2-microbead conjugates without con a into a mouse colitis model by enema showed very poor transduction of the colonic tissue. in contrast, the delivery of aav <dig> in the form of aav2-microbead conjugates bearing con a resulted in efficient transduction of the inflamed colon.


CONCLUSIONS
aav2-microbead conjugates bearing con a can serve as efficient gene transfer agents both for poorly permissive colonic cell lines in vitro and for the inflamed colon in a mouse colitis model. this efficient transduction system for the inflamed colon should be useful for the development of gene therapy strategies for inflammatory bowel disease.

