BACKGROUND
chemical defences are widespread in animals, but how their production is adjusted to ecological conditions is poorly known. optimal defence theory predicts that inducible defences are favoured over constitutive defences when toxin production is costly and the need for it varies across environments. however, if some environmental changes occur predictably , whereas others are unpredictable , changes in defences may have constitutive as well as plastic elements. to investigate this phenomenon, we raised common toad  tadpoles with ad libitum or limited food and in the presence or absence of chemical cues on predation risk, and measured their toxin content on  <dig> occasions during early ontogeny.


RESULTS
the number of compounds showed limited variation with age in tadpoles and was unaffected by food limitation and predator cues. the total amount of bufadienolides first increased and later decreased during development, and it was elevated in young and mid-aged tadpoles with limited food availability compared to their ad libitum fed conspecifics, whereas it did not change in response to cues on predation risk. we provide the first evidence for the active synthesis of defensive toxin compounds this early during ontogeny in amphibians. furthermore, the observation of increased quantities of bufadienolides in food-restricted tadpoles is the first experimental demonstration of resource-dependent induction of elevated de novo toxin production, suggesting a role for bufadienolides in allelopathy.


CONCLUSIONS
our study shows that the evolution of phenotypic plasticity in chemical defences may depend on the ecological context . our results furthermore suggest that the age-dependent changes in the diversity of toxin compounds in developing toads may be fixed , timed for the developmental stages in which they are most reliant on their chemical arsenal, whereas inducible plasticity may prevail in the amount of synthesized compounds.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bufadienolidefood limitationphenotypic plasticitypredation risktadpoletoxin productionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007148bundesministerium für wissenschaft und forschungspa 04/171http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100010665h <dig> marie skłodowska-curie actionspcig13-ga-2013-631722hettyey attila http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003825magyar tudományos akadémialp2012-24/2012jános bolyai scholarshipbókony veronika hettyey attila national research, development and innovation office115402bókony veronika issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

