BACKGROUND
the dmbx <dig> gene is important for the development of the midbrain and hindbrain, and mouse gene targeting experiments reveal that this gene is required for mediating postnatal and adult feeding behaviours. a single dmbx <dig> gene exists in terrestrial vertebrate genomes, while teleost genomes have at least two paralogs. we compared the loss of function of the zebrafish dmbx1a and dmbx1b genes in order to gain insight into the molecular mechanism by which dmbx <dig> regulates neurogenesis, and to begin to understand why these duplicate genes have been retained in the zebrafish genome.


RESULTS
using gene knockdown experiments we examined the function of the dmbx <dig> gene paralogs in zebrafish, dmbx1a and dmbx1b in regulating neurogenesis in the developing retina and midbrain. dose-dependent loss of dmbx1a and dmbx1b function causes a significant reduction in growth of the midbrain and retina that is evident between 48- <dig> hpf. we show that this phenotype is not due to patterning defects or persistent cell death, but rather a deficit in progenitor cell cycle exit and differentiation. analyses of the morphant retina or anterior hindbrain indicate that paralogous function is partially diverged since loss of dmbx1a is more severe than loss of dmbx1b. molecular evolutionary analyses of the dmbx <dig> genes suggest that while this gene family is conservative in its evolution, there was a dramatic change in selective constraint after the duplication event that gave rise to the dmbx1a and dmbx1b gene families in teleost fish, suggestive of positive selection. interestingly, in contrast to zebrafish dmbx1a, over expression of the mouse dmbx <dig> gene does not functionally compensate for the zebrafish dmbx1a knockdown phenotype, while over expression of the dmbx1b gene only partially compensates for the dmbx1a knockdown phenotype.


CONCLUSIONS
our data suggest that both zebrafish dmbx1a and dmbx1b genes are retained in the fish genome due to their requirement during midbrain and retinal neurogenesis, although their function is partially diverged. at the cellular level, dmbx <dig> regulates cell cycle exit and differentiation of progenitor cells. the unexpected observation of putative post-duplication positive selection of teleost dmbx <dig> genes, especially dmbx1a, and the differences in functionality between the mouse and zebrafish genes suggests that the teleost dmbx <dig> genes may have evolved a diverged function in the regulation of neurogenesis.

