BACKGROUND
tomato  establishes a beneficial symbiosis with arbuscular mycorrhizal  fungi. the formation of the mycorrhizal association in the roots leads to plant-wide modulation of gene expression. to understand the systemic effect of the fungal symbiosis on the tomato fruit, we used rna-seq to perform global transcriptome profiling on moneymaker tomato fruits at the turning ripening stage.


RESULTS
fruits were collected at 55 days after flowering, from plants colonized with funneliformis mosseae and from control plants, which were fertilized to avoid responses related to nutrient deficiency. transcriptome analysis identified  <dig> genes that are differentially expressed in fruits from mycorrhizal and control plants. gene ontology  enrichment analysis of these genes showed  <dig> overrepresented functional go classes. up-regulated go classes include photosynthesis, stress response, transport, amino acid synthesis and carbohydrate metabolism functions, suggesting a general impact of fungal symbiosis on primary metabolisms and, particularly, on mineral nutrition. down-regulated go classes include cell wall, metabolism and ethylene response pathways. quantitative rt-pcr validated the rna-seq results for  <dig> genes out of  <dig> when tested at three fruit ripening stages, mature green, breaker and turning. quantification of fruit nutraceutical and mineral contents produced values consistent with the expression changes observed by rna-seq analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
this rna-seq profiling produced a novel data set that explores the intersection of mycorrhization and fruit development. we found that the fruits of mycorrhizal plants show two transcriptomic “signatures”: genes characteristic of a climacteric fleshy fruit, and genes characteristic of mycorrhizal status, like phosphate and sulphate transporters. moreover, mycorrhizal plants under low nutrient conditions produce fruits with a nutrient content similar to those from non-mycorrhizal plants under high nutrient conditions, indicating that am fungi can help replace exogenous fertilizer for fruit crops.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungitomatorna sequencingfruit gene expressionsystemic effectsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

