BACKGROUND
dietary zinc supplementation may help to promote growth, boost the immune system, protect against diabetes, and aid recovery from diarrhoea. we exploited the zebrafish  gill as a unique vertebrate ion transporting epithelium model to study the time-dependent regulatory networks of gene-expression leading to homeostatic control during zinc supplementation. this organ forms a conduit for zinc uptake whilst exhibiting conservation of zinc trafficking components.


RESULTS
fish were maintained with either zinc supplemented water  and diet  or water and diet containing zn2+ at  <dig>  μm and  <dig> mg zinc kg- <dig>  respectively. gill tissues were harvested at five time points  and transcriptome changes analysed in quintuplicate using a  <dig> k microarray with results anchored to gill zn2+ influx and whole body nutrient composition . the number of regulated genes increased up to day  <dig> but declined as the fish acclimated. in total  <dig> genes were regulated  by zinc supplementation, but little overlap was observed between genes regulated at successive time-points. many genes displayed cyclic expression, typical for homeostatic control mechanisms. annotation enrichment analysis revealed strong overrepresentation of "transcription factors", with specific association evident with "steroid hormone receptors". a suite of genes linked to "development" were also statistically overrepresented. more specifically, early regulation of genes was linked to a few key transcription factors  and was followed by hedgehog and bone morphogenic protein signalling.


CONCLUSIONS
the results suggest that zinc supplementation reactivated developmental pathways in the gill and stimulated stem cell differentiation, a response likely reflecting gill remodelling in response to its altered environment. this provides insight to the role of zinc during cell differentiation and illustrates the critical nature of maintaining zinc status. the study also highlights the importance of temporal transcriptomics analysis in order resolve the discrete elements of biological processes, such as zinc acclimation.

