BACKGROUND
gatk best practices workflows are widely used in large-scale sequencing projects and recommend post-alignment processing before variant calling. two key post-processing steps include the computationally intensive local realignment around known indels and base quality score recalibration . both have been shown to reduce erroneous calls; however, the findings are mainly supported by the analytical pipeline that incorporates bwa and gatk unifiedgenotyper. it is not known whether there is any benefit of post-processing and to what extent the benefit might be for pipelines implementing other methods, especially given that both mappers and callers are typically updated. moreover, because sequencing platforms are upgraded regularly and the new platforms provide better estimations of read quality scores, the need for post-processing is also unknown. finally, some regions in the human genome show high sequence divergence from the reference genome; it is unclear whether there is benefit from post-processing in these regions.


RESULTS
we used both simulated and na <dig> exome data to comprehensively assess the impact of post-processing for five or six popular mappers together with five callers. focusing on chromosome 6p <dig> , which is a region of high sequence divergence harboring the human leukocyte antigen  system, we found that local realignment had little or no impact on snp calling, but increased sensitivity was observed in indel calling for the stampy + gatk unifiedgenotyper pipeline. no or only a modest effect of local realignment was detected on the three haplotype-based callers and no evidence of effect on novoalign. bqsr had virtually negligible effect on indel calling and generally reduced sensitivity for snp calling that depended on caller, coverage and level of divergence. specifically, for samtools and freebayes calling in the regions with low divergence, bqsr reduced the snp calling sensitivity but improved the precision when the coverage is insufficient. however, in regions of high divergence , bqsr reduced the sensitivity of both callers with little gain in precision rate. for the other three callers, bqsr reduced the sensitivity without increasing the precision rate regardless of coverage and divergence level.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that the gain from post-processing is not universal; rather, it depends on mapper and caller combination, and the benefit is influenced further by sequencing depth and divergence level. our analysis highlights the importance of considering these key factors in deciding to apply the computationally intensive post-processing to illumina exome data.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
base quality score recalibrationhuman leukocyte antigenlocal realignmentvariant callingwhole exome sequencinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthca118444mayo ccats grantul1tr000135issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

