BACKGROUND
we studied the phylogeography and demographical history of tabebuia serratifolia  to understand the disjunct geographical distribution of south american seasonally dry tropical forests . we specifically tested if the multiple and isolated patches of sdtfs are current climatic relicts of a widespread and continuously distributed dry forest during the last glacial maximum , the so called south american dry forest refugia hypothesis, using ecological niche modelling  and statistical phylogeography. we sampled  <dig> individuals of t. serratifolia in  <dig> populations in brazil and analysed the polymorphisms at three intergenic chloroplast regions and its nuclear ribosomal dna.


RESULTS
coalescent analyses showed a demographical expansion at the last c. 130 ka . simulations and enm also showed that the current spatial pattern of genetic diversity is most likely due to a scenario of range expansion and range shift towards the amazon basin during the colder and arid climatic conditions associated with the lgm, matching the expected for the south american dry forest refugia hypothesis, although contrasting to the pleistocene arc hypothesis. populations in more stable areas or with higher suitability through time showed higher genetic diversity. postglacial range shift towards the southeast and atlantic coast may have led to spatial genome assortment due to leading edge colonization as the species tracks suitable environments, leading to lower genetic diversity in populations at higher distance from the distribution centroid at 21 ka.


CONCLUSIONS
haplotype sharing or common ancestry among populations from caatinga in northeast brazil, atlantic forest in southeast and cerrado biome and enm evince the past connection among these biomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bignoniaceaedry forest refugiaecological niche modellingphylogeographypleistocene arc hypothesisquaternary climatic changescnpq563624/2010-8457406/2012-7collevatti rosane g. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

