BACKGROUND
cattle and other ruminants have evolved the ability to derive most of their metabolic energy requirement from otherwise indigestible plant matter through a symbiotic relationship with plant fibre degrading microbes within a specialised fermentation chamber, the rumen. the genetic changes underlying the evolution of the ruminant lifestyle are poorly understood. the bpi-like locus encodes several putative innate immune proteins, expressed predominantly in the oral cavity and airways, which are structurally related to bactericidal/permeability increasing protein . we have previously reported the expression of variant bpi-like proteins in cattle . characterisation of the bpi-like locus in cattle would lead to a better understanding of the role of the bpi-like proteins in cattle physiology


RESULTS
we have sequenced and characterised a  <dig> kbp segment of bta <dig> containing the bovine bpi-like protein locus. nine of the  <dig> contiguous bpi-like genes in the locus in cattle are orthologous to genes in the human and mouse locus, and are thought to play a role in host defence. phylogenetic analysis indicates the remaining four genes, which we have named bsp30a, bsp30b, bsp30c and bsp30d, appear to have arisen in cattle through a series of duplications. the transcripts of the four bsp <dig> genes are most abundant in tissues associated with the oral cavity and airways. bsp30c transcripts are also found in the abomasum. this, as well as the ratios of non-synonymous to synonymous differences between pairs of the bsp <dig> genes, is consistent with at least bsp30c having acquired a distinct function from the other bsp <dig> proteins and from its paralog in human and mouse, parotid secretory protein .


CONCLUSIONS
the bpi-like locus in mammals appears to have evolved rapidly through multiple gene duplication events, and is thus a hot spot for genome evolution. it is possible that bsp <dig> gene duplication is a characteristic feature of ruminants and that the bsp <dig> proteins contribute to an aspect of ruminant-specific physiology.

