BACKGROUND
wine produced at low temperature is often considered to improve sensory qualities. however, there are certain drawbacks to low temperature fermentations: e.g. low growth rate, long lag phase, and sluggish or stuck fermentations. selection and development of new saccharomyces cerevisiae strains well adapted at low temperature is interesting for future biotechnological applications. this study aimed to select and develop wine yeast strains that well adapt to ferment at low temperature through evolutionary engineering, and to decipher the process underlying the obtained phenotypes.


RESULTS
we used a pool of  <dig> commercial yeast strains and set up batch serial dilution experiments to mimic wine fermentation conditions at 12 °c. evolutionary engineering was accomplished by using the natural yeast mutation rate and mutagenesis procedures. one strain  outcompeted the others under both experimental conditions and was able to impose after  <dig> generations. the evolved strains showed improved growth and low-temperature fermentation performance compared to the ancestral strain. this improvement was acquired only under inositol limitation. the transcriptomic comparison between the evolved and parental strains showed the greatest up-regulation in four mannoprotein coding genes, which belong to the dan/tir family . genome sequencing of the evolved strain revealed the presence of a snp in the gaa <dig> gene and the construction of a site-directed mutant  in a derivative haploid of the ancestral strain resulted in improved fermentation performance. gaa <dig> encodes a gpi transamidase complex subunit that adds gpi, which is required for inositol synthesis, to newly synthesized proteins, including mannoproteins.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study we demonstrate the importance of inositol and mannoproteins in yeast adaptation at low temperature and the central role of the gaa <dig> gene by linking both metabolisms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
wineyeastexperimental evolutioncoldfermentationinositolissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

