BACKGROUND
dsred the red fluorescent protein  isolated from discosoma sp. coral holds much promise as a genetically and spectrally distinct alternative to green fluorescent protein  for application in mice. widespread use of dsred has been hampered by several issues resulting in the inability to establish and maintain lines of red fluorescent protein expressing embryonic stem cells and mice. this has been attributed to the non-viability, or toxicity, of the protein, probably as a result of its obligate tetramerization. a mutagenesis approach directing the stepwise evolution of dsred has produced mrfp <dig>  the first true monomer. mrfp <dig> currently represents an attractive autofluorescent reporter for use in heterologous systems.


RESULTS
we have used embryonic stem cell-mediated transgenesis to evaluate mrfp <dig> in embryonic stem cells and mice. we find that mrfp <dig> exhibits the most spatially homogenous expression when compared to the native  and variant dimeric forms of dsred. high levels of mrfp <dig> expression do not affect cell morphology, developmental potential or viability and fertility of animals. high levels of widespread mrfp <dig> expression are maintained in a constitutive manner in embryonic stem cells in culture and in transgenic animals. we have used various optical imaging modalities to visualize mrfp <dig> expressing cells in culture, in embryos and adult mice. moreover co-visualization of red, green and cyan fluorescent cells within a sample is easily achieved without the need for specialized methodologies, such as spectral deconvolution or linear unmixing.


CONCLUSIONS
fluorescent proteins with excitation and/or emission profiles in the red part of the visible spectrum represent distinct partners, or longer wavelength substitutes for gfp. not only do dsred-based rfps provide a genetically and spectrally distinct addition to the available repertoire of autoflorescent proteins, but by virtue of their spectral properties they permit deeper tissue imaging. our work in generating cag::mrfp <dig> transgenic es cells and mice demonstrates the developmental neutrality of mrfp <dig> in an organismal context. it paves the way for the use of dsred-based monomeric rfps in transgenic and gene targeted approaches which often necessitate spatially and/or temporally restricted reporter expression. moreover animals of the cag::mrfp <dig> transgenic strain serve as a source of rfp tagged tissue for the derivation of cell lines and explant, transplant and embryo chimera experiments.

