BACKGROUND
dinoflagellates are unicellular marine and freshwater eukaryotes. they possess large nuclear genomes  and produce structurally unique and biologically active polyketide secondary metabolites. although polyketide biosynthesis is well studied in terrestrial and freshwater organisms, only recently have dinoflagellate polyketides been investigated. transcriptomic analyses have characterized dinoflagellate polyketide synthase genes having single domains. the genus symbiodinium, with a comparatively small genome, is a group of major coral symbionts, and the s. minutum nuclear genome has been decoded.


RESULTS
the present survey investigated the assembled s. minutum genome and identified  <dig> candidate polyketide synthase  genes that encode proteins with mono- and multifunctional domains. predicted proteins retain functionally important amino acids in the catalytic ketosynthase  domain. molecular phylogenetic analyses of ks domains form a clade in which s. minutum domains cluster within the protist type i pks clade with those of other dinoflagellates and other eukaryotes. single-domain pks genes are likely expanded in dinoflagellate lineage. two pks genes of bacterial origin are found in the s. minutum genome. interestingly, the largest enzyme is likely expressed as a hybrid non-ribosomal peptide synthetase-polyketide synthase  assembly of  <dig>  amino acids, containing nrps and pks modules and a thioesterase  domain. we also found intron-rich genes with the minimal set of catalytic domains needed to produce polyketides. ketosynthase , acyltransferase , and acyl carrier protein  along with other optional domains are present. mapping of transcripts to the genome with the dinoflagellate-specific spliced leader sequence, supports expression of multifunctional pks genes. metabolite profiling of cultured s. minutum confirmed production of zooxanthellamide d, a polyhydroxy amide polyketide and other unknown polyketide secondary metabolites.


CONCLUSIONS
this genomic survey demonstrates that s. minutum contains genes with the minimal set of catalytic domains needed to produce polyketides and provides evidence of the modular nature of type i pks, unlike monofunctional type i pks from other dinoflagellates. in addition, our study suggests that diversification of dinoflagellate pks genes comprises dinoflagellate-specific pks genes with single domains, multifunctional pks genes with ks domains orthologous to those of other protists, and pks genes of bacterial origin.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gene diversificationhorizontal gene transferspliced-leader trans-splicingpolyketide synthasebacterial pksnrpszooxanthellamide dsymbiodinium minutumdinoflagellatesgenome-wide surveyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

