BACKGROUND
currently used mouse models fail to fully reflect human immunity to tuberculosis , which hampers progress in research and vaccine development. bone marrow-liver-thymus  mice, generated by engrafting human fetal liver, thymus, and hematopoietic stem cells in severely immunodeficient nod/scid/il-2rγ-/-  mice, have shown potential to model human immunity to infection. we engrafted hla-a2-positive fetal tissues into nsg mice transgenically expressing human leukocyte antigen -a <dig>   to generate nsg-a2-blt mice and characterized their human immune response to mycobacterium bovis bacillus calmette-guerin  infection to assess the utility of this model for investigating human tb.


RESULTS
nsg-a2-blt mice were infected intravenously with bcg and the immune response of engrafted human immune cells was characterized. after ex vivo antigenic stimulation of splenocytes, interferon -γ-producing cells were detected by elispot from infected, but not uninfected nsg-a2-blt mice. however, the levels of secreted ifn-γ, determined by elisa, were not significantly elevated by antigenic stimulation. nsg-a2-blt mice were susceptible to bcg infection as determined by higher lung bacillary load than the non-engrafted control nsg-a <dig> mice. bcg-infected nsg-a2-blt mice developed lung lesions composed mostly of human macrophages and few human cd4+ or cd8+ t cells. the lesions did not resemble granulomas typical of human tb.


CONCLUSIONS
engrafted human immune cells in nsg-a2-blt mice showed partial function of innate and adaptive immune systems culminating in antigen-specific t cell responses to mycobacterial infection. the lack of protection was associated with low ifn-γ levels and limited numbers of t cells recruited to the lesions. the nsg-a2-blt mouse is capable of mounting a human immune response to m. tuberculosis in vivo but a quantitatively and possibly qualitatively enhanced effector response will be needed to improve the utility of this model for tb research.

animal modelbcgtuberculosisblt micensg mice

