BACKGROUND
animal venoms attract enormous interest given their potential for pharmacological discovery and understanding the evolution of natural chemistries. next-generation transcriptomics and proteomics provide unparalleled, but underexploited, capabilities for venom characterization. we combined multi-tissue rna-seq with mass spectrometry and bioinformatic analyses to determine venom gland specific transcripts and venom proteins from the western black widow spider  and investigated their evolution.


RESULTS
we estimated expression of  <dig>  l. hesperus transcripts in venom glands relative to silk and cephalothorax tissues. we identified  <dig> venom gland specific transcripts , many of which blast and go term analyses indicate may function as toxins or their delivery agents. ~38% of vsts had blast hits, including latrotoxins, inhibitor cystine knot toxins, crisps, hyaluronidases, chitinase, and proteases, and 59% of vsts had predicted protein domains. latrotoxins are venom toxins that cause massive neurotransmitter release from vertebrate or invertebrate neurons. we discovered ≥  <dig> divergent latrotoxin paralogs expressed in l. hesperus venom glands, significantly increasing this biomedically important family. mass spectrometry of l. hesperus venom identified  <dig> proteins from vsts,  <dig> of which blast to toxins. phylogenetic analyses showed venom gland specific gene family expansions and shifts in tissue expression.


CONCLUSIONS
quantitative expression analyses comparing multiple tissues are necessary to identify venom gland specific transcripts. we present a black widow venom specific exome that uncovers a trove of diverse toxins and associated proteins, suggesting a dynamic evolutionary history. this justifies a reevaluation of the functional activities of black widow venom in light of its emerging complexity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqlatrotoxinsvenommass spectrometrytranscriptomicsspiderissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

