BACKGROUND
glycerolipids are the principal constituent of cellular membranes; remodelling of glycerolipids plays important roles in temperature adaptation in plants. temperate plants can endure freezing stress, but even chilling at above-zero temperatures can induce death in tropical species. however, little is known about the differences in glycerolipid response to low temperatures between chilling-sensitive and freezing-tolerant plants. using esi-ms/ms-based lipidomic analysis, we compared the glycerolipidome of chilling -treated rice with that of freezing -treated arabidopsis, both immediately after these low-temperature treatments and after a subsequent recovery culture period.


RESULTS
arabidopsis is a 16: <dig> plant that harbours both eukaryotic and prokaryotic-type lipid synthesis pathways, while rice is an 18: <dig> plant that harbours only the eukaryotic lipid synthesis pathway. arabidopsis contains higher levels of galactolipids than rice and has a higher double bond index . arabidopsis contains lower levels of high melting point phosphatidylglycerol  molecules and has a lower average acyl chain length . marked phospholipid degradation occurred during the recovery culture period of non-lethal chilling treated rice, but did not occur in non-lethal freezing treated arabidopsis. glycerolipids with larger head groups were synthesized more in arabidopsis than in rice at sub-lethal low-temperatures. levels of phosphatidic acid  and phosphatidylinositol  rose in both plants after low-temperature treatment. the dbi and acl of total lipids did not change during low-temperature treatment.


CONCLUSIONS
a higher dbi and a lower acl could make the membranes of arabidopsis more fluid at low temperatures. the ability to synthesize glycerolipids containing a larger head group may correlate with low-temperature tolerance. the low-temperature-induced increase of pa may play a dual role in plant responses to low temperatures: as a lipid signal that initiates tolerance responses, and as a structural molecule that, on extensive in large accumulation, could damage the integrity of membranes. changes in acl and dbi are responses of plants to long-term low temperature.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chillingfreezingarabidopsisriceglycerolipidomehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 3140131330670474zheng guowei li weiqi west light foundation of the chinese academy of sciences germplasm bank of wild speciesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

