BACKGROUND
auxin plays important roles in hormone crosstalk and the plant’s stress response. the auxin-responsive gretchen hagen <dig>  gene family maintains hormonal homeostasis by conjugating excess indole-3-acetic acid , salicylic acid , and jasmonic acids  to amino acids during hormone- and stress-related signaling pathways. with the sequencing of the apple  genome completed, it is possible to carry out genomic studies on gh <dig> genes to indentify candidates with roles in abiotic/biotic stress responses.


RESULTS
malus sieversii roem., an apple rootstock with strong drought tolerance and the ancestral species of cultivated apple species, was used as the experimental material. following genome-wide computational and experimental identification of mdgh <dig> genes, we showed that mdgh3s were differentially expressed in the leaves and roots of m. sieversii and that some of these genes were significantly induced after various phytohormone and abiotic stress treatments. given the role of gh <dig> in the negative feedback regulation of free iaa concentration, we examined whether phytohormones and abiotic stresses could alter the endogenous auxin level. by analyzing the gus activity of dr5::gus-transformed arabidopsis seedlings, we showed that aba, sa, salt, and cold treatments suppressed the auxin response. these findings suggest that other phytohormones and abiotic stress factors might alter endogenous auxin levels.


CONCLUSIONS
previous studies showed that gh <dig> genes regulate hormonal homeostasis. our study indicated that some gh <dig> genes were significantly induced in m. sieversii after various phytohormone and abiotic stress treatments, and that aba, sa, salt, and cold treatments reduce the endogenous level of axuin. taken together, this study provides evidence that gh <dig> genes play important roles in the crosstalk between auxin, other phytohormones, and the abiotic stress response by maintaining auxin homeostasis.

malus sieversii roemphytohormonebiotic stressgh3dr5gus

