BACKGROUND
although outer hair cells  play a key role in cochlear amplification, it is not fully understood how they amplify sound signals by more than  <dig> fold. two competing or possibly complementary mechanisms, stereocilia-based and somatic electromotility-based amplification, have been considered. lacking knowledge about the exceptionally rich protein networks in the ohc plasma membrane, as well as related protein-protein interactions, limits our understanding of cochlear function. therefore, we focused on finding protein partners for two important membrane proteins: cadherin  <dig>  and prestin. cdh <dig> is one of the tip-link proteins involved in transducer function, a key component of mechanoelectrical transduction and stereocilia-based amplification. prestin is a basolateral membrane protein responsible for ohc somatic electromotility.


RESULTS
using the membrane-based yeast two-hybrid system to screen a newly built cdna library made predominantly from ohcs, we identified two completely different groups of potential protein partners using prestin and cdh <dig> as bait. these include both membrane bound and cytoplasmic proteins with  <dig> being de novo gene products with unknown function. in addition, some of these genes are closely associated with deafness loci, implying a potentially important role in hearing. the most abundant prey for prestin  is composed of a group of proteins involved in electron transport, which may play a role in ohc survival. the most abundant group of cdh <dig> prey  contains calcium-binding domains. since calcium performs an important role in hair cell mechanoelectrical transduction and amplification, understanding the interactions between cdh <dig> and calcium-binding proteins should increase our knowledge of hair cell function at the molecular level.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study shed light on some protein networks in cochlear hair cells. not only was a group of de novo genes closely associated with known deafness loci identified, but the data also indicate that the hair cell tip link interacts directly with calcium binding proteins. the ohc motor protein, prestin, also appears to be associated with electron transport proteins. these unanticipated results open potentially fruitful lines of investigation into the molecular basis of cochlear amplification.

