BACKGROUND
the large amount of literature in the post-genomics era enables the study of gene interactions and networks using all available articles published for a specific organism. mesh is a controlled vocabulary of medical and scientific terms that is used by biomedical scientists to manually index articles in the pubmed literature database. we hypothesized that genome-wide gene-mesh term associations from the pubmed literature database could be used to predict implicit gene-to-gene relationships and networks. while the gene-mesh associations have been used to detect gene-gene interactions in some studies, different methods have not been well compared, and such a strategy has not been evaluated for a genome-wide literature analysis. genome-wide literature mining of gene-to-gene interactions allows ranking of the best gene interactions and investigation of comprehensive biological networks at a genome level.


RESULTS
the genome-wide genomesh literature mining algorithm was developed by sequentially generating a gene-article matrix, a normalized gene-mesh term matrix, and a gene-gene matrix. the gene-gene matrix relies on the calculation of pairwise gene dissimilarities based on gene-mesh relationships. an optimized dissimilarity score was identified from six well-studied functions based on a receiver operating characteristic  analysis. based on the studies with well-studied escherichia coli and less-studied brucella spp., genomesh was found to accurately identify gene functions using weighted mesh terms, predict gene-gene interactions not reported in the literature, and cluster all the genes studied from an organism using the mesh-based gene-gene matrix. a web-based genomesh literature mining program is also available at: http://genomesh.hegroup.org. genomesh also predicts gene interactions and networks among genes associated with specific mesh terms or user-selected gene lists.


CONCLUSIONS
the genomesh algorithm and web program provide the first genome-wide, mesh-based literature mining system that effectively predicts implicit gene-gene interaction relationships and networks in a genome-wide scope.

20- <dig> september  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  twelfth international conference on bioinformatics  taicang china

