BACKGROUND
cotton  is produced in over  <dig> countries and represents the most important natural fiber in the world. one of the primary factors affecting both the quantity and quality of cotton production is water. a major facilitator of water movement through cell membranes of cotton and other plants are the aquaporin proteins. aquaporin proteins are present as diverse forms in plants, where they function as transport systems for water and other small molecules. the plant aquaporins belong to the large major intrinsic protein  family. in higher plants, they consist of five subfamilies including plasma membrane intrinsic proteins , tonoplast intrinsic proteins , nod26-like intrinsic proteins , small basic intrinsic proteins , and the recently discovered x intrinsic proteins . although a great deal is known about aquaporins in plants, very little is known in cotton.


RESULTS
from a molecular cloning effort, together with a bioinformatic homology search,  <dig> upland cotton  aquaporin genes were identified. the cotton aquaporins consist of  <dig> pip and  <dig> tip members with high sequence similarity. we also identified  <dig> nip and  <dig> sip members that showed more divergence. in addition, one xip member was identified that formed a distinct 5th subfamily. to explore the physiological roles of these aquaporin genes in cotton, expression analyses were performed for a select set of aquaporin genes from each subfamily using semi-quantitative reverse transcription -pcr. our results suggest that many cotton aquaporin genes have high sequence similarity and diverse roles as evidenced by analysis of sequences and their expression.


CONCLUSIONS
this study presents a comprehensive identification of  <dig> cotton aquaporin genes. phylogenetic analysis of amino acid sequences divided the large and highly similar multi-gene family into the known  <dig> aquaporin subfamilies. together with expression and bioinformatic analyses, our results support the idea that the genes identified in this study represent an important genetic resource providing potential targets to modify the water use properties of cotton.

