BACKGROUND
currently, alternate plasticizers are used to replace phthalate plasticizers in children’s toys, medical equipments and food packaging, due to the adverse effects of phthalate compounds on human health and laws prohibiting their use. current information regarding the safety and potential adverse effects of alternate plasticizers is limited and recent studies have found alternate plasticizers to display similar characteristics to those observed in phthalate plasticizers. this study was undertaken to evaluate and predict the potential endocrine disrupting activity of the three most commonly used alternate plasticizers: diterephthalate , tristrimellitate , and diisononyl hexahydrophthalate  against human sex hormone-binding globulin  using in silico approaches.

materials and methods
the crystal structure of human shbg  was retrieved from protein data bank. pubchem database was searched for the structures of alternate plasticizers, deht, totm, and dinch. docking was performed using glide  induced fit docking module.


RESULTS
induced fit docking of three alternate plasticizer compounds indicated that each of the three compounds fitted well into the steroid binding pocket of shbg. docking displays showed interactions of alternate plasticizers with 25– <dig> amino-acid residues of shbg; 18– <dig> amino residues overlapped between the natural ligand, dht, and the three compounds . the hydrogen-bonding interaction of the amino-acid residue, asn- <dig>  of shbg was also present in displays of dht and all the three alternate phthalates. the binding affinity of all the three alternate phthalates was higher than dht; maximum in dinch followed by totm and deht.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggested that the three alternate plasticizers have potential to engage the important interacting residues of shbg and thus interfere in its steroid homeostatic function.

keywords
dockingsex hormone-binding globulindehttotmdinchendocrine disruption3rd international genomic medicine conference jeddah, saudi arabia  <dig> november -  <dig> december  <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

