BACKGROUND
eggplant  and turkey berry , a wild ally of eggplant with promising multi-disease resistance traits, are of great economic, medicinal and genetic importance, but genomic resources for these species are lacking. in the present study, we sequenced the transcriptomes of eggplant and turkey berry to accelerate research on these two non-model species.


RESULTS
we built comprehensive, high-quality de novo transcriptome assemblies of the two leptostemonum clade solanum species from short-read rna-sequencing data. we obtained  <dig>  unigenes for eggplant and  <dig>  unigenes for turkey berry. functional annotations based on sequence similarity to known plant datasets revealed a distribution of functional categories for both species very similar to that of tomato. comparison of eggplant, turkey berry and another  <dig> plant proteomes resulted in  <dig> high-confidence single-copy orthologous groups, reasonable phylogenetic tree inferences and reliable divergence time estimations. from these data, it appears that eggplant and its wild leptostemonum clade relative turkey berry split from each other in the late miocene, ~ <dig>  million years ago, and that leptostemonum split from the potatoe clade in the middle miocene, ~ <dig>  million years ago. furthermore,  <dig> and  <dig> plant resistance genes were identified in eggplant and turkey berry respectively, indicating the variation of disease resistance genes between them.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a comprehensive transcriptome resource for two leptostemonum clade solanum species and insight into their evolutionary history and biological characteristics. these resources establish a foundation for further investigations of eggplant biology and for agricultural improvement of this important vegetable. more generally, we show that rna-seq is a fast, reliable and cost-effective method for assessing genome evolution in non-model species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
solanum torvum sw.solanum melongena l.comparative transcriptomicsevolutionplant resistance genesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

