BACKGROUND
circadian clocks have been implicated in the regulation of pre-adult development of fruit flies drosophila melanogaster. it is believed that faster clocks speed up development and slower clocks slow it down. we established three sets of d. melanogaster populations . the early and late populations were raised by selecting for flies that emerged either in the morning or in the evening under 12: <dig> hr light/dark  cycles. after  <dig> generations of selection, the time course and waveform of the adult emergence and activity rhythms of the early and the late populations diverged from each other as well as from the controls. in this paper, we report the consequence of this selection on the rate of pre-adult development.


RESULTS
we assayed the pre-adult development time of the selected and control populations under 12: <dig> hr ld cycles and constant darkness . under ld cycles, the early populations develop faster than the controls, while the late populations develop slower than the controls. although flies take longer to develop under dd than in ld, the relative differences between the mean development times of the selected and control populations remain unaltered in dd. in a separate experiment designed to investigate the effect of time of egg collection and experimental conditions on the duration of pre-adult stage, we assayed the development time of the selected and control populations by collecting eggs at different times of the day  and by assaying their pre-adult development time under constant light , ld, and dd conditions. irrespective of the time of egg collection and assay light regime, the late flies continue to develop slower than the early flies.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of our study clearly indicate that selection on the timing of adult emergence alters the rate of pre-adult development in d. melanogaster. the timing of egg collection as well as assay light regime does not have any measurable effect on the relative differences between the developmental rates of the early and the late flies. taken together these results appear to suggest that pleiotropic effects of clock genes mediate correlated changes in the timing of adult emergence and the rate of pre-adult development in d. melanogaster.

