BACKGROUND
expression of the mouse delta-like  <dig>  gene in the presomitic mesoderm and in the caudal halves of somites of the developing embryo is required for the formation of epithelial somites and for the maintenance of caudal somite identity, respectively. the rostro-caudal polarity of somites is initiated early on within the presomitic mesoderm in nascent somites. here we have investigated the requirement of restricted dll <dig> expression in caudal somite compartments for the maintenance of rostro-caudal somite polarity and the morphogenesis of the axial skeleton. we did this by overexpressing a functional copy of the dll <dig> gene throughout the paraxial mesoderm, in particular in anterior somite compartments, during somitogenesis in transgenic mice.


RESULTS
epithelial somites were generated normally and appeared histologically normal in embryos of two independent dll <dig> over-expressing transgenic lines. gene expression analyses of rostro-caudal marker genes suggested that over-expression of dll <dig> without restriction to caudal compartments was not sufficient to confer caudal identity to rostral somite halves in transgenic embryos. nevertheless, dll <dig> over-expression caused dysmorphologies of the axial skeleton, in particular, in morphological structures that derive from the articular joint forming compartment of vertebrae. accordingly, transgenic animals exhibited missing or reduced intervertebral discs, rostral and caudal articular processes as well as costal heads of ribs. in addition, the midline of the vertebral column did not develop normally. transgenic mice had open neural arches and split vertebral bodies with ectopic pseudo-growth plates. endochondral bone formation and ossification in the developing vertebrae were delayed.


CONCLUSIONS
the mice overexpressing dll <dig> exhibit skeletal dysmorphologies that are also evident in several mutant mice with defects in somite compartmentalisation. the dll <dig> transgenic mice demonstrate that vertebral dysmorphologies such as bony fusions of vertebrae and midline vertebral defects can occur without apparent changes in somitic rostro-caudal marker gene expression. also, we demonstrate that the over-expression of the dll <dig> gene in rostral epithelial somites is not sufficient to confer caudal identity to rostral compartments. our data suggest that the restricted dll <dig> expression in caudal epithelial somites may be particularly required for the proper development of the intervertebral joint forming compartment.

