BACKGROUND
south america's western coastline, extending in a near-straight line across some  <dig> latitudinal degrees, presents an elegant setting for assessing both contemporary and historic influences on cladogenesis in the marine environment. southern bull-kelp  has a broad distribution along much of the chilean coast. this species represents an ideal model taxon for studies of coastal marine connectivity and of palaeoclimatic effects, as it grows only on exposed rocky coasts and is absent from beaches and ice-affected shores. we expected that, along the central chilean coast, d. antarctica would show considerable phylogeographic structure as a consequence of the isolating effects of distance and habitat discontinuities. in contrast, we hypothesised that further south - throughout the region affected by the patagonian ice sheet at the last glacial maximum  - d. antarctica would show relatively little genetic structure, reflecting postglacial recolonisation.


RESULTS
mitochondrial  and chloroplast  dna analyses of d. antarctica from  <dig> chilean localities  revealed two deeply divergent  clades from the centre and south of the country, with contrasting levels and patterns of genetic structure. among populations from central chile , substantial phylogeographic structure was evident across small spatial scales, and a significant isolation-by-distance effect was observed. genetic disjunctions in this region appear to correspond to the presence of long beaches. in contrast to the genetic structure found among central chilean populations, samples from the southern chilean patagonian region  were genetically homogeneous and identical to a haplotype recently found throughout the subantarctic region.


CONCLUSIONS
southern  chile has been recolonised by d. antarctica relatively recently, probably since the lgm. the inferred trans-oceanic ancestry of these patagonian populations supports the notion that d. antarctica is capable of long-distance dispersal via rafting. in contrast, further north in central chile, the correspondence of genetic disjunctions in d. antarctica with long beaches indicates that habitat discontinuity drives genetic isolation among established kelp populations. we conclude that rafting facilitates colonisation of unoccupied shores, but has limited potential to enhance gene-flow among established populations. broadly, this study demonstrates that some taxa may be considered to have either high or low dispersal potential across different temporal and geographic scales.

