BACKGROUND
under both physiological and pathological conditions gene expression programs are shaped through the interplay of regulatory proteins and their gene targets, interactions between which form intricate gene regulatory networks . while the assessment of genome-wide expression for the complete set of genes at a given condition has become rather straight-forward and is performed routinely, we are still far from being able to infer the topology of gene regulation simply by analyzing its “descendant” expression profile. in this work we are trying to overcome the existing limitations for the inference and study of such regulatory networks. we are combining our approach with state-of-the-art gene set enrichment analyses in order to create a tool, called regulatory network enrichment analysis  that will prioritize regulatory and functional characteristics of a genome-wide expression experiment.


RESULTS
rnea combines prior knowledge, originating from manual literature curation and small-scale experimental data, to construct a reference network of interactions and then uses enrichment analysis coupled with a two-level hierarchical parsing of the network, to infer the most relevant subnetwork for a given experimental setting. it is implemented as an r package, currently supporting human and mouse datasets and was herein tested on one test case for each of the two organisms. in both cases, rnea’s gene set enrichment analysis was comparable to state-of-the-art methodologies. moreover, through its distinguishing feature of regulatory subnetwork reconstruction, rnea was able to define the key transcriptional regulators for the studied systems as supported from the literature.


CONCLUSIONS
rnea constitutes a novel computational approach to obtain regulatory interactions directly from a genome-wide expression profile. its simple implementation, with minimal requirements from the user is coupled with easy-to-parse enrichment lists and a subnetwork file that may be readily visualized to reveal the most important components of the regulatory hierarchy. the combination of prior information and novel concept of a hierarchical reconstruction of regulatory interactions makes rnea a very useful tool for a first-level interpretation of gene expression profiles.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptional regulationgene regulatory networkgene set enrichment analysisstatistical methods for omics data integration and analysis  <dig> smodia 2014heraklion, crete, greece 10- <dig> november  <dig> http://smodia <dig> com/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

