BACKGROUND
previous dna-based phylogenetic studies of the delphinidae family suggest it has undergone rapid diversification, as characterised by unresolved and poorly supported taxonomic relationships  for some of the species within this group. using an increased amount of sequence data we test between alternative hypotheses of soft polytomies caused by rapid speciation, slow evolutionary rate and/or insufficient sequence data, and hard polytomies caused by simultaneous speciation within this family. combining the mitogenome sequences of five new and  <dig> previously published species within the delphinidae, we used bayesian and maximum-likelihood methods to estimate the phylogeny from partitioned and unpartitioned mitogenome sequences. further ad hoc tests were then conducted to estimate the support for alternative topologies.


RESULTS
we found high support for all the relationships within our reconstructed phylogenies, and topologies were consistent between the bayesian and maximum-likelihood trees inferred from partitioned and unpartitioned data. resolved relationships included the placement of the killer whale  as sister taxon to the rest of the globicephalinae subfamily, placement of the risso's dolphin  within the globicephalinae subfamily, removal of the white-beaked dolphin  from the delphininae subfamily and the placement of the rough-toothed dolphin  as sister taxon to the rest of the delphininae subfamily rather than within the globicephalinae subfamily. the additional testing of alternative topologies allowed us to reject all other putative relationships, with the exception that we were unable to reject the hypothesis that the relationship between l. albirostris and the globicephalinae and delphininae subfamilies was polytomic.


CONCLUSIONS
despite their rapid diversification, the increased sequence data yielded by mitogenomes enables the resolution of a strongly supported, bifurcating phylogeny, and a chronology of the divergences within the delphinidae family. this highlights the benefits and potential application of large mitogenome datasets to resolve long-standing phylogenetic uncertainties.

