BACKGROUND
lipophilic antioxidants play dual key roles in edible seeds  as preservatives of cell integrity and seed viability by preventing the oxidation of fats, and  as essential nutrients for human and animal life stock. it has been well documented that plant domestication and post-domestication evolution frequently resulted in increased seed size and palatability, and reduced seed dormancy. nevertheless, and surprisingly, it is poorly understood how agricultural selection and cultivation affected the physiological fitness and the nutritional quality of seeds. fabaceae have the greatest number of crop species of all plant families, and most of them are cultivated for their highly nutritious edible seeds. here, we evaluate whether evolution of plants under cultivation has altered the integrated system formed by membranes  and lipophilic antioxidants , in the ten most economically important grain legumes and their closest wild relatives, i.e.: arachis , cicer , glycine , lathyrus, lens , lupinus , phaseolus , pisum , vicia  and vigna .


RESULTS
unexpectedly, we found that following domestication, the contents of carotenoids, including lutein and zeaxanthin, decreased in all ten species . furthermore, the composition of carotenoids changed, whereby some carotenoids were lost in most of the crops. an undirected change in the contents of tocopherols and fatty acids was found, with contents increasing in some species and decreasing in others, independently of the changes in carotenoids. in some species, polyunsaturated fatty acids , α-tocopherol and γ-tocopherol decreased following domestication.


CONCLUSIONS
the changes in carotenoids, tocopherols and fatty acids are likely side-effects of the selection for other desired traits such as the loss of seed dormancy and dispersal mechanisms, and selection for seed storability and taste. this work may serve as baseline to broaden our knowledge on the integrated changes on crop fitness and nutritional quality following domestication.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
carotenoiddomesticationfatty acidseedtocopherolwild relativeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

