BACKGROUND
cold stress is regarded as a key factor limiting widespread use for bermudagrass . therefore, to improve cold tolerance for bermudagrass, it is urgent to understand molecular mechanisms of bermudagrass response to cold stress. however, our knowledge about the molecular responses of this species to cold stress is largely unknown. the objective of this study was to characterize the transcriptomic response to low temperature in bermudagrass by using rna-seq platform.


RESULTS
ten cdna libraries were generated from rna samples of leaves from five different treatments in the cold-resistant  and the cold-sensitive  genotypes, including 4 °c cold acclimation  for 24 h and 48 h, freezing  treatments for 4 h with or without prior ca, and controls. when subjected to cold acclimation, global gene expressions were initiated more quickly in the r genotype than those in the s genotype. the r genotype activated gene expression more effectively in response to freezing temperature after 48 h ca than the s genotype. the differentially expressed genes were identified as low temperature sensing and signaling-related genes, functional proteins and transcription factors, many of which were specifically or predominantly expressed in the r genotype under cold treatments, implying that these genes play important roles in the enhanced cold hardiness of bermudagrass. kegg pathway enrichment analysis for degs revealed that photosynthesis, nitrogen metabolism and carbon fixation pathways play key roles in bermudagrass response to cold stress.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study may contribute to our understanding the molecular mechanism underlying the responses of bermudagrass to cold stress, and also provide important clues for further study and in-depth characterization of cold-resistance breeding candidate genes in bermudagrass.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

