BACKGROUND
radish , is an important root vegetable crop worldwide. glucosinolates in the fleshy taproot significantly affect the flavor and nutritional quality of radish. however, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying glucosinolate metabolism in radish taproots. the limited availability of radish genomic information has greatly hindered functional genomic analysis and molecular breeding in radish.


RESULTS
in this study, a high-throughput, large-scale rna sequencing technology was employed to characterize the de novo transcriptome of radish roots at different stages of development. approximately  <dig>  million paired-end reads representing  <dig>  unigenes with a n <dig> length of  <dig>  bp, and a total length of  <dig>  mb were obtained. comparison with the publicly available protein database indicates that a total of  <dig>   unigenes exhibit similarity  to known proteins. the functional annotation and classification including gene ontology , clusters of orthologous group  and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  analysis revealed that the main activated genes in radish taproots are predominately involved in basic physiological and metabolic processes, biosynthesis of secondary metabolite pathways, signal transduction mechanisms and other cellular components and molecular function related terms. the majority of the genes encoding enzymes involved in glucosinolate  metabolism and regulation pathways were identified in the unigene dataset by targeted searches of their annotations. a number of candidate radish genes in the glucosinolate metabolism related pathways were also discovered, from which, eight genes were validated by t-a cloning and sequencing while four were validated by quantitative rt-pcr expression profiling.


CONCLUSIONS
the ensuing transcriptome dataset provides a comprehensive sequence resource for molecular genetics research in radish. it will serve as an important public information platform to further understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in biosynthesis and metabolism of the related nutritional and flavor components during taproot formation in radish.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
radishde novo assemblyrna-seqtranscriptomeglucosinolate metabolic pathwaysissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013

