BACKGROUND
the study aim was to quantify the impact of movement restriction on the well-being of pigs and the associated mitigation responses during a classical swine fever  outbreak. we developed a stochastic risk assessment model and incorporated indiana swine industry statistics to estimate the timing and number of swine premises that would encounter overcrowding or feed interruption resulting from movement restriction. our model also quantified the amount of on-farm euthanasia and movement of pigs to slaughter plants required to alleviate those conditions. we simulated various single-site  and multiple-site  outbreak scenarios in indiana to estimate outputs.


RESULTS
the study estimated that 14% of the swine premises in indiana would encounter overcrowding or feed interruption due to movement restriction implemented during a csf outbreak. the number of premises that would experience animal welfare conditions was about  <dig>  fold of the number of infected premises. on-farm euthanasia needed to be performed on 33% of those swine premises to alleviate adverse animal welfare conditions, and more than 90% of on-farm euthanasia had to be carried out within 2 weeks after the implementation of movement restriction. conversely, movement of pigs to slaughter plants could alleviate 67% of adverse animal welfare conditions due to movement restriction, and only less than 1% of movement of pigs to slaughter plants had to be initiated in the first 2 weeks of movement restrictions. the risk of secondary outbreaks due to movement of pigs from movement restriction areas to slaughter plants was low and only seven pigs from each shipment needed to be tested for csf infection to prevent a secondary outbreak.


CONCLUSIONS
we found that the scale of adverse animal welfare consequences of movement restriction during a csf outbreak in indiana was substantial, and controlled movement of pigs to slaughter plants was an efficient and low-risk alternative mitigation response to on-farm euthanasia. the output estimates generated from this study provide empirical evidence for decision makers to properly incorporate required resources for mitigating adverse animal welfare conditions in csf outbreak management strategic planning.

keywords
classical swine fevermovement restrictionpigsswineoutbreak controlanimal welfareovercrowdingrisk assessmenthttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008370national pork boardnpb 13-153weng hsin-yi http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100005825national institute of food and agriculturehatch project 230919weng hsin-yi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

