BACKGROUND
crop diversity managed by smallholder farmers in traditional agrosystems is the outcome of historical and current processes interacting at various spatial scales, and influenced by factors such as farming practices and environmental pressures. only recently have studies started to consider the complexity of these processes instead of simply describing diversity for breeding purposes. a first step in that aim is to add multiple references to the collection of genetic data, including the farmers’ varietal taxonomy and practices and the historical background of the crop.


RESULTS
on the basis of interview data collected in a previous study, we sampled  <dig> populations of durum wheat varieties in two traditional moroccan agrosystems, in the pre-rif and atlas mountains regions. using a common garden experiment, we detected a high phenotypic variability on traits indicative of taxonomical position and breeding status, namely spike shape and plant height. populations often combined modern  with traditional-like  statures, and classical durum squared spike shape  with flat spike shape  representative of primitive domesticated tetraploid wheat . by contrast, the genetic diversity assessed using  <dig> microsatellite markers was relatively limited. when compared to the genetic diversity found in a large collection of tetraploid wheat, it corresponded to free-threshing tetraploid wheat. within morocco, the two studied regions differed for both genetic diversity and variety names. within regions, neither geography nor variety names nor even breeding status constituted strong barriers to gene exchange despite a few significant patterns.


CONCLUSIONS
this first assessment of morphological and genetic diversity allowed pointing out some important factors that may have influenced the structure and evolutionary dynamics of durum wheat in morocco: the significance of variety names, the occurrence of mixtures within populations, the relative strength of seed exchange between farmers and local adaptation, as well as the fate of modern varieties once they have been introduced. further, multidisciplinary studies at different spatial scales are needed to better understand these complex agrosystems of invaluable importance for food security.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genetic diversitytraditional agrosystemsvariety nameslandracesdurum wheatissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

