BACKGROUND
gene expression connectivity mapping has gained much popularity recently with a number of successful applications in biomedical research testifying its utility and promise. previously methodological research in connectivity mapping mainly focused on two of the key components in the framework, namely, the reference gene expression profiles and the connectivity mapping algorithms. the other key component in this framework, the query gene signature, has been left to users to construct without much consensus on how this should be done, albeit it has been an issue most relevant to end users. as a key input to the connectivity mapping process, gene signature is crucially important in returning biologically meaningful and relevant results. this paper intends to formulate a standardized procedure for constructing high quality gene signatures from a user’s perspective.


RESULTS
we describe a two-stage process for making quality gene signatures using gene expression data as initial inputs. first, a differential gene expression analysis comparing two distinct biological states; only the genes that have passed stringent statistical criteria are considered in the second stage of the process, which involves ranking genes based on statistical as well as biological significance. we introduce a “gene signature progression” method as a standard procedure in connectivity mapping. starting from the highest ranked gene, we progressively determine the minimum length of the gene signature that allows connections to the reference profiles  being established with a preset target false discovery rate. we use a lung cancer dataset and a breast cancer dataset as two case studies to demonstrate how this standardized procedure works, and we show that highly relevant and interesting biological connections are returned. of particular note is gefitinib, identified as among the candidate therapeutics in our lung cancer case study. our gene signature was based on gene expression data from taiwan female non-smoker lung cancer patients, while there is evidence from independent studies that gefitinib is highly effective in treating women, non-smoker or former light smoker, advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients of asian origin.


CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we introduced a gene signature progression method into connectivity mapping, which enables a standardized procedure for constructing high quality gene signatures. this progression method is particularly useful when the number of differentially expressed genes identified is large, and when there is a need to prioritize them to be included in the query signature. the results from two case studies demonstrate that the approach we have developed is capable of obtaining pertinent candidate drugs with high precision.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
connectivity mappingdifferentially expressed genesgene signature progressiondisease inhibitory compoundslung cancerbreast cancerbbsrc/mrc/epsrc co-funded grantbb/i009051/1zhang shu-dong epsrcdoctoral training grantwen qing european union's seventh framework programme fp7/2007-2013rea grant agreement no  <cit> hamilton peter w. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

