BACKGROUND
streptococcus mutans is the primary etiological agent of human dental caries. it can metabolize a wide variety of carbohydrates and produce large amounts of organic acids that cause enamel demineralization. phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent sugar phosphotransferase system  plays an important role in carbohydrates uptake of s. mutans. the ptxa and ptxb genes in s. mutans encode putative enzyme iia and enzyme iib of the l-ascorbate-specific pts. the aim of this study was to analyze the function of these proteins and understand the transcriptional regulatory mechanism.


RESULTS
ptxa−, ptxb−, as well as ptxa−, ptxb− double-deletion mutants all had more extended lag phase and lower growth yield than wild-type strain ua <dig> when grown in the medium using l-ascorbate as the sole carbon source. acid production and acid killing assays showed that the absence of the ptxa and ptxb genes resulted in a reduction in the capacity for acidogenesis, and all three mutant strains did not survive an acid shock. according to biofilm and extracellular polysaccharides  formation analysis, all the mutant strains formed much less prolific biofilms with small amounts of eps than wild-type ua <dig> when using l-ascorbate as the sole carbon source. moreover, pcr analysis and quantitative real-time pcr revealed that sgat, ptxa, ptxb, smu. <dig>  smu. <dig> and smu. <dig> appear to be parts of the same operon. the transcription levels of these genes were all elevated in the presence of l-ascorbate, and the expression of ptxa gene decreased significantly once ptxb gene was knockout.


CONCLUSIONS
the ptxa and ptxb genes are involved in the growth, aciduricity, acidogenesis, and formation of biofilms and eps of s. mutans when l-ascorbate is the sole carbon source. in addition, the expression of ptxa is regulated by ptxb. ptxa, ptxb, and the upstream gene sgat, the downstream genes smu. <dig>  smu. <dig> and smu. <dig> appear to be parts of the same operon, and l-ascorbate is a potential inducer of the operon.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
streptococcus mutansphosphotransferase systeml-ascorbateaciduricityacidogenesisbiofilm formationextracellular polysaccharideshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china81050035zhao wanghong guangdong university development foundationthe president foundation of nanfang hospital, southern medical university2013b003zhao wanghong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

