BACKGROUND
aspergillus fumigatus produces a number of secondary metabolites, one of which, gliotoxin, has been shown to exhibit anti-fungal activity. thus, a. fumigatus must be able to protect itself against gliotoxin. indeed one of the genes in the gliotoxin biosynthetic gene cluster in a. fumigatus, glit, is required for self-protection against the toxin- however the global self-protection mechanism deployed is unclear. rna-seq was employed to identify genes differentially regulated upon exposure to gliotoxin in a. fumigatus wild-type and a. fumigatus ∆glit, a strain that is hypersensitive to gliotoxin.


RESULTS
deletion of a. fumigatus glit resulted in altered expression of  <dig> genes  when compared to a. fumigatus wild-type, of which  <dig> genes were up-regulated and  <dig> genes were down-regulated. expression of  <dig> genes was differentially regulated  in a. fumigatus wild-type when exposed to gliotoxin, consisting of  <dig> genes with up-regulated expression and  <dig> genes with down-regulated expression. interestingly, a much larger number of genes,  <dig>  were found to be differentially regulated  in a. fumigatus ∆glit when challenged with gliotoxin. these consisted of  <dig> genes with up-regulated expression, and  <dig> genes with down-regulated expression. functional catalogue  classification of differentially regulated genes revealed an enrichment of genes involved in both primary metabolic functions and secondary metabolism. specifically, genes involved in gliotoxin biosynthesis, helvolic acid biosynthesis, siderophore-iron transport genes and also nitrogen metabolism genes and ribosome biogenesis genes underwent altered expression. it was confirmed that gliotoxin biosynthesis is induced upon exposure to exogenous gliotoxin, production of unrelated secondary metabolites is attenuated in a. fumigatus ∆glit, while quantitative proteomic analysis confirmed disrupted translation in a. fumigatus ∆glit challenged with exogenous gliotoxin.


CONCLUSIONS
this study presents the first global investigation of the transcriptional response to exogenous gliotoxin in a. fumigatus wild-type and the hyper-sensitive strain, ∆glit. our data highlight the global and extensive affects of exogenous gliotoxin on a sensitive strain devoid of a self-protection mechanism and infer that glit functionality is required for the optimal biosynthesis of selected secondary metabolites in a. fumigatus.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gliotoxinrna-seqtranscriptomesecondary metabolismfungal proteomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

