BACKGROUND
plants respond to diverse environmental cues including microbial perturbations by coordinated regulation of thousands of genes. these intricate transcriptional regulatory interactions depend on the recognition of specific promoter sequences by regulatory transcription factors. the combinatorial and cooperative action of multiple transcription factors defines a regulatory network that enables plant cells to respond to distinct biological signals. the identification of immune-related modules in large-scale transcriptional regulatory networks can reveal the mechanisms by which exposure to a pathogen elicits a precise phenotypic immune response.


RESULTS
we have generated a large-scale immune co-expression network using a comprehensive set of arabidopsis thaliana  transcriptomic data, which consists of a wide spectrum of immune responses to pathogens or pathogen-mimicking stimuli treatments. we employed both linear and non-linear models to generate arabidopsis immune co-expression regulatory  network. we computed network topological properties and ascertained that this newly constructed immune network is densely connected, possesses hubs, exhibits high modularity, and displays hallmarks of a “real” biological network. we partitioned the network and identified  <dig> novel modules related to immune functions. gene ontology  enrichment analyses provided insight into the key biological processes involved in determining finely tuned immune responses. we also developed novel software called occean  to discover statistically enriched promoter elements in the upstream regulatory regions of arabidopsis at a whole genome level. we demonstrated that occean exhibits higher precision than the existing promoter element discovery tools. in light of known and newly discovered cis-regulatory elements, we evaluated biological significance of two key immune-related functional modules and proposed mechanism to explain how large sets of diverse go genes coherently function to mount effective immune responses.


CONCLUSIONS
we used a network-based, top-down approach to discover immune-related modules from transcriptomic data in arabidopsis. detailed analyses of these functional modules reveal new insight into the topological properties of immune co-expression networks and a comprehensive understanding of multifaceted plant defense responses. we present evidence that our newly developed software, occean, could become a popular tool for the arabidopsis research community as well as potentially expand to analyze other eukaryotic genomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pathogen and pathogen-mimic stimulilinear and non-linear modelstranscriptional regulatory networknetwork topologygo termsoccean softwareimmune-related functional modulesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

