BACKGROUND
a large number of papers have been published on analysis of microarray data with particular emphasis on normalization of data, detection of differentially expressed genes, clustering of genes and regulatory network. on other hand there are only few studies on relation between expression level and composition of nucleotide/protein sequence, using expression data. there is a need to understand why particular genes/proteins express more in particular conditions. in this study, we analyze  <dig> genes of saccharomyces cerevisiae obtained from holstege et al.,  to understand the relationship between expression level and amino acid composition.


RESULTS
we compute the correlation between expression of a gene and amino acid composition of its protein. it was observed that some residues  have significant positive correlation  and some other residues  have negative correlation  with the expression of genes. a significant negative correlation  was also found between length and gene expression. these observations indicate the relationship between percent composition and gene expression level. thus, attempts have been made to develop a support vector machine  based method for predicting the expression level of genes from its protein sequence. in this method the svm is trained with proteins whose gene expression data is known in a given condition. then trained svm is used to predict the gene expression of other proteins of the same organism in the same condition. a correlation coefficient r =  <dig>  was obtained between predicted and experimentally determined expression of genes, which improves from r =  <dig>  to  <dig>  when dipeptide composition was used instead of residue composition. the method was evaluated using 5-fold cross validation test. we also demonstrate that amino acid composition information along with gene expression data can be used for improving the function classification of proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
there is a correlation between gene expression and amino acid composition that can be used to predict the expression level of genes up to a certain extent. a web server based on the above strategy has been developed for calculating the correlation between amino acid composition and gene expression and prediction of expression level . this server will allow users to study the evolution from expression data.

