BACKGROUND
domestication of the wild pig has led to obese and lean phenotype breeds, and evolutionary genome research has sought to identify the regulatory mechanisms underlying this phenotypic diversity. however, revealing the molecular mechanisms underlying muscle phenotype variation based on differentially expressed genes has proved to be difficult. to characterize the mechanisms regulating muscle phenotype variation under artificial selection, we aimed to provide an integrated view of genome organization by weighted gene coexpression network analysis.


RESULTS
our analysis was based on  <dig> publicly available next-generation sequencing datasets of lean and obese pig muscle generated from  <dig> developmental stages. the evolution of the constructed coexpression modules was examined using the genome resequencing data of  <dig> domestic pigs and  <dig> wild boars. our results showed the regulation of muscle development might be more complex than had been previously acknowledged, and is regulated by the coordinated action of muscle, nerve and immunity related genes. breed-specific modules that regulated muscle phenotype divergence were identified, and hundreds of hub genes with major roles in muscle development were determined to be responsible for key functional distinctions between breeds. our evolutionary analysis showed that the role of changes in the coding sequence under positive selection in muscle phenotype divergence was minor.


CONCLUSIONS
muscle phenotype divergence was found to be regulated by the divergence of coexpression network modules under artificial selection, and not by changes in the coding sequence of genes. our results present multiple lines of evidence suggesting links between modules and muscle phenotypes, and provide insights into the molecular bases of genome organization in muscle development and phenotype variation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
musclemodulesweighted gene coexpression network analysisphenotype variationartificial selectionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

