BACKGROUND
polystichum  is probably the third largest fern genus in the world and contains ca.  <dig> species. species of polystichum occur on all continents except antarctica, but its highest diversity is found in east asia, especially southwest china and adjacent regions. previous studies typically had sparse taxon sampling and used limited dna sequence data. consequently, the majority of morphological hypotheses/classifications have never been tested using molecular data.


RESULTS
in this study, dna sequences of five plastid loci of  <dig> accessions representing ca.  <dig> species of polystichum and  <dig> species of the closely related genera were used to infer a phylogeny using maximum likelihood, bayesian inference, and maximum parsimony. our analyses show that  polystichum is monophyletic, this being supported by not only molecular data but also morphological features and distribution information;  polystichum is resolved into two strongly supported monophyletic clades, corresponding to the two subgenera, p. subg. polystichum and p. subg. haplopolystichum;  accessions of p. subg. polystichum are resolved into three major clades: clade k , clade l , and the hymaso superclade dominated by accessions of p. sect. hypopeltis, p. sect. macropolystichum, and p. sect. sorolepidium, while those of p. subg. haplopolystichum are resolved into eight major clades; and  the monophyly of the afra clade , the australasian clade , and the north american clade  is confirmed.


CONCLUSIONS
of the  <dig> sections of polystichum recognized in a recent classification of the genus, four  are resolved as non-monophyletic,  <dig> are recovered as monophyletic, and three are monospecific. of the  <dig> monophyletic sections, two  are weakly supported and  <dig> are strongly supported as monophyletic. the relationships of  <dig> sections  are well resolved.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cyrtomiumdryopteridaceaefern phylogenyhymaso supercladehysufi clademcschmans cladephanerophlebiapolystichumissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

