BACKGROUND
leishmania infantum is the protozoan parasite responsible for zoonotic visceral leishmaniasis in the mediterranean basin. a recent outbreak in humans has been reported in this area. the life cycle of the parasite is digenetic. the promastigote stage develops within the gut of phlebotomine sand flies, whereas amastigotes survive and multiply within phagolysosomes of mammalian host phagocytes. the major vector of l. infantum in spain is phlebotomus perniciosus. the axenic culture model of promastigotes is generally used because it is able to mimic the conditions of the natural environment . however, infectivity decreases with culture passages and infection of laboratory animals is frequently required. enrichment of the stationary phase population in highly infective metacyclic promastigotes is achieved by negative selection with peanut agglutinin , which is possible only in certain leishmania species such as l. major and l. infantum. in this study, in vitro infectivity and differential gene expression of cultured pna-negative promastigotes  and metacyclic promastigotes isolated from the sand fly anterior thoracic midgut  have been compared.


RESULTS
in vitro infectivity is about  <dig> % higher in terms of rate of infected cells and number of amastigotes per infected cell in pro-pper than in pro-pna−. this finding is in agreement with up-regulation of a leishmanolysin gene  and genes involved in biosynthesis of glycosylinositolphospholipids , lipophosphoglycan  and proteophosphoglycan  in pro-pper. in addition, differences between pro-pper and pro-pna− in genes involved in important cellular processes  have been found.


CONCLUSIONS
pro-pper are significantly more infective than peanut lectin non-agglutinating ones. therefore, negative selection with pna is an appropriate method for isolating metacyclic promastigotes in stationary phase of axenic culture but it does not allow reaching the in vitro infectivity levels of pro-pper. indeed, gipl, lpg and ppg biosynthetic genes together with a gp <dig> gene are up-regulated in pro-pper and interestingly, the correlation coefficient between both transcriptomes in terms of transcript abundance is r2 =  <dig> . this means that the correlation is sufficiently high to consider that both samples are physiologically comparable  and sufficiently low to conclude that important differences in transcript abundance have been found. therefore, the implications of axenic culture should be evaluated case-by-case in each experimental design even when the stationary phase population in culture is enriched in metacyclic promastigotes by negative selection with pna.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
leishmania infantummetacyclic promastigotesphlebotomus perniciosuspeanut lectin agglutinationinfectivitydifferential gene expressionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004837ministerio de ciencia e innovación agl2010-21806-c02-01larraga vicente http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008054fundación ramón areces 050204100014/ott, code 20100338larraga vicente issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

