BACKGROUND
a compelling demonstration of adaptation by natural selection is the ability
of parasites to manipulate host behavior. one dramatic example involves fungal
species from the genus ophiocordyceps that
control their ant hosts by inducing a biting behavior. intensive sampling across
the globe of ants that died after being manipulated by ophiocordyceps suggests that this phenomenon is highly
species-specific. we advance our understanding of this system by reconstructing
host manipulation by ophiocordyceps parasites
under controlled laboratory conditions and combining this with field observations
of infection rates and a metabolomics survey.


RESULTS
we report on a newly discovered species of ophiocordyceps unilateralis sensu lato from north america that we
use to address the species-specificity of ophiocordyceps-induced manipulation of ant behavior. we show that
the fungus can kill all ant species tested, but only manipulates the behavior of
those it infects in nature. to investigate if this could be explained at the
molecular level, we used ex vivo culturing
assays to measure the metabolites that are secreted by the fungus to mediate
fungus-ant tissue interactions. we show the fungus reacts heterogeneously to
brains of different ant species by secreting a different array of metabolites. by
determining which ion peaks are significantly enriched when the fungus is grown
alongside brains of its naturally occurring host, we discovered candidate
compounds that could be involved in behavioral manipulation by o. unilateralis s.l.. two of these candidates are known
to be involved in neurological diseases and cancer.


CONCLUSIONS
the integrative work presented here shows that ant brain manipulation by
o. unilateralis s.l. is species-specific
seemingly because the fungus produces a specific array of compounds as a reaction
to the presence of the host brain it has evolved to manipulate. these studies have
resulted in the discovery of candidate compounds involved in establishing
behavioral manipulation by this specialized fungus and therefore represent a major
advancement towards an understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying this
phenomenon.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized
users.

keywords
behavioral manipulationhost specificitysecretomemetabolomicsophiocordyceps unilateralisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

