BACKGROUND
modern banana cultivars are primarily interspecific triploid hybrids of two species, musa acuminata and musa balbisiana, which respectively contribute the a- and b-genomes. the m. balbisiana genome has been associated with improved vigour and tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses and is thus a target for musa breeding programs. however, while a reference m. acuminata genome has recently been released , little sequence data is available for the corresponding b-genome.

to address these problems we carried out next generation gdna sequencing of the wild diploid m. balbisiana variety ‘pisang klutuk wulung’ . our strategy was to align pkw gdna reads against the published a-genome and to extract the mapped consensus sequences for subsequent rounds of evaluation and gene annotation.


RESULTS
the resulting b-genome is 79% the size of the a-genome, and contains  <dig>  predicted functional gene sequences which is nearly identical to the  <dig>  of the a-genome. there is substantial sequence divergence from the a-genome at a frequency of  <dig> homozygous snp per  <dig>  bp, and a high degree of heterozygosity corresponding to one heterozygous snp per  <dig>  bp. using expressed small rna data, a similar number of microrna sequences were predicted in both a- and b-genomes, but additional novel mirnas were detected, including some that are unique to each genome. the usefulness of this b-genome sequence was evaluated by mapping rna-seq data from a set of triploid aaa and aab hybrids simultaneously to both genomes. results for the plantains demonstrated the expected 2: <dig> distribution of reads across the a- and b-genomes, but for the aaa genomes, results show they contain regions of significant homology to the b-genome supporting proposals that there has been a history of interspecific recombination between homeologous a and b chromosomes in musa hybrids.


CONCLUSIONS
we have generated and annotated a draft reference musa b-genome and demonstrate that this can be used for molecular genetic mapping of gene transcripts and small rna expression data from several allopolyploid banana cultivars. this draft therefore represents a valuable resource to support the study of metabolism in inter- and intraspecific triploid musa hybrids and to help direct breeding programs.

biotic stressbananafe’igenetic diversitymicrorna molecular breedingmusa acuminatamusa balbisianapisang klutuk wulungplantainpolyploidywild banana

