BACKGROUND
protein-protein interaction  plays essential roles in cellular functions. the cost, time and other limitations associated with the current experimental methods have motivated the development of computational methods for predicting ppis. as protein interactions generally occur via domains instead of the whole molecules, predicting domain-domain interaction  is an important step toward ppi prediction. computational methods developed so far have utilized information from various sources at different levels, from primary sequences, to molecular structures, to evolutionary profiles.


RESULTS
in this paper, we propose a computational method to predict ddi using support vector machines , based on domains represented as interaction profile hidden markov models  where interacting residues in domains are explicitly modeled according to the three dimensional structural information available at the protein data bank . features about the domains are extracted first as the fisher scores derived from the iphmm and then selected using singular value decomposition . domain pairs are represented by concatenating their selected feature vectors, and classified by a support vector machine trained on these feature vectors. the method is tested by leave-one-out cross validation experiments with a set of interacting protein pairs adopted from the 3did database. the prediction accuracy has shown significant improvement as compared to interprets , an existing method for ppi prediction that also uses the sequences and complexes of known 3d structure.


CONCLUSIONS
we show that domain-domain interaction prediction can be significantly enhanced by exploiting information inherent in the domain profiles via feature selection based on fisher scores, singular value decomposition and supervised learning based on support vector machines. datasets and source code are freely available on the web at http://liao.cis.udel.edu/pub/svdsvm. implemented in matlab and supported on linux and ms windows.

