BACKGROUND
long non-coding rnas  are important in various biological processes, but very few studies on lncrna have been conducted in birds. to identify incrnas expressed during feather development, we analyzed single-stranded rna-seq  data from the anterior and posterior dorsal regions during zebra finch  embryonic development. using published transcriptomic data, we further analyzed the evolutionary conservation of incrnas in birds and amniotes.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  lncrnas, including  <dig> intergenic lncrnas ,  <dig> intronic lncrnas, and  <dig> antisense lncrnas , were identified using our newly developed pipeline. these avian incrnas share similar characteristics with lncrnas in mammals, such as shorter transcript length, lower exon number, lower average expression level and less sequence conservation than mrnas. however, the proportion of lncrnas overlapping with transposable elements in birds is much lower than that in mammals. we predicted the functions of incrnas based on the enriched functions of co-expressed protein-coding genes. clusters of lncrnas associated with natal down development were identified. the sequences and expression levels of candidate lncrnas that shared conserved sequences among birds were validated by qpcr in both zebra finch and chicken. finally, we identified three highly conserved lncrnas that may be associated with natal down development.


CONCLUSIONS
our study provides the first systematical identification of avian lncrnas using ssrna-seq analysis and offers a resource of embryonically expressed lncrnas in zebra finch. we also predicted the biological function of identified lncrnas.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
feather developmentlncrnazebra finchssrna-seqhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004663ministry of science and technology, taiwan104-2621-b-001-003-my3105-2311-b-007-008-my2ng chen siang li wen-hsiung issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

