BACKGROUND
biogenic sulfuric acid  corrosion damages sewerage and wastewater treatment facilities but is not well investigated in sludge digesters. sulfur/sulfide oxidizing bacteria  oxidize sulfur compounds to sulfuric acid, inducing bsa corrosion. to obtain more information on bsa corrosion in sludge digesters, microbial communities from six different, bsa-damaged, digesters were analyzed using culture dependent methods and subsequent polymerase chain reaction denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis . bsa production was determined in laboratory scale systems with mixed and pure cultures, and in-situ with concrete specimens from the digester headspace and sludge zones.


RESULTS
the sob acidithiobacillus thiooxidans, thiomonas intermedia, and thiomonas perometabolis were cultivated and compared to pcr-dgge results, revealing the presence of additional acidophilic and neutrophilic sob. sulfate concentrations of 10–87 mmol/l after 6– <dig> days of incubation  in mixed cultures, and up to 433 mmol/l after 42 days  in pure a. thiooxidans cultures showed huge sulfuric acid production potentials. additionally, elevated sulfate concentrations in the corroded concrete of the digester headspace in contrast to the concrete of the sludge zone indicated biological sulfur/sulfide oxidation.


CONCLUSIONS
the presence of sob and confirmation of their sulfuric acid production under laboratory conditions reveal that these organisms might contribute to bsa corrosion within sludge digesters. elevated sulfate concentrations on the corroded concrete wall in the digester headspace  further indicate biological sulfur/sulfide oxidation in-situ. for the first time, sob presence and activity is directly relatable to bsa corrosion in sludge digesters.

keywords
acid attackconcrete corrosionsludge digestersulfur oxidizing bacteriathiobacillusbiogenic sulfuric acidsulfate reducing organismshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006360bundesministerium für wirtschaft und energie kf2990501sa2huber bettina issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

