BACKGROUND
guatemala is a multiethnic and multilingual country located in central america. the main population groups separate ‘ladinos’ , and native indigenous people of maya descent. among the present-day guatemalan maya, there are more than  <dig> different ethnic groups separated by different languages and cultures. genetic variation of these communities still remains largely unexplored. the principal aim of this study is to explore the genetic variability of the maya and ‘ladinos’ from guatemala by means of uniparental and ancestry informative markers .


RESULTS
analyses of uniparental genetic markers indicate that maya have a dominant native american ancestry . ‘ladino’, however, show a clear gender-bias as indicated by the large european ancestry observed in the y-chromosome  compared to the mtdna . autosomal polymorphisms  also mirror this marked gender-bias:  native american ancestry: 92% for the maya vs. 55% for the ‘ladino’, and  european ancestry: 8% for the maya vs. 41% for the ‘ladino’. in addition, the impact of the trans-atlantic slave trade on the present-day guatemalan population is very low , in part mirroring the fact that guatemala has a predominant orientation to the pacific ocean instead of a caribbean one. sequencing of entire guatemalan mitogenomes has led to improved native american phylogeny via the addition of new haplogroups that are mainly observed in mesoamerica and/or the north of south america.


CONCLUSIONS
the data reveal the existence of a fluid gene flow in the mesoamerican area and a predominant unidirectional flow towards south america, most likely occurring during the pre-classic  and the classic  eras of the mesoamerican chronology, coinciding with development of the most distinctive and advanced mesoamerican civilization, the maya. phylogenetic features of mtdna data also suggest a demographic scenario that is compatible with moderate local endogamy and isolation in the maya combined with episodes of gene exchange between ethnic groups, suggesting an ethno-genesis in the guatemalan maya that is recent and supported on a cultural rather than a biological basis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mesoamericaguatemalamayaladinomtdnay-chromosomeaimsautosomal snpsphylogeographyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

