BACKGROUND
insects respond to the spatial and temporal dynamics of a pheromone plume, which implies not only a strong response to 'odor on', but also to 'odor off'. this requires mechanisms geared toward a fast signal termination. several mechanisms may contribute to signal termination, among which odorant-degrading enzymes. these enzymes putatively play a role in signal dynamics by a rapid inactivation of odorants in the vicinity of the sensory receptors, although direct in vivo experimental evidences are lacking. here we verified the role of an extracellular carboxylesterase, esterase- <dig> , in the sensory physiological and behavioral dynamics of drosophila melanogaster response to its pheromone, cis-vaccenyl acetate . est- <dig> was previously linked to post-mating effects in the reproductive system of females. as est- <dig> is also known to hydrolyze cva in vitro and is expressed in the main olfactory organ, the antenna, we tested here its role in olfaction as a putative odorant-degrading enzyme.


RESULTS
we first confirm that est- <dig> is highly expressed in olfactory sensilla, including cva-sensitive sensilla, and we show that expression is likely associated with non-neuronal cells. our electrophysiological approaches show that the dynamics of olfactory receptor neuron  responses is strongly influenced by est- <dig>  as in est-6° null mutants  cva-sensitive orn showed increased firing rate and prolonged activity in response to cva. est-6° mutant males had a lower threshold of behavioral response to cva, as revealed by the analysis of two cva-induced behaviors. in particular, mutant males exhibited a strong decrease of male-male courtship, in association with a delay in courtship initiation.


CONCLUSIONS
our study presents evidence that est- <dig> plays a role in the physiological and behavioral dynamics of sex pheromone response in drosophila males and supports a role of est- <dig> as an odorant-degrading enzyme  in male antennae. our results also expand the role of est- <dig> in drosophila biology, from reproduction to olfaction, and highlight the role of odes in insect olfaction.

carboxylesteraseesterase 6olfactionpheromonesignal termination

