BACKGROUND
secretory and transmembrane proteins traverse the endoplasmic reticulum  and golgi compartments for final maturation prior to reaching their functional destinations. members of the p <dig> protein family, which are transmembrane constituents of er and golgi-derived transport vesicles, function in trafficking some secretory proteins in yeast and higher eukaryotes. yeast p <dig> mutants have minor secretory defects and induce an er stress response that likely results from accumulation of proteins in the er due to disrupted trafficking. we tested the hypothesis that loss of drosophila melanogaster p <dig> protein function causes a transcriptional response characteristic of er stress activation.


RESULTS
we performed genome-wide profiling experiments on tissues from drosophila females with a mutation in the p <dig> gene logjam  and identified changes in message levels for  <dig> genes. we found that loj mutants have expression profiles consistent with activation of stress responses. of particular note is our observation that approximately 20% of the loci up regulated in loj mutants are drosophila immune-regulated genes , many of which are transcriptional targets of nf-κb or jnk signaling pathways.


CONCLUSIONS
the loj mutant expression profiling data support the hypothesis that loss of p <dig> function causes a stress response. genes involved in ameliorating stress, such as those encoding products involved in proteolysis, metabolism and protein folding, are differentially expressed in loj mutants compared to controls. nearly 20% of the genes with increased message levels in the loj mutant are transcriptional targets of drosophila nf-κb proteins. activation of nf-κb transcription factors is the hallmark of an er stress response called the er overload response. therefore, our data are consistent with the hypothesis that drosophila p <dig> mutations induce stress, possibly via activation of er stress response pathways. because of the molecular and genetic tools available for drosophila, the fly will be a useful system for investigating the tissue-specific functions of p <dig> proteins and for determining the how disrupting these molecules causes stress responses in vivo.

