BACKGROUND
the oral gpcr nutrient/taste receptor gene repertoire consists of the tas1r family , the tas2r family  as well as several other potential candidate sensors of amino acids, peptones and fatty acids. taste/nutrient receptors play a fundamental role in survival through the identification of dietary nutrients or potentially toxic compounds. in humans and rodents some variations in taste sensitivity have been related to receptor polymorphisms. some allelic variants, in turn, have been linked to the adaptation to specific geographical locations and dietary regimes. in contrast, the porcine taste/nutrient receptor repertoire has been only partially characterized and limited information on genetic variation across breeds and geographical location exists. the present study aims at filling this void which in turn will form the bases for future improvements in pig nutrition.


RESULTS
our results show that the pig oral repertoire of taste/nutrient receptors consists of at least  <dig> receptor genes with significant transcription measured for  <dig>  when compared to humans and rodents, the porcine gene sequences encoding sensors for carbohydrates, amino acids and fatty acids were highly conserved whilst the bitter taste gene family  showed high divergence. we identified  <dig> porcine tas2rs of which  <dig> are orthologous to human sequences. the single nucleotide polymorphism  sequence analysis using  <dig> pig genomes, representing  <dig> different breeds/populations, revealed that the tas2r subset had higher variability  than for non-bitter taste genes . in addition, our results show that the difference in nutrient receptor genes between asian and european breeds accounts for only a small part of the variability, which is in contrast with previous findings involving genome wide data.


CONCLUSIONS
we have defined twenty-eight oral nutrient sensing related genes for the pig. the homology with the human repertoire is high for the porcine non-bitter taste gene repertoire and low for the porcine tas2r repertoire. our data suggests that bitter taste is a plastic trait, possibly associated with the ability of pigs to adapt to diverse environments and that may be subject to balancing selection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pignutritiongpcrtaste receptorbittert1rt2rsnpspopulation genomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

