BACKGROUND
pyridoxal 5′-phosphate -dependent enzymes of fold type i, the most studied structural class of the plp-dependent enzyme superfamily, are known to exist as stand-alone homodimers or homotetramers. these enzymes have been found also embedded in multimodular and multidomain assembly lines involved in the biosynthesis of polyketides  and nonribosomal peptides . the aim of this work is to provide a proteome-wide view of the distribution and characteristics of type i domains covalently integrated in these assemblies in prokaryotes.


RESULTS
an ad-hoc hidden markov profile was calculated using a sequence alignment derived from a multiple structural superposition of distantly related plp-enzymes of fold type i. the profile was utilized to scan the sequence databank and to collect the proteins containing at least one type i domain linked to a component of an assembly line in bacterial genomes. the domains adjacent to a carrier protein were further investigated. phylogenetic analysis suggested the presence of four plp-dependent families: aminotran_ <dig>  beta_elim_lyase and pyridoxal_dec, occurring mainly within mixed nrps/pks clusters, and aminotran_1_ <dig> found mainly in pks clusters. sequence similarity to the reference plp enzymes with solved structures ranged from  <dig> to 42% identity. homology models were built for each representative type i domain and molecular docking simulations with putative substrates were carried out. prediction of the protein-protein interaction sites evidenced that the surface regions of the type i domains embedded within multienzyme assemblies were different from those of the self-standing enzymes; these structural features appear to be required for productive interactions with the adjacent domains in a multidomain context.


CONCLUSIONS
this work provides a systematic view of the occurrence of type i domain within nrps and pks assembly lines and it predicts their structural characteristics using computational methods. comparison with the corresponding stand-alone enzymes highlighted the common and different traits related to various aspects of their structure-function relationship. therefore, the results of this work, on one hand contribute to the understanding of the functional and structural diversity of the plp-dependent type i enzymes and, on the other, pave the way to further studies aimed at their applications in combinatorial biosynthesis.

pyridoxal 5′-phosphatefold type inonribosomal peptide synthetasespolyketide synthasestailoring domainshidden markov modelshomology modelingprotein-protein interactiondocking

