BACKGROUND
natrxh, a thioredoxin type h, shows differential expression between self-incompatible and self-compatible nicotiana species. natrxh interacts in vitro with s-rnase and co-localizes with it in the extracellular matrix of the stylar transmitting tissue. natrxh contains n- and c-terminal extensions, a feature shared by thioredoxin h proteins of subgroup  <dig>  to ascertain the function of these extensions in natrxh secretion and protein-protein interaction, we performed a deletion analysis on natrxh and fused the resulting variants to gfp.


RESULTS
we found an internal domain in the n-terminal extension, called nβ, that is essential for natrxh secretion but is not hydrophobic, a canonical feature of a signal peptide. the lack of hydrophobicity as well as the location of the secretion signal within the natrxh primary structure, suggest an unorthodox secretion route for natrxh. notably, we found that the fusion protein natrxh-gfp is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum and that treatment of natrxh-gfp-expressing cells with brefeldin a leads to its retention in the golgi, which indicates that natrxh uses, to some extent, the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi apparatus for secretion. furthermore, we found that nβ contributes to natrxh tertiary structure stabilization and that the c-terminus functions in the protein-protein interaction with s-rnase.


CONCLUSIONS
the extensions contained in natrxh sequence have specific functions on the protein. while the c-terminus directly participates in protein-protein interaction, particularly on its interaction with s-rnase in vitro; the n-terminal extension contains two structurally different motifs: nα and nβ. nβ, the inner domain , is essential and enough to target natrxh towards the apoplast. interestingly, when it was fused to gfp, this protein was also found in the cell wall of the onion cells. although the biochemical features of the n-terminus suggested a non-classical secretion pathway, our results provided evidence that natrxh at least uses the endoplasmic reticulum, golgi apparatus and also vesicles for secretion. therefore, the nβ domain sequence is suggested to be a novel signal peptide.

thioredoxinsecretionself-incompatibilitynicotiana alatagametophytics-rnase

