BACKGROUND
shortened rapid eye movement  sleep latency and increased rem sleep amount are presumed biological markers of depression. these sleep alterations are also observable in several animal models of depression as well as during the rebound sleep after selective rem sleep deprivation . furthermore, rem sleep fragmentation is typically associated with stress procedures and anxiety. the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor  antidepressants reduce rem sleep time and increase rem latency after acute dosing in normal condition and even during rem rebound following rd. however, their therapeutic outcome evolves only after weeks of treatment, and the effects of chronic treatment in rem-deprived animals have not been studied yet.


RESULTS
chronic escitalopram-  or vehicle-treated rats were subjected to a 3-day-long rd on day  <dig> using the flower pot procedure or kept in home cage. on day  <dig>  fronto-parietal electroencephalogram, electromyogram and motility were recorded in the first 2 h of the passive phase. the observed sleep patterns were characterized applying standard sleep metrics, by modelling the transitions between sleep phases using markov chains and by spectral analysis.

based on markov chain analysis, chronic escitalopram treatment attenuated the rem sleep fragmentation  during the rebound sleep. additionally, the antidepressant avoided the frequent awakenings during the first 30 min of recovery period. the spectral analysis showed that the ssri prevented the rd-caused elevation in theta  power during slow-wave sleep. conversely, based on the aggregate sleep metrics, escitalopram had only moderate effects and it did not significantly attenuate the rem rebound after rd.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, chronic ssri treatment is capable of reducing several effects on sleep which might be the consequence of the sub-chronic stress caused by the flower pot method. these data might support the antidepressant activity of ssris, and may allude that investigating the rebound period following the flower pot protocol could be useful to detect antidepressant drug response. markov analysis is a suitable method to study the sleep pattern.

keywords
rem sleep deprivationeegserotoninmarkov chain modelstage transitionanimal modeldepressionanxietythetarem sleep fragmentationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

