BACKGROUND
molecular phylogenetics has provided unprecedented resolution in the ruminant evolutionary tree. however, molecular age estimates using only one or a few  fossil calibration points have produced a diversity of conflicting ages for important evolutionary events within this clade. i here identify  <dig> fossil calibration points of relevance to the phylogeny of bovidae and ruminantia and use these, individually and together, to construct a dated molecular phylogeny through a reanalysis of the full mitochondrial genome of over  <dig> ruminant species.


RESULTS
the new multi-calibrated tree provides ages that are younger overall than found in previous studies. among these are young ages for the origin of crown ruminantia , and crown bovidae . these are argued to be reasonable hypotheses given that many basal fossils assigned to these taxa may in fact lie on the stem groups leading to the crown clades, thus inflating previous age estimates. areas of conflict between molecular and fossil dates do persist, however, especially with regard to the base of the rapid pecoran radiation and the sister relationship of moschidae to bovidae. results of the single-calibrated analyses also show that a very wide range of molecular age estimates are obtainable using different calibration points, and that the choice of calibration point can influence the topology of the resulting tree. compared to the single-calibrated trees, the multi-calibrated tree exhibits smaller variance in estimated ages and better reflects the fossil record.


CONCLUSIONS
the use of a large number of vetted fossil calibration points with soft bounds is promoted as a better approach than using just one or a few calibrations, or relying on internal-congruency metrics to discard good fossil data. this study also highlights the importance of considering morphological and ecological characteristics of clades when delimiting higher taxa. i also illustrate how phylogeographic and paleoenvironmental hypotheses inferred from a tree containing only extant taxa can be problematic without consideration of the fossil record. incorporating the fossil record of ruminantia is a necessary step for future analyses aiming to reconstruct the evolutionary history of this clade.

fossil calibrationruminantiabayesian analysisphylogenetic systematicsneogene

