BACKGROUND
retroviral vectors are valuable tools for gene transfer. particularly convenient are ires-containing retroviral vectors expressing both the protein of interest and a marker protein from a single bicistronic mrna. this coupled expression increases the relevance of tracking and/or selection of transduced cells based on the detection of a marker protein. pap <dig> is a retroviral vector containing egfp downstream of a modified ires element of emcv origin, and a cmv enhancer-promoter instead of the u <dig> region of the 5'ltr, which increases its efficiency in transient transfection. however, pap <dig> contains a limited multicloning site  and shows weak egfp expression, which previously led us to engineer an improved version, termed pprig, harboring: i) the wild-type ecmv ires sequence, thereby restoring its full activity; ii) an optimized mcs flanked by t <dig> and sp <dig> sequences; and iii) a ha tag encoding sequence 5' of the mcs .


RESULTS
the convenience of pprig makes it a good basic vector to generate additional derivatives for an extended range of use. here we present several novel pprig-based vectors  in which : i) the ha tag sequence was inserted in the three reading frames 3' of the mcs ; ii) a functional domain  was inserted either 5' or 3' of the mcs ; iii) egfp was replaced by either ecfp, eyfp, mcherry or puro-r ; and iv) mcherry, eyfp or egfp was inserted 5' of the mcs of the ires-egfp, ires-ecfp or ires-puro-r containing prigs, respectively . additionally, some of these prigs were also constructed in a pmigr mscv background which has been widely used in pluripotent cells.


CONCLUSIONS
these novel vectors allow for straightforward detection of any expressed protein , for functional studies of chimeric proteins , for multiple transductions and fluorescence analyses of transduced cells , or for quantitative detection of studied proteins in independently identified/selected transduced cells . they maintain the original advantages of pprig and provide suitable tools for either transient or stable expression and functional studies in a large range of experimental settings.

