BACKGROUND
consuming watercress is thought to provide health benefits as a consequence of its phytonutrient composition. however, for watercress there are currently limited genetic resources underpinning breeding efforts for either yield or phytonutritional traits. in this paper, we use rnaseq data from twelve watercress accessions to characterize the transcriptome, perform candidate gene mining and conduct differential expression analysis for two key phytonutritional traits: antioxidant  capacity and glucosinolate  content.


RESULTS
the watercress transcriptome was assembled to  <dig>  transcripts ; 71 % of which were annotated based on orthology to arabidopsis. differential expression analysis comparing watercress accessions with ‘high’ and ‘low’ ao and gls resulted in  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed loci for ao capacity and gls respectively. differentially expressed loci between high and low ao watercress were significantly enriched for genes involved in plant defence and response to stimuli, in line with the observation that ao are involved in plant stress-response. differential expression between the high and low gls watercress identified links to gls regulation and also novel transcripts warranting further investigation. additionally, we successfully identified watercress orthologs for arabidopsis phenylpropanoid, gls and shikimate biosynthesis pathway genes, and compiled a catalogue of polymorphic markers for future applications.


CONCLUSIONS
our work describes the first transcriptome of watercress and establishes the foundation for further molecular study by providing valuable resources, including sequence data, annotated transcripts, candidate genes and markers.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
watercressnasturtium officinalebrassicaceaernaseqde novo assemblydifferential expressionantioxidant capacityglucosinolatesgluconasturtiinphenylpropanoid pathwayissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

