BACKGROUND
trichoderma reesei is a key cellulase source for economically saccharifying cellulosic biomass for the production of biofuels. lignocellulose hydrolysis at temperatures above the optimum temperature of t. reesei cellulases  could provide many significant advantages, including reduced viscosity at high-solids loadings, lower risk of microbial contamination during saccharification, greater compatibility with high-temperature biomass pretreatment, and faster rates of hydrolysis. these potential advantages motivate efforts to engineer t. reesei cellulases that can hydrolyze lignocellulose at temperatures ranging from 60–70°c.


RESULTS
a b-factor guided approach for improving thermostability was used to engineer variants of endoglucanase i  from t. reesei  that are able to hydrolyze cellulosic substrates more rapidly than the recombinant wild-type tregi at temperatures ranging from 50–70°c. when expressed in t. reesei, tregi variant g230a/d113s/d115t  had a higher apparent melting temperature  and improved half-life at 60°c  than the recombinant  wild-type tregi . furthermore, g230a/d113s/d115t tr_tregi showed 2-fold improved activity compared to tr_tregi at 65°c on solid cellulosic substrates, and was as efficient in hydrolyzing cellulose at 60°c as tr_tregi was at 50°c. the activities and stabilities of the recombinant tregi enzymes followed similar trends but differed significantly in magnitude depending on the expression host . compared to n.crassa-expressed tregi, s. cerevisiae-expressed tregi showed inferior activity and stability, which was attributed to the lack of cyclization of the n-terminal glutamine in sc_tregi and not to differences in glycosylation. n-terminal pyroglutamate formation in tregi expressed in s. cerevisiae was found to be essential in elevating its activity and stability to levels similar to the t. reesei or n. crassa-expressed enzyme, highlighting the importance of this ubiquitous modification in gh <dig> enzymes.


CONCLUSIONS
structure-guided evolution of t. reesei egi was used to engineer enzymes with increased thermal stability and activity on solid cellulosic substrates. production of tregi enzymes in four hosts highlighted the impact of the expression host and the role of n-terminal pyroglutamate formation on the activity and stability of tregi enzymes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
trichoderma reeseiendoglucanase ib-factorcellulasethermostabilitycell-free synthesissaccharomyces cerevisiaeneurospora crassapyroglutamateglutaminyl cylcaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

