BACKGROUND
isoprenoids constitute a vast family of natural compounds performing diverse and essential functions in all domains of life. in most eubacteria, isoprenoids are synthesized through the methylerythritol 4-phosphate  pathway. the production of mep is usually catalyzed by deoxyxylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase  but a few organisms use an alternative dxr-like enzyme .


RESULTS
searches through  <dig> bacterial complete proteomes detected  <dig> sequences with similarity to dxr-ii. phylogenetic analysis identified three well-resolved clades: the dxr-ii family , and two previously uncharacterized nad-dependent oxidoreductase families . our analyses identified amino acid changes critical for the acquisition of dxr-ii biochemical function through type-i functional divergence, two of them mapping onto key residues for dxr-ii activity. dxr-ii showed a markedly discontinuous distribution, which was verified at several levels: taxonomic , metabolic , and phenotypic . by performing a thorough comparative sequence analysis of gc content, 3: <dig> dinucleotide frequencies, codon usage and codon adaptation indexes  between dxr-ii sequences and their corresponding genomes, we examined the role of horizontal gene transfer , as opposed to an scenario of massive gene loss, in the evolutionary origin and diversification of the dxr-ii subfamily in bacteria.


CONCLUSIONS
our analyses support a single origin of the dxr-ii family through functional divergence, in which constitutes an exceptional model of acquisition and maintenance of redundant gene functions between non-homologous genes as a result of convergent evolution. subsequently, although old episodic events of hgt could not be excluded, the results supported a prevalent role of gene loss in explaining the distribution of dxr-ii in specific pathogenic eubacteria. our results highlight the importance of the functional characterization of evolutionary shortcuts in isoprenoid biosynthesis for screening specific antibacterial drugs and for regulating the production of isoprenoids of human interest.

dxr-iiisoprenoid metabolismhorizontal gene transfergene lossfunctional divergence

