BACKGROUND
cattle breeding populations are susceptible to the propagation of recessive diseases. individual sires generate tens of thousands of progeny via artificial insemination. the frequency of deleterious alleles carried by such sires may increase considerably within few generations. deleterious alleles manifest themselves often by missing homozygosity resulting from embryonic/fetal, perinatal or juvenile lethality of homozygotes.


RESULTS
a scan for homozygous haplotype deficiency in  <dig>  fleckvieh cattle uncovered four haplotypes affecting reproductive and rearing success. exploiting whole-genome resequencing data from  <dig> animals facilitated to pinpoint putatively causal mutations in two of these haplotypes. a mutation causing an evolutionarily unlikely substitution in sugt <dig> was perfectly associated with a haplotype compromising insemination success. the mutation was not found in homozygous state in  <dig>  animals  and is thus likely to cause lethality of homozygous embryos. a frameshift mutation in slc2a <dig> encoding glucose transporter  <dig>  compromises calf survival. the mutation leads to premature termination of translation and activates cryptic splice sites resulting in multiple exon variants also with premature translation termination. the affected calves exhibit stunted growth, resembling the phenotypic appearance of fanconi-bickel syndrome in humans , which is also caused by mutations in slc2a <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
exploiting comprehensive genotype and sequence data enabled us to reveal two deleterious alleles in slc2a <dig> and sugt <dig> that compromise pre- and postnatal survival in homozygous state. our results provide the basis for genome-assisted approaches to avoiding inadvertent carrier matings and to improving reproductive and rearing success in fleckvieh cattle.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
slc2a2sugt1homozygous haplotype deficiencyfanconi-bickel syndromeembryonic lethalityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

