BACKGROUND
optimization of shade avoidance response  is crucial for enhancing crop yield in high-density planting conditions in modern agriculture, but a comprehensive study of the regulatory network of sar is still lacking in monocot crops.


RESULTS
in this study, the genome-wide early responses in maize seedlings to the simulated shade  and also to far-red light treatment were transcriptionally profiled. the two processes were predominantly mediated by phytochrome b and phytochrome a, respectively. clustering of differentially transcribed genes  along with functional enrichment analysis identified important biological processes regulated in response to both treatments. co-expression network analysis identified two transcription factor modules as potentially pivotal regulators of sar and de-etiolation, respectively. a comprehensive cross-species comparison of orthologous dtg pairs between maize and arabidopsis in sar was also conducted, with emphasis on regulatory circuits controlling accelerated flowering and elongated growth, two physiological hallmarks of sar. moreover, it was found that the genome-wide distribution of dtgs in sar and de-etiolation both biased toward the maize <dig> subgenome, and this was associated with differential retention of various cis-elements between the two subgenomes.


CONCLUSIONS
the results provide the first transcriptional picture for the early dynamics of maize phytochrome signaling. candidate genes with regulatory functions involved in maize shade avoidance response have been identified, offering a starting point for further functional genomics investigation of maize adaptation to heavily shaded field conditions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
maizeshadephytochrometranscriptomeregulatory modulehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china9143511231430008zhang chunyi wang haiyang issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

