BACKGROUND
the timing of grape ripening initiation, length of maturation period, berry size and seed content are target traits in viticulture. the availability of early and late ripening varieties is desirable for staggering harvest along growing season, expanding production towards periods when the fruit gets a higher value in the market and ensuring an optimal plant adaptation to climatic and geographic conditions. berry size determines grape productivity; seedlessness is especially demanded in the table grape market and is negatively correlated to fruit size. these traits result from complex developmental processes modified by genetic, physiological and environmental factors. in order to elucidate their genetic determinism we carried out a quantitative analysis in a  <dig> individuals-f <dig> segregating progeny obtained by crossing two table grape cultivars.


RESULTS
molecular linkage maps covering most of the genome  were generated for each parent. eighteen pairs of homologous groups were integrated into a consensus map spanning over  <dig> cm with  <dig> markers  and an average map distance between loci of  <dig>  cm. segregating traits were evaluated in three growing seasons by recording flowering, veraison and ripening dates and by measuring berry size, seed number and weight. qtl  analysis was carried out based on single marker and interval mapping methods. qtls were identified for all but one of the studied traits, a number of them steadily over more than one year. clusters of qtls for different characters were detected, suggesting linkage or pleiotropic effects of loci, as well as regions affecting specific traits. the most interesting qtls were investigated at the gene level through a bioinformatic analysis of the underlying pinot noir genomic sequence.


CONCLUSIONS
our results revealed novel insights into the genetic control of relevant grapevine features. they provide a basis for performing marker-assisted selection and testing the role of specific genes in trait variation.

