BACKGROUND
ensemble attribute profile clustering is a novel, text-based strategy for analyzing a user-defined list of genes and/or proteins. the strategy exploits annotation data present in gene-centered corpora and utilizes ideas from statistical information retrieval to discover and characterize properties shared by subsets of the list. the practical utility of this method is demonstrated by employing it in a retrospective study of two non-overlapping sets of genes defined by a published investigation as markers for normal human breast luminal epithelial cells and myoepithelial cells.


RESULTS
each genetic locus was characterized using a finite set of biological properties and represented as a vector of features indicating attributes associated with the locus . in this study, the vector space models for a pre-defined list of genes were constructed from the gene ontology  terms and the conserved domain database  protein domain terms assigned to the loci by the gene-centered corpus locuslink. this data set of go- and cdd-based gene attribute profiles, vectors of binary random variables, was used to estimate multiple finite mixture models and each ensuing model utilized to partition the profiles into clusters. the resultant partitionings were combined using a unanimous voting scheme to produce consensus clusters, sets of profiles that co-occured consistently in the same cluster. attributes that were important in defining the genes assigned to a consensus cluster were identified. the clusters and their attributes were inspected to ascertain the go and cdd terms most associated with subsets of genes and in conjunction with external knowledge such as chromosomal location, used to gain functional insights into human breast biology. the  <dig> luminal epithelial cell markers and  <dig> myoepithelial cell markers are disjoint sets of genes. ensemble attribute profile clustering-based analysis indicated that both lists contained groups of genes with the functional properties of membrane receptor biology/signal transduction and nucleic acid binding/transcription. a subset of the luminal markers was associated with metabolic and oxidoreductase activities, whereas a subset of myoepithelial markers was associated with protein hydrolase activity.


CONCLUSIONS
given a set of genes and/or proteins associated with a phenomenon, process or system of interest, ensemble attribute profile clustering provides a simple method for collating and sythesizing the annotation data pertaining to them that are present in text-based, gene-centered corpora. the results provide information about properties common and unique to subsets of the list and hence insights into the biology of the problem under investigation.

