BACKGROUND
biliverdin ixα is produced when heme undergoes reductive ring cleavage at the α-methene bridge catalyzed by heme oxygenase. it is subsequently reduced by biliverdin reductase to bilirubin ixα which is a potent endogenous antioxidant. biliverdin ixα, through interaction with biliverdin reductase, also initiates signaling pathways leading to anti-inflammatory responses and suppression of cellular pro-inflammatory events. the use of biliverdin ixα as a cytoprotective therapeutic has been suggested, but its clinical development and use is currently limited by insufficient quantity, uncertain purity, and derivation from mammalian materials. to address these limitations, methods to produce, recover and purify biliverdin ixα from bacterial cultures of escherichia coli were investigated and developed.


RESULTS
recombinant e. coli strains bl <dig> and bl <dig> expressing cyanobacterial heme oxygenase gene ho <dig> and a sequence modified version  optimized for e. coli expression, respectively, were constructed and shown to produce biliverdin ixα in batch and fed-batch bioreactor cultures. strain bl <dig> produced roughly twice the amount of biliverdin ixα than did strain bl <dig>  lactose either alone or in combination with glycerol supported consistent biliverdin ixα production by strain bl <dig>  in fed-batch mode and production by strain bl <dig>  in batch-mode was scalable to 100l bioreactor culture volumes. synthesis of the modified ho <dig> gene protein product was determined, and identity of the enzyme reaction product as biliverdin ixα was confirmed by spectroscopic and chromatographic analyses and its ability to serve as a substrate for human biliverdin reductase a.


CONCLUSIONS
methods for the scalable production, recovery, and purification of biliverdin ixα by e. coli were developed based on expression of a cyanobacterial ho <dig> gene. the purity of the produced biliverdin ixα and its ability to serve as substrate for human biliverdin reductase a suggest its potential as a clinically useful therapeutic.

biliverdin ixαheme oxygenaseescherichia coliho1bilirubinanti-inflammatorybiliverdin reductasebioreactor

