BACKGROUND
in drosophila, the enhancer of split complex -c) comprises  <dig> bhlh and bearded genes that function during notch signaling to repress proneural identity in the developing peripheral nervous system. comparison with other insects indicates that the basal state for diptera is a single bhlh and bearded homolog and that the expansion of the gene complex occurred in the lineage leading to drosophila. however, comparative genomic data from other fly species that would elucidate the origin and sequence of gene duplication for the complex is lacking. therefore, in order to examine the evolutionary history of the complex within diptera, we reconstructed, using several fosmid clones, the entire e-complex in the stalk-eyed fly, teleopsis dalmanni and collected additional homologs of e-c genes from searches of dipteran est databases and the glossina morsitans genome assembly.


RESULTS
comparison of the teleopsis e-c gene organization with drosophila indicates complete conservation in gene number and orientation between the species except that t. dalmanni contains a duplicated copy of em <dig> that is not present in drosophila. phylogenetic analysis of e-complex bhlh and bearded genes for several dipteran species clearly demonstrates that all members of the complex were present prior to the diversification of schizophoran flies. comparison of upstream regulatory elements and 3' utr domains between the species also reveals strong conservation for many of the genes and identifies several novel characteristics of e-c regulatory evolution including the discovery of a previously unidentified, highly conserved sps+a domain between emγ and emβ.


CONCLUSIONS
identifying the phylogenetic origin of e-c genes and their associated regulatory dna is essential to understanding the functional significance of this well-studied gene complex. results from this study provide numerous insights into the evolutionary history of the complex and will help refine the focus of studies examining the adaptive consequences of this gene expansion.

enhancer of split complexstalk-eyed flygene duplicationsps+a domain

