BACKGROUND
wild barley is adapted to highly diverse environments throughout its geographical distribution range. transcriptome sequencing of differentially adapted wild barley ecotypes from contrasting environments contributes to the identification of genes and genetic variation involved in abiotic stress tolerance and adaptation.


RESULTS
two differentially adapted wild barley ecotypes from desert  and mediterranean  environments were analyzed for drought stress response under controlled conditions. the desert ecotype lost more water under both irrigation and drought, but exhibited higher relative water content  and better water use efficiency  than the coastal ecotype. we sequenced normalized cdna libraries from drought-stressed leaves of both ecotypes with the  <dig> platform to identify drought-related transcripts. over half million reads per ecotype were de novo assembled into  <dig>  putative unique transcripts  for b1k <dig>   <dig>  for b1k <dig> and  <dig>  for the joint assembly. over 50% of puts of each ecotype were not shared with the other ecotype. furthermore, 16%  of b1k <dig> and 17%  of b1k <dig> transcripts did not show orthologous sequence hits in the other wild barley ecotype and cultivated barley, and are candidates of ecotype-specific transcripts. over  <dig> unique transcripts from each ecotype homologous to over  <dig> different stress-related genes were identified. we extracted  <dig>  high quality snps that differentiated the two ecotypes. the genetic distance between the desert ecotype and cultivated barley was  <dig> -fold higher than between the mediterranean ecotype and cultivated barley. moreover, the desert ecotype harbored a larger proportion of non-synonymous snps than the mediterranean ecotype suggesting different demographic histories of these ecotypes.


CONCLUSIONS
the results indicate a strong physiological and genomic differentiation between the desert and mediterranean wild barley ecotypes and a closer relationship of the mediterranean to cultivated barley. a significant number of novel transcripts specific to wild barley were identified. the higher snp density and larger proportion of snps with functional effects in the desert ecotype suggest different demographic histories and effects of natural selection in mediterranean and desert wild barley. the data are a valuable genomic resource for an improved genome annotation, transcriptome studies of drought adaptation and a source of new genetic markers for future barley improvement.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hordeum spontaneumtranscriptomedrought tolerancegenetic diversityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

