BACKGROUND
proteogenomics is a promising approach for various tasks ranging from gene annotation to cancer research. databases for proteogenomic searches are often constructed by adding peptide sequences inferred from genomic or transcriptomic evidence to reference protein sequences. such inflation of databases has potential of identifying novel peptides. however, it also raises concerns on sensitive and reliable peptide identification. spurious peptides included in target databases may result in underestimated false discovery rate . on the other hand, inflation of decoy databases could decrease the sensitivity of peptide identification due to the increased number of high-scoring random hits. although several studies have addressed these issues, widely applicable guidelines for sensitive and reliable proteogenomic search have hardly been available.


RESULTS
to systematically evaluate the effect of database inflation in proteogenomic searches, we constructed a variety of real and simulated proteogenomic databases for yeast and human tandem mass spectrometry  data, respectively. against these databases, we tested two popular database search tools with various approaches to search result validation: the target-decoy search strategy  and a mixture model-based method. the effect of separate filtering of known and novel peptides was also examined. the results from real and simulated proteogenomic searches confirmed that separate filtering increases the sensitivity and reliability in proteogenomic search. however, no one method consistently identified the largest  number of novel peptides from real proteogenomic searches.


CONCLUSIONS
we propose to use a set of search result validation methods with separate filtering, for sensitive and reliable identification of peptides in proteogenomic search.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
false discovery rateproteogenomic searchseparate false discovery rate analysissimulationtarget-decoy approachmodel-based approach15th international conference on bioinformatics  incob 2016queenstown, singapore 21- <dig> september  <dig> http://incob <dig> apbionet.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

