BACKGROUND
tumourigenesis can be regarded as an evolutionary process, in which the transformation of a normal cell into a tumour cell involves a number of limiting genetic and epigenetic events. to study the progression process, time schemes have been proposed for studying the process of colorectal cancer based on extensive clinical investigations. moreover, a number of mathematical models have been designed to describe this evolutionary process. these models assumed that the mutation rate of genes is constant during different stages. however, it has been pointed that the subsequent driver mutations appear faster than the previous ones and the cumulative time to have more driver mutations grows with the growing number of gene mutations. thus it is still a challenge to calculate the time when the first mutation occurs and to determine the influence of tumour size on the mutation rate.


RESULTS
in this work we present a general framework to remedy the shortcoming of existing models. rather than considering the information of gene mutations based on a population of patients, we for the first time determine the values of the selective advantage of cancer cells and initial mutation rate for individual patients. the averaged values of doubling time and selective advantage coefficient determined by our model are consistent with the predictions made by the published models. our calculation showed that the values of biological parameters, such as the selective advantage coefficient, initial mutation rate and cell doubling time diversely depend on individuals. our model has successfully predicted the values of several important parameters in cancer progression, such as the selective advantage coefficient, initial mutation rate and cell doubling time. in addition, experimental data validated our predicted initial mutation rate and cell doubling time.


CONCLUSIONS
the introduced new parameter makes our proposed model more flexible to fix various types of information based on different patients in cancer progression.

18- <dig> december  <dig> ieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine  shanghai, china

