BACKGROUND
sequences up to several megabases in length have been found to be present in individual genomes but absent in the human reference genome. these sequences may be common in populations, and their absence in the reference genome may indicate rare variants in the genomes of individuals who served as donors for the human genome project. as the reference genome is used in probe design for microarray technology and mapping short reads in next generation sequencing , this missing sequence could be a source of bias in functional genomic studies and variant analysis. one end anchor  and/or orphan reads from paired-end sequencing have been used to identify novel sequences that are absent in reference genome. however, there is no study to investigate the distribution, evolution and functionality of those sequences in human populations.


RESULTS
to systematically identify and study the missing common sequences , we extended the previous method by pooling oea reads from large number of individuals and applying strict filtering methods to remove false sequences. the pipeline was applied to data from phase  <dig> of the  <dig> genomes project. we identified  <dig> micseqs that are present in at least 1% of the human population, but absent in the reference genome. we confirmed 76% of these  <dig> micseqs by comparison to other primate genomes, individual human genomes, and gene expression data. furthermore, we randomly selected fifteen micseqs and confirmed their presence using pcr validation in  <dig> additional individuals. functional analysis using published rna-seq and chip-seq data showed that eleven micseqs are highly expressed in human brain and three micseqs contain transcription factor  binding regions, suggesting they are functional elements. in addition, the identified micseqs are absent in non-primates and show dynamic acquisition during primate evolution culminating with most micseqs being present in africans, suggesting some micseqs may be important sources of human diversity.


CONCLUSIONS
76% of micseqs were confirmed by a comparative genomics approach. fourteen micseqs are expressed in human brain or contain tf binding regions. some micseqs are primate-specific, conserved and may play a role in the evolution of primates.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
missing common sequencede novo assemblingnext generation sequencingexpression in braintranscription factor bindinggenome evolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

