BACKGROUND
the family camelidae that evolved in north america during the eocene survived with two distinct tribes, camelini and lamini. to investigate the evolutionary relationship between them and to further understand the evolutionary history of this family, we determined the complete mitochondrial genome sequence of the wild two-humped camel , the only wild survivor of the old world camel.


RESULTS
the mitochondrial genome sequence  from c. bactrianus ferus contains  <dig> protein-coding, two rrna, and  <dig> trna genes as well as a typical control region; this basic structure is shared by all metazoan mitochondrial genomes. its protein-coding region exhibits codon usage common to all mammals and possesses the three cryptic stop codons shared by all vertebrates. c. bactrianus ferus together with the rest of mammalian species do not share a triplet nucleotide insertion  that encodes a proline residue found only in the nd <dig> gene of the new world camelid lama pacos. this lineage-specific insertion in the l. pacos mtdna occurred after the split between the old and new world camelids suggests that it may have functional implication since a proline insertion in a protein backbone usually alters protein conformation significantly, and nd <dig> gene has not been seen as polymorphic as the rest of nd family genes among camelids. our phylogenetic study based on complete mitochondrial genomes excluding the control region suggested that the divergence of the two tribes may occur in the early miocene; it is much earlier than what was deduced from the fossil record . an evolutionary history reconstructed for the family camelidae based on cytb sequences suggested that the split of bactrian camel and dromedary may have occurred in north america before the tribe camelini migrated from north america to asia.


CONCLUSIONS
molecular clock analysis of complete mitochondrial genomes from c. bactrianus ferus and l. pacos suggested that the two tribes diverged from their common ancestor about  <dig> million years ago, much earlier than what was predicted based on fossil records.

