BACKGROUND
genes in the sex determination pathway are important regulators of sexually dimorphic animal traits, including the elaborate and exaggerated male ornaments and weapons of sexual selection. in this study, we identified and functionally analyzed members of the sex determination gene family in the golden metallic stag beetle cyclommatus metallifer, which exhibits extreme differences in mandible size between males and females.


RESULTS
we constructed a c. metallifer transcriptomic database from larval and prepupal developmental stages and tissues of both males and females. using roche  <dig> pyrosequencing, we generated a de novo assembled database from a total of  <dig> , <dig> raw reads, which resulted in  <dig>  isotigs  contained in  <dig>  isogroups . we queried this database for c. metallifer conserved sex determination genes and identified  <dig> candidate sex determination pathway genes. we then characterized the roles of several of these genes in development of extreme sexual dimorphic traits in this species. we performed molecular expression analyses with rt-pcr and functional analyses using rnai on three c. metallifer candidate genes – sex-lethal , transformer- <dig> , and intersex . no differences in expression pattern were found between the sexes for any of these three genes. in the rnai gene-knockdown experiments, we found that only the cmix had any effect on sexually dimorphic morphology, and these mimicked the effects of cmdsx knockdown in females. knockdown of cmsxl had no measurable effects on stag beetle phenotype, while knockdown of cmtra <dig> resulted in complete lethality at the prepupal period. these results indicate that the roles of cmsxl and cmtra <dig> in the sex determination cascade are likely to have diverged in stag beetles when compared to drosophila. our results also suggest that cmix has a conserved role in this pathway. in addition to those three genes, we also performed a more complete functional analysis of the c. metallifer dsx gene  to identify the isoforms that regulate dimorphism more fully using exon-specific rnai. we identified a total of  <dig> alternative splice variants of the cmdsx gene that code for up to  <dig> separate exons. despite the variation in rna splice products of the cmdsx gene, only four protein isoforms are predicted. the results of our exon-specific rnai indicated that the essential cmdsx isoform for postembryonic male differentiation is cmdsxb, whereas postembryonic female specific differentiation is mainly regulated by cmdsxd.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our results highlight the importance of studying the function of highly conserved sex determination pathways in numerous insect species, especially those with dramatic and exaggerated sexual dimorphism, because conservation in protein structure does not always translate into conservation in downstream function.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cyclommatus metallifersex determinationsexual dimorphismsexual selectionnational science foundation 064240706424090920142dworkin ian emlen douglas j. lavine laura c. kakenhiu.s. department of agriculture hatchlavine laura c. sumitomo foundation 120165gotoh hiroki japan society for the promotion of science research fellowship for young scientistsgotoh hiroki issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

