BACKGROUND
small rnas include different classes essential for endogenous gene regulation and cellular defence against genomic parasites. however, a comprehensive analysis of the small rna pathways in the germline of the mosquito anopheles gambiae has never been performed despite their potential relevance to reproductive capacity in this malaria vector.


RESULTS
we performed small rna deep sequencing during larval and adult gonadogenesis and find that they predominantly express four classes of regulatory small rnas. we identified  <dig> novel mirna precursors some of which were sex-biased and gonad-enriched , nearly doubling the number of previously known mirna loci. we also determine multiple genomic clusters of 24- <dig> nt piwi-interacting rnas  that map to transposable elements  and 3’utr of protein coding genes. unusually, many tes and the 3’utr of some endogenous genes produce an abundant peak of 29-nt small rnas with pirna-like characteristics. moreover, both sense and antisense pirnas from tes in both anopheles gambiae and drosophila melanogaster reveal novel features of pirna sequence bias. we also discovered endogenous small interfering rnas  that map to overlapping transcripts and tes.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first description of the germline mirnome in a mosquito species and should prove a valuable resource for understanding gene regulation that underlies gametogenesis and reproductive capacity. we also provide the first evidence of a pirna pathway that is active against transposons in the germline and our findings suggest novel pirna sequence bias. the contribution of small rna pathways to germline te regulation and genome defence in general is an important finding for approaches aimed at manipulating mosquito populations through the use of selfish genetic elements.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mosquitomirnassmall rnaspirnasgametogenesismalariagenome defencetransposonsgermlineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

