BACKGROUND
grape is one of the most valuable fruit crops and can serve for both fresh consumption and wine production. grape cultivars have been selected and evolved to produce high-quality fruits during their domestication over thousands of years. however, current widely planted grape cultivars suffer extensive loss to many diseases while most wild species show resistance to various pathogens. therefore, a comprehensive evaluation of wild grapes would contribute to the improvement of disease resistance in grape breeding programs.


RESULTS
we performed deep transcriptome sequencing of three chinese wild grapes using the illumina strand-specific rna-seq technology. high quality transcriptomes were assembled de novo and more than 93% transcripts were shared with the reference pn <dig> genome. over  <dig>  distinct transcripts, which were absent or highly divergent from sequences in the reference pn <dig> genome, were identified in each of the three wild grapes, among which more than  <dig>  were potential protein-coding genes. gene ontology  and pathway annotations of these distinct genes showed those involved in defense responses and plant secondary metabolisms were highly enriched. more than  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms  and  <dig>  small insertions or deletions  were identified between each genotype and pn <dig>  and approximately 20% of the snps caused nonsynonymous mutations. finally, we discovered  <dig> to  <dig> highly confident cis-natural antisense transcript  pairs in each genotype. these transcripts were significantly enriched with genes involved in secondary metabolisms and plant responses to abiotic stresses.


CONCLUSIONS
the three de novo assembled transcriptomes provide a comprehensive sequence resource for molecular genetic research in grape. the newly discovered genes from wild vitis, as well as snps and small indels we identified, may facilitate future studies on the molecular mechanisms related to valuable traits possessed by these wild vitis and contribute to the grape breeding programs. furthermore, we identified hundreds of cis-nat pairs which showed their potential regulatory roles in secondary metabolism and abiotic stress responses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
grapechinese wild vitisde novo transcriptomedisease related genescis-natsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

