BACKGROUND
the species of utricularia attract attention not only owing to their carnivorous lifestyle, but also due to an elevated substitution rate and a dynamic evolution of genome size leading to its dramatic reduction. to better understand the evolutionary dynamics of genome size and content as well as the great physiological plasticity in this mostly aquatic carnivorous genus, we analyzed the transcriptome of utricularia vulgaris, a temperate species with well characterized physiology and ecology. we compared its transcriptome, namely gene content and overall transcript profile, with a previously described transcriptome of utricularia gibba, a congener possessing one of the smallest angiosperm genomes.


RESULTS
we sequenced a normalized cdna library prepared from total rna extracted from shoots of u. vulgaris including leaves and traps, cultivated under sterile or outdoor conditions.  <dig> pyrosequencing resulted in more than  <dig> , <dig> reads which were assembled into  <dig>  isotigs in  <dig>  isogroups. we observed high transcript variation in several isogroups explained by multiple loci and/or alternative splicing. the comparison of u. vulgaris and u. gibba transcriptomes revealed a similar distribution of go categories among expressed genes, despite the differences in transcriptome preparation. we also found a strong correspondence in the presence or absence of root-associated genes between the u. vulgaris transcriptome and u. gibba genome, which indicated that the loss of some root-specific genes had occurred before the divergence of the two rootless species.


CONCLUSIONS
the species-rich genus utricularia offers a unique opportunity to study adaptations related to the environment and carnivorous habit and also evolutionary processes responsible for considerable genome reduction. we show that a transcriptome may approximate the genome for gene content or gene duplication estimation. our study is the first comparison of two global sequence data sets in utricularia.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomeroot-associated genesalternative splicingutricularia vulgarisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

