BACKGROUND
the  <dig>  kb cryptic plasmid of chlamydia trachomatis has been shown to be a virulence factor in animal models, but its significance in humans still remains unknown. the aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence and potential involvement of the c. trachomatis cryptic plasmid in causing various clinical manifestations; including infertility, reproductive tract disintegrity, menstrual disorder, and polycystic ovarian syndrome  among genital c. trachomatis–infected patients.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> female patients of child bearing age  with gynecological complications and subfertility issues, who visited obstetrics and gynecology clinics in kuala lumpur, malaysia were recruited for the study. prevalence of genital chlamydial infection among these patients was alarmingly high at  <dig>  % . of the  <dig> chlamydia-infected patients,  <dig>  %  were infected with plasmid-bearing  c. trachomatis while the remaining  <dig>  %  were caused by the plasmid-free  variant. our data showed that genital c. trachomatis infection was associated with infertility issues, inflammation in the reproductive tract , irregular menstrual cycles and polycystic ovarian syndrome . however, no statistical significance was detected among patients with plasmid  versus plasmid  c. trachomatis infection. interestingly, plasmid  c. trachomatis was detected in all patients with pcos, and the plasmid copy numbers were significantly higher among pcos patients, relative to non-pcos patients.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings show a high incidence of c. trachomatis infection among women with infertility or gynecological problems in malaysia. however, due to the low number of plasmid  c. trachomatis cases, a significant role of the plasmid in causing virulence in human requires further investigation of a larger cohort.

keywords
chlamydia trachomatisreproductive system disordersinfertilityplasmidhigh impact research  granthir-mohe e000013-20001wong won fen fundamental research grant scheme fp027-2010bsabet negar shafiei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

