BACKGROUND
members of the cys-loop ligand-gated ion channel  superfamily mediate chemical neurotransmission and are studied extensively as potential targets of drugs used to treat neurological disorders such as alzheimer's disease. insect cys-loop lgics are also of interest as they are targets of highly successful insecticides. the red flour beetle, tribolium castaneum, is a major pest of stored agricultural products and is also an important model organism for studying development.


RESULTS
as part of the t. castaneum genome sequencing effort, we have characterized the beetle cys-loop lgic superfamily which is the third insect superfamily to be described after those of drosophila melanogaster and apis mellifera, and also the largest consisting of  <dig> genes. as with drosophila and apis, tribolium possesses ion channels gated by acetylcholine, γ-amino butyric acid , glutamate and histamine as well as orthologs of the drosophila ph-sensitive chloride channel subunit , cg <dig> and cg <dig>  similar to drosophila and apis, tribolium cys-loop lgic diversity is broadened by alternative splicing although the beetle orthologs of rdl and glucl possess more variants of exon  <dig>  also, rna a-to-i editing was observed in two tribolium nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits, tcasα <dig> and tcasβ <dig>  editing in tcasα <dig> is evolutionarily conserved with d. melanogaster, a. mellifera and heliothis virescens, whereas tcasβ <dig> is edited at a site so far only observed in the beetle.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings reveal that in diverse insect species the cys-loop lgic superfamily has remained compact with only minor changes in gene numbers. however, alternative splicing, rna editing and the presence of divergent subunits broadens the cys-loop lgic proteome and generates species-specific receptor isoforms. these findings on tribolium castaneum enhance our understanding of cys-loop lgic functional genomics and provide a useful basis for the development of improved insecticides that target an important agricultural pest.

