BACKGROUND
banana is one of the most important crop plants grown in the tropics and sub-tropics. it is a climacteric fruit and undergoes ethylene dependent ripening. once ripening is initiated, it proceeds at a fast rate making postharvest life short, which can result in heavy economic losses. during the fruit ripening process a number of physiological and biochemical changes take place and thousands of genes from various metabolic pathways are recruited to produce a ripe and edible fruit. to better understand the underlying mechanism of ripening, we undertook a study to evaluate global changes in the transcriptome of the fruit during the ripening process.


RESULTS
we sequenced the transcriptomes of the unripe and ripe stages of banana  fruit. the transcriptomes were sequenced using a  <dig> gsflx-titanium platform that resulted in more than  <dig> , <dig> high quality  reads. the assembly of the reads resulted in  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons. a large number of the differentially expressed genes identified were linked to ripening dependent processes including ethylene biosynthesis, perception and signalling, cell wall degradation and production of aromatic volatiles. in the banana fruit transcriptomes, we found transcripts included in  <dig> pathways described in the kegg database for rice. the members of the expansin and xyloglucan transglycosylase/hydrolase  gene families were highly up-regulated during ripening, which suggests that they might play important roles in the softening of the fruit. several genes involved in the synthesis of aromatic volatiles and members of transcription factor families previously reported to be involved in ripening were also identified.


CONCLUSIONS
a large number of differentially regulated genes were identified during banana fruit ripening. many of these are associated with cell wall degradation and synthesis of aromatic volatiles. a large number of differentially expressed genes did not align with any of the databases and might be novel genes in banana. these genes can be good candidates for future studies to establish their role in banana fruit ripening. the datasets developed in this study will help in developing strategies to manipulate banana fruit ripening and reduce post harvest losses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bananaethylenefruit ripeningmusa acuminatatranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

