BACKGROUND
rice is a major source of dietary intake of cadmium  for populations that consume rice as a staple food. understanding how cd is transported into grains through the whole plant body is necessary for reducing rice cd concentrations to the lowest levels possible, to reduce the associated health risks. in this study, we have visualized and quantitatively analysed the real-time cd dynamics from roots to grains in typical rice cultivars that differed in grain cd concentrations. we used positron-emitting107cd tracer and an innovative imaging technique, the positron-emitting tracer imaging system . in particular, a new method for direct and real-time visualization of the cd uptake by the roots in the culture was first realized in this work.


RESULTS
imaging and quantitative analyses revealed the different patterns in time-varying curves of cd amounts in the roots of rice cultivars tested. three low-cd accumulating cultivars  showed rapid saturation curves, whereas three high-cd accumulating cultivars  were characterized by curves with a peak within  <dig> min after107cd supplementation, and a subsequent steep decrease resulting in maintenance of lower cd concentrations in their roots. this difference in cd dynamics may be attributable to oshma <dig> transporter protein, which was recently shown to be involved in cd storage in root vacuoles and not functional in the high-cd accumulating cultivars. moreover, the petis analyses revealed that the high-cd accumulating cultivars were characterized by rapid and abundant cd transfer to the shoots from the roots, a faster transport velocity of cd to the panicles, and cd accumulation at high levels in their panicles, passing through the nodal portions of the stems where the highest cd intensities were observed.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first successful visualization and quantification of the differences in whole-body cd transport from the roots to the grains of intact plants within rice cultivars that differ in grain cd concentrations, by using petis, a real-time imaging method.

