BACKGROUND
over the last two decades, many approaches have been developed in bioinformatics that aim at one of the most promising, yet unsolved problems in modern life sciences - prediction of structural features of a protein. such tasks addressed to transmembrane protein structures provide valuable knowledge about their three-dimensional structure. for this reason, the analysis of membrane proteins is essential in genomic and proteomic-wide investigations. thus, many in-silico approaches have been utilized extensively to gain crucial advances in understanding membrane protein structures and functions.


RESULTS
it turned out that amino acid covariation within interacting sequence parts, extracted from a evolutionary sequence record of α-helical membrane proteins, can be used for structure prediction. in a recent study we discussed the significance of short membrane sequence motifs widely present in nature that act as stabilizing ’building blocks’ during protein folding and in retaining the three-dimensional fold. in this work, we used motif data to define evolutionary interaction pattern pairs. these were obtained from different pattern alignments and were used to evaluate which coupling mechanisms the evolution provides. it can be shown that short interaction patterns of homologous sequence records are membrane protein family-specific signatures. these signatures can provide valuable information for structure prediction and protein classification. the results indicate a good agreement with recent studies.


CONCLUSIONS
generally, it can be shown how the evolution contributes to realize covariation within discriminative interaction patterns to maintain structure and function. this points to their general importance for α-helical membrane protein structure formation and interaction mediation. in the process, no fundamentally energetic approaches of previous published works are considered. the low-cost rapid computational methods postulated in this work provides valuable information to classify unknown α-helical transmembrane proteins and to determine their structural similarity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
membrane proteinsmotifevolutionary interaction pattern paireippstructural similarityprotein family affiliationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

