BACKGROUND
2b-rad  approach was invented by wang in  <dig> and proven as a simple and flexible method for genome-wide genotyping. however, there is still plenty of room for improvement for the existent 2b-rad approach. firstly, it doesn’t include the samples pooling in library preparation as other reduced representation libraries. secondly, the information of 2b-rad tags, such as tags numbers and distributions, in most of species are unknown. the purposes of the research are to improve a new 2b-rad approach which possesses samples pooling, moreover to figure out the characteristic and application potentiality of 2b-rad tags by bioinformatics analysis.


RESULTS
twelve adapter <dig> and an adapter <dig> were designed. a library approach comprising digestion, ligation, pooling, pcr and size selection were established. for saving costs, we used non-phosphorylated adapters and indexed pcr primers. a f <dig> population of rice  was genotyped to validate the new approach. on average,  <dig> high quality reads of each sample were obtained with high evenness. totally  <dig> markers containing  <dig> snps were discovered and the missing rate was  <dig> %. a genetic linkage map of  <dig> markers was constructed and 92% of the markers’ orders in the genetic map were in accordance with the orders in chromosomes. meanwhile, the bioinformatics simulation in  <dig> species showed that the bsaxi had the most widespread recognition sites, indicating that 2b-rad tags had a powerful application potentiality for high density genetic map. using modified adapters with a fix base in 3′end, 2b-rad was also fit for qtl studies with low costs.


CONCLUSIONS
an improved 2b-rad genotyping approach was established in this research and named as i2b-rad. the method was a simple, fast, cost-effective and multiplex sequencing library approach. it could be adjusted by selecting different enzymes and adapters to fit for alternative uses including chromosomes assembly, qtl fine mapping and even natural population analysis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
2b-radgenotypinggenetic linkage mapissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

