BACKGROUND
grass carp hemorrhagic disease, caused by grass carp reovirus , is the most fatal causative agent in grass carp aquaculture. protein-protein interactions between virus and host are one avenue through which gcrv can trigger infection and induce disease. experimental approaches for the detection of host-virus interactome have many inherent limitations, and studies on protein-protein interactions between gcrv and its host remain rare.


RESULTS
in this study, based on known motif-domain interaction information, we systematically predicted the gcrv virus-host protein interactome by using motif-domain interaction pair searching strategy. these proteins derived from different domain families and were predicted to interact with different motif patterns in gcrv. jam-a protein was successfully predicted to interact with motifs of gcrv sigma1-like protein, and shared the similar binding mode compared with orthoreovirus. differentially expressed genes during gcrv infection process were extracted and mapped to our predicted interactome, the overlapped genes displayed different tissue expression distributions on the whole, the overall expression level in intestinal is higher than that of other three tissues, which may suggest that the functions of these genes are more active in intestinal. function annotation and pathway enrichment analysis revealed that the host targets were largely involved in signaling pathway and immune pathway, such as interferon-gamma signaling pathway, vegf signaling pathway, egf receptor signaling pathway, b cell activation, and t cell activation.


CONCLUSIONS
although the predicted ppis may contain some false positives due to limited data resource and poor research background in non-model species, the computational method still provide reasonable amount of interactions, which can be further validated by high throughput experiments. the findings of this work will contribute to the development of system biology for gcrv infectious diseases, and help guide the identification of novel receptors of gcrv in its host.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hemorrhagic diseasereovirusprotein-protein interactionsmotifdomaingcrvstrategic priority research programme of chinese academy of sciencesxda08030203wang yaping independent project of state key laboratory of freshwater ecology and biotechnology2014fbz04wang yaping http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31130055wang yaping issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

