BACKGROUND
lactic acid bacteria  are part of the gut microbiota and produce ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial peptides or bacteriocins with interest as natural food preservatives and therapeutic agents. bacteriocin-producing lab are also attractive as probiotics. griffon vultures  are scavenger birds that feed almost exclusively on carrion without suffering apparent ill effects. therefore, griffon vultures might be considered a reservoir of bacteriocin-producing lactic acid bacteria  with potential biotechnological applications.


RESULTS
griffon vulture feces were screened for lab with antimicrobial activity, genes encoding bacteriocins, potential virulence determinants, susceptibility to antibiotics, genotyping and characterization of bacteriocins. in this study, from  <dig> lab evaluated  <dig> isolates  showed direct antimicrobial activity against gram-positive bacteria only. the molecular identification of the most antagonistic  <dig> isolates showed that enterococci was the largest lab group with antimicrobial activity  and e. faecium  the most identified antagonistic species. the evaluation of the presence of bacteriocin structural genes in  <dig> lab isolates with the highest bacteriocinogenic activity in their supernatants determined that most enterococcal isolates  encoded multiple bacteriocins, being enterocin a  the largest identified  bacteriocin. most enterococci  were resistant to multiple antibiotics. eric-pcr and mlst techniques permitted genotyping and recognition of the potential safety of the bacteriocinogenic enterococci. a multiple-step chromatographic procedure, determination of the n-terminal amino acid sequence of purified bacteriocins by edman degradation and a maldi tof/tof tandem ms procedure permitted characterization of bacteriocins present in supernatants of producer cells.


CONCLUSIONS
enterococci was the largest lab group with bacteriocinogenic activity isolated from griffon vulture feces. among the isolates, e. faecium m3k <dig> has been identified as producer of enterocin hf , a bacteriocin with remarkable antimicrobial activity against most evaluated listeria spp. and of elevated interest as a natural food preservative. e. faecium m3k <dig> would be also considered a safe probiotic strain for use in animal nutrition.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lactic acid bacteria antimicrobial activitybacteriocinsenterococcivirulence traitsprobioticshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007136secretaría de estado de investigación, desarrollo e innovaciónagl2012-34829issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

