BACKGROUND
microsatellite  and single nucleotide polymorphism  markers are two types of important genetic markers useful in genetic mapping and genotyping. often, large-scale genomic research projects require high-throughput computer-assisted primer design. numerous such web-based or standard-alone programs for pcr primer design are available but vary in quality and functionality. in particular, most programs lack batch primer design capability. such a high-throughput software tool for designing ssr flanking primers and snp genotyping primers is increasingly demanded.


RESULTS
a new web primer design program, batchprimer <dig>  is developed based on primer <dig>  batchprimer <dig> adopted the primer <dig> core program as a major primer design engine to choose the best primer pairs. a new score-based primer picking module is incorporated into batchprimer <dig> and used to pick position-restricted primers. batchprimer <dig> v <dig>  implements several types of primer designs including generic primers, ssr primers together with ssr detection, and snp genotyping primers , as well as dna sequencing primers. dna sequences in fasta format can be batch read into the program. the basic information of input sequences, as a reference of parameter setting of primer design, can be obtained by pre-analysis of sequences. the input sequences can be pre-processed and masked to exclude and/or include specific regions, or set targets for different primer design purposes as in primer3web and primer3plus. a tab-delimited or excel-formatted primer output also greatly facilitates the subsequent primer-ordering process. thousands of primers, including wheat conserved intron-flanking primers, wheat genome-specific snp genotyping primers, and brachypodium ssr flanking primers in several genome projects have been designed using the program and validated in several laboratories.


CONCLUSIONS
batchprimer <dig> is a comprehensive web primer design program to develop different types of primers in a high-throughput manner. additional methods of primer design can be easily integrated into future versions of batchprimer <dig>  the program with source code and thousands of pcr and sequencing primers designed for wheat and brachypodium are accessible at .

