BACKGROUND
protein degradation is a basic cell process that operates in general protein turnover or to produce bioactive peptides. however, very little is known about the qualitative and quantitative composition of a plant cell peptidome, the actual result of this degradation. in this study we comprehensively analyzed a plant cell peptidome and systematically analyzed the peptide generation process.


RESULTS
we thoroughly analyzed native peptide pools of physcomitrella patens moss in two developmental stages as well as in protoplasts. peptidomic analysis was supplemented by transcriptional profiling and quantitative analysis of precursor proteins. in total, over  <dig>  unique endogenous peptides, ranging in size from  <dig> to  <dig> amino acid residues, were identified. we showed that in both the protonema and protoplast states, plastid proteins served as the main source of peptides and that their major fraction formed outside of chloroplasts. however, in general, the composition of peptide pools was very different between these cell types. in gametophores, stress-related proteins, e.g., late embryogenesis abundant proteins, were among the most productive precursors. the driselase-mediated protonema conversion to protoplasts led to a peptide generation “burst”, with a several-fold increase in the number of components in the latter. degradation of plastid proteins in protoplasts was accompanied by suppression of photosynthetic activity.


CONCLUSIONS
we suggest that peptide pools in plant cells are not merely a product of waste protein degradation, but may serve as important functional components for plant metabolism. we assume that the peptide “burst” is a form of biotic stress response that might produce peptides with antimicrobial activity from originally functional proteins. potential functions of peptides in different developmental stages are discussed.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
endogenous peptideslc-ms/msphyscomitrella patensproteometranscriptome profilingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

