BACKGROUND
evolutionary studies benefit from deep sequencing technologies that generate
genomic and transcriptomic sequences from a variety of organisms. genome
sequencing and rnaseq have complementary strengths. in this study, we
present the assembly of the most complete hydra transcriptome to
date along with a comparative analysis of the specific features of rnaseq
and genome-predicted transcriptomes currently available in the freshwater
hydrozoan hydra vulgaris.


RESULTS
to produce an accurate and extensive hydra transcriptome, we
combined illumina and  <dig> titanium reads, giving the primacy to illumina
over  <dig> reads to correct homopolymer errors. this strategy yielded an
rnaseq transcriptome that contains 48’ <dig> unique sequences including
splice variants, representing approximately 24’ <dig> distinct genes.
comparative analysis to the available genome-predicted transcriptomes
identified 10’ <dig> novel hydra transcripts that encode 529
evolutionarily-conserved proteins. the annotation of  <dig> human orthologs
points to critical functions in protein biosynthesis, fgf and tor signaling,
vesicle transport, immunity, cell cycle regulation, cell death,
mitochondrial metabolism, transcription and chromatin regulation. however, a
majority of these novel transcripts encodes short orfs, at least  <dig> of them
corresponding to pseudogenes. this rnaseq transcriptome also lacks
11’ <dig> predicted transcripts that correspond either to silent genes or
to genes expressed below the detection level of this study.


CONCLUSIONS
we established a simple and powerful strategy to combine illumina and 454
reads and we produced, with genome assistance, an extensive and accurate
hydra transcriptome. the comparative analysis of the rnaseq
transcriptome with genome-predicted transcriptomes lead to the
identification of large populations of novel as well as missing transcripts
that might reflect hydra-specific evolutionary events.

illumina and  <dig> rnaseq transcriptome assemblyhydra transcriptomereciprocal best hits next generation sequencinggenome-predicted transcriptomehuman orthologs in hydrapseudogenes

