BACKGROUND
long wave-sensitive  opsin genes have undergone multiple lineage-specific duplication events throughout the evolution of teleost fishes. lws repertoire expansions in live-bearing fishes  have equipped multiple species in this family with up to four lws genes. given that color vision, especially attraction to orange male coloration, is important to mate choice within poeciliids, lws opsins have been proposed as candidate genes driving sexual selection in this family. to date the genomic organization of these genes has not been described in the family poeciliidae, and little is known about the mechanisms regulating the expression of lws opsins in any teleost.


RESULTS
two bac clones containing the complete genomic repertoire of lws opsin genes in the green swordtail fish, xiphophorus helleri, were identified and sequenced. three of the four lws loci identified here were linked in a tandem array downstream of two tightly linked short wave-sensitive  <dig>  opsin genes. the fourth lws opsin gene, containing only a single intron, was not linked to the other three and is the product of a retrotransposition event. genomic and phylogenetic results demonstrate that the lws genes described here share a common evolutionary origin with those previously characterized in other poeciliids. using qualitative rt-pcr and msp we showed that each of the lws and sws <dig> opsins, as well as three other cone opsin genes and a single rod opsin gene, were expressed in the eyes of adult female and male x. helleri, contributing to six separate classes of adult retinal cone and rod cells with average λmax values of  <dig> nm,  <dig> nm,  <dig> nm,  <dig> nm,  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm. comparative genomic analysis identified two candidate teleost opsin regulatory regions containing putative crx binding sites and hormone response elements in upstream sequences of lws gene regions of seven teleost species, including x. helleri.


CONCLUSIONS
we report the first complete genomic description of lws and sws <dig> genes in poeciliids. these data will serve as a reference for future work seeking to understand the relationship between lws opsin genomic organization, gene expression, gene family evolution, sexual selection and speciation in this fish family.

