BACKGROUND
it is known that mrna folding can affect and regulate various gene expression steps both in living organisms and in viruses. previous studies have recognized functional rna structures in the genome of the dengue virus. however, these studies usually focused either on the viral untranslated regions or on very specific and limited regions at the beginning of the coding sequences, in a limited number of strains, and without considering evolutionary selection.


RESULTS
here we performed the first large scale comprehensive genomics analysis of selection for local mrna folding strength in the dengue virus coding sequences, based on a total of  <dig>  genomes and  <dig> serotypes. our analysis identified clusters of positions along the coding regions that may undergo a conserved evolutionary selection for strong or weak local folding maintained across different viral variants. specifically, 53- <dig> clusters for strong folding and 49- <dig> clusters for weak folding  aggregated of positions with a significant conservation of folding energy signals  were recognized. in addition, up to 7% of these positions were found to be conserved in more than 90% of the viral genomes. although some of the identified positions undergo frequent synonymous / non-synonymous substitutions, the selection for folding strength therein is preserved, and thus cannot be trivially explained based on sequence conservation alone.


CONCLUSIONS
the fact that many of the positions with significant folding related signals are conserved among different dengue variants suggests that a better understanding of the mrna structures in the corresponding regions may promote the development of prospective anti- dengue vaccination strategies. the comparative genomics approach described here can be employed in the future for detecting functional regions in other pathogens with very high mutations rates.

dengue virusfolding energyviral genomecomparative viral genomicssecondary structure4- <dig> october  <dig> 13th annual research in computational molecular biology  satellite workshop on comparative genomics frankfurt, germany

