BACKGROUND
machine learning-based methods have been proven to be powerful in developing new fold recognition tools. in our previous work , a machine learning-based method called descfold was established by using support vector machines  to combine the following four descriptors: a profile-sequence-alignment-based descriptor using psi-blast e-values and bit scores, a sequence-profile-alignment-based descriptor using rps-blast e-values and bit scores, a descriptor based on secondary structure element alignment , and a descriptor based on the occurrence of prosite functional motifs. in this work, we focus on the improvement of descfold by incorporating more powerful descriptors and setting up a user-friendly web server.


RESULTS
in seeking more powerful descriptors, the profile-profile alignment score generated from the compass algorithm was first considered as a new descriptor . when considering a profile-profile alignment between two proteins in the context of fold recognition, one protein is regarded as a template . instead of a sequence profile derived from a psi-blast search, a structure-seeded profile for the template protein was generated by searching its structural neighbors with the assistance of the tm-align structural alignment algorithm. moreover, the compass algorithm was used again to derive a profile-structural-profile-alignment-based descriptor . we trained and tested the new descfold in a total of  <dig>  highly diverse proteins extracted from the scop  <dig>  version. when the ppa and pspa descriptors were introduced, the new descfold boosts the performance of fold recognition substantially. using the scop_ <dig> _40% dataset as the fold library, the descfold web server based on the trained svm models was further constructed. to provide a large-scale test for the new descfold, a stringent test set of  <dig>  proteins were selected from the scop  <dig>  version. at a less than 5% false positive rate control, the new descfold is able to correctly recognize structural homologs at the fold level for nearly 46% test proteins. additionally, we also benchmarked the descfold method against several well-established fold recognition algorithms through the livebench targets and lindahl dataset.


CONCLUSIONS
the new descfold method was intensively benchmarked to have very competitive performance compared with some well-established fold recognition methods, suggesting that it can serve as a useful tool to assist in template-based protein structure prediction. the descfold server is freely accessible at http:// <dig> . <dig> /descfold/index.html.

