BACKGROUND
parkinson disease  is a movement disorder affecting 1 % of people over the age of  <dig>  the etiology of the disease is unknown; however, accumulating evidence suggests that mitochondrial defects, oxidative stress, and neuroinflammation play important roles in developing the disease. current medications for pd can only improve its symptoms, but are unable to halt its progressive nature. although many therapeutic approaches are available, new drugs are urgently needed for the treatment of pd. thus, the present study was undertaken to investigate the neuroprotective potential of nerolidol, a sesquiterpene alcohol, on a rotenone-induced experimental model of pd, where male wistar rats intraperitoneally received rotenone  at a dose of  <dig>  mg/kg of body weight once daily for 4 weeks.


RESULTS
nerolidol, which has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, was injected intraperitoneally at 50 mg/kg of body weight, once daily for 4 weeks, and at 30 min prior to rot administration. rot administration significantly reduced the activities of antioxidant enzymes superoxide dismutase  and catalase , and the level of the antioxidant tripeptide glutathione . moreover, rot increased the levels of the lipid peroxidation product malondialdehyde , proinflammatory cytokines , and inflammatory mediators  in rat brain tissues. immunostaining of brain tissue sections revealed a significant increase in the number of activated astrocytes  and microglia , along with the concomitant loss of dopamine  neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta and dopaminergic nerve fibers in the striatum of rot-treated rats. as expected, nerolidol supplementation to rot-injected rats significantly increased the level of sod, cat, and gsh, and decreased the level of mda. nerolidol also inhibited the release of proinflammatory cytokines and inflammatory mediators. finally, nerolidol treatment prevented rot-induced glial cell activation and the loss of dopaminergic neurons and nerve fibers, and ultimately attenuated rot-induced dopaminergic neurodegeneration.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings are the first to show that the neuroprotective effect of nerolidol is mediated through its anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory activities, which strongly supports its therapeutic potential for the treatment of pd.

keywords
parkinson diseaserotenoneneurodegenerationoxidative stressnerolidolcollege of medicine and health sciences, united arab emirates university 31m123haque m. emdadul http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006014college of medicine and health sciences, united arab emirates universityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

