BACKGROUND
cotton  is the largest producer of natural fibers for textile and is an important crop worldwide. crop production is comprised primarily of g. hirsutum l., an allotetraploid. however, elite cultivars express very small amounts of variation due to the species monophyletic origin, domestication and further bottlenecks due to selection. conversely, wild cotton species harbor extensive genetic diversity of prospective utility to improve many beneficial agronomic traits, fiber characteristics, and resistance to disease and drought. introgression of traits from wild species can provide a natural way to incorporate advantageous traits through breeding to generate higher-producing cotton cultivars and more sustainable production systems. interspecific introgression efforts by conventional methods are very time-consuming and costly, but can be expedited using marker-assisted selection.


RESULTS
using transcriptome sequencing we have developed the first gene-associated single nucleotide polymorphism  markers for wild cotton species g. tomentosum, g. mustelinum, g. armourianum and g. longicalyx. markers were also developed for a secondary cultivated species g. barbadense cv. 3– <dig>  a total of  <dig>  non-redundant snp markers were developed from the five wild species which can be utilized for interspecific germplasm introgression into cultivated g. hirsutum and are directly associated with genes. over  <dig> of the g. barbadense markers have been validated by whole-genome radiation hybrid mapping. overall  <dig>  snps from the five different species have been screened and shown to produce acceptable genotyping assays.


CONCLUSIONS
this large set of  <dig>  snps relative to cultivated g. hirsutum will allow for the first high-density mapping of genes from five wild species that affect traits of interest, including beneficial agronomic and fiber characteristics. upon mapping, the markers can be utilized for marker-assisted introgression of new germplasm into cultivated cotton and in subsequent breeding of agronomically adapted types, including cultivar development.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cottongossypium barbadensegossypium tomentosumgossypium mustelinumgossypium armourianumgossypium longicalyxrna-seqinterspecific snpissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

