BACKGROUND
pathogenic members of the fusarium oxysporum species complex are responsible for vascular wilt disease on many important crops including legumes, where they can be one of the most destructive disease causing necrotrophic fungi. we previously developed a model legume-infecting pathosystem based on the reference legume medicago truncatula and a pathogenic f. oxysporum forma specialis  medicaginis . to dissect the molecular pathogenicity arsenal used by this root-infecting pathogen, we sequenced its transcriptome during infection of a susceptible and resistant host accession.


RESULTS
high coverage rna-seq of fom infected root samples harvested from susceptible  or resistant  m. truncatula seedlings at early or later stages of infection ) and from vegetative  samples facilitated the identification of unique and overlapping sets of in planta differentially expressed genes. this included enrichment, particularly in dza <dig> in planta up-regulated datasets, for proteins associated with sugar, protein and plant cell wall metabolism, membrane transport, nutrient uptake and oxidative processes. genes encoding effector-like proteins were identified, including homologues of the f. oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici secreted in xylem  proteins, and several novel candidate effectors based on predicted secretion, small protein size and high in-planta induced expression. the majority of the effector candidates contain no known protein domains but do share high similarity to predicted proteins predominantly from other f. oxysporum ff. spp. as well as other fusaria , and from another wilt pathogen of the same class, a verticillium species. overall, this suggests these novel effector candidates may play important roles in fusaria and wilt pathogen virulence.


CONCLUSIONS
combining high coverage in planta rna-seq with knowledge of fungal pathogenicity protein features facilitated the identification of differentially expressed pathogenicity associated genes and novel effector candidates expressed during infection of a resistant or susceptible m. truncatula host. the knowledge from this first in depth in planta transcriptome sequencing of any f. oxysporum ff. spp. pathogenic on legumes will facilitate the dissection of fusarium wilt pathogenicity mechanisms on many important legume crops.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fusarium wiltvascular wiltrna-seqdegroot pathogennecrotrophhemibiotropheffectorsecreted in xylemsmall secreted proteinhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000980grains research and development corporationuwa00145singh karam b. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000943commonwealth scientific and industrial research organisationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

