BACKGROUND
bacillus cereus group isolates that produce diarrheal or emetic toxins are frequently isolated from raw milk and, in spore form, can survive pasteurization. several species within the b. cereus group are closely related and cannot be reliably differentiated by established taxonomical criteria. while b. cereus is traditionally recognized as the principal causative agent of foodborne disease in this group, there is a need to better understand the distribution and expression of different toxin and virulence genes among b. cereus group food isolates to facilitate reliable characterization that allows for assessment of the likelihood of a given isolate to cause a foodborne disease.


RESULTS
we performed whole genome sequencing of  <dig> b. cereus group dairy isolates, which represented considerable genetic diversity not covered by other isolates characterized to date. maximum likelihood analysis of these genomes along with  <dig> reference genomes representing eight validly published species revealed nine phylogenetic clades. three of these clades were represented by a single species , one by two dairy-associated isolates , one by two species  and four by three species . homologues of genes encoding a principal diarrheal enterotoxin  were distributed across all, except the b. cytotoxicus clade. using a lateral flow immunoassay, hemolysin bl was detected in  <dig> out of  <dig> isolates that carried hblacd genes. isolates from clade iii-c  consistently did not carry hblacd and did not produce hemolysin bl. isolates from clade iv  consistently carried hblacd and produced hemolysin bl. compared to others, clade iv was significantly  more likely to produce this toxin. isolates from clade vi  carried hblacd homologues, but did not produce hemolysin bl, possibly due to amino acid substitutions in different toxin-encoding genes.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that production of diarrheal enterotoxin hemolysin bl is neither inclusive nor exclusive to b. cereus sensu stricto, and that phylogenetic classification of isolates may be better than taxonomic identification for assessment of b. cereus group isolates risk for causing a diarrheal foodborne disease.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacillus cereus groupwgsvirulence genesdairytoxin productionhemolysin blnew york state dairy promotion advisory boardissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

