BACKGROUND
codon usage bias  is an important evolutionary feature in genomes that has been widely observed in many organisms. however, the synonymous codon usage pattern in the genome of t. multiceps remains to be clarified. in this study, we analyzed the codon usage of t. multiceps based on the transcriptome data to reveal the constraint factors and to gain an improved understanding of the mechanisms that shape synonymous cub.


RESULTS
analysis of a total of  <dig>  annotated mrna sequences from t. multiceps indicated only a weak codon bias, with mean gc and gc <dig> content values of  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively. our analysis indicated that nucleotide composition, mutational pressure, natural selection, gene expression level, amino acids with grand average of hydropathicity  and aromaticity  and the effective selection of amino-acids all contributed to the codon usage in t. multiceps. among these factors, natural selection was implicated as the major factor affecting the codon usage variation in t. multiceps. the codon usage of ribosome genes was affected mainly by mutations, while the essential genes were affected mainly by selection. in addition, 21codons were identified as “optimal codons”. overall, the optimal codons were gc-rich , and ended with g or c . furthermore, different degrees of variation in codon usage were found between t. multiceps and escherichia coli, yeast, homo sapiens. however, little difference was found between t. multiceps and taenia pisiformis.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, the codon usage pattern of t. multiceps was analyzed systematically and factors affected cub were also identified. this is the first study of codon biology in t. multiceps. understanding the codon usage pattern in t. multiceps can be helpful for the discovery of new genes, molecular genetic engineering and evolutionary studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
taenia multicepscodon usage patternnatural selectiongenomeevolutionthe program for changjiang scholars and innovative research team in university irt0848yang guangyou issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

