BACKGROUND
g-quadruplexes are four-stranded structures formed in guanine-rich nucleotide sequences. several functional roles of dna g-quadruplexes have so far been investigated, where their putative functional roles during dna replication and transcription have been suggested. a necessary condition for g-quadruplex formation is the presence of four regions of tandem guanines called g-runs and three nucleotide subsequences called loops that connect g-runs. a simple computational way to detect potential g-quadruplex regions in a given genomic sequence is pattern matching with regular expression. although many putative g-quadruplex motifs can be found in most genomes by the regular expression-based approach, the majority of these sequences are unlikely to form g-quadruplexes because they are unstable as compared with canonical double helix structures.


RESULTS
here we present elaborate computational models for representing dna g-quadruplex motifs using hidden markov models . use of hmms enables us to evaluate g-quadruplex motifs quantitatively by a probabilistic measure. in addition, the parameters of hmms can be trained by using experimentally verified data. computational experiments in discriminating between positive and negative g-quadruplex sequences as well as reducing putative g-quadruplexes in the human genome were carried out, indicating that hmm-based models can discern bona fide g-quadruplex structures well and one of them has the possibility of reducing false positive g-quadruplexes predicted by existing regular expression-based methods. furthermore, our results show that one of our models can be specialized to detect g-quadruplex sequences whose functional roles are expected to be involved in dna transcription.


CONCLUSIONS
the hmm-based method along with the conventional pattern matching approach can contribute to reducing costly and laborious wet-lab experiments to perform functional analysis on a given set of potential g-quadruplexes of interest. the c++ and perl programs are available at http://tcs.cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~ykato/program/g4hmm/.

 <dig> july- <dig> august  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  thirteenth international conference on bioinformatics  sydney, australia

