BACKGROUND
unlike in tomato, little is known about the genetic and molecular control of fleshy fruit development of perennial fruit trees like grapevine . here we present the study of the sequence polymorphism in a  <dig> mb grapevine genome region at the top of chromosome  <dig> carrying the fleshless berry mutation  in order, first to identify snp markers closely linked to the gene and second to search for possible signatures of domestication.


RESULTS
in total,  <dig> regions  were scanned for polymorphism along a  <dig>  mb interval  at the top of the chromosome  <dig>  in both v. vinifera cv. chardonnay and a genotype carrying the flb mutation, v. vinifera cv. ugni blanc mutant. a nearly complete homozygosity in ugni blanc  and an expected high level of heterozygosity in chardonnay were revealed. experiments using qpcr and bac fish confirmed the observed homozygosity. under the assumption that flb could be one of the genes involved into the domestication syndrome of grapevine, we sequenced  <dig> gene fragments, spread over the flb region, representing  <dig>  bp in a highly diverse set of cultivated and wild v. vinifera genotypes, to identify possible signatures of domestication in the cultivated v. vinifera compartment. we identified eight gene fragments presenting a significant deviation from neutrality of the tajima's d parameter in the cultivated pool. one of these also showed higher nucleotide diversity in the wild compartments than in the cultivated compartments. in addition, snps significantly associated to berry weight variation were identified in the flb region.


CONCLUSIONS
we observed the occurrence of a large homozygous region in a non-repetitive region of the grapevine otherwise highly-heterozygous genome and propose a hypothesis for its formation. we demonstrated the feasibility to apply bac fish on the very small grapevine chromosomes and provided a specific probe for the identification of chromosome  <dig> on a cytogenetic map. we evidenced genes showing putative signatures of selection and snps significantly associated with berry weight variation in the flb region. in addition, we provided to the community  <dig> snps at the top of chromosome  <dig> for the development of a genotyping chip for future fine mapping of the flb gene in a f <dig> population when available.

