BACKGROUND
the b and t cells of the human adaptive immune system leverage a highly diverse repertoire of antigen-specific receptors to protect the human body from pathogens. the sequencing and analysis of immune repertoires is emerging as an important tool to understand immune responses, whether beneficial or harmful . however, methods for studying these repertoires, and for directly comparing different immune repertoires, are lacking.


RESULTS
in this paper, we present a non-parametric method for directly comparing sequencing repertoires, with the goal of rigorously quantifying differences in v, d, and j gene segment utilization. this method, referred to as the repertoire dissimilarity index , uses a bootstrapped subsampling approach to account for variance in sequencing depth, and, coupled with a data simulation approach, allows for direct quantification of the average variation between repertoires. we use the rdi method to recapitulate known differences in the formation of the cd4+ and cd8+ t cell repertoires, and further show that antigen-driven activation of naïve cd8+ t cells is more selective than in the cd4+ repertoire, resulting in a more specialized cd8+ memory repertoire.


CONCLUSIONS
we prove that the rdi method is an accurate and versatile method for comparisons of immune repertoires. the rdi method has been implemented as an r package, and is available for download through bitbucket.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
repertoire sequencingimmunologynonparametric methodshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthu19a1057229davis mark m. national institute of healthu <dig> ai090019davis mark m. bioinformatics support contract hhsn272201200028crubelt florian “molecular and cellular immunobiology” training grant <dig> t <dig> ai07290bolen christopher r. national library of medicinet15lm07056vander heiden jason a. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

