BACKGROUND
high density genotyping data are indispensable for genomic analyses of complex traits in animal and crop species. maize is one of the most important crop plants worldwide, however a high density snp genotyping array for analysis of its large and highly dynamic genome was not available so far.


RESULTS
we developed a high density maize snp array composed of  <dig>  variants . initially, 57 m variants were discovered by sequencing  <dig> representative temperate maize lines and then stringently filtered for sequence quality scores and predicted conversion performance on the array resulting in the selection of  <dig>  m polymorphic variants assayed on two screening arrays. to identify high-confidence variants,  <dig> dna samples from a broad genetic diversity panel of worldwide maize lines including the samples used for sequencing, important founder lines for european maize breeding, hybrids, and proprietary samples with european, us, semi-tropical, and tropical origin were used for experimental validation. we selected 616 k variants according to their performance during validation, support of genotype calls through sequencing data, and physical distribution for further analysis and for the design of the commercially available affymetrix® axiom® maize genotyping array. this array is composed of  <dig>  snps and  <dig>  indels. among these are  <dig>  variants in coding regions and  <dig>  snps of the illumina® maizesnp <dig> beadchip for study comparison. in a subset of  <dig>  variants, apart from the target snp additional off-target variants are detected, which show only a minor bias towards intermediate allele frequencies. we performed principal coordinate and admixture analyses to determine the ability of the array to detect and resolve population structure and investigated the extent of ld within a worldwide validation panel.


CONCLUSIONS
the high density affymetrix® axiom® maize genotyping array is optimized for european and american temperate maize and was developed based on a diverse sample panel by applying stringent quality filter criteria to ensure its suitability for a broad range of applications. with 600 k variants it is the largest currently publically available genotyping array in crop species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
high density genotyping arraymaizesnpissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

