BACKGROUND
at high concentrations of organic substrates, microbial utilization of preferred substrates  often results in diauxic growth with hierarchical substrate depletion. unlike the carbon catabolite repression-mediated discriminative utilization of carbohydrates, the substrate preferences of non-carbohydrate-utilizing bacteria for environmentally relevant compound classes  are rarely investigated. the denitrifying alphaproteobacterium magnetospirillum sp. strain pmbn <dig> anaerobically degrades a wide variety of aliphatic and aromatic compounds and is unique for anaerobic degradation of 4-methylbenzoate. the latter proceeds via a distinct reaction sequence analogous to the central anaerobic benzoyl-coa pathway to intermediates of central metabolism. considering the presence of these two different anaerobic “aromatic ring degrading” pathways, substrate preferences of magnetospirillum sp. strain pmbn <dig> were investigated. anaerobic growth and substrate consumption were monitored in binary and ternary mixtures of 4-methylbenzoate, benzoate and succinate, in conjuction with time-resolved abundance profiling of selected transcripts and/or proteins related to substrate uptake and catabolism.


RESULTS
diauxic growth with benzoate preference was observed for binary and ternary substrate mixtures containing 4-methylbenzoate and succinate . on the contrary, 4-methylbenzoate and succinate were utilized simultaneously from a binary mixture, as well as after benzoate depletion from the ternary mixture. apparently, simultaneous repression of 4-methylbenzoate and succinate utilization from the ternary substrate mixture resulted from  inhibition of 4-methylbenzoate uptake, and  combined inhibition of succinate uptake  and succinate conversion to acetyl-coa . the benzoate-mediated repression of c4-dicarboxylate utilization in magnetospirillum sp. strain pmbn <dig> differs from that recently described for “aromatoleum aromaticum” ebn <dig> .


CONCLUSIONS
the preferential or simultaneous utilization of benzoate and other aromatic acids from mixtures with aliphatic acids may represent a more common nutritional behavior among  degradation specialist than previously thought. preference of magnetospirillum sp. strain pmbn <dig> for benzoate from mixtures with 4-methylbenzoate, and thus temporal separation of the benzoyl-coa  and 4-methylbenzoyl-coa  pathway, may reflect a catabolic tuning towards metabolic efficiency and the markedly broader range of aromatic substrates feeding into the central anaerobic benzoyl-coa pathway.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
anaerobic degradation4-methylbenzoatearomatic compoundsrepressiondiauxieternary substrate mixturephysiologytranscript analysisproteomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

