BACKGROUND
evolution equipped bdellovibrio bacteriovorus predatory bacteria to invade other bacteria, digesting and replicating, sealed within them thus preventing nutrient-sharing with organisms in the surrounding environment. bdellovibrio were previously described as “obligate predators” because only by mutations, often in gene bd <dig>  are  <dig> in ~1x <dig> of predatory lab strains of bdellovibrio converted to prey-independent growth. a previous genomic analysis of b. bacteriovorus strain hd <dig> suggested that predatory consumption of prey dna by lytic enzymes made bdellovibrio less likely than other bacteria to acquire dna by lateral gene transfer . however the doolittle and pan groups predicted, in silico, both ancient and recent lateral gene transfer into the b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> genome.


RESULTS
to test these predictions, we isolated a predatory bacterium from the river tiber- a good potential source of lgt as it is rich in diverse bacteria and organic pollutants- by enrichment culturing with e. coli prey cells. the isolate was identified as b. bacteriovorus and named as strain tiberius. unusually, this tiberius strain showed simultaneous prey-independent growth on organic nutrients and predatory growth on live prey. despite the prey-independent growth, the homolog of bd <dig> did not have typical prey-independent-type mutations. the dual growth mode may reflect the high carbon content of the river, and gives b. bacteriovorus tiberius extended non-predatory contact with the other bacteria present. the hd <dig> and tiberius genomes were extensively syntenic despite their different cultured-terrestrial/freshly-isolated aquatic histories; but there were significant differences in gene content indicative of genomic flux and lgt. gene content comparisons support previously published in silico predictions for lgt in strain hd <dig> with substantial conservation of genes predicted to have ancient lgt origins but little conservation of at-rich genes predicted to be recently acquired.


CONCLUSIONS
the natural niche and dual predatory, and prey-independent growth of the b. bacteriovorus tiberius strain afforded it extensive non-predatory contact with other marine and freshwater bacteria from which lgt is evident in its genome. thus despite their arsenal of dna-lytic enzymes; bdellovibrio are not always predatory in natural niches and their genomes are shaped by acquiring whole genes from other bacteria.

evolutionary genetics of bacterialateral gene transferpredatory bdellovibrio

