BACKGROUND
drugs often kill some cancer cells while others survive. this stochastic outcome is seen even in clonal cells grown under the same conditions. understanding the molecular reasons for this stochastic outcome is a current challenge, which requires studying the proteome at the single cell level over time. in a previous study we used dynamic proteomics to study the response of cancer cells to a dna damaging drug, camptothecin. several proteins showed bimodal dynamics: they rose in some cells and decreased in others, in a way that correlated with eventual cell fate: death or survival. here we ask whether bimodality is a special case for camptothecin, or whether it occurs for other drugs as well. to address this, we tested a second drug with a different mechanism of action, an hsp <dig> inhibitor. we used dynamic proteomics to follow  <dig> proteins in space and time, endogenously tagged in their native chromosomal location in individual living human lung-cancer cells, following drug administration.


RESULTS
we find bimodal dynamics for a quarter of the proteins. in some cells these proteins strongly rise in level about 12 h after treatment, but in other cells their level drops or remains constant. the proteins which rise in surviving cells included anti-apoptotic factors such as ddx <dig>  and cell cycle regulators such as rfc <dig>  the proteins that rise in cells that eventually die include pro-apoptotic factors such as apaf <dig>  the two drugs shared some aspects in their single-cell response, including  <dig> of the bimodal proteins and translocation of oxidative response proteins to the nucleus, but differed in other aspects, with hsp90i showing more bimodal proteins. moreover, the cell cycle phase at drug administration impacted the probability to die from hsp90i but not camptothecin.


CONCLUSIONS
single-cell dynamic proteomics reveals sub-populations of cells within a clonal cell line with different protein dynamics in response to a drug. these different dynamics correlate with cell survival or death. bimodal proteins which correlate with cell fate may be potential drug targets to enhance the effects of therapy.

http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003977israel science foundationclore-katz weizmann internal grantissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

