BACKGROUND
few, if any, protozoan parasites are reported to exhibit extreme organ tropism like the flagellate tritrichomonas foetus. in cattle, t. foetus infects the reproductive system causing abortion, whereas the infection in cats results in chronic large bowel diarrhoea. in the absence of a t. foetus genome, we utilized a de novo approach to assemble the transcriptome of the bovine and feline genotype to identify host-specific adaptations and virulence factors specific to each genotype. furthermore, a subset of orthologs was used to characterize putative druggable targets and expose complications of in silico drug target mining in species with indefinite host-ranges.


RESULTS
illumina rna-seq reads were assembled into two representative bovine and feline transcriptomes containing  <dig>  and  <dig>  contigs, respectively. coding and non-coding regions of the genome libraries revealed striking similarities, with  <dig>  shared homolog pairs reduced down to  <dig>  coding orthologs between the two genotypes. the transcriptomes were near identical in functional category distribution; with no indication of selective pressure acting on orthologs despite differences in parasite origins/host. orthologs formed a large proportion of highly expressed transcripts in both genotypes . mining the libraries for protease virulence factors revealed the cysteine proteases  to be the most common. in total,  <dig> and  <dig> bovine and feline t. foetus transcripts were identified as putative proteases based on merops database, with  <dig> hits to putative protease inhibitors. in bovine t. foetus, cp <dig> is the preferentially transcribed cp while in the feline genotype, transcription of cp <dig> showed higher abundance. in silico druggability analysis of the two genotypes revealed that when host sequences are taken into account, drug targets are genotype-specific.


CONCLUSIONS
gene discovery analysis based on rna-seq data analysis revealed prominent similarities between the bovine and feline t. foetus, suggesting recent adaptation to their respective host/niche. t. foetus represents a unique case of a mammalian protozoan expanding its parasitic grasp across distantly related host lineages. consequences of the host-range for in silico drug targeting are exposed here, demonstrating that targets of the parasite in one host are not necessarily ideal for the same parasite in another host.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

