BACKGROUND
despite the advances in our understanding of aging-associated behavioral decline, relatively little is known about how aging affects neural circuits that regulate specific behaviors, particularly the expression of genes in specific neural circuits during aging. we have addressed this by exploring a peptidergic neuron r <dig>  an identified neuron of the marine snail aplysia californica. r <dig> is implicated in reproduction and osmoregulation and responds to neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, serotonin and glutamate and is characterized by its action potential bursts.


RESULTS
we examined changes in gene expression in r <dig> neurons during aging by microarray analyses of rnas from two different age groups, mature and old animals. specifically we find that  <dig> ests are differentially regulated in mature and old r <dig> neurons. bioinformatics analyses of these genes have identified specific biological pathways that are up or downregulated in mature and old neurons. comparison with human signaling networks using pathway analyses have identified three major networks  altered in old r <dig> neurons. furthermore, qpcr analysis of single r <dig> neurons to quantify expression levels of candidate regulators involved in transcription  and translation  showed that aging is associated with a decrease in expression of these regulators, and similar analysis in three other neurons  showed that gene expression change during aging could be bidirectional.


CONCLUSIONS
we find that aging is associated with bidirectional changes in gene expression. detailed bioinformatics analyses and human homolog searches have identified specific biological processes and human-relevant signaling pathways in r <dig> that are affected during aging. evaluation of gene expression changes in different neurons suggests specific transcriptomic signature of single neurons during aging.

aplysia californicabi-directional gene regulationsingle neuron transcriptomer <dig> neuronneuronal circuitrysignaling networksagingcrebs <dig> kinase

