BACKGROUND
oxycodone is an opioid that is prescribed to treat multiple types of pain, especially when other opioids are ineffective. unfortunately, similar to other opioids, repetitive oxycodone administration has the potential to lead to development of analgesic tolerance, withdrawal, and addiction. studies demonstrate that chronic opioid exposure, including oxycodone, alters gene expression profiles and that these changes contribute to opioid-induced analgesic effect, tolerance and dependence. however, very little is known about opioids altering the translational machinery of the central nervous system. considering that opioids induce clinically significant levels of hypoxia, increase intracellular ca2+ levels, and induce the production of nitric oxide and extracellular glutamate transmission, we hypothesize that opioids also trigger a defensive mechanism called the integrated stress response . the key event in the isr activation, regardless of the trigger, is phosphorylation of translation initiation factor  <dig> alpha , which modulates expression and translational activation of specific mrnas important for adaptation to stress. to test this hypothesis, we used an animal model in which female rats were orally gavaged with 15 mg/kg of oxycodone every 24 h for 30 days.


RESULTS
we demonstrated increased levels of hsp <dig> and bip expression as well as phosphorylation of eif2α in various rat brain areas after oxycodone administration. polysomal analysis indicated oxycodone-induced translational stimulation of atf <dig> and pdgfrα mrnas, which have previously been shown to depend on the eif2α kinase activation. moreover, using breast adenocarcinoma mcf <dig> cells, which are known to express the μ-opioid receptor, we observed induction of the isr pathway after one 24-h treatment with oxycodone.


CONCLUSIONS
the combined in vivo and in vitro data suggest that prolonged opioid treatment induces the integrated stress response in the central nervous system; it modulates translational machinery in favor of specific mrna and this may contribute to the drug-induced changes in neuronal plasticity.

keywords
oxycodonemorphineopioidnucleus accumbenscortexbrain stemoxidative stressnitro-tyrosineendoplasmic reticulum stressintegrated stress responsehsp70bip/grp78phosphorylated eif2αpolysomal analysistranslationatf4pdgfrαpurkinje cellsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

