BACKGROUND
outcomes of infections with the salmon louse lepeophtheirus salmonis vary considerably among its natural hosts . host-parasite interactions range from weak to strong host responses accompanied by high to low parasite abundances, respectively. parasite behavioral studies indicate that the louse prefers the host atlantic salmon , which is characterized by a weak immune response, and that this results in enhanced parasite reproduction and growth rates. furthermore, parasite-derived immunosuppressive molecules  have been detected at higher amounts in response to the mucus of atlantic salmon relative to coho salmon . however, the host-specific responses of the salmon louse have not been well characterized in either of the genetically distinct sub-species that occur in the atlantic and pacific oceans.


RESULTS
we assessed and compared the transcriptomic feeding response of the pacific salmon louse  while parasitizing the highly susceptible atlantic salmon and sockeye salmon  or the more resistant coho salmon  using a 38 k oligonucleotide microarray. the response of the louse was enhanced both in the number of overexpressed genes and in the magnitude of expression while feeding on the non-native atlantic salmon, compared to either coho or sockeye salmon. for example, putative virulence factors , metabolic enzymes , protein synthesis enzymes , and reproduction-related genes  were overexpressed in atlantic-fed lice, indicating heightened parasite fitness with this host species. in contrast, responses in coho- or sockeye-fed lice were more similar to those of parasites deprived of a host. to test for host acclimation by the parasite, we performed a reciprocal host transfer experiment and determined that the exaggerated response to atlantic salmon was independent of the initial host species, confirming our conclusion that the pacific salmon louse exhibits an enhanced response to atlantic salmon.


CONCLUSIONS
this study characterized global transcriptomic responses of pacific salmon lice during infection of susceptible and resistant hosts. similar parasite responses during infection of coho or sockeye salmon, despite differences in natural immunity to infection between these host species, indicate that host susceptibility status alone does not drive the parasite response. we identified an enhanced louse response after feeding on atlantic salmon, characterized by up-regulation of virulence factors, energy metabolism and reproductive-associated transcripts. in contrast, the responses of lice infecting coho or sockeye salmon were weaker, with reduced expression of virulence factors. these observations indicate that the response of the louse is independent of host susceptibility and suggest that co-evolutionary host-parasite relationships may influence contemporary host-parasite interactions. this research improves our understanding of the susceptibility of atlantic salmon and may assist in the development of novel control measures against the salmon louse.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
copepodahost susceptibilitylepeophtheirus salmonisresistancesalmonsea licevirulence factorshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000041fisheries and oceans canadahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000233genome british columbiaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

