BACKGROUND
population differentiation is the result of demographic and evolutionary forces. whole genome datasets from the  <dig> genomes project  provide an unbiased view of genetic variation across populations from europe, asia, africa and the americas. common population-specific snps  reflect a deep history and may have important consequences for health and wellbeing. their interpretation is contextualised by currently available genome data.


RESULTS
the identification of common population-specific  variants  is influenced by admixture and the sample size under investigation. nine of the populations in the  <dig> genomes project  and  <dig> european) revealed that the african populations , followed by the japanese  have the highest number of cps snps, in concordance with their histories and given the populations studied. using two methods, sliding 50-snp and 5-kb windows, the cps snps showed distinct clustering across large genome segments and little overlap of clusters between populations. ihs enrichment score and the population branch statistic  analyses suggest that selective sweeps are unlikely to account for the clustering and population specificity. of interest is the association of clusters close to recombination hotspots. functional analysis of genes associated with the cps snps revealed over-representation of genes in pathways associated with neuronal development, including axonal guidance signalling and creb signalling in neurones.


CONCLUSIONS
common population-specific snps are non-randomly distributed throughout the genome and are significantly associated with recombination hotspots. since the variant alleles of most cps snps are the derived allele, they likely arose in the specific population after a split from a common ancestor. their proximity to genes involved in specific pathways, including neuronal development, suggests evolutionary plasticity of selected genomic regions. contrary to expectation, selective sweeps did not play a large role in the persistence of population-specific variation. this suggests a stochastic process towards population-specific variation which reflects demographic histories and may have some interesting implications for health and susceptibility to disease.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

