BACKGROUND
bovine parainfluenza  <dig> viruses  are respiratory pathogens of cattle that cause disease singly but are often associated with bovine respiratory disease complex  in conjunction with other viral and bacterial agents. bovine vaccines currently contain bpi3v to provide protection against the virus, but there is no current information regarding the bpi3v strains that are circulating in the u.s.


RESULTS
a project was initiated to sequence archival bpi3v isolates to study viral evolution over time. this was done with a deep sequencing protocol that generated sequences of multiple rna virus genomes simultaneously. analysis of the bpi3v sequences revealed that, in addition to the genotype a  viruses previously described in the united states, there were two additional genotypes of bpi3v circulating that had been described only in australia  and asia . the u.s. bpi3vb and bpi3vc isolates showed some divergence from the australian and asian strains; the bpi3vb were 93 % similar to the australian q <dig> strain and the bpi3vc viruses were 98 % similar to the 12q <dig> strain that was described in south korea. overall, the three genotypes were  <dig> to 84 % identical to each other and 80 % identical to the most similar human pi3v. cross-neutralization studies using an aphis/nvsl bpi3v reference serum showed that neutralization titers against the genotype b and c viruses were 4- to ≥16-fold less then the titer against the aphis bpi3va reference strain, sf- <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
this study clearly demonstrated that bpi3vb and bpi3vc strains, previously thought to be foreign to the u.s., are indeed circulating in domestic livestock herds. based on virus neutralization using polyclonal antisera, there were antigenic differences between viruses from these genotypes and the bpi3va viruses that are included in currently marketed bovine vaccines. further study of these viruses is warranted to determine pathogenic potential and cross-protection afforded by vaccination.

keywords
deep sequencingvirus genomeparamyxovirusvirus genotypesubgenotypeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

