BACKGROUND
metabolomics is one of most recent omics technologies. it has been applied on fields such as food science, nutrition, drug discovery and systems biology. for this, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry  has been largely applied and many computational tools have been developed to support the analysis of metabolomics data. among them, amdis is perhaps the most used tool for identifying and quantifying metabolites. however, amdis generates a high number of false-positives and does not have an interface amenable for high-throughput data analysis. although additional computational tools have been developed for processing amdis results and to perform normalisations and statistical analysis of metabolomics data, there is not yet a single free software or package able to reliably identify and quantify metabolites analysed by gc-ms.


RESULTS
here we introduce a new algorithm, pscore, able to score peaks according to their likelihood of representing metabolites defined in a mass spectral library. we implemented pscore in a r package called metabox and evaluated the applicability and potential of metabox by comparing its performance against amdis results when analysing volatile organic compounds  from standard mixtures of metabolites and from female and male mice faecal samples. metabox reported lower percentages of false positives and false negatives, and was able to report a higher number of potential biomarkers associated to the metabolism of female and male mice.


CONCLUSIONS
identification and quantification of metabolites is among the most critical and time-consuming steps in gc-ms metabolome analysis. here we present an algorithm implemented in a r package, which allows users to construct flexible pipelines and analyse metabolomics data in a high-throughput manner.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
metabolomicsidentificationgc-msdata analysisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

