BACKGROUND
stroke immediately sets into motion sustained excitotoxicity and calcium dysregulation, causing aberrant activity in neuronal nitric oxide synthase  and an imbalance in the levels of nitric oxide . drugs targeting nnos-originated toxicity may therefore reduce stroke-induced damage. recently, we observed that a redox-modulating agent of the no metabolome, s-nitrosoglutathione , confers neurovascular protection by reducing the levels of peroxynitrite, a product of aberrant nos activity. we therefore investigated whether gsno-mediated neuroprotection and improved neurological functions depend on blocking nnos/peroxynitrite-associated injurious mechanisms using a rat model of cerebral ischemia reperfusion .


RESULTS
ir increased the activity of nnos, the levels of neuronal peroxynitrite and phosphorylation at ser <dig> of nnos. gsno treatment of ir animals decreased ir-activated nnos activity and neuronal peroxynitrite levels by reducing nnos phosphorylation at ser <dig>  the ser <dig> phosphorylation is associated with increased nnos activity. supporting the notion that nnos activity and peroxynitrite are deleterious following ir, inhibition of nnos by its inhibitor 7-nitroindazole or reducing peroxynitrite by its scavenger fetpps decreased ir injury. gsno also decreased the activation of amp kinase  and its upstream kinase lkb <dig>  both of which were activated in ir brain. ampk has been implicated in nnos activation via ser <dig> phosphorylation. to determine whether ampk activation is deleterious in the acute phase of ir, we treated animals after ir with aicar  and compound c . while aicar potentiated, compound c reduced the ir injury.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, these results indicate an injurious nnos/peroxynitrite/ampk cycle following stroke, and gsno treatment of ir inhibits this vicious cycle, resulting in neuroprotection and improved neurological function. gsno is a natural component of the human body, and its exogenous administration to humans is not associated with any known side effects. currently, the fda-approved thrombolytic therapy suffers from a lack of neuronal protective activity. because gsno provides neuroprotection by ameliorating stroke’s initial and causative injuries, it is a candidate of translational value for stroke therapy.

keywords
amp-activated protein kinaseneuronal nitric oxide synthaseneuroprotectionperoxynitrites-nitrosoglutathionestrokecerebral ischemia reperfusionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

