BACKGROUND
highly adapted plant species are able to alter their root architecture to improve nutrient uptake and thrive in environments with limited nutrient supply. cluster roots  are specialised structures of dense lateral roots formed by several plant species for the effective mining of nutrient rich soil patches through a combination of increased surface area and exudation of carboxylates. white lupin is becoming a model-species allowing for the discovery of gene networks involved in cr development. a greater understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms driving these developmental processes is important for the generation of smarter plants for a world with diminishing resources to improve food security.


RESULTS
rna-seq analyses for three developmental stages of the cr formed under phosphorus-limited conditions and two of non-cluster roots have been performed for white lupin. in total  <dig> , <dig> high-quality paired-end reads were used for a de novo assembly of the root transcriptome and merged with lagi <dig>  to generate an improved lagi <dig> with  <dig>  functionally annotated contigs. this was followed by comparative gene expression analysis. we show marked differences in the transcriptional response across the various cluster root stages to adjust to phosphate limitation by increasing uptake capacity and adjusting metabolic pathways. several transcription factors such as plt, scr, phb, phv or aux/iaa with a known role in the control of meristem activity and developmental processes show an increased expression in the tip of the cr. genes involved in hormonal responses  and cell cycle control  are also differentially expressed. in addition, we identify primary transcripts of mirnas with established function in the root meristem.


CONCLUSIONS
our gene expression analysis shows an intricate network of transcription factors and plant hormones controlling cr initiation and formation. in addition, functional differences between the different cr developmental stages in the acclimation to phosphorus starvation have been identified.

cluster rootwhite lupinroot developmentphosphaterna-seqde novo transcriptome

