BACKGROUND
pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen that significantly increases morbidity and mortality in nosocomial infections and cystic fibrosis patients. its pathogenicity especially relies on the production of virulence factors or resistances to many antibiotics. since multiplication of antibiotic resistance can lead to therapeutic impasses, it becomes necessary to develop new tools for fighting p. aeruginosa infections. the use of probiotics is one of the ways currently being explored. probiotics are microorganisms that exert a positive effect on the host’s health and some of them are known to possess antibacterial activities. since most of their effects have been shown in the digestive tract, experimental data compatible with the respiratory environment are strongly needed. the main goal of this study was then to test the capacity of lactobacilli to inhibit major virulence factors  associated with p. aeruginosa pathogenicity.


RESULTS
sixty-seven lactobacilli were isolated from the oral cavities of healthy volunteers. these isolates together with  <dig> lactobacilli isolated from raw milks, were tested for their capacity to decrease biofilm formation and activity of the elastase produced by p. aeruginosa pao <dig>  ten isolates, particularly efficient, were accurately identified using a polyphasic approach  and typed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis . the  <dig> remaining strains belonging to the l. fermentum , l. zeae  and l. paracasei  species were sensitive to all antibiotics tested with the exception of the intrinsic resistance to vancomycin. the strains were all able to grow in artificial saliva.


CONCLUSIONS
eight strains belonging to l. fermentum, l. zeae and l. paracasei species harbouring anti-elastase and anti-biofilm properties are potential probiotics for fighting p. aeruginosa pulmonary infections. however, further studies are needed in order to test their innocuity and their capacity to behave such as an oropharyngeal barrier against pseudomonas aeruginosa colonisation in vivo.

pseudomonas aeruginosalactobacillusprobioticsorganic acidsbiofilm formationelastolytic activity

