BACKGROUND
single particle tracking  is nowadays one of the most popular technique to probe spatio-temporal dynamics of proteins diffusing within the plasma membrane. indeed membrane components of eukaryotic cells are very dynamic molecules and can diffuse according to different motion modes. trajectories are often reconstructed frame-by-frame and dynamic properties often evaluated using mean square displacement  analysis. however, to get statistically significant results in tracking experiments, analysis of a large number of trajectories is required and new methods facilitating this analysis are still needed.


RESULTS
in this study we developed a new algorithm based on back-propagation neural network  and msd analysis using a sliding window. the neural network was trained and cross validated with short synthetic trajectories. for simulated and experimental data, the algorithm was shown to accurately discriminate between brownian, confined and directed diffusion modes within one trajectory, the  <dig> main of diffusion encountered for proteins diffusing within biological membranes. it does not require a minimum number of observed particle displacements within the trajectory to infer the presence of multiple motion states. the size of the sliding window was small enough to measure local behavior and to detect switches between different diffusion modes for segments as short as  <dig> frames. it also provides quantitative information from each segment of these trajectories. besides its ability to detect switches between  <dig> modes of diffusion, this algorithm is able to analyze simultaneously hundreds of trajectories with a short computational time.


CONCLUSIONS
this new algorithm, implemented in powerful and handy software, provides a new conceptual and versatile tool, to accurately analyze the dynamic behavior of membrane components.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
single molecule trackingmembranediffusiontrajectoryneural networkissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

