BACKGROUND
burkholderia pseudomallei  and burkholderia mallei  are gram-negative facultative intracellular pathogens, which are the causative agents of melioidosis and glanders, respectively. depending on the route of exposure, aerosol or transcutaneous, infection by bp or bm can result in an extensive range of disease – from acute to chronic, relapsing illness to fatal septicemia. both diseases are associated with difficult diagnosis and high fatality rates. about ninety five percent of patients succumb to untreated septicemic infections and the fatality rate is 50 % even when standard antibiotic treatments are administered.


RESULTS
the goal of this study is to profile murine macrophage-mediated phenotypic and molecular responses that are characteristic to a collection of bp, bm, burkholderia thailandensis  and burkholderia oklahomensis  strains obtained from humans, animals, environment and geographically diverse locations. burkholderia spp.  were able to invade and replicate in macrophages, albeit to varying degrees. all bp  and four bm strains were able to induce actin polymerization on the bacterial surface following infection. several bp and bm strains showed reduced ability to induce multinucleated giant cell  formation, while bo and bp  <dig> were unable to induce this phenotype. measurement of host cytokine responses revealed a statistically significant bm mediated il- <dig> and il- <dig> production compared to bp strains. hierarchical clustering of transcriptional data from  <dig> mouse cytokines, chemokines and their corresponding receptors identified  <dig> host genes as indicators of differential responses between the burkholderia spp. further validation confirmed bm mediated il-1b, il- <dig>  tnfrsf1b and il-36a mrna expressions were significantly higher when compared to bp and bt.


CONCLUSIONS
these results characterize the phenotypic and immunological differences in the host innate response to pathogenic and avirulent burkholderia strains and provide insight into the phenotypic alterations and molecular targets underlying host-burkholderia interactions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
burkholderia thailandensisburkholderia malleiburkholderia pseudomalleiburkholderia oklahomensishost responseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

