BACKGROUND
the vaginal microbiome plays an important role in urogenital health. quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction  assays for the most prevalent vaginal lactobacillus species and bacterial vaginosis species g. vaginalis and a. vaginae exist, but qpcr information regarding variation over time is still very limited. we set up qpcr assays for a selection of seven species and defined the temporal variation over three menstrual cycles in a healthy caucasian population with a normal nugent score. we also explored differences in qpcr data between these healthy women and an ‘at risk’ clinic population of caucasian, african and asian women with and without bacterial vaginosis , as defined by the nugent score.


RESULTS
temporal stability of the lactobacillus species counts was high with l. crispatus counts of  <dig> copies/ml and l. vaginalis counts of  <dig> copies/ml. we identified  <dig> types of ‘normal flora’ and one ‘bv type flora’ with latent class analysis on the combined data of all women. the first group was particularly common in women with a normal nugent score and was characterized by a high frequency of l. crispatus, l. iners, l. jensenii, and l. vaginalis and a correspondingly low frequency of l. gasseri and a. vaginae. the second group was characterized by the predominance of l. gasseri and l. vaginalis and was found most commonly in healthy caucasian women. the third group was commonest in women with a high nugent score but was also seen in a subset of african and asian women with a low nugent score and was characterized by the absence of lactobacillus species  but the presence of g. vaginalis and a. vaginae.


CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that the quantification of specific bacteria by qpcr contributes to a better description of the non-bv vaginal microbiome, but we also demonstrated that differences in populations such as risk and ethnicity also have to be taken into account. we believe that our selection of indicator organisms represents a feasible strategy for the assessment of the vaginal microbiome and could be useful for monitoring the microbiome in safety trials of vaginal products.

