BACKGROUND
bovine brucellosis  is a zoonotic disease caused by brucella abortus. bb is endemic in argentina, where vaccination with brucella abortus strain  <dig> is compulsory for 3-to-8 month-old heifers. the objectives of this study were to quantify the prevalence of bb and to identify factors associated with its occurrence, along with the spatial distribution of the disease, in the provinces of la pampa and san luis. a two-stage random sampling design was used to sample  <dig>  cows  from  <dig> farms .


RESULTS
cow and herd prevalence were  <dig>  %  and  <dig>  % , respectively. both cow-level and herd-level prevalence in la pampa  were significantly higher than in san luis . there were not differences between the proportions of reactive cattle compared to that obtained in a survey conducted in  <dig>  however, herd prevalence in la pampa was significantly  higher compared to that study. disease was found to be spatially clustered in west la pampa. the lower the bovine density and the calf/cow ratio, the higher odds of belonging to the cluster.


CONCLUSIONS
the increase of farm prevalence in the last five years suggests that the disease is spreading and that control measures should be applied in the region.

the cluster of infected farms was located in the west region of la pampa. there, farms have lower animal densities and smaller cow/calf indices compared to the rest of the province. although western la pampa has more infected herds, within-farm prevalence was not higher, which suggests that the control program has been relatively successful in controlling the disease at the farm level, and/or that low animal density inherently results in low disease prevalence. our results provide baseline information on the epidemiology of bb and its potential pattern of transmission in argentina, which will ultimately help to improve bb control programs in the country.

keywords
bovine brucellosisprevalencespatial analysisargentinaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

