BACKGROUND
establishing highly productive clonal cell lines with constant productivity over 2– <dig> months of continuous culture remains a tedious task requiring the screening of tens of thousands of clonal colonies. in addition, long-term cultivation of many candidate lines derived in the absence of drug selection pressure is necessary. expression vectors based on the elongation factor- <dig> alpha  gene and the dihydrofolate reductase  selection marker  can be used to obtain highly productive populations of stably transfected cells in the selection medium, but they have not been tested for their ability to support target gene amplification under gradually increasing methotrexate pressure.


RESULTS
we have modified eef1a-based vectors by linking the dhfr selection marker to the target gene in the bicistronic rna, shortening the overall plasmid size, and adding an epstein-barr virus terminal repeat fragment  element. presence of the ebvtr element increased the rate of stable transfection by the plasmid by  <dig> times that of the ebvtr-minus control and improved the rate of methotrexate-driven gene amplification. the mean expression level of the enhanced green fluorescent protein  used herein as a model protein, increased up to eight-fold using a single round of amplification in the case of adherent colonies formation and up to  <dig> -fold in the case of suspension polyclonal cultures. several egfp-expressing cell populations produced using vectors with antibiotic resistance markers instead of the dhfr marker were compared with each other. stable transfection of chinese hamster ovary  dg <dig> cells by the p <dig> -hygro-egfp plasmid  generated highest egfp expression levels of up to  <dig> % of the total cytoplasmic protein, with less than 5% of the cell population being egfp-negative.


CONCLUSIONS
the p <dig>  vector was very effective for stable transfection of cho cells and capable of rapid mtx-driven target gene amplification, while p <dig> -hygro achieved similar egfp expression levels as p <dig> . the set of vectors we have developed should speed-up the process of generating highly productive clonal cell lines while substantially decreasing the associated experimental effort.

cho cellshigh level expressionstable cell line generationmolecular cloning

