BACKGROUND
plants respond differently to mechanical wounding and herbivore attack, using distinct pathways for defense. the versatile sweet potato sporamin possesses multiple biological functions in response to stress. however, the regulation of sporamin gene expression that is activated upon mechanical damage or herbivore attack has not been well studied.


RESULTS
biochemical analysis revealed that different patterns of reactive oxygen species  and antioxidant mechanism exist between mechanical wounding  and herbivore attack  in the sweet potato leaf. using lc-esi-ms , only the endogenous ja  level was found to increase dramatically after mw in a time-dependent manner, whereas both endogenous ja and sa  increase in parallel after ha. through yeast one-hybrid screening, two transcription factors ibnac <dig> , arabidopsis transcription activation factor , and cup-shaped cotyledon ) and ibwrky <dig> were isolated, which interact with the sporamin promoter fragment of swre  regulatory sequences. exogenous application of meja , sa and dieca  on sweet potato leaves was employed, and the results revealed that ibnac <dig> mediated the expression of sporamin through a ja-dependent signaling pathway upon mw, whereas both ibnac <dig> and ibwrky <dig> coordinately regulated sporamin expression through ja- and sa-dependent pathways upon ha. transcriptome analysis identified myc2/ <dig> and jaz2/tify10a , the repressor and activator of ja and sa signaling among others, as the genes that play an intermediate role in the ja and sa pathways, and these results were further validated by qrt-pcr .


CONCLUSIONS
this work has improved our understanding of the differential regulatory mechanism of sporamin expression. our study illustrates that sweet potato sporamin expression is differentially induced upon abiotic mw and biotic ha that involves ibnac <dig> and ibwrky <dig> and is dependent on the ja and sa signaling pathways. thus, we established a model to address the plant-wounding response upon physical and biotic damage.

sporamindifferent activationjasmonic acidsalicylic acidtranscription factors: nac, wrkyrostranscriptomesweet potato

