BACKGROUND
creation of human gene families was facilitated significantly by gene duplication and diversification. the n repeats exhibit length variability, display genome-wide distribution, and are abundant in the human genome. accumulation of evidences for their multiple functional roles including regulation of transcription and stimulation of recombination and splicing elect them as functional elements. here, we report analysis of the distribution of n repeats in human gene families.


RESULTS
the  <dig>  human gene families were classified into six functional classes. distribution of n repeats were analyzed both from a global perspective and from a stratified perspective based on their biological properties. the number of genes with repeats decreased with increasing repeat length and several genes  had repeats of multiple types in various combinations. repeats were positively associated with the class of signaling and communication whereas, they were negatively associated with the classes of immune and related functions and of information. the proportion of genes with n repeats in each class was proportional to the corresponding average gene length. the repeat distribution pattern in large gene families generally mirrored the global distribution pattern but differed particularly for collagen gene family, which was rich in repeats. the position and flanking sequences of the repeats of collagen genes showed high conservation in the chimpanzee genome. however the majority of these repeats displayed length polymorphism.


CONCLUSIONS
positive association of repeats with genes of signaling and communication points to their role in modulation of transcription. negative association of repeats in genes of information relates to the smaller gene length, higher expression and fundamental role in cellular physiology. in genes of immune and related functions negative association of repeats perhaps relates to the smaller gene length and the directional nature of the recombinogenic processes to generate immune diversity. thus, multiple factors including gene length, function and directionality of recombinogenic processes steered the observed distribution of n repeats. furthermore, the distribution of repeat patterns is consistent with the current model that long repeats tend to contract more than expand whereas, the reverse dynamics operates in short repeats.

