BACKGROUND
the use of fluoroquinolones in the fowl industry has led to an alarming incidence of fluoroquinolone resistance in pathogenic as well as commensal bacteria. next to simply reducing antimicrobial consumption, optimizing dosage regimens can be regarded as a suitable strategy to reduce antimicrobial resistance development without jeopardizing therapy efficacy and outcome. a first step in order to limit antimicrobial resistance is to assess the exposure of the intestinal microbiota to enrofloxacin after different treatment strategies. therefore, a study was conducted in broiler chickens to assess the effect of route of administration  and dose escalation  on plasma and intestinal concentrations of enrofloxacin and its main metabolite ciprofloxacin after treatment with enrofloxacin once daily for five consecutive days. four different parts of the intestinal tract were sampled: ileum, cecum, colon and cloaca. a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry  method was developed to quantify both analytes in plasma and intestinal content. sample preparation prior to lc-ms/ms analysis consisted of extraction with ethyl acetate. for intestinal content samples pbs buffer was added before extraction. the supernatant was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in water prior to analysis.


RESULTS
the results in plasma and intestinal content demonstrated that biotransformation of enro- to ciprofloxacin in broiler chickens is limited. in general, the intestinal microbiota in cecum and colon is exposed to significant levels of enrofloxacin after conventional treatment . a clear increase of intestinal concentrations was demonstrated after administration of a five-fold higher dose . after intramuscular administration, intestinal concentrations were comparable, except for the higher levels in cloaca due to the complete bioavailability and urinary excretion.


CONCLUSIONS
the intestinal microbiota is exposed to high levels of the antimicrobial, after oral as well as parenteral therapy. furthermore, a dose and time dependent correlation was observed. the impact of the detected intestinal levels on resistance selection in the intestinal microbiota has to be further investigated.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
enrofloxacinbroiler chickendose escalationroute of administrationplasmaintestinal contentissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

