BACKGROUND
soil populations of bacteria rapidly degrading atrazine are critical to the environmental fate of the herbicide. an enrichment bias from the routine isolation procedure prevents studying the diversity of atrazine degraders. in the present work, we analyzed the occurrence, diversity and community structure of soil atrazine-degrading bacteria based on their direct isolation.

methods
atrazine-degrading bacteria were isolated by direct plating on a specially developed sm agar. the atrazine degradation genes trzn and atzabc were detected by multiplex pcr. the diversity of atrazine degraders was characterized by enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus-pcr  genotyping followed by 16s rrna gene phylogenetic analysis. the occurrence of atrazine-degrading bacteria was also assessed by conventional pcr targeting trzn and atzabc in soil dna.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> atrazine-degrading isolates were recovered from bulk and rhizosphere soils sampled near an atrazine factory and from geographically distant maize fields. fifteen genotypes were distinguished among  <dig> industrial isolates, with  <dig> of them representing eight phylogenetic groups of the genus arthrobacter. the remaining two were closely related to pseudomonas alcaliphila and gulosibacter molinativorax and constituted major components of the atrazine-degrading community in the most heavily contaminated industrial plantless soil. all isolates from the adjacent sites inhabited by cogon grass or common reed were various arthrobacter spp. with a strong prevalence of a. aurescens group. only three genotypes were distinguished among  <dig> agricultural strains. genetically similar arthrobacter ureafaciens bacteria which occurred as minor inhabitants of cogon grass roots in the industrial soil were ubiquitous and predominant atrazine degraders in the maize rhizosphere. the other two genotypes represented two distant nocardioides spp. that were specific to their geographic origins.


CONCLUSIONS
direct plating on sm agar enabled rapid isolation of atrazine-degrading bacteria and analysis of their natural diversity in soil. the results obtained provided evidence that contaminated soils harbored communities of genetically distinct bacteria capable of individually degrading and utilizing atrazine. the community structures of culturable atrazine degraders were habitat-specific. bacteria belonging to the genus arthrobacter were the predominant degraders of atrazine in the plant rhizosphere.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
atrazine-degrading bacteriadiversitysoil bacterial communitiesarthrobactergulosibacternocardioidespseudomonastrznatz genesone thousand talents plan of chinawq20123700079taishan scholar plan of shandong provincetshw20120743youth foundation of shandong academy of sciences2014qn021li chengyun science foundation for distinguished young scholars of shandong provincebs2014sw030li chengyun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

