BACKGROUND
cassava mosaic disease  in madagascar is caused by a complex of at least six african cassava mosaic geminivirus  species. this provides a rare opportunity for a comparative study of the evolutionary and epidemiological dynamics of distinct pathogenic crop-infecting viral species that coexist within the same environment. the genetic and spatial structure of cmg populations in madagascar was studied and bayesian phylogeographic modelling was applied to infer the origins of madagascan cmg populations within the epidemiological context of related populations situated on mainland africa and other south western indian ocean  islands.


RESULTS
the isolation and analysis of  <dig> dna-a and  <dig> dna-b sequences revealed the presence in madagascar of four prevalent cmg species , and of numerous cmg recombinants that have, to date, only ever been detected on this island. sacmv and acmv, the two most prevalent viruses, displayed low degrees of genetic diversity and have most likely been introduced to the island only once. by contrast, eacmv-like cmg populations  were more diverse, more spatially structured, and displayed evidence of at least three independent introductions from mainland africa. although there were no statistically supported virus movement events between madagascar and the other swio islands, at least one mainland african acmv variant likely originated in madagascar.


CONCLUSIONS
our study highlights both the complexity of cmd in madagascar, and the distinct evolutionary and spatial dynamics of the different viral species that collectively are associated with this disease. given that more distinct cmg species and recombinants have been found in madagascar than any other similarly sized region of the world, the risks of recombinant cmg variants emerging on this island are likely to be higher than elsewhere. evidence of an epidemiological link between madagascan and mainland african cmgs suggests that the consequences of such emergence events could reach far beyond the shores of this island.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
begomovirusescassavaepidemiologymadagascarphylogeographyrecombinationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

