BACKGROUND
micrornas  are an abundant class of small single-stranded non-coding rna molecules ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides. they negatively regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level and play key roles in many biological processes, including skeletal development and cartilage maturation. in addition, mirnas involvement in osteoarticular diseases has been proved and some of them were identified as suitable biomarkers for pathological conditions. equine osteochondrosis  is one of the most prevalent juvenile osteoarticular disorders in horses and represents a major concern for animal welfare and economic reasons. its etiology and pathology remain controversial and biological pathways as well as molecular mechanisms involved in the physiopathology are still unclear. this study aims to investigate the potential role of mirnas in equine osteochondrosis  physiopathology.

short-read ngs technology  was used to establish a comprehensive repertoire of mirna expressed in either equine cartilage or subchondral bone. undamaged cartilage and subchondral bone samples from healthy  and oc-affected  10-month anglo-arabian foals were analysed. samples were also subjected or not to an experimental mechanical loading to evaluate the role of mirnas in the regulation of mechano-transduction pathways. predicted targets of annotated mirnas were identified using mirmap.


RESULTS
epiphyseal cartilage and subchondral bone mirnome were defined, including about  <dig> new mirnas. differentially expressed mirnas were identified between bone and cartilage from healthy and oc foals, as well as after an experimental mechanical loading. in cartilage, functional annotation of their predicted targets suggests a role in the maintenance of cartilage integrity through the control of cell cycle and differentiation, energy production and metabolism as well as extracellular matrix structure and dynamics. in bone, mirna predicited targets were associated with osteoblasts and osteoclasts differentiation, though the regulation of energy production, vesicle transport and some growth factor signaling pathways.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our results suggest a role of mirnas in equine oc physiopathology and in the cellular response to biomechanical stress in cartilage and bone. in silico target prediction and functional enrichment analysis provides new insight into oc molecular physiopathology.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
micrornacartilageboneequine osteochondrosisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

