BACKGROUND
few pharmaceuticals are registered in cats for the management of post-operative pain and inflammation. the objective of this study was to assess the field efficacy and safety of an injectable formulation of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug robenacoxib in cats undergoing surgery. the study was a multi-center, prospective, randomized, masked, parallel-group, placebo-controlled clinical trial. a total of  <dig> cats were enrolled and underwent surgery comprising forelimb onychectomy, as an example of orthopedic surgery, plus either ovariohysterectomy or castration. all cats received butorphanol prior to anesthesia and forelimb four-point regional nerve blocks with bupivacaine after induction of general anesthesia. cats were randomized to receive daily subcutaneous  injection of robenacoxib, at a target dosage of  <dig>  mg/kg , or placebo  once prior to surgery and for an additional two days post-operatively.


RESULTS
significantly  fewer cats administered robenacoxib received additional analgesia rescue therapy  compared to cats given placebo . the percentage of treatment success was therefore  <dig>  % with robenacoxib and  <dig>  % with placebo. behavior, posture, pain on palpation of the paw and soft tissue surgery sites, and overall pain were significantly  improved versus placebo at various time points within the first 8 h in cats receiving robenacoxib. the most frequently reported adverse events were incision site infection/dehiscence, bleeding, vomiting, decreased appetite and lethargy. frequencies of reported adverse clinical signs, hematology, serum chemistry and urinalysis variables, and body weight changes were similar between groups. there were no significant changes from baseline with robenacoxib in hepatic, hematological or renal clinical pathology variables.


CONCLUSIONS
robenacoxib by s.c. injection was effective and well tolerated in the control of post-operative pain associated with orthopedic, ovariohysterectomy and castration surgery in cats.

keywords
catinjectablepost-operativepainnsaidrandomizedrobenacoxibelanco animal healthissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

