BACKGROUND
the capability of correlating specific genotypes with human diseases is a complex issue in spite of all advantages arisen from high-throughput technologies, such as genome wide association studies . new tools for genetic variants interpretation and for single nucleotide polymorphisms  prioritization are actually needed. given a list of the most relevant snps statistically associated to a specific pathology as result of a genotype study, a critical issue is the identification of genes that are effectively related to the disease by re-scoring the importance of the identified genetic variations. vice versa, given a list of genes, it can be of great importance to predict which snps can be involved in the onset of a particular disease, in order to focus the research on their effects.


RESULTS
we propose a new bioinformatics approach to support biological data mining in the analysis and interpretation of snps associated to pathologies. this system can be employed to design custom genotyping chips for disease-oriented studies and to re-score gwas results. the proposed method relies  on the data integration of public resources using a gene-centric database design,  on the evaluation of a set of static biomolecular annotations, defined as features, and  on the snp scoring function, which computes snp scores using parameters and weights set by users. we employed a machine learning classifier to set default feature weights and an ontological annotation layer to enable the enrichment of the input gene set. we implemented our method as a web tool called snpranker  <dig>  , improving our first published release of this system. a user-friendly interface allows the input of a list of genes, snps or a biological process, and to customize the features set with relative weights. as result, snpranker  <dig>  returns a list of snps, localized within input and ontologically enriched genes, combined with their prioritization scores.


CONCLUSIONS
different databases and resources are already available for snps annotation, but they do not prioritize or re-score snps relying on a-priori biomolecular knowledge. snpranker  <dig>  attempts to fill this gap through a user-friendly integrated web resource. end users, such as researchers in medical genetics and epidemiology, may find in snpranker  <dig>  a new tool for data mining and interpretation able to support snps analysis. possible scenarios are gwas data re-scoring, snps selection for custom genotyping arrays and snps/diseases association studies.

16- <dig> september  <dig> seventh international meeting on computational intelligence methods for bioinformatics and biostatistics  palermo, italy

