BACKGROUND
vitis vinifera berry development is characterised by an initial phase where the fruit is small, hard and acidic, followed by a lag phase known as veraison. in the final phase, berries become larger, softer and sweeter and accumulate an array of organoleptic compounds. since the physiological and biochemical makeup of grape berries at harvest has a profound impact on the characteristics of wine, there is great interest in characterising the molecular and biophysical changes that occur from flowering through veraison and ripening, including the coordination and temporal regulation of metabolic gene pathways. advances in deep-sequencing technologies, combined with the availability of increasingly accurate v. vinifera genomic and transcriptomic data, have enabled us to carry out rna-transcript expression analysis on a global scale at key points during berry development.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> million 100-base pair reads were generated from pooled vitis vinifera  berries sampled at 3-weeks post-anthesis, 10- and 11-weeks post-anthesis  and at 17-weeks post-anthesis . mapping reads from each developmental stage  onto the ncbi refseq transcriptome of  <dig>  v. vinifera mrnas revealed that at least 75% of these transcripts were detected in each sample. rna-seq analysis uncovered  <dig>  transcripts that were significantly upregulated at a single developmental stage, including  <dig> transcription factors. clustering transcripts according to distinct patterns of transcription revealed coordination in metabolic pathways such as organic acid, stilbene and terpenoid metabolism. from the phenylpropanoid/stilbene biosynthetic pathway at least  <dig> transcripts were upregulated in ripe berries when compared to veraison and immature berries, and  <dig> terpene synthases were predominantly detected only in a single sample. quantitative real-time pcr was used to validate the expression pattern of  <dig> differentially expressed genes from primary and secondary metabolic pathways.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study we report the global transcriptional profile of shiraz grapes at key stages of development. we have undertaken a comprehensive analysis of gene families contributing to commercially important berry characteristics and present examples of co-regulation and differential gene expression. the data reported here will provide an invaluable resource for the on-going molecular investigation of wine grapes.

grapevineilluminashirazrna-seqtranscriptome

