BACKGROUND
the decreasing costs of sequencing are driving the need for cost effective and real time variant calling of whole genome sequencing data. the scale of these projects are far beyond the capacity of typical computing resources available with most research labs. other infrastructures like the cloud aws environment and supercomputers also have limitations due to which large scale joint variant calling becomes infeasible, and infrastructure specific variant calling strategies either fail to scale up to large datasets or abandon joint calling strategies.


RESULTS
we present a high throughput framework including multiple variant callers for single nucleotide variant  calling, which leverages hybrid computing infrastructure consisting of cloud aws, supercomputers and local high performance computing infrastructures. we present a novel binning approach for large scale joint variant calling and imputation which can scale up to over  <dig>  samples while producing snv callsets with high sensitivity and specificity. as a proof of principle, we present results of analysis on cohorts for heart and aging research in genomic epidemiology  wgs freeze  <dig> dataset in which joint calling, imputation and phasing of over  <dig> whole genome samples was produced in under  <dig> weeks using four state-of-the-art callers. the callers used were snptools, gatk-haplotypecaller, gatk-unifiedgenotyper and gotcloud. we used amazon aws, a 4000-core in-house cluster at baylor college of medicine, ibm power pc blue biou at rice and rhea at oak ridge national laboratory  for the computation. aws was used for joint calling of 180 tb of bam files, and ornl and rice supercomputers were used for the imputation and phasing step. all other steps were carried out on the local compute cluster. the entire operation used  <dig>  million core hours and only transferred a total of 6 tb of data across the platforms.


CONCLUSIONS
even with increasing sizes of whole genome datasets, ensemble joint calling of snvs for low coverage data can be accomplished in a scalable, cost effective and fast manner by using heterogeneous computing platforms without compromising on the quality of variants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
wgssnvvariant callingjoint callingsupercomputercloud awsscalablebig dataensemble callinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthr <dig> hg008115yu fuli http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000015u.s. department of energyde-ac05-00or22725issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

