BACKGROUND
colonial invertebrates such as corals exhibit nested levels of modularity, imposing a challenge to the depiction of their morphological evolution. comparisons among diverse caribbean gorgonian corals suggest decoupling of evolution at the polyp vs. branch/internode levels. thus, evolutionary change in polyp form or size  does not imply a change in colony form . this study examined the patterns of morphological integration at the intraspecific level. pseudopterogorgia bipinnata   is a caribbean shallow water gorgonian that can colonize most reef habitats  and shows great morphological variation.


RESULTS
to characterize the genotype/environment relationship and phenotypic plasticity in p. bipinnata, two microsatellite loci, mitochondrial  and nuclear  dna sequences, and  dgge banding patterns were initially compared among the populations present in the coral reefs of belize , panama , colombia  and the bahamas . despite the large and discrete differentiation of morphotypes, there was no concordant genetic variation  in the its <dig> genotypes from belize, panama and colombia. its1– <dig> s-its <dig> phylogenetic analysis afforded evidence for considering the species p. kallos  as the shallow-most morphotype of p. bipinnata from exposed environments. the population from carrie bow cay, belize  was examined to determine the phenotypic integration of modular features such as branch thickness, polyp aperture, inter-polyp distance, internode length and branch length. third-order partial correlation coefficients suggested significant integration between polypar and colonial traits. some features did not change at all despite 10-fold differences in other integrated features. more importantly, some colonial features showed dependence on modular features.


CONCLUSIONS
consequently, module integration in gorgonian corals can be shifted, switched or canalized along lineages. modular marine organisms such as corals are variations on a single theme: their modules can couple or decouple, allowing them to adapt to all marine benthic environments.

