BACKGROUND
zinc is considered as an essential element for all living organisms, but it can be toxic at large concentrations. bacteria therefore tightly regulate zinc metabolism. the cg <dig> protein of corynebacterium glutamicum was a candidate to control zinc metabolism in this species, since it was classified as metalloregulator of the zinc uptake regulator  subgroup of the ferric uptake regulator  family of dna-binding transcription regulators.


RESULTS
the cg <dig>  gene was deleted in the chromosome of c. glutamicum atcc  <dig> by an allelic exchange procedure to generate the zur-deficient mutant c. glutamicum js <dig>  whole-genome dna microarray hybridizations and real-time rt-pcr assays comparing the gene expression in c. glutamicum js <dig> with that of the wild-type strain detected  <dig> genes with enhanced expression in the zur mutant. the expression data were combined with results from cross-genome comparisons of shared regulatory sites, revealing the presence of candidate zur-binding sites in the mapped promoter regions of five transcription units encoding components of potential zinc abc-type transporters , a putative secreted protein , a putative oxidoreductase , and a putative p-loop gtpase of the cog <dig> protein family . enhanced transcript levels of the respective genes in c. glutamicum js <dig> were verified by real-time rt-pcr, and complementation of the mutant with a wild-type zur gene reversed the effect of differential gene expression. the zinc-dependent expression of the putative cg <dig> and cg <dig> operons was detected in vivo with a gfp reporter system. moreover, the zinc-dependent binding of purified zur protein to double-stranded 40-mer oligonucleotides containing candidate zur-binding sites was demonstrated in vitro by dna band shift assays.


CONCLUSIONS
whole-genome expression profiling and dna band shift assays demonstrated that zur directly represses in a zinc-dependent manner the expression of nine genes organized in five transcription units. accordingly, the zur  protein is the key transcription regulator for genes involved in zinc homeostasis in c. glutamicum.

