BACKGROUND
bacterial and cellular genotyping is becoming increasingly important in the diagnosis of infectious diseases. however, difficulties in obtaining sufficient amount of bacterial and cellular dna extracted from the same human biopsy specimens is often a limiting factor. in this study, total dna  was isolated from minute amounts of gastric biopsy specimens and amplified by means of whole genome amplification using the multiple displacement amplification  technique. subsequently, mda-dna was used for concurrent helicobacter pylori and human host cellular dna genotyping analysis using pcr-based methods.


RESULTS
total dna was isolated from gastric biopsy specimens of  <dig> subjects with gastritis and  <dig> control subjects having a normal mucosa. the dna was amplified using a multiple displacement amplification  kit. next, concurrent genotyping was performed using h. pylori-specific virulence gene pcr amplification assays, pyrosequencing of bacterial 16s rdna and pcr characterisation of various host genes. this includes interleukin 1-beta  and interferon-gamma receptor  snp analysis, and interleukin- <dig> receptor antagonist  variable tandem repeats  in intron  <dig>  finally, regions of the vaca-gene were pcr amplified using m13-sequence tagged primers which allowed for direct dna sequencing, omitting cloning of pcr amplicons. h. pylori specific multiplex pcr assays revealed the presence of h. pylori caga and vaca genotypic variations in  <dig> of  <dig> gastritis biopsy specimens. using pyrosequencing, 16s rdna variable v <dig> region signatures of h. pylori were found in  <dig> of  <dig> individuals with gastritis, but in none of the control subjects. similarly, il1b and ifngr1-snp and il1rn-vntr patterns could be established in all individuals. furthermore, sequencing of m13-sequence tagged vaca-pcr amplicons revealed the presence of highly diverse h. pylori vaca-s/i/m regions.


CONCLUSIONS
the pcr-based molecular typing methods applied, using mda-amplified dna derived from small amounts of gastric biopsy specimens, enabled a rapid and concurrent molecular analysis of bacterial and host genes in the same biopsy specimen. the principles and technologies used in this study could also be applied to any situation in which human host and microbial genes of interest in microbial-host interactions would need to be sequenced.

