BACKGROUND
tobacco smoke  toxicity to the brain microvasculature is still an understudied area till date. nf-e <dig> related factor  is a key transcription factor responsible for activating the antioxidant response element  genes following an oxidative insult. till date, several studies targeting the blood brain barrier  have shown some protective role of nrf <dig> in ischemia–reperfusion  injury, however, its functional role in chronic smokers subjected to a life-long oxidative stress has never been addressed. this is of crucial importance since smokers have a much higher risk for cerebrovascular stroke and tobacco smoke exposure has been clearly shown to enhance bbb damage following an ischemia/reperfusion injury. thus, the goal of our study was to investigate the defense pathways activated at the bbb endothelial level by ts exposure. specifically we focused on nrf <dig> and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated b signaling response  as the central protective mechanisms related to oxidative insult.


RESULTS
with the exception of nicotine, both full flavor  and decotinized  cigarettes activated nrf <dig> and nfκβ pathways in hcmec/d <dig> endothelial cells. several detoxification and anti-oxidant genes including downstream products were also activated including nadh dehydrogenase quinone  <dig> , heme oxygenase- <dig> , catalytic and modifier subunits of glutamate-cysteine ligase , solute carrier-slc7a11). gene expression levels of cytochrome p450s  and efflux transporters p-glycoprotein  and multi-drug resistance protein- <dig>  were also enhanced. increase of p-gp functional activity and depletion of gsh were also observed. strikingly, toxicity of denicotinized  cigarettes was equivalent to 3r4f .


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a detailed analysis of nrf2-related cytoprotective mechanisms activated in response to 3r4f and uln-derived ts exposure correlating the results with their oxidative and inflammatory potential. toxicants present in soluble cigarette smoke extracts  and not nicotine seem to be the primary determinant of vascular toxicity. in this respect our results from this and previous studies suggest that chronic ts exposure can overcome nrf <dig> and nfκb-p <dig> dependent cytoprotective mechanisms of the brain microvascular endothelium possibly leading to bbb impairment and loss of bbb integrity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
environmentendotheliumblood brain barrierinflammationtranscriptomicsalternativeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

