BACKGROUND
contaminations from various exogenous sources are a common problem in next-generation sequencing. another possible source of contaminating dna are endogenous parasites. on the one hand, undiscovered contaminations of animal sequence assemblies may lead to erroneous interpretation of data; on the other hand, when identified, parasite-derived sequences may provide a valuable source of information.


RESULTS
here we show that sequences deriving from apicomplexan parasites can be found in many animal genome and transcriptome projects, which in most cases derived from an infection of the sequenced host specimen. the apicomplexan sequences were extracted from the sequence assemblies using a newly developed bioinformatic pipeline  and tentatively assigned to distinct taxa employing phylogenetic methods. we analysed  <dig> assemblies and found  <dig>  contigs of apicomplexan origin in  <dig> of the datasets. the contaminating species were identified as members of the apicomplexan taxa gregarinasina, coccidia, piroplasmida, and haemosporida. for example, in the platypus genome assembly, we found a high number of contigs derived from a piroplasmid parasite . for most of the infecting parasite species, no molecular data had been available previously, and some of the datasets contain sequences representing large amounts of the parasite’s gene repertoire.


CONCLUSIONS
our study suggests that parasite-derived contaminations represent a valuable source of information that can help to discover and identify new parasites, and provide information on previously unknown host-parasite interactions. we, therefore, argue that uncurated assembly data should routinely be made available in addition to the final assemblies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
apicomplexacontaminationdatabase analysisphylogenycoccidiapiroplasmidagregarinasinahaemosporidamalariaparasiteshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftbu956/16-1burmester thorsten issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

