BACKGROUND
identification of rna homologs within genomic stretches is difficult when pairwise sequence identity is low or unalignable flanking residues are present. in both cases structure-sequence or profile/family-sequence alignment programs become difficult to apply because of unreliable rna structures or family alignments. as such, local sequence-sequence alignment programs are frequently used instead. we have recently demonstrated that maximal expected accuracy alignments using partition function match probabilities  are significantly better than contemporary methods on heterogeneous length protein sequence datasets, thus suggesting an affinity for local alignment.


RESULTS
we create a pairwise rna-genome alignment benchmark from rfam families with average pairwise sequence identity up to 60%. each dataset contains a query rna aligned to a target rna  embedded in a genomic sequence at least 5k nucleotides long. to simulate common conditions when exact ends of an ncrna are unknown, each query rna has 5' and 3' genomic flanks of size  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> nucleotides. we subsequently compare the error of the probalign program  to the commonly used local alignment programs hmmer, ssearch, and blast, and the popular clustalw program with zero end-gap penalties. parameters were optimized for each program on a small subset of the benchmark. probalign has overall highest accuracies on the full benchmark. it leads by 10% accuracy over ssearch  on  <dig> out of  <dig> families. on datasets restricted to maximum of 30% sequence identity, probalign's overall median error is  <dig> % vs.  <dig> % for ssearch . furthermore, on these datasets probalign leads ssearch by at least 10% on five families; ssearch leads probalign by the same margin on two of the fourteen families. we also demonstrate that the probalign mean posterior probability, compared to the normalized ssearch z-score, is a better discriminator of alignment quality. all datasets and software are available online.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate, for the first time, that partition function match probabilities used for expected accuracy alignment, as done in probalign, provide statistically significant improvement over current approaches for identifying distantly related rna sequences in larger genomic segments.

