BACKGROUND
many ovules of late devonian  seed plants have been well studied. however, because few taxa occur with anatomically preserved stems and/or petioles, the vascular system of these earliest spermatophytes is little understood and available data come mostly from euramerica. there remains great controversy over the anatomical differentiation of late devonian and carboniferous seed plant groups of buteoxylonales, calamopityales and lyginopteridales. protostele evolution of these early spermatophytes needs more research.


RESULTS
a new taxon yiduxylon trilobum gen. et sp. nov. with seed plant affinities has been discovered in the upper devonian  tizikou formation of hubei province, china. it is represented by stems, helically arranged and bifurcate fronds with two orders of pinnae and planate pinnules. both secondary pinnae and pinnules are borne alternately. stems contain a small protostele with three primary xylem ribs possessing a single peripheral protoxylem strand. thick secondary xylem displays multiseriate bordered pitting on the tangential and radial walls of the tracheids, and has biseriate to multiseriate and high rays. a narrow cortex consists of inner cortex without sclerotic nests and sparganum-type outer cortex with peripheral bands of vertically aligned sclerenchyma cells. two leaf traces successively arise tangentially from each primary xylem rib and they divide once to produce four circular-oval traces in the stem cortex. four vascular bundles occur in two c-shaped groups at each petiole base with ground tissue and peripheral bands of sclerenchyma cells.


CONCLUSIONS
yiduxylon justifies the assignment to a new genus mainly because of the protostele with protoxylem strands only near the periphery of primary xylem ribs, leaf trace origination and petiolar vascular supply structure. it shares many definitive characters with calamopityales and lyginopteridales, further underscoring the anatomical similarities among early seed plants. the primary vascular system, pycnoxylic-manoxylic secondary xylem with bordered pits on both tangential and radial walls of a tracheid and leaf trace divergence of yiduxylon suggest transitional features between the early spermatophytes and ancestral aneurophyte progymnosperms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chinaearly seed plantfamennianlate devonianleaf tracepetioleprotosteletizikou formationyiduxylon trilobumissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

