BACKGROUND
monsegmental pedicle instrumentation  has been used to treat thoracolumbar fractures. however, there are few reports about the biomechanical characteristics of mspi compared with traditional short-segment pedicle instrumentation  in management of unstable thoracolumbar fractures, and the influence of vertebral fracture on screw stability is still unclear.

methods
this study was to compare the immediate stability between mspi and sspi in management of unstable l <dig> fracture, and to evaluate the role of fractured vertebrae in screw stability. two studies were performed: in the first study, sixteen fresh calf spines  were divided into two groups, in which unstable fractures at l <dig> were produced and then instrumented with mspi or sspi respectively. the range of motion  and lax zone  of specimens were evaluated with pure moment of 6 nm loaded. the second study measured and compared the pullout strength of screws inserted in to  <dig> intact and fractured vertebrae of calf spines  respectively. the correlation of pullout strength with load sharing classification  of fractured vertebrae was analyzed.


RESULTS
no significant difference in the rom and lz of the destabilized segments after fixation between mspi and sspi, except in axial rotation of rom . after fatigue cyclic loading, the mspi showed a significant increase of rom during lateral bending and axial rotation ; however, there were no significant differences in the lz during all loading models between groups . the mean pullout strength of pedicle screws in fractured vertebrae decreased by  <dig>  %, compared with that of intact vertebrae , and had a low correlation with lsc of the fractured vertebrae .


CONCLUSIONS
mspi can provide effective immediate stability for management of unstable thoracolumbar fractures; however, it has less fatigue resistance during lateral bending and axial rotation compared with sspi. lsc score of fractured vertebrae is not a major influence on the pullout strength of screws.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

