BACKGROUND
grasses are adapted to a wide range of climatic conditions. species of the subfamily pooideae, which includes wheat, barley and important forage grasses, have evolved extreme frost tolerance. a class of ice binding proteins that inhibit ice re-crystallisation, specific to the pooideae subfamily lineage, have been identified in perennial ryegrass and wheat, and these proteins are thought to have evolved from a leucine-rich repeat phytosulfokine receptor kinase -like ancestor gene. even though the ice re-crystallisation inhibition function of these proteins has been studied extensively in vitro, little is known about the evolution of these genes on the molecular level.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> putative novel ice re-crystallisation inhibition -like protein coding genes in perennial ryegrass, barley, and wheat. using synonymous divergence estimates we reconstructed the evolution of the iri-like gene family. we also explored the hypothesis that the iri-domain has evolved through repeated motif expansion and investigated the evolutionary relationship between a lrr-domain containing iri coding gene in carrot and the pooideae iri-like genes. our analysis showed that the main expansion of the iri-gene family happened ~ <dig> million years ago . in addition to iri-like paralogs, wheat contained several sequences that likely were products of polyploidisation events . through sequence analysis we identified two short motifs in the rice lrr-psr gene highly similar to the repeat motifs of the iri-domain in cold tolerant grasses. finally we show that the lrr-domain of carrot and grass iri proteins both share homology to an arabidopsis thaliana lrr-trans membrane protein kinase .


CONCLUSIONS
the diverse iri-like genes identified in this study tell a tale of a complex evolutionary history including birth of an ice binding domain, a burst of gene duplication events after cold tolerant grasses radiated from rice, protein domain structure differentiation between paralogs, and sub- and/or neofunctionalisation of iri-like proteins. from our sequence analysis we provide evidence for iri-domain evolution probably occurring through increased copy number of a repeated motif. finally, we discuss the possibility of parallel evolution of lrr domain containing iri proteins in carrot and grasses through two completely different molecular adaptations.

