BACKGROUND
pear  is an important fruit species worldwide; however, its genetics and genomic information is limited. combining the solexa/illumina rna-seq high-throughput sequencing approach  with digital gene expression  analysis would be a powerful tool for transcriptomic study. this paper reports the transcriptome profiling analysis of chinese white pear  using rna-seq and dge to better understand the molecular mechanisms in fruit development and maturation of chinese white pear.


RESULTS
de novo transcriptome assembly and gene expression analysis of chinese white pear were performed in an unprecedented depth  using high-throughput illumina rna-seq combined with a tag-based digital gene expression  system. approximately,  <dig>  million reads were sequenced, trimmed, and assembled into  <dig>  unigenes. these unigenes comprised  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons with an average length of  <dig> bp and had an n <dig> of  <dig> bp. sequence similarity analyses against six public databases  found that  <dig>  unigenes can be annotated with gene descriptions, conserved protein domains, or gene ontology terms. by blasting all  <dig>  unigenes in kegg, a total of  <dig>  unigenes were annotated into  <dig> known metabolic or signaling pathways in which a few primary, intermediate, and secondary metabolic pathways are directly related to pear fruit quality. dge libraries were constructed for each of the five fruit developmental stages. variations in gene expression among all developmental stages of pear fruit were significantly different in a large amount of unigenes.


CONCLUSIONS
extensive transcriptome and dge profiling data at five fruit developmental stages of chinese white pear have been obtained from a deep sequencing, which provides comprehensive gene expression information at the transcriptional level. this could facilitate understanding of the molecular mechanisms in fruit development and maturation. such a database can also be used as a public information platform for research on molecular biology and functional genomics in pear and other related species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013

