BACKGROUND
the microsporidian encephalitozoon cuniculi is an obligate intracellular eukaryotic pathogen with a small nuclear genome  consisting of  <dig> chromosomes. although each chromosome end is known to contain a single rdna unit, the incomplete assembly of subtelomeric regions following sequencing of the genome identified only  <dig> of the  <dig> expected rdna units. while chromosome end assembly remains a difficult process in most eukaryotic genomes, it is of significant importance for pathogens because these regions encode factors important for virulence and host evasion.


RESULTS
here we report the first complete assembly of e. cuniculi chromosome ends, and describe a novel mosaic structure of segmental duplications  in these regions. ext repeats range in size between  <dig>  and  <dig>  kbp and contain four multigene families encoding membrane associated proteins. twenty-one recombination sites were identified in the sub-terminal region of e. cuniculi chromosomes. our analysis suggests that these sites contribute to the diversity of chromosome ends organization through double strand break repair mechanisms. the region containing ext repeats at chromosome extremities can be differentiated based on gene composition, gc content, recombination sites density and chromosome landscape.


CONCLUSIONS
together this study provides the complete structure of the chromosome ends of e. cuniculi gb-m <dig>  and identifies important factors, which could play a major role in parasite diversity and host-parasite interactions. comparison with other eukaryotic genomes suggests that terminal regions could be distinguished precisely based on gene content, genetic instability and base composition biais. the diversity of processes assciated with chromosome extremities and their biological consequences, as they are presented in the present study, emphasize the fact that great effort will be necessary in the future to characterize more carefully these regions during whole genome sequencing efforts.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
microsporidiaencephalitozoon cuniculisubtelomerechromosome endsrecombinationmultigene familyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

