BACKGROUND
infection of intestinal epithelial cells by pathogenic salmonella leads to activation of signaling cascades that ultimately initiate the proinflammatory gene program. the transcription factor nf-κb is a key regulator/activator of this gene program and is potently activated. we explored the mechanism by which salmonella activates nf-κb during infection of cultured intestinal epithelial cells and found that flagellin produced by the bacteria and contained on them leads to nf-κb activation in all the cells; invasion of cells by the bacteria is not required to activate nf-κb.


RESULTS
purified flagellin activated the mitogen activated protein kinase , stress-activated protein kinase  and ikappa b kinase  signaling pathways that lead to expression of the proinflammatory gene program in a temporal fashion nearly identical to that of infection of intestinal epithelial cells by salmonella. flagellin expression was required for salmonella invasion of host cells and it activated nf-κb via toll-like receptor  <dig> . surprisingly, a number of cell lines found to be unresponsive to flagellin express tlr <dig> and expression of exogenous tlr <dig> in these cells induces nf-κb activity in response to flagellin challenge although not robustly. conversely, overexpression of dominant-negative tlr <dig> alleles only partially blocks nf-κb activation by flagellin. these observations are consistent with the possibility of either a very stable tlr <dig> signaling complex, the existence of a low abundance flagellin co-receptor or required adapter, or both.


CONCLUSIONS
these collective results provide the evidence that flagellin acts as the main determinant of salmonella mediated nf-κb and proinflammatory signaling and gene activation by this flagellated pathogen. in addition, expression of the fli c gene appears to play an important role in the proper functioning of the ttss since mutants that fail to express fli c are defective in expressing a subset of sip proteins and fail to invade host cells. flagellin added in trans cannot restore the ability of the fli c mutant bacteria to invade intestinal epithelial cells. lastly, tlr <dig> expression in weak and non-responding cells indicates that additional factors may be required for efficient signal propagation in response to flagellin recognition.

