BACKGROUND
geobacillus stearothermophilus is able to utilize phenol as a sole carbon source. a dna fragment encoding a phenol hydroxylase catalyzing the first step in the meta-pathway has been isolated previously. based on these findings a pcr-based dna walk was performed initially to isolate a catechol  <dig> -dioxygenase for biosensoric applications but was continued to elucidate the organisation of the genes encoding the proteins for the metabolization of phenol.


RESULTS
a  <dig>  kb dna fragment was isolated as a result of the dna walk. fifteen open reading frames residing on a low-copy megaplasmid were identified. eleven genes are co-transcribed in one polycistronic mrna as shown by reverse transcription-pcr. ten genes encode proteins, that are directly linked with the meta-cleavage pathway. the deduced amino acid sequences display similarities to a two-component phenol hydroxylase, a catechol  <dig> -dioxygenase, a 4-oxalocrotonate tautomerase, a 2-oxopent-4-dienoate hydratase, a 4-oxalocrotonate decarboxylase, a 4-hydroxy-2-oxovalerate aldolase, an acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, a plant-type ferredoxin involved in the reactivation of extradiol dioxygenases and a novel regulatory protein. the only enzymes missing for the complete mineralization of phenol are a 2-hydroxymuconic acid-6-semialdehyde hydrolase and/or 2-hydroxymuconic acid-6-semialdehyde dehydrogenase.


CONCLUSIONS
research on the bacterial degradation of aromatic compounds on a sub-cellular level has been more intensively studied in gram-negative organisms than in gram-positive bacteria. especially regulatory mechanisms in gram-positive  prokaryotes remain mostly unknown. we isolated the first complete sequence of an operon from a thermophilic bacterium encoding the meta-pathway genes and analyzed the genetic organization. moreover, the first transcriptional regulator of the phenol metabolism in gram-positive bacteria was identified. this is a first step to elucidate regulatory mechanisms that are likely to be distinct from modes described for gram-negative bacteria.

