BACKGROUND
metagenomics is a powerful methodology to study microbial communities, but it is highly dependent on nucleotide sequence similarity searching against sequence databases. metagenomic analyses with next-generation sequencing technologies produce enormous numbers of reads from microbial communities, and many reads are derived from microbes whose genomes have not yet been sequenced, limiting the usefulness of existing sequence similarity search tools. therefore, there is a clear need for a sequence similarity search tool that can rapidly detect weak similarity in large datasets.


RESULTS
we developed a tool, which we named clast , that enables analyses of millions of reads and thousands of reference genome sequences, and runs on nvidia fermi architecture graphics processing units. clast has four main advantages over existing alignment tools. first, clast was capable of identifying sequence similarities ~ <dig>  times faster than blast and  <dig>  times faster than blat. second, clast executes global alignment as the default , enabling clast to assign reads to taxonomic and functional groups based on evolutionarily distant nucleotide sequences with high accuracy. third, clast does not need a preprocessed sequence database like burrows–wheeler transform-based tools, and this enables clast to incorporate large, frequently updated sequence databases. fourth, clast requires <2 gb of main memory, making it possible to run clast on a standard desktop computer or server node.


CONCLUSIONS
clast achieved very high speed  and sensitivity  without the need for extensive database preprocessing or a specialized computing platform. our results demonstrate that clast has the potential to be one of the most powerful and realistic approaches to analyze the massive amount of sequence data from next-generation sequencing technologies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gpucudametagenomicsmicrobial communitysequence similarity search toolissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

