BACKGROUND
the outcome of the arms race between hosts and pathogens depends heavily on the interactions between their genetic diversity, population size and transmission ability. theory predicts that genetically diverse hosts will select for higher virulence and more diverse pathogens than hosts with low genetic diversity. cultivated hosts typically have lower genetic diversity and thus small effective population sizes, but can potentially harbour large pathogen population sizes. on the other hand, hosts, such as weeds, which are genetically more diverse and thus have larger effective population sizes, usually harbour smaller pathogen population sizes. large pathogen population sizes may lead to more opportunities for mutation and hence more diverse pathogens. here we test the predictions that pathogen neutral genetic diversity will increase with large pathogen population sizes and host diversity, whereas diversity under selection will increase with host diversity. we assessed and compared the diversity of a fungal pathogen, rhynchosporium commune, on weedy barley grass  and cultivated barley  using microsatellites, effector locus nip <dig> diversity and pathogen aggressiveness in order to assess the importance of weeds in the evolution of the neutral and selected diversity of pathogens.


RESULTS
the findings indicated that the large barley acreage and low host diversity maintains higher pathogen neutral genetic diversity and lower linkage disequilibrium, while the weed maintains more pathotypes and higher virulence diversity at nip <dig>  strong evidence for more pathogen migration from barley grass to barley suggests transmission of virulence from barley grass to barley is common.


CONCLUSIONS
pathogen census population size is a better predictor for neutral genetic diversity than host diversity. despite maintaining a smaller pathogen census population size, barley grass acts as an important ancillary host to r. commune, harbouring highly virulent pathogen types capable of transmission to barley. management of disease on crops must therefore include management of weedy ancillary hosts, which may harbour disproportionate supplies of virulent pathogen strains.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
population sizegenetic diversitymigrationpathogen evolutionweedy hostbarleyrhynchosporium communefungihttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000980grains research and development corporationanu00012daq00187linde celeste c. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

