BACKGROUND
the liver plays important roles in nutrient metabolism, detoxification and immunity. enterococcus faecium  is a probiotic that has been shown to have positive effects on broiler production. however, its molecular effects on liver metabolism have not been characterized. this study aims to further identify the biological roles of e. faecium by characterizing the hepatic proteomic changes of broilers  fed e. faecium using two-dimensional fluorescence difference gel electrophoresis  and mass spectrometry .


RESULTS
thirty-three proteins  involved in nutrient metabolism, immunity and the antioxidant system were shown to be differentially expressed in the liver of broilers fed e. faecium than from birds not fed the probiotic. the biological processes of sulphur amino acids, vitamin and cellular hormone metabolism, sulphur compound biosynthesis and protein tetramerization were enhanced in the liver of broilers fed e. faecium. however, proteins involved in calcium ion flux, cell redox homeostasis and platelet activation related to hepatic immune responses were down-regulated in broilers fed e. faecium. these results indicate that the supplementation of poultry feed with e. faecium may alter the partitioning of nutrients and promote optimal nutrient utilization.


CONCLUSIONS
this study assists in unraveling the molecular effects of the dietary probiotic, e. faecium, in the liver of broiler chickens. it shows that the probiotic improves the metabolism of nutrients and decreases inflammatory responses. our findings extend previous knowledge of the mechanism of dietary probiotic action and provide new findings for research and future probiotic development.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
broiler chicken enterococcus faeciumliverproteomeprobioticsthe national high-tech research and development program2013aa102803yao bin national chicken industry technology systemcars-42-g16yao bin the national natural science foundation of china31101731zheng aijuan issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

