BACKGROUND
haemophilus influenzae colonizes the human nasopharynx as a commensal, and is etiologically associated with numerous opportunistic infections of the airway; it is also less commonly associated with invasive disease. clinical isolates of h. influenzae display extensive genomic diversity and plasticity. the development of strategies to successfully prevent, diagnose and treat h. influenzae infections depends on tools to ascertain the gene content of individual isolates.


RESULTS
we describe and validate a haemophilus influenzae supragenome hybridization  array that can be used to characterize the full genic complement of any strain within the species, as well as strains from several highly related species. the array contains  <dig>  probes that collectively cover essentially all alleles of the  <dig> gene clusters identified from the whole genome sequencing of  <dig> clinical h. influenzae strains. the finite supragenome model predicts that these data include greater than 85% of all non-rare genes . the veracity of the array was tested by comparing the whole genome sequences of eight strains with their hybridization data obtained using the supragenome array. the array predictions were correct and reproducible for ~ 98% of the gene content of all of the sequenced strains. this technology was then applied to an investigation of the gene content of  <dig> geographically and clinically diverse h. influenzae clinical strains. these strains came from multiple locations from five different continents and papua new guinea and include isolates from: the middle ears of persons with otitis media and otorrhea; lung aspirates and sputum samples from pneumonia and copd patients, blood specimens from patients with sepsis; cerebrospinal fluid from patients with meningitis, as well as from pharyngeal specimens from healthy persons.


CONCLUSIONS
these analyses provided the most comprehensive and detailed genomic/phylogenetic look at this species to date, and identified a subset of highly divergent strains that form a separate lineage within the species. this array provides a cost-effective and high-throughput tool to determine the gene content of any h. influenzae isolate or lineage. furthermore, the method for probe selection can be applied to any species, given a group of available whole genome sequences.

