BACKGROUND
mitochondrial and nuclear genes have generally been employed for different purposes in molecular systematics, the former to resolve relationships within recently evolved groups and the latter to investigate phylogenies at a deeper level. in the case of rapid and recent evolutionary radiations, mitochondrial genes like cytochrome b  are often inefficient for resolving phylogenetic relationships. one of the best examples is illustrated by arvicolinae rodents , the most impressive mammalian radiation of the northern hemisphere which produced voles, lemmings and muskrats. here, we compare the relative contribution of a nuclear marker – the exon  <dig> of the growth hormone receptor  gene – to the one of the mitochondrial cyb for inferring phylogenetic relationships among the major lineages of arvicoline rodents.


RESULTS
the analysis of ghr sequences improves the overall resolution of the arvicolinae phylogeny. our results show that the caucasian long-clawed vole  is one of the basalmost arvicolines, and confirm that true lemmings  and collared lemmings  are not closely related as suggested by morphology. red-backed voles  are found as the sister-group of a clade encompassing water vole , snow vole , and meadow voles . within the latter, no support is recovered for the generic recognition of blanfordimys, lasiopodomys, neodon, and phaiomys as suggested by morphology. comparisons of parameter estimates for branch lengths, base composition, among sites rate heterogeneity, and gtr relative substitution rates indicate that cyb sequences consistently exhibit more heterogeneity among codon positions than ghr. by analyzing the contribution of each codon position to node resolution, we show that the apparent higher efficiency of ghr is due to their third positions. although we focus on speciation events spanning the last  <dig> million years , cyb sequences display highly saturated codon positions contrary to the nuclear exon. lastly, variable length bootstrap predicts a significant increase in resolution of arvicoline phylogeny through the sequencing of nuclear data in an order of magnitude three to five times greater than the size of ghr exon  <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
our survey provides a first resolved gene tree for arvicolinae. the comparison of cyb and ghr phylogenetic efficiency supports recent assertions that nuclear genes are useful for resolving relationships of recently evolved animals. the superiority of nuclear exons may reside both in  less heterogeneity among sites, and  the presence of highly informative sites in third codon positions, that evolve rapidly enough to accumulate synapomorphies, but slow enough to avoid substitutional saturation.

