BACKGROUND
the caleosin genes encode proteins with a single conserved ef hand calcium-binding domain and comprise small gene families found in a wide range of plant species. some members of the gene family have been shown to be upregulated by environmental stresses including low water availability and high salinity. caleosin  <dig> from wheat has been shown to interact with the α-subunit of the heterotrimeric g proteins, and to act as a gtpase activating protein . this study characterizes the size and diversity of the gene family in wheat and related species and characterizes the differential tissue-specific expression of members of the gene family.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> gene family members that belong to eleven paralogous groups of caleosins were identified in the hexaploid bread wheat, t. aestivum. each group was represented by three homeologous copies of the gene located on corresponding homeologous chromosomes, except the caleosin  <dig>  which has four gene copies. ten gene family members were identified in diploid barley, hordeum vulgare, and in rye, secale cereale, seven in brachypodium distachyon, and six in rice, oryza sativa. the analysis of gene expression was assayed in triticale and rye by rna-seq analysis of  <dig> sequence sets and members of the gene family were found to have diverse patterns of gene expression in the different tissues that were sampled in rye and in triticale, the hybrid hexaploid species derived from wheat and rye. expression of the gene family in wheat and barley was also previously determined by microarray analysis, and changes in expression during development and in response to environmental stresses are presented.


CONCLUSIONS
the caleosin gene family had a greater degree of expansion in the triticeae than in the other monocot species, brachypodium and rice. the prior implication of one member of the gene family in the stress response and heterotrimeric g protein signaling, points to the potential importance of the caleosin gene family. the complexity of the family and differential expression in various tissues and under conditions of abiotic stress suggests the possibility that caleosin family members may play diverse roles in signaling and development that warrants further investigation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
caleosin gene familycalcium-binding proteinphylogenetic analysistissue-specific expressiongapgαheterotrimeric g protein signalingrna-seqissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

