BACKGROUND
the chloroplast genome of gracilaria firma was sequenced in view of its role as an economically important marine crop with wide industrial applications. to date, there are only  <dig> chloroplast genomes published for the florideophyceae. apart from presenting the complete chloroplast genome of g. firma, this study also assessed the utility of genome-scale data to address the phylogenetic relationships within the subclass rhodymeniophycidae. the synteny and genome structure of the chloroplast genomes across the taxa of eurhodophytina was also examined.


RESULTS
the chloroplast genome of gracilaria firma maps as a circular molecule of  <dig>  bp and contains  <dig> genes, which are distributed on both strands and consist of  <dig> rna genes  and  <dig> protein-coding genes, including the unidentified open reading frames. the chloroplast genome of g. firma is by far the largest reported for gracilariaceae, featuring a unique intergenic region of about 7000 bp with discontinuous vestiges of red algal plasmid dna sequences interspersed between the nbla and cpeb genes. this chloroplast genome shows similar gene content and order to other florideophycean taxa. phylogenomic analyses based on the concatenated amino acid sequences of  <dig> protein-coding genes confirmed the monophyly of the classes bangiophyceae and florideophyceae with full nodal support. relationships within the subclass rhodymeniophycidae in florideophyceae received moderate to strong nodal support, and the monotypic family of gracilariales were resolved with maximum support.


CONCLUSIONS
chloroplast genomes hold substantial information that can be tapped for resolving the phylogenetic relationships of difficult regions in the rhodymeniophycidae, which are perceived to have experienced rapid radiation and thus received low nodal support, as exemplified in this study. the present study shows that chloroplast genome of g. firma could serve as a key link to the full resolution of gracilaria sensu lato complex and recognition of hydropuntia as a genus distinct from gracilaria sensu stricto.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chloroplast genomegracilaria firmagracilariaceaeconserved syntenyphylogenomic analysesred algal plasmid remnantstaiwan ministry of science and technology102-2628-b-019-002-my3104-2811-b-019-004lin showe-mei http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003093ministry of higher education, malaysiah-50001-00-a000025lim phaik-eem issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

