BACKGROUND
proteins are the important molecules which participate in virtually every aspect of cellular function within an organism in pairs. although high-throughput technologies have generated considerable protein-protein interactions  data for various species, the processes of experimental methods are both time-consuming and expensive. in addition, they are usually associated with high rates of both false positive and false negative results. accordingly, a number of computational approaches have been developed to effectively and accurately predict protein interactions. however, most of these methods typically perform worse when other biological data sources  are not available. therefore, it is very urgent to develop effective computational methods for prediction of ppis solely using protein sequence information.


RESULTS
in this study, we present a novel computational model combining weighted sparse representation based classifier  and global encoding  of amino acid sequence. two kinds of protein descriptors, composition and transition, are extracted for representing each protein sequence. on the basis of such a feature representation, novel weighted sparse representation based classifier is introduced to predict protein interaction class. when the proposed method was evaluated with the ppis data of s. cerevisiae, human and h. pylori, it achieved high prediction accuracies of  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  % respectively. extensive experiments were performed for cross-species ppis prediction and the prediction accuracies were also very promising.


CONCLUSIONS
to further evaluate the performance of the proposed method, we then compared its performance with the method based on support vector machine . the results show that the proposed method achieved a significant improvement. thus, the proposed method is a very efficient method to predict ppis and may be a useful supplementary tool for future proteomics studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 61373086you zhu-hong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

