BACKGROUND
termites of the subfamily macrotermitinae live in a mutualistic symbiosis with basidiomycete fungi of the genus termitomyces. here, we explored interaction specificity in fungus-growing termites using samples from  <dig> colonies in south-africa and senegal, belonging to eight species divided over three genera. knowledge of interaction specificity is important to test the hypothesis that inhabitants  are taxonomically less diverse than 'exhabitants'  and to test the hypothesis that transmission mode is an important determinant for interaction specificity.


RESULTS
analysis of molecular variance among symbiont its sequences across termite hosts at three hierarchical levels showed that  <dig> % of the variation occurred between genera,  <dig> % between species, and the remaining  <dig> % between colonies within species. different patterns of specificity were evident. high mutual specificity was found for the single macrotermes species studied, as m. natalensis was associated with a single unique fungal haplotype. the three species of the genus odontotermes showed low symbiont specificity: they were all associated with a genetically diverse set of fungal symbionts, but their fungal symbionts showed some host specificity, as none of the fungal haplotypes were shared between the studied odontotermes species. finally, bilaterally low specificity was found for the four tentatively recognized species of the genus microtermes, which shared and apparently freely exchanged a common pool of divergent fungal symbionts.


CONCLUSIONS
interaction specificity was high at the genus level and generally much lower at the species level. a comparison of the observed diversity among fungal symbionts with the diversity among termite hosts, indicated that the fungal symbiont does not follow the general pattern of an endosymbiont, as we found either similar diversity at both sides or higher diversity in the symbiont. our results further challenge the hypothesis that transmission-mode is a general key-determinant of interaction specificity in fungus-growing termites.

