BACKGROUND
we have recently identified a number of active regulatory networks involved in diabetes progression in goto-kakizaki  rats by network screening. the networks were quite consistent with the previous knowledge of the regulatory relationships between transcription factors  and their regulated genes. to study the underlying molecular mechanisms directly related to phenotype changes, such as diseases, we also previously developed a computational procedure for identifying transcriptional master regulators  in conjunction with network screening and network inference, by effectively perturbing the phenotype states.


RESULTS
in this work, we further improved our previous method for identifying mr candidates, by listing them in a more reliable manner, and applied the method to reveal the mr candidates for diabetes progression in gk rats from the active networks. specifically, the active tf-gene pairs for different time periods in gk rats were first extracted from the networks by network screening. another set of active tf-gene pairs was selected by network inference, by considering the gene expression signatures for those periods between gk and wistar-kyoto  rats. the tf-gene pairs extracted by the two methods were then further selected, from the viewpoints of the emergence specificity of tf in gk rats and the regulated-gene coverage of tf in the expression signature. finally, we narrowed all of the genes down to only  <dig> tfs  as the candidates of mrs, with  <dig> regulated genes, by merging the selected tf-gene pairs.


CONCLUSIONS
the present method has successfully identified biologically plausible mr candidates, including the tfs related to diabetes in previous reports. although the experimental verifications of the candidates and the present procedure are beyond the scope of this study, we narrowed down the candidates to  <dig> tfs, which can be used to perform the verification experiments relatively easily. the numerical results showed that our computational method is an efficient way to detect the key molecules responsible for biological phenomena.

02- <dig> september  <dig> the 5th ieee international conference on computational systems biology  zhuhai, china

