BACKGROUND
providing double-stranded rna  to insects has been proven to silence target genes, and this approach has emerged as a potential method to control agricultural pests by engineering plants to express insect dsrnas. a critical step of this technology is the screening of effective target genes essential for insect development and/or survival. the tomato leafminer  is a major solanum lycopersicum  pest that causes significant yield losses and has recently invaded europe, from where it is spreading at an alarming rate. to explore rna interference  against t. absoluta, sequence information on potential target genes is necessary, but only a few sequences are available in public databases.


RESULTS
we sequenced six libraries from rna samples from eggs, adults, and larvae at four stages, obtaining an overall total of around  <dig> million reads. the assembled t. absoluta transcriptome contained  <dig>  contigs with an average size of  <dig>  bp,  <dig>  % of which presented positive blast hits, with  <dig>   annotated by gene ontology. from the transcriptome, most of the core genes of the rnai mechanism of lepidoptera were identified indicating the potential suitability of t. absoluta for gene silencing. no contigs displayed significant similarity with a rna-dependent rna polymerase. genes from the juvenile hormone and ecdysteroid biosynthetic pathways were identified, representing potential target genes for systemic silencing. comparisons of transcript profiles among stages revealed  <dig>  genes differentially expressed at earlier larval stages, from which potential gene targets were identified. five of these genes were evaluated using in vitro transcribed dsrna absorbed by tomato leaflets, which were fed to 1st instar t. absoluta larvae, resulting in significant reduction of larval body weight while exhibiting significant knockdown for three of the genes.


CONCLUSIONS
the transcriptome we generated represents a valuable genomic resource for screening potential gene targets that affect the development or survival of t. absoluta larvae. five novel genes that showed greater expression at the 1st larval stage were demonstrated to be effective potential rnai targets by reducing larval weight and can be considered good candidates for use in rnai-mediated crop protection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gelechiidaegene silencinghormone synthesislepidopterarna-seqsolanaceaeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

