BACKGROUND
the environmental factors that determine the elevated levels of polyclonal ige observed in populations living in the tropics are poorly understood but may include geohelminth infections. we investigated the association between geohelminth infections and total ige levels in school children in rural tropical ecuador, and assessed the effect on ige of repeated anthelmintic treatments over a period of  <dig> months. the study was nested within a cluster-randomized study that randomized  <dig> schools to receive either  <dig> mg of albendazole every  <dig> months over a year or no treatment. we studied random samples of children completing follow-up and representing four groups stratified by the presence of geohelminth infection at baseline and treatment allocation. we measured levels of total ige and anti-a. lumbricoides igg  in blood samples collected at the start of the study and after  <dig> months.


RESULTS
we observed elevated levels of total ige  at the start of the study in this population of school children ) and baseline ige levels were strongly associated with parameters of geohelminth infection but not with age, nutritional and socioeconomic status. after  <dig> months, levels of ige fell significantly in the treatment  and no treatment  groups, respectively, but the fall was significantly greater in the treatment group. falls in ige were independently associated with albendazole treatment, having a baseline geohelminth infection and with high baseline levels of anti-a. lumbricoides igg. increases in ige at  <dig> months were associated with the presence of geohelminth infections and increasing levels of anti-a. lumbricoides igg at  <dig> months independent of treatment allocation.


CONCLUSIONS
the data provide evidence that geohelminth infections are an important determinant of total ige in school children in the rural tropics and that periodic anthelmintic treatments over  <dig> months are associated with reductions in ige. the failure of anthelmintic treatment to reduce ige levels to that considered normal in industrialized countries may be attributed to continued exposure of children to geohelminths or to the effects of infections in early life in programming a long-lasting th2-biassed immunity.

