BACKGROUND
several recent studies showed that next-generation sequencing -based human leukocyte antigen  typing is a feasible and promising technique for variant calling of highly polymorphic regions. to date, however, no method with sufficient read depth has completely solved the allele phasing issue. in this study, we developed a new method  for hla genotyping using ngs data.


RESULTS
hlascan performs alignment of reads to hla sequences from the international immunogenetics project/human leukocyte antigen  database. the distribution of aligned reads was used to calculate a score function to determine correctly phased alleles by progressively removing false-positive alleles. comparative hla typing tests using public datasets from the  <dig> genomes project and the international hapmap project demonstrated that hlascan could perform hla typing more accurately than previously reported ngs-based methods such as hlareporter and phlat. in addition, the results of hla-a, −b, and -drb <dig> typing by hlascan using data generated by nextgen were identical to those obtained using a sanger sequencing–based method. we also applied hlascan to a family dataset with various coverage depths generated on the illumina hiseq x-ten platform. hlascan identified allele types of hla-a, −b, −c, −dqb <dig>  and -drb <dig> with 100% accuracy for sequences at ≥ 90× depth, and the overall accuracy was  <dig> %.


CONCLUSIONS
hlascan, an alignment-based program that takes read distribution into account to determine true allele types, outperformed previously developed hla typing tools. therefore, hlascan can be reliably applied for determination of hla type across the whole-genome, exome, and target sequences.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hla typingnext-generation sequencingphasing issuehlascaninnopolis foundationa2014dd101jung jongsun http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003710korea health industry development institutehi14c0072kim hyung-lae issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

