BACKGROUND
the members of the genus muntiacus are of particular interest to evolutionary biologists due to their extreme chromosomal rearrangements and the ongoing discussions about the number of living species. red muntjacs have the largest distribution of all muntjacs and were formerly considered as one species. karyotype differences led to the provisional split between the southern red muntjac  and the northern red muntjac , but uncertainties remain as, so far, no phylogenetic study has been conducted. here, we analysed whole mitochondrial genomes of  <dig> archival and  <dig> contemporaneous samples to resolve uncertainties about their taxonomy and used red muntjacs as model for understanding the evolutionary history of other species in southeast asia.


RESULTS
we found three distinct matrilineal groups of red muntjacs: sri lankan red muntjacs  diverged first from other muntjacs about  <dig>  mya; later northern red muntjacs  and southern red muntjacs  split around  <dig>  mya. the diversification of red muntjacs into these three main lineages was likely promoted by two pleistocene barriers: one through the indian subcontinent and one separating the indochinese and sundaic red muntjacs. interestingly, we found a high level of gene flow within the populations of northern and southern red muntjacs, indicating gene flow between populations in indochina and dispersal of red muntjacs over the exposed sunda shelf during the last glacial maximum.


CONCLUSIONS
our results provide new insights into the evolution of species in south and southeast asia as we found clear genetic differentiation in a widespread and generalist species, corresponding to two known biogeographical barriers: the isthmus of kra and the central indian dry zone. in addition, our molecular data support either the delineation of three monotypic species or three subspecies, but more importantly these data highlight the conservation importance of the sri lankan/south indian red muntjac.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
phylogeographyarchival dnamuntjacsoutheast asiaspecies complexhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001664leibniz-gemeinschaftsaw-2013-izw-2fickel jörns http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007224national foundation for science and technology development <dig> .30le minh issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

