BACKGROUND
recent studies illuminated a novel role of microrna  in the competing endogenous rna  interaction: two genes  can achieve coexpression by competing for a pool of common targeting mirnas. individual biological investigations implied cerna interaction performs crucial oncogenic/tumor suppressive functions in glioblastoma multiforme . yet, a systematic analysis has not been conducted to explore the functional landscape and prognostic significance of cerna interaction.


RESULTS
incorporating the knowledge that cerna interaction is highly condition-specific and modulated by the expressional abundance of mirnas, we devised a cerna inference by differential correlation analysis to identify the mirna-modulated cerna pairs. analyzing sample-paired mirna and gene expression profiles of gbm, our data showed that this alternative layer of gene interaction is essential in global information flow. functional annotation analysis revealed its involvement in activated processes in brain, such as synaptic transmission, as well as critical tumor-associated functions. notably, a systematic survival analysis suggested the strength of cerna-cerna interactions, rather than expressional abundance of individual cernas, among three immune response genes  is predictive of patient survival. the prognostic value was validated in two independent cohorts.


CONCLUSIONS
this work addresses the lack of a comprehensive exploration into the functional and prognostic relevance of cerna interaction in gbm. the proposed efficient and reliable method revealed its significance in gbm-related functions and prognosis. the highlighted roles of cerna interaction provide a basis for further biological and clinical investigations.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
competing endogenous rnaimmune genessurvival predictiondifferential correlation analysisglioblastoma multiformehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004663ministry of science and technology, taiwan103-2917-i-002-166chiu yu-chiao greehey children's cancer research instituteintramural fundchen yidong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

