BACKGROUND
orb-web weaving spiders and their relatives use multiple types of task-specific silks. the majority of spider silk studies have focused on the ultra-tough dragline silk synthesized in major ampullate glands, but other silk types have impressive material properties. for instance, minor ampullate silks of orb-web weaving spiders are as tough as draglines, due to their higher extensibility despite lower strength. differences in material properties between silk types result from differences in their component proteins, particularly members of the spidroin  gene family. however, the extent to which variation in material properties within a single silk type can be explained by variation in spidroin sequences is unknown. here, we compare the minor ampullate spidroins  of orb-weavers and cobweb weavers. orb-web weavers use minor ampullate silk to form the auxiliary spiral of the orb-web while cobweb weavers use it to wrap prey, suggesting that selection pressures on minor ampullate spidroins  may differ between the two groups.


RESULTS
we report complete or nearly complete misp sequences from five cobweb weaving spider species and measure material properties of minor ampullate silks in a subset of these species. we also compare misp sequences and silk properties of our cobweb weavers to published data for orb-web weavers. we demonstrate that all our cobweb weavers possess multiple misp loci and that one locus is more highly expressed in at least two species. we also find that the proportion of β-spiral-forming amino acid motifs in misp positively correlates with minor ampullate silk extensibility across orb-web and cobweb weavers.


CONCLUSIONS
misp sequences vary dramatically within and among spider species, and have likely been subject to multiple rounds of gene duplication and concerted evolution, which have contributed to the diverse material properties of minor ampullate silks. our sequences also provide templates for recombinant silk proteins with tailored properties.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
theridiidaelatrodectussteatodasilk glandsgene expressionsilk proteinsspidroin gene familyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationios-0951086ios-0951061hayashi cheryl y. ayoub nadia a. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of health1f32gm083661-011r15gm097714-01garb jessica e. http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000011howard hughes medical institute52007570issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

