BACKGROUND
in  <dig>  in addition to a united states multistate outbreak linked to contaminated ice cream, another outbreak linked to ice cream was reported in the pacific northwest of the united states. it was a hospital-acquired outbreak linked to milkshakes, made from contaminated ice cream mixes and milkshake maker, served to patients. here we performed multiple analyses on isolates associated with this outbreak: pulsed-field gel electrophoresis , whole genome single nucleotide polymorphism  analysis, species-specific core genome multilocus sequence typing , lineage-specific cgmlst and whole genome-specific mlst /outbreak-specific cgmlst. we also analyzed the prophages and virulence genes.


RESULTS
the outbreak isolates belonged to sequence type  <dig>  clonal complex  <dig>  genetic lineage ii. there were no pre-mature stop codons in inla. isolates contained listeria pathogenicity island  <dig> and multiple internalins. pfge and multiple whole genome sequencing  analyses all clustered together food, environmental and clinical isolates when compared to outgroup from the same clonal complex, which supported the finding that l. monocytogenes likely persisted in the soft serve ice cream/milkshake maker from november  <dig> to november  <dig> and caused  <dig> illnesses, and that the outbreak strain was transmitted between two ice cream production facilities. the whole genome snp analysis, one of the two species-specific cgmlst, the lineage ii-specific cgmlst and the wgsmlst/outbreak-specific cgmlst showed that l. monocytogenes cells persistent in the milkshake maker for a year formed a unique clade inside the outbreak cluster. this clustering was consistent with the cleaning practice after the outbreak was initially recognized in late  <dig> and early  <dig>  putative prophages were conserved among prophage-containing isolates. the loss of a putative prophage in two isolates resulted in the loss of the asci restriction site in the prophage, which contributed to their asci-pfge banding pattern differences from other isolates.


CONCLUSIONS
the high resolution of wgs analyses allowed the differentiation of epidemiologically unrelated isolates, as well as the elucidation of the microevolution and persistence of isolates within the scope of one outbreak. we applied a wgsmlst scheme which is essentially the outbreak-specific cgmlst. this scheme can be combined with lineage-specific cgmlst and species-specific cgmlst to maximize the resolution of wgs.

keywords
listeriosisice creamoutbreakwhole genome sequencingcore genome multilocus sequence typinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100006229oak ridge institute for science and educationnot applicableissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

