BACKGROUND
despite the fact that the organization of the ciliate mitochondrial genome is exceptional, only few ciliate mitochondrial genomes have been sequenced until today. all ciliate mitochondrial genomes are linear. they are  <dig> kb to  <dig> kb long and contain some  <dig> tightly packed genes without introns. earlier studies documented that the mitochondrial guanine + cytosine contents are very different between paramecium tetraurelia and all studied tetrahymena species. this raises the question of whether the high mitochondrial g+c content observed in p. tetraurelia is a characteristic property of paramecium mtdna, or whether it is an exception of the ciliate mitochondrial genomes known so far. to test this question, we determined the mitochondrial genome sequence of paramecium caudatum and compared the gene content and sequence properties to the closely related p. tetraurelia.


RESULTS
the guanine + cytosine content of the p. caudatum mitochondrial genome was significantly lower than that of p. tetraurelia . this difference in the mitochondrial nucleotide composition was accompanied by significantly different codon usage patterns in both species, i.e. within p. caudatum clearly a/t ending codons dominated, whereas for p. tetraurelia the synonymous codons were more balanced with a higher number of g/c ending codons. further analyses indicated that the nucleotide composition of most members of the genus paramecium resembles that of p. caudatum and that the shift observed in p. tetraurelia is restricted to the p. aurelia species complex.


CONCLUSIONS
surprisingly, the codon usage bias in the p. caudatum mitochondrial genome, exemplified by the effective number of codons, is more similar to the distantly related t. pyriformis and other single-celled eukaryotes such as chlamydomonas, than to the closely related p. tetraurelia. these differences in base composition and codon usage bias were, however, not reflected in the amino acid composition. most probably, the observed picture is best explained by a hitherto unknown  mechanism that increased the guanine + cytosine content in p. tetraurelia mtdna on the one hand, and strong purifying selection on the ancestral amino acid composition on the other hand. these contradicting forces are counterbalanced by a considerably altered codon usage pattern.

