BACKGROUND
the objective of this study was to elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms of how mycoplasma hyopneumoniae enhances secondary pasteurella multocida type a infection which leads to porcine enzootic pneumonia in infected pigs. sixteen pigs were experimentally infected with m. hyopneumoniae and then euthanized at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days post inoculation. in situ hybridization for m. hyopneumoniae dna and ulex europaeus agglutinin-i  lectin histochemistry for fucosyl glycoconjugate, was performed in serial lung sections to determine alteration of fucosyl glycoconjugate in m. hyopneumoniae-infected bronchial and bronchiolar epithelium. bacterial overlay assay was performed to determine the affinity of p. multocida type a with l-fucose.


RESULTS
the luminal surface of bronchial and bronchiolar epithelial cells that were stained with uea-i always showed hybridization signals for m. hyopneumoniae but it was negative in the unaffected parts of the lung from m. hyopneumoniae-infected pigs and in lung from negative control pigs. colocalization of m. hyopneumoniae and uea-i was especially prominent in the luminal surface of bronchial and bronchiolar epithelial cells in serial section of lung. the mean number of m. hyopneumoniae-positive cells correlated with the mean number of uea-i-positive cells in lungs from infected pigs throughout the experiment. all eight p. multocida type a isolates from naturally occurring enzootic pneumonia, bound strongly at levels of  <dig> μg and  <dig> μg of l-fucose.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of the present study demonstrate that m. hyopneumoniae increases the l-fucose composition to enhance adherence of p. multocida type a to the bronchial and bronchiolar epithelial cells.

keywords
co-infectionenzootic pneumoniamycoplasma hyopneumoniaepasteurella multocidahttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003624ministry of agriculture, food and rural affairsbrain korea plus 21the research institute for veterinary science from the college of veterinary medicineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

