BACKGROUND
fluctuations in external salinity force eukaryotic cells to respond by changes in the gene expression of proteins acting in protective biochemical processes, thus counteracting the changing osmotic pressure. the high-osmolarity glycerol  signaling pathway is essential for the efficient up-regulation of the osmoresponsive genes. in this study, the differential gene expression of the extremely halotolerant black yeast hortaea werneckii was explored. furthermore, the interaction of mitogen-activated protein kinase hwhog <dig> and rna polymerase ii with the chromatin in cells adapted to an extremely hypersaline environment was analyzed.


RESULTS
a cdna subtraction library was constructed for h. werneckii, adapted to moderate salinity or an extremely hypersaline environment of  <dig>  m nacl. an uncommon osmoresponsive set of  <dig> differentially expressed genes was identified. the majority of these had not previously been connected with the adaptation of salt-sensitive s. cerevisiae to hypersaline conditions. the transcriptional response in hypersaline-adapted and hypersaline-stressed cells showed that only a subset of the identified genes responded to acute salt-stress, whereas all were differentially expressed in adapted cells. interaction with hwhog <dig> was shown for  <dig> of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes. the majority of the identified osmoresponsive and hwhog1-dependent genes in h. werneckii have not been previously reported as hog1-dependent genes in the salt-sensitive s. cerevisiae. the study further demonstrated the co-occupancy of hwhog <dig> and rna polymerase ii on the chromatin of  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated genes in  <dig>  m nacl-adapted h. werneckii cells.


CONCLUSIONS
extremely halotolerant h. werneckii represents a suitable and highly relevant organism to study cellular responses to environmental salinity. in comparison with the salt-sensitive s. cerevisiae, this yeast shows a different set of genes being expressed at high salt concentrations and interacting with hwhog <dig> map kinase, suggesting atypical processes deserving of further study.

