BACKGROUND
poly  is a water-soluble polyester with many attractive properties in medicine and food industries, but the high cost of pma fermentation has restricted its further application for large-scale production. to overcome this problem, pma production from jerusalem artichoke tubers was successfully performed. additionally, a valuable exopolysaccharide, pullulan, was co-produced with pma by aureobasidum pullulans ha-4d.


RESULTS
the jerusalem artichoke medium for pma and pullulan co-production contained only 100 g/l hydrolysate sugar, 30 g/l caco <dig> and 1 g/l nano <dig>  compared with the glucose medium, the jerusalem artichoke medium resulted in a higher pma concentration  and a lower pullulan concentration  in a 5 l bioreactor. meanwhile, the activity of pyruvate carboxylase and malate dehydrogenas was significantly increased, while the activity of α-phosphoglucose mutase, udp-glucose pyrophosphorylase and glucosyltransferase was not affected. to assay the economic-feasibility, large-scale production in a 1 t fermentor was performed, yielding  <dig>  g/l pma and  <dig>  g/l pullulan.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, an economical co-production system for pma and pullulan from jerusalem artichoke was developed. the medium for pma and pullulan co-production was significantly simplified when jerusalem artichoke tubers were used. with the simplified medium, pma production was obviously stimulated, which would be associated with the improved activity of pyruvate carboxylase and malate dehydrogenas.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
polypullulanjerusalem artichokeco-productionenzyme activitynatural science foundation of chinano. <dig> and 31600047xu jiaxing http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004608natural science foundation of jiangsu province bk20150412xia jun huai’an municipal science and technology support programhag2015037xia jun opening fund of jiangsu province engineering laboratory for biomass conversion and process integrationjpelbcpi2015001xia jun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

