BACKGROUND
we have recently identified two large families of extinct transposable elements termed short interspersed degenerated retroposons  in the parasitic protozoan leishmania major. the characterization of sider elements was limited to the sider <dig> subfamily, although members of both subfamilies have been shown to play a role in the regulation of gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. apparent functional domestication of siders prompted further investigation of their characterization, dissemination and evolution throughout the leishmania genus, with particular attention to the disregarded sider <dig> subfamily.


RESULTS
using optimized statistical profiles of both sider <dig> and sider <dig> subgroups, we report the first automated and highly sensitive annotation of siders in the genomes of l. infantum, l. braziliensis and l. major. sider annotations were combined to in-silico mrna extremity predictions to generate a detailed distribution map of the repeat family, hence uncovering an enrichment of antisense-oriented sider repeats between the polyadenylation and trans-splicing sites of intergenic regions, in contrast to the exclusive sense orientation of sider elements within 3'utrs. our data indicate that sider elements are quite uniformly dispersed throughout all three genomes and that their distribution is generally syntenic. however, only  <dig> % of orthologous genes harbor a sider element in all three species. there is evidence for species-specific enrichment of siders and for their preferential association, especially for sider2s, with different metabolic functions. investigation of the sequence attributes and evolutionary relationship of siders to other trypanosomatid retroposons reveals that sider <dig> is a truncated version of extinct autonomous ingi-like retroposons , which were functional in the ancestral leishmania genome.


CONCLUSIONS
a detailed characterization of the sequence traits for both sider subfamilies unveils major differences. the sider <dig> subfamily is more heterogeneous and shows an evolutionary link with vestigial dire retroposons as previously observed for the ingi/rime and l1tc/nartc couples identified in the t. brucei and t. cruzi genomes, whereas no identified dires are related to sider <dig> sequences. although sider1s and sider2s display equivalent genomic distribution globally, the varying degrees of sequence conservation, preferential genomic disposition, and differential association to orthologous genes allude to an intricate web of sider assimilation in these parasitic organisms.

