BACKGROUND
visual, tactile and auditory information is processed from the periphery to the cortical level through separate channels that target primary sensory cortices, from which it is further distributed to functionally specialized areas. multisensory integration is classically assigned to higher hierarchical cortical areas, but there is growing electrophysiological evidence in man and monkey of multimodal interactions in areas thought to be unimodal, interactions that can occur at very short latencies. such fast timing of multisensory interactions rules out the possibility of an origin in the polymodal areas mediated through back projections, but is rather in favor of heteromodal connections such as the direct projections observed in the monkey, from auditory areas  directly to the primary visual cortex v <dig>  based on the existence of such ai to v <dig> projections, we looked for modulation of neuronal visual responses in v <dig> by an auditory stimulus in the awake behaving monkey.


RESULTS
behavioral or electrophysiological data were obtained from two behaving monkeys. one monkey was trained to maintain a passive central fixation while a peripheral visual  or visuo-auditory  stimulus was presented. from a population of  <dig> v <dig> neurons, there was no difference in the mean latencies or strength of visual responses when comparing v and av conditions. in a second active task, the monkey was required to orient his gaze toward the visual or visuo-auditory stimulus. from a population of  <dig> cells recorded during this saccadic task, we observed a significant reduction in response latencies in the visuo-auditory condition compared to the visual condition  only when the visual stimulus was at midlevel contrast. no effect was observed at high contrast.


CONCLUSIONS
our data show that single neurons from a primary sensory cortex such as v <dig> can integrate sensory information of a different modality, a result that argues against a strict hierarchical model of multisensory integration. multisensory interaction in v <dig> is, in our experiment, expressed by a significant reduction in visual response latencies specifically in suboptimal conditions and depending on the task demand. this suggests that neuronal mechanisms of multisensory integration are specific and adapted to the perceptual features of behavior.

