BACKGROUND
pistachio  is a dioecious species that has a long juvenility period. therefore, development of marker-assisted selection  techniques would greatly facilitate pistachio cultivar-breeding programs. the sex determination mechanism is presently unknown in pistachio. the generation of sex-linked markers is likely to reduce time, labor, and costs associated with breeding programs, and will help to clarify the sex determination system in pistachio.


RESULTS
restriction site-associated dna  markers were used to identify sex-linked markers and to elucidate the sex determination system in pistachio. eight male and eight female f <dig> progenies from a pistacia vera l. siirt × bağyolu cross, along with the parents, were subjected to rad sequencing in two lanes of a hi-seq  <dig> sequencing platform. this generated  <dig> million reads, comprising approximately  <dig>  gb of sequences. there were  <dig>  polymorphic single nucleotide polymorphism  loci between the parents. thirty-eight of these, from  <dig> rad reads, were detected as putative sex-associated loci in pistachio. validation was performed by snapshot analysis in  <dig> mature f <dig> progenies and in  <dig> cultivars and genotypes in a germplasm collection. eight loci could distinguish sex with 100% accuracy in pistachio. to ascertain cost-effective application of markers in a breeding program, high-resolution melting  analysis was performed; four markers were found to perfectly separate sexes in pistachio. because of the female heterogamety in all candidate snp loci, we report for the first time that pistachio has a zz/zw sex determination system. as the reported female-to-male segregation ratio is 1: <dig> in all known segregating populations and there is no previous report of super-female genotypes or female heteromorphic chromosomes in pistachio, it appears that the ww genotype is not viable.


CONCLUSIONS
sex-linked snp markers were identified and validated in a large germplasm and proved their suitability for mas in pistachio. hrm analysis successfully validated the sex-linked markers for mas. for the first time in dioecious pistachio, a female heterogamety zw/zz sex determination system is suggested.

keywords
pistachiopistacia verasex determinationradseqsnpsnapshothrmissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

