BACKGROUND
reproductive biology in citrus is still poorly understood. although in recent years several efforts have been made to study pollen-pistil interaction and self-incompatibility, little information is available about the molecular mechanisms regulating these processes. here we report the identification of candidate genes involved in pollen-pistil interaction and self-incompatibility in clementine . these genes have been identified comparing the transcriptomes of laser-microdissected stylar canal cells  isolated from two genotypes differing for self-incompatibility response .


RESULTS
the transcriptome profiling of scc indicated that the differential regulation of few specific, mostly uncharacterized transcripts is associated with the breakdown of self-incompatibility in 'monreal'. among them, a novel f-box gene showed a drastic up-regulation both in laser microdissected stylar canal cells and in self-pollinated whole styles with stigmas of 'comune' in concomitance with the arrest of pollen tube growth. moreover, we identify a non-characterized gene family as closely associated to the self-incompatibility genetic program activated in 'comune'. three different aspartic-acid rich  protein genes, located in tandem in the clementine genome, were over-represented in the transcriptome of 'comune'. these genes are tightly linked to a della gene, previously found to be up-regulated in the self-incompatible genotype during pollen-pistil interaction.


CONCLUSIONS
the highly specific transcriptome survey of the stylar canal cells identified novel genes which have not been previously associated with self-pollen rejection in citrus and in other plant species. bioinformatic and transcriptional analyses suggested that the mutation leading to self-compatibility in 'monreal' affected the expression of non-homologous genes located in a restricted genome region. also, we hypothesize that the asp-rich protein genes may act as ca2+ "entrapping" proteins, potentially regulating ca2+ homeostasis during self-pollen recognition.

