BACKGROUND
homoeologous sequences pose a particular challenge if bacterial artificial chromosome  contigs shall be established for specific regions of an allopolyploid genome. single nucleotide polymorphisms  differentiating between homoeologous genomes  may represent a suitable screening tool for such purposes, since they do not only identify homoeologous sequences but also differentiate between them.


RESULTS
sequence alignments between brassica rapa  and brassica oleracea  sequences mapping to corresponding regions on chromosomes a <dig> and c <dig>  respectively were used to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms between the a and c genomes. a large fraction of these polymorphisms was also present in brassica napus , an allopolyploid species that originated from hybridisation of a and c genome species. intergenomic snps mapping throughout homoeologous chromosome segments spanning approximately one mbp each were included in illumina’s goldengate® genotyping assay and used to screen multidimensional pools of a brassica napus bacterial artificial chromosome library with tenfold genome coverage. based on the results of  <dig> snp assays, a bac contig for the brassica napus a subgenome was established that spanned the entire region of interest. the c subgenome region was represented in three bac contigs.


CONCLUSIONS
this proof-of-concept study shows that sequence resources of diploid progenitor genomes can be used to deduce intergenomic snps suitable for multiplex polymerase chain reaction -based screening of multidimensional bac pools of a polyploid organism. owing to their high abundance and ease of identification, intergenomic snps represent a versatile tool to establish bac contigs for homoeologous regions of a polyploid genome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bac contigbac librarybrassica napushomoeologous regionsmultidimensional poolspcr screeningpolyploidysnpissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

