BACKGROUND
among teleosts, the south american genus austrolebias  includes  <dig> taxa of annual fishes divided into five different species groups. it is a monophyletic genus, but morphological and molecular data do not resolve the relationship among intrageneric clades and high rates of substitution have been previously described in some mitochondrial genes. in this work, the complete mitogenome of a species of the genus was determined for the first time. we determined its structure, gene order and evolutionary peculiar features, which will allow us to evaluate the performance of mitochondrial genes in the phylogenetic resolution at different taxonomic levels.


RESULTS
regarding gene content and order, the circular mitogenome of a. charrua  presents the typical pattern of vertebrate mitogenomes. it contains the full complement of  <dig> proteins-coding genes,  <dig> trna,  <dig> rrna and one non-coding control region. notably, the trna-cys was only 57 bp in length and lacks the d-loop arm. in three full sibling individuals, heteroplasmatic condition was detected due to a total of  <dig> variable sites in seven protein-coding genes. among cyprinodontiforms, the mitogenome of a. charrua exhibits the lowest g+c content  and gcskew, as well as the highest strand asymmetry with a net difference of t over a at 1st and 3rd codon positions. considering the  <dig> coding-genes of the h strand, correspondence analyses of nucleotide composition and codon usage show that a and t at 1st and 3rd codon positions have the highest weight in the first axis, and segregate annual species from the other cyprinodontiforms analyzed. given the annual life-style, their mitogenomes could be under different selective pressures. all  <dig> protein-coding genes are under strong purifying selection and we did not find any significant evidence of nucleotide sites showing episodic selection  at annual lineages. when fast evolving third codon positions were removed from alignments, the “supergene” tree recovers our reference species phylogeny as well as the cytb, nd4l and nd <dig> genes. therefore, third codon positions seem to be saturated in the aforementioned coding regions at intergeneric cyprinodontiformes comparisons.


CONCLUSIONS
the complete mitogenome obtained in present work, offers relevant data for further comparative studies on molecular phylogeny and systematics of this taxonomic controversial endemic genus of annual fishes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
high-throughput sequencingaustrolebias charruacyprinodontiformescomparative mitogenomicsmolecular markersissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

