BACKGROUND
zoraptera, generally regarded as a member of polyneoptera, represents one of the most enigmatic insect orders. although phylogenetic analyses based on a wide array of morphological and/or nuclear data have been performed, the position of zoraptera is still under debate. mitochondrial genome  information is commonly considered to be preferable to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships, but no efforts have been made to incorporate it in zorapteran phylogeny. to characterize zoraptera mitogenome features and provide insights into its phylogenetic placement, here we sequenced, for the first time, one complete mitogenome of zoraptera and reconstructed the phylogeny of polyneoptera.


RESULTS
the mitogenome of zorotypus medoensis with an a + t content of  <dig> % is composed of  <dig> protein-coding genes,  <dig> transfer rna genes,  <dig> ribosomal rna genes, and a noncoding a + t-rich region. the gene content and arrangement are identical to those considered ancestral for insects. this mitogenome shows a number of very unusual features. first, it is very compact, comprising  <dig>  bp, and is the smallest among all known polyneopteran mitogenomes. second, both noncoding sequences and coding genes exhibit a significant decrease in size compared with those of other polyneopterans. third, z. medoensis mitogenome has experienced an accelerated substitution rate. fourth, truncated secondary structures of trna genes occur with loss of dihydrouridine  arm in trnc, trnr, and trns and loss of tΨc arm in trnh and trnt. the phylogenetic analyses based on the mitogenome sequence information indicate that zoraptera, represented by z. medoensis, is recovered as sister to embioptera. however, both zoraptera and embioptera exhibit very long branches in phylogenetic trees.


CONCLUSIONS
characterization of z. medoensis mitogenome contributes to our understanding of the enigmatic zoraptera. mitogenome data demonstrate an overall strong resolution of deep-level phylogenies of polyneoptera but not insecta. it is preferable to expand taxon sampling of zoraptera and other poorly represented orders in future to break up long branches.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
polyneopteraembiopteralong-branch attractiongene length reductiontrna truncationsubstitution rateissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

