BACKGROUND
petunia , derived from a hybrid between p. axillaris and p. integrifolia, is one of the most economically important bedding plant crops and petunia spp. serve as model systems for investigating the mechanisms underlying diverse mating systems and pollination syndromes. in addition, we have previously described genetic variation and quantitative trait loci  related to petunia development rate and morphology, which represent important breeding targets for the floriculture industry to improve crop production and performance. despite the importance of petunia as a crop, the floriculture industry has been slow to adopt marker assisted selection to facilitate breeding strategies and there remains a limited availability of sequences and molecular markers from the genus compared to other economically important members of the solanaceae family such as tomato, potato and pepper.


RESULTS
here we report the de novo assembly, annotation and characterization of transcriptomes from p. axillaris, p. exserta and p. integrifolia. each transcriptome assembly was derived from five tissue libraries . a total of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  assembled transcripts were recovered from p. axillaris, p. exserta and p. integrifolia, respectively and following removal of multiple isoforms,  <dig>  p. axillaris,  <dig>  p. exserta, and  <dig>  p. integrifolia high quality representative transcripts were extracted for annotation and expression analysis. the transcriptome data was mined for single nucleotide polymorphisms  and simple sequence repeat  markers, yielding  <dig>  high quality snps and  <dig> ssrs, respectively.  <dig>  snps were computationally converted into user-friendly cleaved amplified polymorphic sequence  markers and a subset of snp and caps markers were experimentally verified. caps markers developed from plastochron-related homologous transcripts from p. axillaris were mapped in an interspecific petunia population and evaluated for co-localization with qtl for development rate.


CONCLUSIONS
the high quality of the three petunia spp. transcriptomes coupled with the utility of the snp data will serve as a resource for further exploration of genetic diversity within the genus and will facilitate efforts to develop genetic and physical maps to aid the identification of qtl associated with traits of interest.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
petuniatranscriptome sequencingmolecular markerssingle nucleotide polymorphismsdevelopment ratefloricultureissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

