BACKGROUND
a deletion mutation in the growth hormone receptor  gene results in the inhibition of skeletal muscle growth and fat deposition in dwarf chickens. we used microarray techniques to determine microrna  and mrna expression profiles of ghr in the skeletal muscles of 14-day-old embryos as well as 7-week-old deletion-type dwarf and normal-type chickens. our aim was to elucidate the mirna regulation of ghr expression with respect to growth inhibition and fat deposition.


RESULTS
at the same developmental stages, different expression profiles in skeletal muscles of dwarf and normal chickens occurred for four mirnas . at different developmental stages, there was a significant difference in the expression profiles of a greater number of mirnas. eleven mirnas were up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated in the 7-week-old dwarf chickens when compared with profiles in 14-day-old embryos. in 7-week-old normal chickens, seven mirnas were up-regulated and nine down-regulated compared with those in 14-day-old embryos. in skeletal muscles,  <dig> genes were up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated in 14-day-old embryos compared with 7-week-old dwarf chickens. sixty-five mrnas were up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated in 14-day-old embryos as compared with 7-week-old normal chickens. thirty-four differentially expressed mirnas were grouped into  <dig> categories based on overlapping seed and target sequences. only let-7b was found to be complementary to its target in the 3′ untranslated region of ghr, and was able to inhibit its expression. kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes pathway analysis and quantitative polymerase chain reactions indicated there were three main signaling pathways regulating skeletal muscle growth and fat deposition of chickens. these were influenced by let-7b-regulated ghr. suppression of the cytokine signaling  <dig>  gene was found to be involved in the signaling pathway of adipocytokines.


CONCLUSIONS
there is a critical mirna, let-7b, involved in the regulation of ghr. socs <dig> plays a critical role in regulating skeletal muscle growth and fat deposition via let-7b-mediated ghr expression.

