BACKGROUND
development of automatable processes for clustering proteins into functionally relevant groups is a critical hurdle as an increasing number of sequences are deposited into databases. experimental function determination is exceptionally time-consuming and can’t keep pace with the identification of protein sequences. a tool, dasp , was previously developed to identify protein sequences with active site similarity to a query set. development of two iterative, automatable methods for clustering proteins into functionally relevant groups exposed algorithmic limitations to dasp.


RESULTS
the accuracy and efficiency of dasp was significantly improved through six algorithmic enhancements implemented in two stages: dasp <dig> and dasp <dig>  validation demonstrated dasp <dig> provides greater score separation between true positives and false positives than earlier versions. in addition, dasp <dig> shows similar performance to previous versions in clustering protein structures into isofunctional groups , but dasp <dig> gathers and clusters protein sequences into isofunctional groups more efficiently than dasp and dasp <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
dasp algorithmic enhancements resulted in improved efficiency and accuracy of identifying proteins that contain active site features similar to those of the query set. these enhancements provide incremental improvement in structure database searches and initial sequence database searches; however, the enhancements show significant improvement in iterative sequence searches, suggesting dasp <dig> is an appropriate tool for the iterative processes required for clustering proteins into isofunctional groups.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
active site profilingprotein function annotationfunctionally relevant clusteringmisannotationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthgm60595p41-gm103311ferrin thomas e. babbitt patricia c. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

