BACKGROUND
eukaryotic cells express a complex layer of noncoding rnas. an intriguing family of regulatory rnas includes transcripts from the opposite strand of protein coding genes, so called natural antisense transcripts . here, we test the hypothesis that antisense transcription triggers rna interference and gives rise to endogenous short rnas .


RESULTS
we used cloned human embryonic kidney cells  followed by short rnaseq to investigate the small genic rna transcriptome.  <dig> genes gave rise to short rna reads that mapped to exons of refseq genes. the length profile of short rnas showed a broad peak of 20- <dig> nucleotides, indicative of endo-sirnas. collapsed reads mapped predominantly to the first and the last exon of genes . rnas reads were intersected with sequences occupied by rnapii or bound to argonaute . in the first exon, 94% of the reads correlated with rnapii occupancy with an average density of  <dig> ; this decreased to 65%/ <dig> in middle exons and 54%/ <dig> in the last exon. clash reads mapping to multi-exon genes showed little distribution bias with an average of about  <dig> clash reads overlapping with 60% of the endo-sirna reads. however, endo-sirnas  intersecting with clash reads were enriched at the 5′end and decreased towards the 3′end.

we then investigated the  <dig> genes with particular focus on features indicative for short rna production; however, found that endo-sirna numbers did not correlate with gene structures that favor convergent transcription. in contrast, our gene set was found notably over-represented in the natsdb sense/antisense group as compared to non-overlapping and non-bidirectional groups. moreover, read counts showed no correlation with the steady-state levels of the related mrnas and the pattern of endo-sirnas proved reproducible after an induced mutagenic insult.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that antisense transcripts contribute to low levels of endo-sirnas in fully differentiated human cells. a characteristic endo-sirna footprint is being produced at sites of rnapii transcription which is also related to ago <dig>  this endo-sirna signature represents an intriguing finding and its reproducibility suggests that the production of endo-sirnas is a regulated process with potential homoeostatic impact.

endo-sirnanoncoding rnaantisense transcriptsrnaseq

