BACKGROUND
endometrial adenocarcinomas are a rare type of tumour in cats. though different morphologies have been reported, the most frequent histological type of feline endometrial adenocarcinoma  is the papillary serous. characterization of molecular markers expression in fea may contribute to clarify the pathogenesis of these tumours and to assess the differences between normal endometrium and fea regarding the expression pattern of several proteins. therefore, this study aimed to evaluate the immunohistochemical profile of a wide panel of antibodies  in twenty-four cases of fea. comparisons were made between fea and feline normal cyclic endometrium in follicular  and luteal  stages. except for ki- <dig>  all other molecular markers were assessed independently for the intensity of immunolabeling and for the percentage of cells expressing the protein.


RESULTS
this study showed that in fea a loss of expression occurs for er-α  and less markedly also for pr. the lost in sex steroid receptors concerns a decrease in both the proportion of labelled cells and the intensity of immunolabelling . proliferative activity, estimated via ki- <dig> immunoreaction, significantly increased in fea as compared to normal endometrium . feline endometrial adenocarcinomas maintained the ck7+/ck20+ status of normal endometrium. however, fea showed decreased ck <dig> intensity of labelling compared to normal endometria  and loss of ck <dig> expression, both in intensity  and in percentage of positive cells , compared to normal tissues.


CONCLUSIONS
data gathered in this study suggest that proliferation in fea accompanies er-α down-regulation, possibly following activation of pathways mediated by local growth factors. moreover, fea retains combined expression of ck <dig> and ck <dig>  as evidenced in normal endometrial epithelia, although a decrease in ck <dig> expression was observed.

keywords
cat diseasesendometriumadenocarcinomaimmunohistochemistryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

