BACKGROUND
glutamate gated postsynaptic receptors in the central nervous system  are essential for environmentally stimulated behaviours including learning and memory in both invertebrates and vertebrates. though their genetics, biochemistry, physiology, and role in behaviour have been intensely studied in vitro and in vivo, their molecular evolution and structural aspects remain poorly understood. to understand how these receptors have evolved different physiological requirements we have investigated the molecular evolution of glutamate gated receptors and ion channels, in particular the n-methyl-d-aspartate  receptor, which is essential for higher cognitive function. studies of rodent nmda receptors show that the c-terminal intracellular domain forms a signalling complex with enzymes and scaffold proteins, which is important for neuronal and behavioural plasticity


RESULTS
the vertebrate nmda receptor was found to have subunits with c-terminal domains up to  <dig> amino acids longer than invertebrates. this extension was specific to the nr <dig> subunit and occurred before the duplication and subsequent divergence of nr <dig> in the vertebrate lineage. the shorter invertebrate c-terminus lacked vertebrate protein interaction motifs involved with forming a signaling complex although the terminal pdz interaction domain was conserved. the vertebrate nr <dig> c-terminal domain was predicted to be intrinsically disordered but with a conserved secondary structure.


CONCLUSIONS
we highlight an evolutionary adaptation specific to vertebrate nmda receptor nr <dig> subunits. using in silico methods we find that evolution has shaped the nmda receptor c-terminus into an unstructured but modular intracellular domain that parallels the expansion in complexity of an nmda receptor signalling complex in the vertebrate lineage. we propose the nr <dig> c-terminus has evolved to be a natively unstructured yet flexible hub organising postsynaptic signalling. the evolution of the nr <dig> c-terminus and its associated signalling complex may contribute to species differences in behaviour and in particular cognitive function.

