BACKGROUND
the interaction mechanism between microbial communities and environment is a key issue in microbial ecology. microbial communities usually change significantly under environmental stress, which has been studied both phylogenetically and functionally, however which method is more effective in assessing the relationship between microbial communities shift and environmental changes still remains controversial.


RESULTS
by comparing the microbial taxonomic and functional shift pattern along heavy metal contamination gradient, we found that both sedimentary composition and function shifted significantly along contamination gradient. for example, the relative abundance of geobacter and fusibacter decreased along contamination gradient , while janthinobacterium and arthrobacter increased their abundances. most genes involved in heavy metal resistance  showed higher intensity in sites with higher concentration of heavy metals. comparing the two shift patterns, there were correlations between them, because functional and phylogenetic β-diversities were significantly correlated, and many heavy metal resistance genes were derived from geobacter, explaining their high abundance in heavily contaminated sites. however, there was a stronger link between functional composition and environmental drivers, while stochasticity played an important role in formation and succession of phylogenetic composition demonstrated by null model test.


CONCLUSIONS
overall our research suggested that the responses of functional traits depended more on environmental changes, while stochasticity played an important role in formation and succession of phylogenetic composition for microbial communities. so profiling microbial functional composition seems more appropriate to study the relationship between microbial communities and environment, as well as explore the adaptation and remediation mechanism of microbial communities to heavy metal contamination.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
heavy metal contaminationmicrobial remediationtaxonomic and functional compositionnull model testnatural science foundation of china41573072yin huaqun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

