BACKGROUND
haloxylon ammodendron  is widely distributed across a range of habitats, including gravel desert, clay desert, fixed and semi-fixed sand, and saline land in asian and african deserts. to date, no genomic information or expressed sequence tag-simple sequence repeat  marker has been reported for h. ammodendron plants.


RESULTS
using illumina sequencing technology, we generated over two billion bases of high-quality sequence data on h. ammodendron and conducted de novo assembly and annotation of genes without prior genome information. these reads were assembled into  <dig>  unigenes . based on similarity searches comparing these unigenes with known proteins in the non-redundant  protein database,  <dig>  unigenes were functionally annotated with a cut-off e-value of 10- <dig>  in addition, dge reads were mapped to the assembled transcriptome for gene expression analysis under drought stress. in total,  <dig>  differentially expressed genes were identified. among these genes,  <dig> genes were upregulated after drought treatment, and  <dig> genes were downregulated. we used the kegg database to annotate these drought-induced genes;  <dig> unigenes were identified in the kegg pathway annotation, and approximately  <dig> % of the unigenes with known function fell into categories related to fatty acid metabolism, starch and sucrose metabolism, and nitrogen metabolism, suggesting that these pathways or processes may be involved in the drought response. together, a total of  <dig> drought-inducible transcription factors were identified, including wrky, myb and bzip family members.


CONCLUSIONS
our study is the first to provide a transcriptome sequence resource for h. ammodendron plants and to determine its digital gene expression profile under drought conditions using the assembled transcriptome data for reference. these data provide a valuable resource for genetic and genomic studies of desert plants under abiotic conditions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
haloxylon ammodendrondroughttranscriptomedigital gene expressionest-ssrissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

