BACKGROUND
biotrophic fungal plant pathogens cause billions of dollars in losses to north american crops annually. the model for functional investigation of these fungi is ustilago maydis. its  <dig>  mb annotated genome sequence has been an excellent resource for investigating biotrophic plant pathogenesis. expressed-sequence tag libraries and microarray hybridizations have provided insight regarding the type of transcripts produced by u. maydis but these analyses were not comprehensive and there were insufficient data for transcriptome comparison to other smut fungi. to improve transcriptome annotation and enable comparative analyses, comprehensive strand-specific rna-seq was performed on cell-types of three related smut species: u. maydis , ustilago hordei , and sporisorium reilianum .


RESULTS
in total, > <dig> billion paired-end sequence reads were obtained from haploid cell, dikaryon and teliospore rna of u. maydis, haploid cell rna of u. hordei, and haploid and dikaryon cell rna of s. reilianum. the sequences were assembled into transfrags using trinity, and updated gene models were created using pasa and categorized with cufflinks cuffcompare. representative genes that were predicted for the first time with these rna-seq analyses and genes with novel annotation features were independently assessed by reverse transcriptase pcr. the analyses indicate hundreds more predicted proteins, relative to the previous genome annotation, could be produced by u. maydis from altered transcript forms, and that the number of non-coding rnas produced, including transcribed intergenic sequences and natural antisense transcripts, approximately equals the number of mrnas. this high representation of non-coding rnas appears to be a conserved feature of the smut fungi regardless of whether they have rna interference machinery. approximately 50% of the identified nats were conserved among the smut fungi.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, these analyses revealed: 1) smut genomes encode a number of transcriptional units that is twice the number of annotated protein-coding genes, 2) a small number of intergenic transcripts may encode proteins with characteristics of fungal effectors, 3) the vast majority of intergenic and antisense transcripts do not contain orfs, 4) a large proportion of the identified antisense transcripts were detected at orthologous loci among the smut fungi, and 5) there is an enrichment of functional categories among orthologous loci that suggests antisense rnas could have a genome-wide, non-rnai-mediated, influence on gene expression in smut fungi.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
smut fungirna-seqnon-coding rnasnatural antisense transcriptsustilago maydisustilago hordeisporisorium reilianumhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canadaontario research fund research excellenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

