BACKGROUND
polyploidization is a prominent process in plant evolution, whereas the mechanism and tempo-spatial process remained poorly understood. oryza officinalis complex, a polyploid complex in the genus oryza, could exemplify the issues not only for it covering a variety of ploidy levels, but also for the pantropical geographic pattern of its polyploids in asia, africa, australia and americas, in which a pivotal genome, the c-genome, witnessed all the polyploidization process.


RESULTS
tracing the c-genome evolutionary history in oryza officinalis complex, this study revealed the genomic relationships, polyploid forming and diverging times, and diploidization process, based on phylogeny, molecular-clock analyses and fluorescent in situ hybridization using genome-specific probes. results showed that c-genome split with b-genome at ca.  <dig>  mya, followed by a series of speciation of c-genome diploids , which then partook in successive polyploidization events, forming ccdd tetraploids in ca.  <dig>  mya, and stepwise forming bbcc tetraploids between ca.  <dig> - <dig>  mya. inter-genomic translocations between b- and c-genomes were identified in bbcc tetraploid, o. punctata. distinct fish  patterns among three ccdd species were visualized by c-genome-specific probes. b-genome was modified before forming the bbcc tetraploid, o. malampuzhaensis.


CONCLUSIONS
c-genome, shared by all polyploid species in the complex, had experienced different evolutionary history particularly after polyploidization, e.g., inter-genomic exchange in bbcc and genomic invasion in ccdd tetraploids. it diverged from b-genome at  <dig>  mya, then participated in the tetraploid formation spanning from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mya, and spread into tropics of the disjunct continents by transcontinentally long-distance dispersal, instead of vicariance, as proposed by this study, given that the continental splitting was much earlier than the c-genome species radiation. we also find reliable evidence indicated that an extinct bb diploid species in asia was presumptively the direct genomic donor of their sympatric tetraploids.

