BACKGROUND
chicken is fast becoming the world’s most consumed meat. as a consequence poultry health is more important now than ever before, with pathogens of chickens recognised as serious threats to food security. one such threat are eimeria species parasites, protozoa which can cause the disease coccidiosis. eimeria can compromise economic poultry production and chicken welfare, and have serious consequences for poor livestock keepers. seven eimeria species that infect chickens are recognised with a global enzootic distribution. more recently three cryptic operational taxonomic units  have been described in populations of eimeria recovered from chickens in australia. two of the three otus have also been detected in sub-saharan africa, but their occurrence, pathology and the risk they pose is largely unknown.


RESULTS
nigeria has witnessed a dramatic expansion in poultry production and is now the largest poultry producer in africa. here, faecal samples collected from nine of  <dig> commercial chicken farms sampled in kaduna state, nigeria, were found to contain eimerian oocysts. after amplification by in vivo propagation all three cryptic otu genotypes were detected using polymerase chain reaction , including otuy for the first time outside of australia. comparison with a widely used, established eimeria species-specific pcr assay revealed failure to detect the otu genotypes.


CONCLUSIONS
all three of the eimeria otu genotypes appear to be common in north-western nigeria. the failure of a leading species-specific molecular assay to detect these genotypes indicates a risk of false negative eimeria diagnosis when using molecular tools and suggests that the spatial occurrence of each otu may be far wider than has been recognised. the risk posed by these novel genotypes is unknown, but it is clear that a better understanding of eimeria occurrence is required together with the validation of effective diagnostics.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
eimeriachickensnigeriapoultryprevalenceoperational taxonomic unithttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000268biotechnology and biological sciences research council bb/h009337issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

