BACKGROUND
transposable elements  are mobile genetic dna sequences. tes can insert copies of themselves into new genomic locations and they have the capacity to multiply. therefore, tes have been crucial in the shaping of hosts’ current genomes. tes can be utilized as genetic markers to study population genetic diversity. the rice stem borer chilo suppressalis walker is one of the most important insect pests of many subtropical and tropical paddy fields. this insect occurs in all the rice-growing areas in china. this research was carried out in order to find diversity between c. suppressalis field populations and detect the original settlement of c. suppressalis populations based on the piggybac-like element . we also aim to provide insights into the evolution of ples in c. suppressalis and the phylogeography of c. suppressalis.


RESULTS
here we identify a new piggybac-like element  in the rice stem borer chilo suppressalis walker, which is called csuple <dig>  . csuple <dig>  is transcriptionally active. additionally, the csuple <dig>  sequence varied slightly between field populations, with polymorphic indels  and hyper-variable regions including the identification of the 3′ region outside the open reading frame . csuple <dig>  insertion frequency varied between field populations. sequences variation was found between csuple <dig> copies and varied within and among field populations. twenty-one different insertion sites for csuple <dig> copies were identified with at least two insertion loci found in all populations.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the initial invasion of csuple <dig> into c. suppressalis occurred before c. suppressalis populations spread throughout china, and suggest that c. suppressalis populations have a common ancestor in china. additionally, the lower reaches of the yangtze river are probably the original settlement of c. suppressalis in china. finally, the csuple <dig> insertion site appears to be a candidate marker for phylogenetic research of c. suppressalis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transposonpiggybacmolecular characterizationevolutionchilo suppressalisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

