BACKGROUND
speciality rice, in general, and aromatic rice in particular, possess enormous market potential for enhancing farm profits. however, systematic characterization of the diversity present in this natural wealth is a major pre requisite for using it in the breeding programs. this study reports qualitative phenotypic trait based characterization of  <dig> short grain aromatic rice genotypes, collected from different areas of the state of odisha, india.


RESULTS
out of the  <dig> descriptors employed, highest variability  was observed for lemma-palea colour with a genetic diversity index  of  <dig> . the principal component analysis reveals that the tip colour of lemma, colour of awn and colour of stigma, cumulatively explain 74 % of the total variation. the population structure analysis classified the population into two subpopulations which were subdivided further into four distinct groups. the western and southern districts of odisha are endowed with maximum diversity in comparison to eastern and northern districts and at district level comparisons, koraput and puri districts are rich with a genetic diversity values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. with this set of morphological qualitative traits, based on ‘phenoprinting’, a newly proposed bar coding system, unique fingerprints of each genotype can be effectively generated that can help in easy identification of these genotypes.


CONCLUSIONS
though aromatic rices represent a tiny fraction of the total rice germplasm, a small collection of  <dig> land races did exhibit rich diversity for all the qualitative traits. for lemma-palea colour, eight different types were detected while for tip colour of lemma, six different types were recorded, suggesting the presence of rich variability in short grain aromatic rices that are conserved in this region. the proposed ‘phenoprinting’ can be an effective descriptor with the unique finger prints generated for each genotype and coupled with molecular  finger printing, we can discriminate and identify each and every aromatic short grain rice genotype. the proposed system not only help in conservation but also can confer ipr protection to these specialty rices.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ricelandracesaromatic short grainphenotypictraitcharacterizationdiversityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

