BACKGROUND
action potential generation in excitable cells such as myocytes and neurons critically depends on voltage-gated sodium channels. in mammals, sodium channels exist as macromolecular complexes that include a pore-forming alpha subunit and  <dig> or more modulatory beta subunits. although alpha subunit genes have been cloned from diverse metazoans including flies, jellyfish, and humans, beta subunits have not previously been identified in any non-mammalian species. to gain further insight into the evolution of electrical signaling in vertebrates, we investigated beta subunit genes in the teleost danio rerio .


RESULTS
we identified and cloned single zebrafish gene homologs for beta1-beta <dig>  and duplicate genes for beta <dig> . sodium channel beta subunit loci are similarly organized in fish and mammalian genomes. unlike their mammalian counterparts, zbeta <dig> and zbeta <dig> subunit genes display extensive alternative splicing. zebrafish beta subunit genes and their splice variants are differentially-expressed in excitable tissues, indicating tissue-specific regulation of zbeta1- <dig> expression and splicing. co-expression of the genes encoding zbeta <dig> and the zebrafish sodium channel alpha subunit nav <dig>  in chinese hamster ovary cells increased sodium current and altered channel gating, demonstrating functional interactions between zebrafish alpha and beta subunits. analysis of the synteny and phylogeny of mammalian, teleost, amphibian, and avian beta subunit and related genes indicated that all extant vertebrate beta subunits are orthologous, that beta2/beta <dig> and beta1/beta <dig> share common ancestry, and that beta subunits are closely related to other proteins sharing the v-type immunoglobulin domain structure. vertebrate sodium channel beta subunit genes were not identified in the genomes of invertebrate chordates and are unrelated to known subunits of the para sodium channel in drosophila.


CONCLUSIONS
the identification of conserved orthologs to all  <dig> voltage-gated sodium channel beta subunit genes in zebrafish and the lack of evidence for beta subunit genes in invertebrate chordates together indicate that this gene family emerged early in vertebrate evolution, prior to the divergence of teleosts and tetrapods. the evolutionary history of sodium channel beta subunits suggests that these genes may have played a key role in the diversification and specialization of electrical signaling in early vertebrates.

