BACKGROUND
white clover  is an allotetraploid species possessing two highly collinear ancestral sub-genomes. the apparent existence of highly similar homeolog copies for the majority of genes in white clover is problematic for the development of genome-based resources in the species. this is especially true for the development of genetic markers based on single nucleotide polymorphisms , since it is difficult to distinguish between homeolog-specific and allelic variants. robust methods for categorising single nucleotide variants as allelic or homeolog-specific in large transcript datasets are required. we illustrate one potential approach in this study.


RESULTS
we used 454-pyrosequencing sequencing to generate ~ <dig>  transcript sequences from an 8th generation white clover inbred line. these were assembled and partially annotated to yield a reference transcript set comprising  <dig>  sequences. we subsequently performed illumina sequencing on three further white clover samples, generating  <dig> million transcript reads from a mixed sample comprising  <dig> divergent white clover genotypes, and  <dig> million reads on two further eighth generation white clover inbred lines. mapping these reads to the reference transcript set allowed us to develop a significant snp resource for white clover, and to partition the snps from the inbred lines into categories reflecting allelic or homeolog-specific variation. the potential for using haplotype reconstruction and progenitor genome comparison to assign haplotypes to specific ancestral sub-genomes of white clover is demonstrated for sequences corresponding to genes encoding dehydration responsive element binding protein and acyl-coa oxidase.


CONCLUSIONS
in total,  <dig>  independent snps in  <dig>  reference sequences were discovered, approximately three quarters of which were categorised as representing allelic or homeolog-specific variation using two inbred lines. this represents a significant resource for white clover genomics and genetics studies. we discuss the potential to extend the analysis to identify a “core set” of ancestrally derived homeolog specific variants in white clover.

allelic variantsallotetraploidhaplotype reconstructionnext generation sequencingsingle nucleotide polymorphismssub-genometranscript assemblytrifoliumwhite clover

