BACKGROUND
the eastern mosquitofish  has the potential to become a bioindicator organism of endocrine disrupting chemicals  due to its androgen-driven secondary sexual characteristics. however, the lack of molecular information on g. holbrooki hinders its use as a bioindicator coupled with biomarker data. while traditional gene-by-gene approaches provide insight for biomarker development, a holistic analysis would provide more rapid and expansive determination of potential biomarkers. the objective of this study was to develop and utilize a mosquitofish microarray to determine potential biomarkers of subchronic androgen exposure. to achieve this objective, two specific aims were developed: 1) sequence a g. holbrooki cdna library, and 2) use microarray analysis to determine genes that are differentially regulated by subchronic androgen exposure in hepatic tissues of 17β-trenbolone  exposed adult female g. holbrooki.


RESULTS
a normalized library of multiple organs of male and female g. holbrooki was prepared and sequenced by the illumina ga iix and roche  <dig> xlr <dig>  over  <dig>  genes with e-value ≤ 10- <dig> were annotated and  <dig>  of these genes were selected for inclusion on the microarray. hepatic microarray analysis of adult female g. holbrooki exposed to the vehicle control or 1 μg/l of tb  revealed  <dig> genes upregulated and  <dig> downregulated by tb . fifteen gene ontology biological processes were enriched by tb exposure . the expression levels of 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase  <dig> and zona pellucida glycoprotein  <dig> were validated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction  .


CONCLUSIONS
coupling microarray data with phenotypic changes driven by androgen exposure in mosquitofish is key for developing this organism into a bioindicator for edcs. future studies using this array will enhance knowledge of the biology and toxicological response of this species. this work provides a foundation of molecular knowledge and tools that can be used to delve further into understanding the biology of g. holbrooki and how this organism can be used as a bioindicator organism for endocrine disrupting pollutants in the environment.

gambusia holbrooki17β-trenboloneandrogen biomarkeraquatic toxicologyecotoxicogenomicsmicroarraygonopodium

