BACKGROUND
despite the improvements of tools for automated annotation of genome sequences, manual curation at the structural and functional level can provide an increased level of refinement to genome annotation. the institute for genomic research rice genome annotation  is the product of an automated pipeline and, for this reason, will benefit from the input of biologists with expertise in rice and/or particular gene families. leveraging knowledge from a dispersed community of scientists is a demonstrated way of improving a genome annotation. this requires tools that facilitate 1) the submission of gene annotation to an annotation project, 2) the review of the submitted models by project annotators, and 3) the incorporation of the submitted models in the ongoing annotation effort.


RESULTS
we have developed the eukaryotic community annotation package , an annotation tool, and have applied it to the rice genome. the primary level of curation by community annotators  has been the annotation of gene families. annotation can be submitted by email or through the eucap web tool. the ca models are aligned to the rice pseudomolecules and the coordinates of these alignments, along with functional annotation, are stored in the mysql eucap gene model database. web pages displaying the alignments of the ca models to the osa <dig> genome models are automatically generated from the eucap gene model database. the alignments are reviewed by the project annotators  in the context of experimental evidence. upon approval by the pas, the ca models, along with the corresponding functional annotations, are integrated into the osa <dig> genome annotation. the ca annotations, grouped by family, are displayed on the community annotation pages of the project website , as well as in the community annotation track of the genome browser.


CONCLUSIONS
we have applied eucap to rice. as of july  <dig>  the structural and/or functional annotation of  <dig>  genes representing  <dig> families have been deposited and integrated into the current gene set. all of the eucap components are open-source, thereby allowing the implementation of eucap for the annotation of other genomes. eucap is available at .

