BACKGROUND
the olive mouse abrothrix olivacea is a
cricetid rodent of the subfamily sigmodontinae that inhabits a wide range of
contrasting environments in southern south america, from aridlands to temperate
rainforests. along its distribution, it presents different geographic forms that
make the olive mouse a good focal case for the study of geographical variation in
response to environmental variation. we chose to characterize the kidney
transcriptome because this organ has been shown to be associated with multiple
physiological processes, including water reabsorption.


RESULTS
transcriptomes of thirteen kidneys from individuals from argentina and chile
were sequenced using illumina technology in order to obtain a kidney reference
transcriptome. after combining the reads produced for each sample, we explored
three assembly strategies to obtain the best reconstruction of transcripts,
trinitynorm and diginorm, which include its own normalization algorithms for
redundant reads removal, and multireads, which simply consist on the assembly of
the joined reads. we found that multireads strategy produces a less fragmented
assembly than normalization algorithms but recovers fewer number of genes. in
general, about  <dig> genes were annotated, of which almost half had at least one
coding sequence reconstructed at 99% of its length. we also built a list of highly
expressed genes, of which several are involved in water conservation under
laboratory conditions using mouse models.


CONCLUSIONS
based on our assembly results, trinity's in
silico normalization is the best algorithm in terms of cost-benefit
returns; however, our results also indicate that normalization should be avoided
if complete or nearly complete coding sequences of genes are desired. given that
this work is the first to characterize the transcriptome of any member of
sigmodontinae, a subfamily of cricetid rodents with about  <dig> living species, it
will provide valuable resources for future ecological and evolutionary genomic
analyses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized
users.

keywords
abrothrix olivaceaabrotrichinicricetidaesigmodontinaemuroidearna-seqgene expressionde novo assemblynormalization methodsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

