BACKGROUND
an organism’s dna sequence is one of the key factors guiding the positioning of nucleosomes within a cell’s nucleus. sequence-dependent bending anisotropy dictates how dna is wrapped around a histone octamer. one of the best established sequence patterns consistent with this anisotropy is the periodic occurrence of at-containing dinucleotides  and gc-containing dinucleotides  in the nucleosomal locations where dna is bent in the minor and major grooves, respectively. although this simple pattern has been observed in nucleosomes across eukaryotic genomes, its use for prediction of nucleosome positioning was not systematically tested.


RESULTS
we present a simple computational model, termed the w/s scheme, implementing this pattern, without using any training data. this model accurately predicts the rotational positioning of nucleosomes both in vitro and in vivo, in yeast and human genomes. about  <dig> – 75% of the experimentally observed nucleosome positions are predicted with the precision of one to two base pairs. the program is freely available at http://people.rit.edu/fxcsbi/ws_scheme/. we also introduce a simple and efficient way to compare the performance of different models predicting the rotational positioning of nucleosomes.


CONCLUSIONS
this paper presents the w/s scheme to achieve accurate prediction of rotational positioning of nucleosomes, solely based on the sequence-dependent anisotropic bending of nucleosomal dna. this method successfully captures dna features critical for the rotational positioning of nucleosomes, and can be further improved by incorporating additional terms related to the translational positioning of nucleosomes in a species-specific manner.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nucleosomesrotational positioningsequence-dependent dna anisotropyprediction of nucleosome positioningissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

