BACKGROUND
fungal laccases are multicopper oxidases  with high biotechnological potential due to their capability to oxidize a wide range of aromatic contaminants using oxygen from the air. albeit the numerous laccase-like genes described in ascomycete fungi, ascomycete laccases have been less thoroughly studied than white-rot basidiomycetous laccases. a variety of mco genes has recently been discovered in plant pathogenic ascomycete fungi, however little is known about the presence and function of laccases in these fungi or their potential use as biocatalysts. we aim here to identify the laccase-type oxidoreductases that might be involved in the decolorization of dyes by leptosphaerulina sp. and to characterize them as potential biotechnological tools.


RESULTS
a leptosphaerulina fungal strain, isolated from lignocellulosic material in colombia, produces laccase as the main ligninolytic oxidoreductase activity during decolorization of synthetic organic dyes. four laccase-type mco genes were partially amplified from the genomic dna using degenerate primers based on laccase-specific signature sequences. the phylogenetic analysis showed the clustering of lac <dig>  lac <dig> and lac <dig> with ascomycete laccases, whereas lac <dig> grouped with fungal ferroxidases . lac <dig>  the main laccase produced by leptosphaerulina sp. in dye decolorizing and laccase-induced cultures  was purified and characterized in this study. it is a sensu-stricto laccase able to decolorize synthetic organic dyes with high efficiency particularly in the presence of natural mediator compounds.


CONCLUSIONS
the searching for laccase-type mcos in ascomycetous families where their presence is poorly known, might provide a source of biocatalysts with potential biotechnological interest and shed light on their role in the fungus. the information provided by the use of genomic and proteomic tools must be combined with the biochemical evaluation of the enzyme to prove its catalytic activity and applicability potential.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
leptosphaerulinamulticopper-oxidaseslaccasesphylogenysecretomedye decolorizationnatural mediatorsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

