BACKGROUND
dietary interventions during pregnancy alter offspring fitness. we have shown mouse maternal low protein diet fed exclusively for the preimplantation period  before return to normal protein diet  for the rest of gestation, is sufficient to cause adult offspring cardiovascular and metabolic disease. moreover, emb-lpd blastocysts sense altered nutrition within the uterus and activate compensatory cellular responses including stimulated endocytosis within extra-embryonic trophectoderm and primitive endoderm  lineages to protect fetal growth rate. however, these responses associate with later disease. here, we investigate epigenetic mechanisms underlying nutritional programming of pe that may contribute to its altered phenotype, stabilised during subsequent development. we use embryonic stem  cell lines established previously from emb-lpd and npd blastocysts that were differentiated into embryoid bodies  with outer pe-like layer.


RESULTS
emb-lpd ebs grow to a larger size than npd ebs and express reduced gata <dig> transcription factor  at mrna and protein levels, similar to emb-lpd pe derivative visceral yolk sac tissue in vivo in later gestation. we analysed histone modifications at the gata <dig> promoter in emb-lpd ebs using chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. we found significant reduction in histone h <dig> and h <dig> acetylation and rna polymerase ii binding compared with npd ebs, all markers of reduced transcription. other histone modifications, h3k4me <dig>  h3k9me <dig> and h3k27me <dig>  were unaltered. a similar but generally non-significant histone modification pattern was found on the gata <dig> promoter. consistent with these changes, histone deacetylase hdac- <dig>  but not hdac- <dig>  gene expression was upregulated in emb-lpd ebs.


CONCLUSIONS
first, these data demonstrate es cells and ebs retain and propagate nutritional programming adaptations in vitro, suitable for molecular analysis of mechanisms, reducing animal use. second, they reveal maternal diet induces persistent changes in histone modifications to regulate gata <dig> expression and pe growth and differentiation that may affect lifetime health.

keywords
maternal low protein dietembryoid bodymouse blastocysthistone epigeneticsmetabolic diseasegata6primitive endodermchromatin immunoprecipitationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

