BACKGROUND
small non-coding rnas  are important regulators of gene expression in eukaryotes. previously, only micrornas  and pirnas have been identified in the silkworm, bombyx mori. furthermore, only ncrnas  of intermediate size have been systematically identified in the silkworm.


RESULTS
here, we performed a systematic identification and analysis of small rnas  associated with the bombyx mori argonaute <dig>  protein. using rip-seq, we identified various types of small ncrnas associated with bmago <dig>  these ncrnas showed a multimodal length distribution, with three peaks at ~20nt, ~27nt and ~33nt, which included trna-, transposable element -, rrna-, snorna- and snrna-derived small rnas as well as mirnas and pirnas. the trna-derived fragments  were found at an extremely high abundance and accounted for  <dig> % of the bmago2-associated small rnas. northern blotting confirmed that many trfs were expressed or up-regulated only in the bmnpv-infected cells, implying that the trfs play a prominent role by binding to bmago <dig> during bmnpv infection. additional evidence suggested that there are potential cleavage sites on the d, anti-codon and tψc loops of the trnas. te-derived small rnas and pirnas also accounted for a significant proportion of the bmago2-associated small rnas, suggesting that bmago <dig> could be involved in the maintenance of genome stability by suppressing the activities of transposons guided by these small rnas. finally, northern blotting was also used to confirm the bombyx  <dig>  s rrna-derived small rnas, demonstrating that various novel small rnas exist in the silkworm.


CONCLUSIONS
using an rip-seq method in combination with northern blotting, we identified various types of small rnas associated with the bmago <dig> protein, including trna-, te-, rrna-, snorna- and snrna-derived small rnas as well as mirnas and pirnas. our findings provide new clues for future functional studies of the role of small rnas in insect development and evolution.

bombyx moribmago2-associated small rnasrip-seqtrfsbmnpv

