BACKGROUND
in the calvin cycle of eubacteria, the dephosphorylations of both fructose- <dig>  6-bisphosphate  and sedoheptulose- <dig>  7-bisphosphate  are catalyzed by the same bifunctional enzyme: fructose- <dig>  6-bisphosphatase/sedoheptulose- <dig>  7-bisphosphatase , while in that of eukaryotic chloroplasts by two distinct enzymes: chloroplastic fructose- <dig>  6-bisphosphatase  and sedoheptulose- <dig>  7-bisphosphatase , respectively. it was proposed that these two eukaryotic enzymes arose from the divergence of a common ancestral eubacterial bifunctional f/sbpase of mitochondrial origin. however, no specific affinity between sbpase and eubacterial fbpase or f/sbpase can be observed in the previous phylogenetic analyses, and it is hard to explain why sbpase and/or f/sbpase are/is absent from most extant nonphotosynthetic eukaryotes according to this scenario.


RESULTS
domain analysis indicated that eubacterial f/sbpase of two different resources contain distinct domains: proteobacterial f/sbpases contain typical fbpase domain, while cyanobacterial f/sbpases possess fbpase_glpx domain. therefore, like prokaryotic fbpase, eubacterial f/sbpase can also be divided into two evolutionarily distant classes . phylogenetic analysis based on a much larger taxonomic sampling than previous work revealed that all eukaryotic sbpase cluster together and form a close sister group to the clade of epsilon-proteobacterial class i fbpase which are gluconeogenesis-specific enzymes, while all eukaryotic chloroplast fbpase group together with eukaryotic cytosolic fbpase and form another distinct clade which then groups with the class i fbpase of diverse eubacteria. motif analysis of these enzymes also supports these phylogenetic correlations.


CONCLUSIONS
there are two evolutionarily distant classes of eubacterial bifunctional f/sbpase. eukaryotic fbpase and sbpase do not diverge from either of them but have two independent origins: sbpase share a common ancestor with the gluconeogenesis-specific class i fbpase of epsilon-proteobacteria , while fbpase arise from class i fbpase of an unknown kind of eubacteria. during the evolution of sbpase from eubacterial class i fbpase, the sbp-dephosphorylation activity was acquired through the transition “from specialist to generalist”. the evolutionary substitution of the endosymbiotic-origin cyanobacterial bifunctional f/sbpase by the two light-regulated substrate-specific enzymes made the regulation of the calvin cycle more delicate, which contributed to the evolution of eukaryotic photosynthesis and even the entire photosynthetic eukaryotes.

fbpasesbpasef/sbpaseevolutioncalvin cycle

