BACKGROUND
cassava plants  have obvious abscission zone  structures in their leaf pulvinus-petioles. cassava leaf abscission can be triggered by either 17 days of water-deficit stress or 4 days of ethylene treatment. to date, little is known about cassava ap2/erf factors, and less is known regarding their roles in regulating abscission zone development.


RESULTS
here, the cassava and arabidopsis ap2/erf genes were compared, finding that the cassava genome contains approximately  <dig> -fold more erf subfamily than the arabidopsis genome. microarray analysis was used to identify the ap2/erf genes that are expressed in cassava leaf pulvinus-petiole abscission zones by comparing the ap2/erf gene expression profiles of ethylene- and water-deficit stress-induced leaf abscission. in total,  <dig> ap2/erf genes were identified as expressed in azs across six time points during both ethylene- and water-deficit stress-induced leaf abscission. comparative expression profile analysis of similar sota  clusters at six time points during ethylene- and water-deficit stress-induced leaf abscission demonstrated that  <dig> erf subfamily genes had similar expression patterns in response to both treatments. go  annotation confirmed that all  <dig> erf subfamily genes participate in ethylene-mediated signalling. analysis of the putative erf promoter regions shown that the genes contained primarily ethylene- and stress-related cis-elements. further analysis of acc oxidase activity in azs across six time points during abscission shown increased ethylene production in response to both ethylene and water-deficit stress; however, the difference was more dramatic for water-deficit stress. finally, the expression ratios of  <dig> erf subfamily genes were analysed in two cassava cultivars, ‘ku50’ and ‘sc5’, that exhibit different levels of leaf abscission when challenged with the same water-deficit stress. the analysis indicated that most of the erf genes were expressed at higher levels in the precocious abscission ‘ku50’ cultivar than in the delayed abscission ‘sc5’ cultivar.


CONCLUSIONS
ccomparative analysis of both ethylene- and water-deficit stress-induced leaf abscission shown that the erf subfamily functions in the regulation of cassava abscission zone development.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cassava abscission zoneap2/erfethylenewater-deficit stresshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31471551liao wenbin international science and technology cooperation program of china2013dfa32020peng ming national high technology research and development program of china2012aa101204-2peng ming national basic research program2010cb126600peng ming issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

