BACKGROUND
most biological nitrogen fixation is catalyzed by the molybdenum nitrogenase. this enzyme is a complex which contains the mofe protein encoded by nifdk and the fe protein encoded by nifh. in addition to nifhdk, nifhdk-like genes were found in some archaea and firmicutes, but their function is unclear.


RESULTS
we sequenced the genome of paenibacillus sabinae t <dig>  a total of  <dig>  open reading frames were predicted from its  <dig>  mb genome. the genome of p. sabinae t <dig> contains fifteen nitrogen fixation  genes, including three nifh, one nifd, one nifk, four nifb, two nife, two nifn, one nifx and one nifv. of the  <dig> nif genes, eight nif genes  and two non-nif genes  form a complete nif gene cluster. in addition to the nif genes, there are nitrogenase-like genes, including two nifh-like genes and five pairs of nifdk-like genes. is elements on the flanking regions of nif and nif-like genes imply that these genes might have been obtained by horizontal gene transfer. phylogenies of the concatenated  <dig> nif gene  products suggest that p. sabinae t <dig> is closely related to frankia. rt-pcr analysis showed that the complete nif gene cluster is organized as an operon. we demonstrated that the complete nif gene cluster under the control of σ70-dependent promoter enabled escherichia coli jm <dig> to fix nitrogen. also, here for the first time we demonstrated that unlike nif genes, the transcriptions of nifhdk-like genes were not regulated by ammonium and oxygen, and nifh-like or nifd-like gene could not restore the nitrogenase activity of klebsiella pneumonia nifh− and nifd− mutant strains, respectively, suggesting that nifhdk-like genes were not involved in nitrogen fixation.


CONCLUSIONS
our data and analysis reveal the contents and distribution of nif and nif-like genes and contribute to the study of evolutionary history of nitrogen fixation in paenibacillus. for the first time we demonstrated that the transcriptions of nifhdk-like genes were not regulated by ammonium and oxygen and nifhdk-like genes were not involved in nitrogen fixation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
paenibacillus sabinae t27nif gene clusternif-like genegenome sequenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

