BACKGROUND
there are few genomic tools available in melon , a member of the cucurbitaceae, despite its importance as a crop. among these tools, genetic maps have been constructed mainly using marker types such as simple sequence repeats , restriction fragment length polymorphisms  and amplified fragment length polymorphisms  in different mapping populations. there is a growing need for saturating the genetic map with single nucleotide polymorphisms , more amenable for high throughput analysis, especially if these markers are located in gene coding regions, to provide functional markers. expressed sequence tags  from melon are available in public databases, and resequencing ests or validating snps detected in silico are excellent ways to discover snps.


RESULTS
est-based snps were discovered after resequencing ests between the parental lines of the pi  <dig>  × 'piel de sapo'  genetic map or using in silico snp information from est databases. in total  <dig> est-based snps were mapped in the melon genetic map using a bin-mapping strategy, increasing the map density to  <dig>  cm/marker. a subset of  <dig> snps was used to study variation in a panel of  <dig> melon accessions covering a wide range of the genetic diversity of the species. snp analysis correctly reflected the genetic relationships compared with other marker systems, being able to distinguish all the accessions and cultivars.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first example of a genetic map in a cucurbit species that includes a major set of snp markers discovered using ests. the pi  <dig> × 'piel de sapo' melon genetic map has around  <dig> markers, of which more than  <dig> are gene-based markers . this genetic map will be a central tool for the construction of the melon physical map, the step prior to sequencing the complete genome. using the set of snp markers, it was possible to define the genetic relationships within a collection of forty-eight melon accessions as efficiently as with ssr markers, and these markers may also be useful for cultivar identification in occidental melon varieties.

