BACKGROUND
the yolk sac  is an extra-embryonic tissue that surrounds the yolk and absorbs, digests and transports nutrients during incubation of the avian embryo as well as during early term mammalian embryonic development. understanding ys functions and development may enhance the efficient transfer of nutrients and optimize embryo development. to identify temporal large-scale patterns of gene expression and gain insights into processes and mechanisms in the ys, we performed a transcriptome study of the ys of chick embryos on embryonic days  e <dig>  e <dig>  e <dig>  e <dig>  and e <dig> .


RESULTS
 <dig> genes exhibited a significantly changed expression across days. clustering and functional annotation of these genes as well as histological sectioning of the ys revealed that we monitored two cell types: the epithelial cells and the erythropoietic cells of the ys. we observed a significant up-regulation of epithelial genes involved in lipid transport and metabolism between e <dig> and e <dig>  ys epithelial cells expressed a vast array of lipoprotein receptors and fatty acid transporters. several lysosomal genes  and apolipoproteins genes  were among the highest expressed, reflecting the intensive digestion and re-synthesis of lipoproteins in ys epithelial cells. genes associated with cytoskeletal structure were down-regulated between e <dig> and e <dig> supporting histological evidence of a degradation of ys epithelial cells towards hatch.

expression patterns of hemoglobin synthesis genes indicated a high erythropoietic capacity of the ys between e <dig> and e <dig>  which decreased towards hatch. ys histological sections confirmed these results. we also observed that ys epithelial cells expressed high levels of genes coding for plasma carrier proteins , normally produced by the liver.


CONCLUSIONS
here we expand current knowledge on developmental, nutritional and molecular processes in the ys. we demonstrate that in the final week of chick embryonic development, the ys plays different roles to support or replace the functions of several organs that have not yet reached their full functional capacity. the ys has a similar functional role as the intestine in digestion and transport of nutrients, the liver in producing plasma carrier proteins and coagulation factors, and the bone marrow in synthesis of blood cells.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
yolk sacgene expressiontranscriptome analysischicken embryoepithelial cellsnutrient transportlipoproteinscytoskeletonerythropoiesisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

