BACKGROUND
serial analysis of gene expression  is a powerful tool to determine gene expression profiles. two types of sage libraries, shortsage and longsage, are classified based on the length of the sage tag . longsage libraries are thought to be more useful than shortsage libraries, but their information content has not been widely compared. to dissect the differences between these two types of libraries, we utilized four libraries  generated from the hippocampus of alzheimer and control samples. in addition, we generated two additional short sage libraries, the truncated long sage libraries , from longsage libraries by deleting seven 5' basepairs from each longsage tag.


RESULTS
one problem that occurred in the sage study is that individual tags may have matched to multiple different genes – due to the short length of a tag. we found that the longsage tag maps up to  <dig> unigene clusters, while the shortsage and tsage tags map up to  <dig> unigene clusters. both long and short sage libraries exhibit a large number of orphan tags , implying the limitation of the unigene database. among  <dig> orphan longsage tags, the complete sequences  of nine orphan tags match to  <dig> genomic sequences; four of the orphan tags match to a single genomic sequence. our data show the potential to resolve 4–9% of orphan longsage tags. finally, among  <dig> tsage tags showing significant differential expression between ad and control,  <dig> tags  were derived from multiple non-significant longsage tags, implying the false positive results.


CONCLUSIONS
our data show that longsage tags have high specificity in gene mapping compared to shortsage tags. longsage tags show an advantage over shortsage in identifying novel genes by blast analysis. most importantly, the chances of obtaining false positive results are higher for shortsage than longsage libraries due to their specificity in gene mapping. therefore, it is recommended that the number of corresponding unigene clusters  of a tag for prioritizing the significant results be considered.

