BACKGROUND
nosocomial infections caused by the bacterial pathogen staphylococcus aureus can lead to serious complications due to the varying presence of secreted toxins. comparative studies of genomic information and production rates are needed to assess the pathogenic potential of isolated strains. genotypic and phenotypic profiling of clinical and colonising isolates of s. aureus was used to characterise the release of exotoxins. blood isolates were compared with colonisation strains to determine similarities and differences of single strains and clusters.


RESULTS
fifty-one fresh isolates obtained from colonised individuals  and s. aureus bacteremia  patients  were investigated. the prevalence of genes encoding for three cytolysins  and twenty-four superantigens  was determined. isolates exhibited eighteen distinct combinations of superantigens. sequence analysis identified mutated open reading frames in hla in  <dig>  % of all strains, in selw  and in selx . all corrupted genes were associated with specific clonal complexes. functional assessment of alpha toxin activity by a rabbit erythrocyte lysis assay revealed that supernatants lacking alpha toxin still displayed hemolysis. this was due to the presence of gamma toxin, as proven by inhibition experiments using antisera raised against the respective recombinant proteins. alpha toxin, sec, and tsst <dig> production was quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays on supernatants of all hla, sec, and tst positive isolates. blood isolates and colonising strains showed comparable amounts of secreted proteins within a wide range. agr types i to iv were identified, but did not allow a prediction of high or low production rates. in contrast, alpha toxin production rates between distinct clonal complexes clearly differed. spa typing was performed and revealed thirty-two unique spa gene patterns and eight small clusters comprising nineteen isolates. recognised spa-typing clusters displayed highly similar production rates.


CONCLUSIONS
production rates of the three most prevalent exotoxins varied within both groups of blood isolates and colonising strains. by comparing genotypes and secretion, we found that identical complex gene patterns did not allow predictions of toxin production and function. however, identification of spa typing clusters was suitable to predict similar quantities of released exotoxins.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
staphylococcal infectionexotoxinsprotein quantificationtypinghemolysisaustrian research promotion agency ffg839130844049eibl martha m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

