BACKGROUND
protein-protein interactions play a fundamental role in elucidating the molecular mechanisms of biomolecular function, signal transductions and metabolic pathways of living organisms. although high-throughput technologies such as yeast two-hybrid system and affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry are widely used in model organisms, the progress of protein-protein interactions detection in plants is rather slow. with this motivation, our work presents a computational approach to predict protein-protein interactions in oryza sativa.


RESULTS
to better understand the interactions of proteins in oryza sativa, we have developed prin, a predicted rice interactome network. protein-protein interaction data of prin are based on the interologs of six model organisms where large-scale protein-protein interaction experiments have been applied: yeast , worm , fruit fly , human , escherichia coli k <dig> and arabidopsis thaliana. with certain quality controls, altogether we obtained  <dig>  non-redundant rice protein interaction pairs among  <dig>  rice proteins. further analysis showed that the topology properties of predicted rice protein interaction network are more similar to yeast than to the other  <dig> organisms. this may not be surprising as the interologs based on yeast contribute nearly 74% of total interactions. in addition, go annotation, subcellular localization information and gene expression data are also mapped to our network for validation. finally, a user-friendly web interface was developed to offer convenient database search and network visualization.


CONCLUSIONS
prin is the first well annotated protein interaction database for the important model plant oryza sativa. it has greatly extended the current available protein-protein interaction data of rice with a computational approach, which will certainly provide further insights into rice functional genomics and systems biology.

prin is available online at http://bis.zju.edu.cn/prin/.

