BACKGROUND
prostatic diseases in intact male dogs are common. however, studies about the computed tomographic  examination of the prostate in dogs are rare. the aim of the present study was to evaluate age related-changes in the canine prostate with the help of the ct and to evaluate whether measuring hounsfield units  in different morphological conditions of the prostate is of diagnostic value.

fifty pre- and post-contrast ct scans of the prostate of dogs were evaluated and divided into three groups according to the tissue structure: group <dig> dogs with homogenous prostate tissue ; group  <dig> with prostate cysts  and group  <dig> with inhomogeneous prostate tissue . the prostatic dimensions were measured and the ratio between length, height and width and the sixth lumbar vertebra was calculated. median values of prostatic attenuation measured in hus, using regions of interests  were determined on pre- and post- contrast scans over the whole length of the prostate. the results were compared to the dog’s age.

furthermore, the ct images were compared with the results of ultrasonography .


RESULTS
on pre-contrast scans hus within rois placed in the prostate did not differ statistically significantly between the different morphological groups . hus within on the post- contrast scans showed statistically significant differences between the groups. group one had a mean density of  <dig>  hu, group two had a mean density of  <dig>  hu and group three had one of  <dig>  hu. the prostatic size in the first group was smaller than in the other groups, whereas the largest prostates were found in the second group.

in six cases the post-contrast ct scan showed results that differed from the ultrasound examination. dogs had a homogenous tissue in ultrasonography while the ct scan revealed an inhomogeneous tissue structure.


CONCLUSIONS
the ct examination can be a beneficial diagnostic tool for examining the prostatic size and for evaluating the prostatic tissue. the different hus reflected age-related changes and alterations in the prostate while measuring the density of the prostate. contrast agent application enables a more specific analysis of the prostate to be carried out and for precise changes in tissue structure to be observed.

keywords
prostate glandcomputed tomographydoghounsfield unitissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

