BACKGROUND
by encoding a group of small secretory peptides, the members of the clavata3/embryo-surrounding region  family play important roles in cell-to-cell communication to control the balance between stem cell proliferation and differentiation in plant development. despite recent identification and characterization of members of this gene family in several plant species, little is known about its functional role in plants with fleshy fruits.


RESULTS
in total, fifteen cle genes  were identified from tomato  genome and their multiple characters including phylogeny, gene structures, chromosome locations, conserved motifs and cis-elements in the promoter sequences, were analyzed. real-time pcr analysis showed that  <dig> out of  <dig> identified slcle genes are transcribed and exhibit remarkably unique expression patterns among tissues and organs. in particular, slcle <dig>  the homologue of arabidopsis cle41/ <dig> gene, appears to be the dominant cle gene in most of tested tissues with its maximum expression found in vascular tissues. meanwhile, slcle <dig>   <dig>   <dig> exhibit specific but distinct expression in flower bud, root and shoot apex, respectively. more notably, several slcles are dramatically regulated in their transcriptional levels during fruit development and ripening, indicating significant role these genes may potentially play in the critical physiological process. upon the treatment with synthetic peptides corresponding to the 12-aa cle domains of slcle  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  tomato seedlings exhibit a clear reduction in root length to varying degrees.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a comprehensive genomic analysis of cle gene family in tomato, a crop species with fleshy fruit. differential expression patterns of various slcles provide important insights into the functional divergence of cle signaling cascade in solanaceae species, especially their potential involvements in the regulation of fruit development and ripening.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
solanum lycopersicumcle gene familyphylogenetic analysistissue expression patternpeptide applicationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

