BACKGROUND
rat liver regeneration  proceeds along a process of highly organized and ordered tissue growth in response to the loss or injury of liver tissue, during which many physiological processes may play important roles. the molecular mechanism of hepatocyte proliferation, energy metabolism and substance metabolism during rat lr had been elucidated. further, the correlation of circular rna  abundance with proliferation has recently been clarified. however, the regulatory capacity of circrna in rat lr remains a fascinating topic.


RESULTS
to investigate the regulatory mechanism of circrna during priming phase of rat lr, high-throughput rna sequencing technology was performed to unbiasedly profile the expression of circrna during priming phase of rat lr. gene ontology  and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  biological pathway analysis was conducted to predict the functions of differentially expressed circrnas and their host linear transcripts. co-expression networks of circrna-mirna were constructed based on the correlation analysis between the differentially expressed lr-related circrnas and the condition of their mirna binding sites. to excavate the key circrnas in the early phase of rat lr, we comprehensively evaluated and integrated the relationship of expression level between the circrnas and the linear transcripts as well as the distribution of mirna binding sites in circrna sequences.


CONCLUSIONS
this paper is the first to employ the comprehensive circrna expression profile and to investigate circrna-mirna interactions during priming phase of rat lr. two thousand four hundred twelve circrnas were detected, and  <dig> circrnas deriving from  <dig> host linear transcripts differentially expressed . six significantly changed circrnas during priming phase of rat lr were screened as key circle molecules, and then were validated by qrt-pcr. this study will lay the foundation for revealing the functional roles of circrnas during rat lr and help solve the remaining clinical problems.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
high-throughput rna sequencing technologycircrnarat liver regenerationmirnahost linear transcriptshepatocyte proliferationenergy metabolismsubstance metabolismhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31572270xu cunshuan project of fundamental research and advanced technology of henan162300410144guo jianlin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

