BACKGROUND
autoinflammatory diseases in dogs are characterized by complex disease processes with varying clinical signs. in shar-pei, signs of inflammation including fever and arthritis are known to be related with a breed-specific predisposition for shar-pei autoinflammatory disease .


RESULTS
clinical and histopathological examinations of two severely spaid-affected shar-pei revealed signs of inflammation including fever, arthritis, and perivascular and diffuse dermatitis in both dogs. a multifocal accumulation of amyloid in different organs was found in one spaid-affected case. whole genome sequencing resulted in  <dig> variants, which were homozygous mutant private mutations in spaid-affected shar-pei. nine snvs with predicted damaging effects and three indels were further investigated in  <dig> shar-pei affected with spaid,  <dig> unaffected shar-pei and  <dig> controls from  <dig> different dog breeds. the results showed the missense variant mtbp:g.19383758g > a in mtbp to be highly associated with spaid in shar-pei. in the region of this gene a large roh  region could be detected exclusively in the two investigated spaid-affected shar-pei compared to control dog breeds. no further spaid-associated variant with predicted high or moderate effects could be found in genes identified in roh regions. this mtbp variant was predicted to affect the mdn2-binding protein domain and consequently promote proinflammatory reactions. in the investigated group of shar-pei older than six years all dogs with the mutant genotype a/a were spaid-affected whereas spaid-unaffected dogs harbored the homozygous wildtype . shar-pei with a heterozygous genotype  were shown to have a  <dig> -fold higher risk for disease development, which gave evidence for an incomplete dominant mode of inheritance.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study give strong evidence for a variant in mtbp related with proinflammatory processes via mtbp-mdm <dig> pathway. thus, these results enable a reliable detection of spaid in shar-pei dogs.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
shar-peiautoinflammatory diseasewhole genome sequencingmtbp <dig>  deutscher shar pei club  <dig> e.v., shar pei freunde deutschland and world of shar peiissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

