BACKGROUND
segmental duplications , also known as low-copy repeats, are dna sequences of length greater than 1 kb which are duplicated with a high degree of sequence identity  causing instability in genomes. sds are generally found in the genome as mosaic forms of duplicated sequences which are generated by a two-step process: first, multiple duplicated sequences are aggregated at specific genomic regions, and then, these primary duplications undergo multiple secondary duplications. however, the mechanism of how duplicated sequences are aggregated in the first place is not well understood.


RESULTS
by analyzing the distribution of microsatellite sequences among twenty insect species in a genome-wide manner it was found that pairs of microsatellites along with the intervening sequences were duplicated multiple times in each genome. they were found as low copy repeats or segmental duplications when the duplicated loci were greater than 1 kb in length and had greater than 90% sequence similarity. by performing a sliding-window genomic analysis for number of paired microsatellites and number of segmental duplications, it was observed that regions rich in repetitive paired microsatellites tend to get richer in segmental duplication suggesting a “rich-gets-richer” mode of aggregation of the duplicated loci in specific regions of the genome. results further show that the relationship between number of paired microsatellites and segmental duplications among the species is independent of the known phylogeny suggesting that association of microsatellites with segmental duplications may be a species-specific evolutionary process. it was also observed that the repetitive microsatellite pairs are associated with gene duplications but those sequences are rarely retained in the orthologous genes between species. although some of the duplicated sequences with microsatellites as termini were found within transposable elements  of drosophila, most of the duplications are found in the te-free and gene-free regions of the genome.


CONCLUSIONS
the study clearly suggests that microsatellites are instrumental in extensive sequence duplications that may contribute to species-specific evolution of genome plasticity in insects.

segmental duplicationgenome dynamicsmicrosatelliteinsect genomesduplication shadowinggene duplication

