BACKGROUND
in eukaryotes, classical protein disulfide isomerases  facilitate the oxidative folding of nascent secretory proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum by catalyzing the formation, breakage, and rearrangement of disulfide bonds. terrestrial plants encode six structurally distinct subfamilies of pdis. the novel pdi-b subfamily is unique to terrestrial plants, and in arabidopsis is represented by a single member, pdi <dig>  unlike classical pdis, which lack transmembrane domains , pdi <dig> is unique in that it has a c-terminal tmd and a single n-terminal thioredoxin domain . no pdi <dig> isoforms have been experimentally characterized to date. here we describe the characterization of the membrane orientation, expression, sub-cellular localization, and biochemical function of this novel member of the pdi family.


RESULTS
histochemical staining of plants harboring a pdi <dig> promoter:β-glucuronidase  fusion revealed that the pdi <dig> promoter is highly active in young, expanding leaves, the guard cells of cotyledons, and in the vasculature of several organs, including roots, leaves, cotyledons, and flowers. immunoelectron microscopy studies using a pdi8-specific antibody on root and shoot apical cells revealed that pdi <dig> localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum . transient expression of two pdi <dig> fusions to green fluorescent protein  in leaf mesophyll protoplasts also resulted in labeling of the er. protease-protection immunoblot analysis indicated that pdi <dig> is a type i membrane protein, with its catalytic domain facing the er lumen. the lumenal portion of pdi <dig> was able to functionally complement the loss of the prokaryotic protein foldase, disulfide oxidase , as demonstrated by the reconstitution of periplasmic alkaline phosphatase in escherichia coli.


CONCLUSIONS
the results indicate that pdi <dig> is a type i transmembrane protein with its catalytic domain facing the lumen of the er and functions in the oxidation of cysteines to produce disulfide bonds. it likely plays a role in folding newly-synthesized secretory proteins as they translocate across the er membrane into the lumen. these foundational results open the door to identifying the substrates of pdi <dig> to enable a more thorough understanding of its function in plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
endoplasmic reticulumtransmembraneprotein disulfide isomeraseprotein foldingnsf-division of molecular and cellular biosciencesmcb-0958107us hatch507h and 5030hissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

