BACKGROUND
genome evolution in intracellular microbial symbionts is characterized by gene loss, generating some of the smallest and most gene-poor genomes known. as a result of gene loss these genomes commonly contain metabolic pathways that are fragmented relative to their free-living relatives. the evolutionary retention of fragmented metabolic pathways in the gene-poor genomes of endosymbionts suggests that they are functional. however, it is not always clear how they maintain functionality. to date, the fragmented metabolic pathways of endosymbionts have been shown to maintain functionality through complementation by host genes, complementation by genes of another endosymbiont and complementation by genes in host genomes that have been horizontally acquired from a microbial source that is not the endosymbiont. here, we demonstrate a fourth mechanism.


RESULTS
we investigate the evolutionary retention of a fragmented pathway for the essential nutrient pantothenate  in the pea aphid, acyrthosiphon pisum endosymbiosis with buchnera aphidicola. using quantitative analysis of gene expression we present evidence for complementation of the buchnera pantothenate biosynthesis pathway by host genes. further, using complementation assays in an escherichia coli mutant we demonstrate functional replacement of a pantothenate biosynthesis enzyme, 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase , by an endosymbiont gene, ilvc, encoding a substrate ambiguous enzyme.


CONCLUSIONS
earlier studies have speculated that missing enzyme steps in fragmented endosymbiont metabolic pathways are completed by adaptable endosymbiont enzymes from other pathways. here, we experimentally demonstrate completion of a fragmented endosymbiont vitamin biosynthesis pathway by recruitment of a substrate ambiguous enzyme from another pathway. in addition, this work extends host/symbiont metabolic collaboration in the aphid/buchnera symbiosis from amino acid metabolism to include vitamin biosynthesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacteriocytesymbiosisendosymbiosisco-evolutiongammaproteobacteriaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

