BACKGROUND
introgressive hybridization is an important evolutionary process that can lead to the creation of novel genome structures and thus potentially new genetic variation for selection to act upon. on the other hand, hybridization with introduced species can threaten native species, such as cutthroat trout  following the introduction of rainbow trout . neither the evolutionary consequences nor conservation implications of rainbow trout introgression in cutthroat trout is well understood. therefore, we generated a genetic linkage map for rainbow-yellowstone cutthroat trout  hybrids to evaluate genome processes that may help explain how introgression affects hybrid genome evolution.


RESULTS
the hybrid map closely aligned with the rainbow trout map , sharing all but one linkage group. this linkage group  represented a fusion between an acrocentric  and a metacentric chromosome  in rainbow trout. additional mapping in yellowstone cutthroat trout indicated the two rainbow trout homologues were fused in the yellowstone genome. variation in the number of hybrid linkage groups  likely depended on a robertsonian rearrangement polymorphism within the rainbow trout stock. comparison between the female-merged f <dig> map and a female consensus rainbow trout map revealed that introgression suppressed recombination across large genomic regions in  <dig> hybrid linkage groups. two of these linkage groups  contained confirmed chromosome rearrangements between rainbow and yellowstone cutthroat trout indicating that rearrangements may suppress recombination. the frequency of allelic and genotypic segregation distortion varied among parents and families, suggesting few incompatibilities exist between rainbow and yellowstone cutthroat trout genomes.


CONCLUSIONS
chromosome rearrangements suppressed recombination in the hybrids. this result supports several previous findings demonstrating that recombination suppression restricts gene flow between chromosomes that differ by arrangement. conservation of synteny and map order between the hybrid and rainbow trout maps and minimal segregation distortion in the hybrids suggest rainbow and yellowstone cutthroat trout genomes freely introgress across chromosomes with similar arrangement. taken together, these results suggest that rearrangements impede introgression. recombination suppression across rearrangements could enable large portions of non-recombined chromosomes to persist within admixed populations.

