BACKGROUND
-β-glucan is an important component of the cell walls of barley grain as it affects processability during the production of alcoholic beverages and has significant human health benefits when consumed above recommended threshold levels. this leads to diametrically opposed quality requirements for different applications as low levels of -β-glucan are required for brewing and distilling and high levels for positive impacts on human health.


RESULTS
we quantified grain -β-glucan content in a collection of  <dig> 2-row spring-type, and  <dig> 2-row winter-type elite barley cultivars originating mainly from north western europe. we combined these data with genotypic information derived using a 9 k illumina iselect snp platform and subsequently carried out a genome wide association scan . statistical analysis accounting for residual genetic structure within the germplasm collection allowed us to identify significant associations between molecular markers and the phenotypic data. by anchoring the regions that contain these associations to the barley genome assembly we catalogued genes underlying the associations. based on gene annotations and transcript abundance data we identified candidate genes.


CONCLUSIONS
we show that a region of the genome on chromosome  <dig> containing a cluster of cellulose synthase-like  genes, including cslf <dig>  cslf <dig>  cslf <dig>  cslf <dig>  cslf <dig> and cslh, as well as a region on chromosome 1h containing cslf <dig>  are associated with the phenotype in this germplasm. we also observed that several regions identified by gwas contain glycoside hydrolases that are possibly involved in -β-glucan breakdown, together with other genes that might participate in -β-glucan synthesis, re-modelling or regulation. this analysis provides new opportunities for understanding the genes related to the regulation of -β-glucan content in cereal grains.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
barley-β-glucancell wallsgwassoluble fibreissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

