BACKGROUND
the phylogeography of the house mouse , an emblematic species for genetic and biomedical studies, is only partly understood, essentially because of a sampling bias towards its most peripheral populations in europe, asia and the americas. moreover, the present-day phylogeographic hypotheses stem mostly from the study of mitochondrial lineages. in this article, we complement the mtdna studies with a comprehensive survey of nuclear markers  typed in  <dig> individuals from  <dig> population samples, with an emphasis on the putative middle-eastern centre of dispersal of the species.


RESULTS
based on correspondence analysis, distance and allele-sharing trees, we find a good coherence between geographical origin and genetic make-up of the populations. we thus confirm the clear distinction of the three best described peripheral subspecies, m. m. musculus, m. m. domesticus and m. m. castaneus. a large diversity was found in the iranian populations, which have had an unclear taxonomic status to date. in addition to samples with clear affiliation to m. m. musculus and m. m. domesticus, we find two genetic groups in central and south east iran, which are as distinct from each other as they are from the south-east asian m. m. castaneus. these groups were previously also found to harbor distinct mitochondrial haplotypes.


CONCLUSIONS
we propose that the iranian plateau is home to two more taxonomic units displaying complex primary and secondary relationships with their long recognized neighbours. this central region emerges as the area with the highest known diversity of mouse lineages within a restricted geographical area, designating it as the focal place to study the mechanisms of speciation and diversification of this species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
house mousemicrosatellitesphylogeographic hotspotiranian plateauissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

