BACKGROUND
ralstonia solanacearum, the causal agent of bacterial wilt, is a genetically diverse bacterial plant pathogen present in tropical and subtropical regions of the world that infects more than  <dig> plant species, including economically important solanaceous crops. most strains of r. solanacearum are only pathogenic at temperatures between  <dig> to 30°c with strains that can cause disease below 20°c considered a threat to agriculture in temperate areas. identifying key molecular factors that distinguish strains virulent at cold temperatures from ones that are not is needed to develop effective management tools for this pathogen. we compared protein profiles of two strains virulent at low temperature and two strains not virulent at low temperature when incubated in the rhizosphere of tomato seedlings at  <dig> and 18°c using quantitative 2d dige gel methods. spot intensities were quantified and compared, and differentially expressed proteins were sequenced and identified by mass spectrometry .


RESULTS
four hundred and eighteen  differentially expressed protein spots sequenced produced  <dig> unique proteins. the identified proteins were classified in the gene ontology biological processes categories of metabolism, cell processes, stress response, transport, secretion, motility, and virulence. identified virulence factors included catalase , exoglucanase a , drug efflux pump, and twitching motility porin . other proteins identified included two components of a putative type vi secretion system. we confirmed differential expression of  <dig> candidate genes using real time pcr techniques. global regulators hrpb and hrpg also had temperature dependent expression when quantified by real time pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
the putative involvement of the identified proteins in virulence at low temperature is discussed. the discovery of a functional type vi secretion system provides a new potential virulence mechanism to explore. the global regulators hrpg and hrpb, and the protein expression profiles identified suggest that virulence at low temperatures can be partially explained by differences in regulation of virulence factors present in all the strains.

bacterial wilttemperaturevirulent strains at low temperaturetype vi secretion systemstress response

