BACKGROUND
the presence of lymphoma in buffaloes was first reported in india in the 1960s. the disease is similar to enzootic bovine leucosis  caused by bovine leukemia virus  in cattle; however, according to our results and those of other studies, the etiology of these lymphomas in buffalo do not appear to be associated with blv. the objectives of this study are to describe four cases of the disease in buffaloes belonging to the same herd in the amazon region of brazil and to perform a clinical-anatomopathological, immunohistochemical, and etiological study of the lymphomas.


RESULTS
over a period of ten years, four buffaloes were observed presenting progressive weight loss, swelling of peripheral lymph nodes, and nodules in the subcutaneous tissue. upon necropsy, whitish-colored tumor masses were observed in the form of nodules in the subcutaneous tissue, along with miliary nodules on the serosal surfaces of abdominal and thoracic organs and tumors in lymph nodes and other organs. neoplastic lymphocyte proliferation was observed through histopathology. an immunohistochemical study revealed that the neoplasias were formed by proliferation of predominantly b lymphocytes. the presence of blv genome was not detected in the lymphomas when using the real-time pcr technique, nor was it detected through immunohistochemical staining using monoclonal antibodies against two viral proteins. bovine herpesvirus  <dig> was not detected in the tumors. however, bovine immunodeficiency virus  was detected in samples of lymphoma and in the lymph nodes and kidneys of one of the animals.


CONCLUSIONS
the occurrence of lymphoma in buffaloes is reported for the first time in brazil and is characterized by b-cell multicentric lymphoma. the etiology of the disease does not appear to be associated with blv; however, the detection of biv in samples of lymphoma from one sick animal deserves further study, considering the oncogenic potential of this virus.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lymphomabuffalobivblvbohv-6brazilissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

