BACKGROUND
a genome-wide set of single nucleotide polymorphisms  is a valuable resource in genetic research and breeding and is usually developed by re-sequencing a genome. if a genome sequence is not available, an alternative strategy must be used. we previously reported the development of a pipeline  for genome-wide snp discovery in coding sequences and other single-copy dna without a complete genome sequence in self-pollinating  plants. here we updated this pipeline for snp discovery in outcrossing  species and demonstrated its efficacy in snp discovery in walnut .


RESULTS
the first step in the original implementation of the agsnp pipeline was the construction of a reference sequence and the identification of single-copy sequences in it. to identify single-copy sequences, multiple genome equivalents of short solid reads of another individual were mapped to shallow genome coverage of long sanger or roche  <dig> reads making up the reference sequence. the relative depth of solid reads was used to filter out repeated sequences from single-copy sequences in the reference sequence. the second step was a search for snps between solid reads and the reference sequence. polymorphism within the mapped solid reads would have precluded snp discovery; hence both individuals had to be homozygous. the agsnp pipeline was updated here for using solid or other type of short reads of a heterozygous individual for these two principal steps. a total of  <dig> x walnut genome equivalents of solid reads of vegetatively propagated walnut scion cultivar ‘chandler’ were mapped to  <dig>  ‘chandler’ bacterial artificial chromosome  end sequences  produced by sanger sequencing during the construction of a walnut physical map. a total of  <dig>  putative snps were initially identified. a total of  <dig>  infinium ii type snps evenly distributed along the walnut physical map were selected for the construction of an infinium beadchip, which was used to genotype a walnut mapping population having ‘chandler’ as one of the parents. genotyping results were used to adjust the filtering parameters of the updated agsnp pipeline. with the adjusted filtering criteria,  <dig> % of snps discovered with the updated pipeline were real and could be mapped on the walnut genetic map. a total of  <dig>  snps were discovered by bes re-sequencing. bess harboring snps were in  <dig> fpc contigs covering 98% of the physical map of the walnut genome.


CONCLUSIONS
the updated agsnp pipeline is a versatile snp discovery tool for a high-throughput, genome-wide snp discovery in both autogamous and allogamous species. with this pipeline, a large set of snps were identified in a single walnut cultivar.

bacphysical mapbac end sequenceinfiniumsingle nucleotide polymorphismgenome sequencesolidwalnutagsnp

