BACKGROUND
group b streptococcus  capsular polysaccharide is one of the major virulence factors underlying invasive gbs disease and a component of forthcoming vaccines. serotype classification of gbs is based on the capsule polysaccharide of which ten variants are known to exist . current methods for gbs serotype assignment rely on latex agglutination or pcr while more recently a whole genome sequencing method was reported. in this study, three distinct algorithms for serotype assignment from genomic data were assessed using a panel of  <dig> clinical isolates.

methods
the first approach utilised the entire capsular locus coupled with a mapping methodology. the second approach continues from the first and utilised a snp-based methodology across the conserved cpsd-g region to differentiate serotypes ia-vii and ix. finally the third approach used the variable cpsg –k region coupled with a mapping methodology. all three approaches were assessed for typeability  and concordance to the latex agglutination methodology.


RESULTS
following comparisons, the third approach using the variable cpsg-k region demonstrated the best performance with  <dig> % typeability and  <dig> % concordance. overall, of the  <dig> discordant isolates,  <dig> were resolved following retesting of latex agglutination and whole genome sequencing,  <dig> failed to assign a serotype using latex agglutination and only  <dig> were found to be truly discordant on re-testing. comparison of this final approach with the previously described assembly-based approach returned identical results.


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrated that molecular capsular typing using whole genome sequencing and a mapping-based approach is a viable alternative to the traditional, latex agglutination-based serotyping method and can be implemented in a public health microbiology setting.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
group b streptococciserotypingwhole genome sequencingstreptococcus agalactiaeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

