BACKGROUND
parkinson’s disease  is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disorder that is clinically defined in terms of motor symptoms. these are preceded by prodromal non-motor manifestations that prove the systemic nature of the disease. identifying genes and pathways altered in living patients provide new information on the diagnosis and pathogenesis of sporadic pd.

methods
changes in gene expression in the blood of  <dig> sporadic pd patients and  <dig> healthy controls  were analyzed by taking advantage of the affymetrix platform. patients were at the onset of motor symptoms and before initiating any pharmacological treatment. data analysis was performed by applying ranking-principal component analysis, puma and significance analysis of microarrays. functional annotations were assigned using go, david, gsea to unveil significant enriched biological processes in the differentially expressed genes. the expressions of selected genes were validated using rt-qpcr and samples from an independent cohort of  <dig> patients and controls .


RESULTS
gene expression profiling of blood samples discriminates pd patients from healthy controls and identifies differentially expressed genes in blood. the majority of these are also present in dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra, the key site of neurodegeneration. together with neuronal apoptosis, lymphocyte activation and mitochondrial dysfunction, already found in previous analysis of pd blood and post-mortem brains, we unveiled transcriptome changes enriched in biological terms related to epigenetic modifications including chromatin remodeling and methylation. candidate transcripts as cbx <dig>  tcf <dig>  man1c <dig> and dock <dig> were validated by rt-qpcr. 


CONCLUSIONS
our data support the use of blood transcriptomics to study neurodegenerative diseases. it identifies changes in crucial components of chromatin remodeling and methylation machineries as early events in sporadic pd suggesting epigenetics as target for therapeutic intervention.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
blood transcriptomicsparkinson’s diseasede novodrug-naïve patientsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

