BACKGROUND
chemical cross-linking is used for protein-protein contacts mapping and for structural analysis. one of the difficulties in cross-linking studies is the analysis of mass-spectrometry data and the assignment of the site of cross-link incorporation. the difficulties are due to higher charges of fragment ions, and to the overall low-abundance of cross-link species in the background of linear peptides. cross-linkers non-specific at one end, such as photo-inducible diazirines, may complicate the analysis further. in this report, we design and validate a novel cross-linked peptide mapping algorithm  and compare it to stavrox, which is currently one of the best algorithms in this class.


RESULTS
we have designed a novel cross-link search algorithm -xlpm - and implemented it both as an online tool and as a downloadable archive of scripts. we designed a filter based on an observation that observation of a b-ion implies observation of a complimentary y-ion with high probability . we validated the b-y filter on the set of linear peptides from nist library, and demonstrate that it is an effective way to find high-quality mass spectra. next, we generated cross-linked data from an ssdna binding protein, rim1with a specific cross-linker disuccinimidyl suberate, and a semi-specific cross-linker nhs-diazirine, followed by analysis of the cross-linked products by nanolc-ltq-orbitrap mass spectrometry. the cross-linked data were searched by xlpm and stavrox and the performance of the two algorithms was compared. the cross-links were mapped to the x-ray structure of rim <dig> tetramer. analysis of the mixture of nhs-diazirine cross-linked 15n and 14n-labeled rim <dig> tetramers yielded 15n-labeled to 14n-labeled cross-linked peptide pairs, corresponding to c-terminus-to-n-terminus cross-linking, demonstrating interaction between different two rim <dig> tetramers. both xlpm and stavrox were successful in identification of this interaction, with xlpm leading to a better annotation of higher-charged fragments. we also put forward a new method of estimating specificity and sensitivity of identification of a cross-linked residue in the case of a non-specific cross-linker.


CONCLUSIONS
the novel cross-link mapping algorithm, xlpm, considerably improves the speed and accuracy of the analysis compared to other methods. the quality selection filter based on b-to-y ions ratio proved to be an effective way to select high quality cross-linked spectra.

chemical cross-linking mass spectrometryprotein-protein interactionspeptide fragmentationcomputational proteomics6- <dig> march  <dig> 11th annual mcbios conference stillwater, ok, usa

