BACKGROUND
mirnas are small noncoding rna molecules that play an important role in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. length and/or sequence variants of the same mirna are termed isomirs. while most isomirs are functionally redundant compared to their canonical counterparts, the so-called 5’isomirs exhibit a shifted 5’ end and therefore a shifted seed sequence resulting in a different target spectrum. however, not much is known about the functional relevance of these isoforms.


RESULTS
analysis of mirna-seq data from breast cancer cell lines identified six pairs of highly expressed mirnas and associated 5’isomirs. among them, hsa-mir-140-3p was of particular interest because its 5’isomir showed higher expression compared to the canonical mirna annotated in mirbase. this mirna has previously been shown to control stemness of breast cancer cells. mirnaseq data of breast cancer patients  showed that both the canonical hsa-mir-140-3p and its 5’isomir-140-3p were highly expressed in patients’ tumors compared to normal breast tissue. in the current work, we present the functional characterization of 5’isomir-140-3p and the cellular phenotypes associated with its overexpression in mcf10a, mda-mb- <dig> and mda-mb- <dig> cell lines in comparison to the canonical hsa-mir-140-3p. contrary to the effect of the canonical hsa-mir-140-3p, overexpression of the 5’isomir-140-3p led to a decrease in cell viability. the latter observation was supported by cell cycle analysis, where the 5’isomir-140-3p but not the hsa-mir-140-3p caused cell cycle arrest in g0/g1-phase. additionally, 5’ismoir-140-3p overexpression was found to cause a decrease in cell migration in the three cell lines. we identified three novel direct target genes of the 5’isomir-140-3p; col4a <dig>  itga <dig> and marcksl <dig>  finally, we have shown that knocking down these genes partially phenocopied the effects of the 5’isomir-140-4p overexpression, where col4a <dig> and itga <dig> knockdown led to reduced cell viability and cell cycle arrest, while marcksl <dig> knockdown resulted in a decrease in the migratory potential of cells.


CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this work presents evidence that there is functional synergy between the canonical hsa-mir-140-3p and the newly identified 5’isomir-140-3p in suppressing growth and progression of breast cancer by simultaneously targeting genes related to differentiation, proliferation, and migration.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
breast cancerisomirsmirnaseed sequenceproliferationmigrationmir-140http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008316baden-württemberg stiftungbwst_ncrna_035issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

