BACKGROUND
protein-protein interactions are at the basis of many cellular processes, and they are also involved in the interaction between pathogens and their host. many intracellular pathogenic bacteria translocate proteins called effectors into the cytoplasm of the infected host cell, and these effectors can interact with one or several host protein. an effector named rica was recently reported in brucella abortus to specifically interact with human rab <dig> and to affect intracellular trafficking of this pathogen.


RESULTS
in order to identify regions of the rica protein involved in the interaction with rab <dig>  rica was subjected to extensive random mutagenesis using error prone polymerase chain reaction. the resulting allele library was selected by the yeast two-hybrid assay for rab2-interacting clones that were isolated and sequenced, following the “absence of interference” approach. a tridimensional model of rica structure was used to position the substitutions that did not affect rica-rab <dig> interaction, giving a “negative image” of the putative interaction region. since rica is a bacterial conserved protein, rica homologs were also tested against rab <dig> in a yeast two-hybrid assay, and the c. crescentus homolog of rica was found to interact with human rab <dig>  analysis of the rica structural model suggested that regions involved in the folding of the “beta helix” or an exposed loop with the igfp sequence could also be involved in the interaction with rab <dig>  extensive mutagenesis of the igfp loop suggested that loss of interaction with rab <dig> was correlated with insolubility of the mutated rica, showing that “absence of interference” approach also generates surfaces that could be necessary for folding.


CONCLUSIONS
extensive analysis of substitutions in rica unveiled two structural elements on the surface of rica, the most exposed β-sheet and the igfp loop, which could be involved in the interaction with rab <dig> and protein folding. our analysis of mutants in the igfp loop suggests that, at least for some mono-domain proteins such as rica, protein interaction analysis using allele libraries could be complicated by the dual effect of many substitutions affecting both folding and protein-protein interaction.

protein-protein interactionyeast two-hybridmutagenesisbrucella

