BACKGROUND
the emergence of next-generation sequencing  technologies in the past decade has allowed the democratization of dna sequencing both in terms of price per sequenced bases and ease to produce dna libraries. when it comes to preparing dna sequencing libraries for illumina, the current market leader, a plethora of kits are available and it can be difficult for the users to determine which kit is the most appropriate and efficient for their applications; the main concerns being not only cost but also minimal bias, yield and time efficiency.


RESULTS
we compared  <dig> commercially available library preparation kits in a systematic manner using the same dna sample by probing the amount of dna remaining after each protocol steps using a new droplet digital pcr  assay. this method allows the precise quantification of fragments bearing either adaptors or p5/p <dig> sequences on both ends just after ligation or pcr enrichment. we also investigated the potential influence of dna input and dna fragment size on the final library preparation efficiency. the overall library preparations efficiencies of the libraries show important variations between the different kits with the ones combining several steps into a single one exhibiting some final yields  <dig> to  <dig> times higher than the other kits. detailed ddpcr data also reveal that the adaptor ligation yield itself varies by more than a factor of  <dig> between kits, certain ligation efficiencies being so low that it could impair the original library complexity and impoverish the sequencing results. when a pcr enrichment step is necessary, lower adaptor-ligated dna inputs leads to greater amplification yields, hiding the latent disparity between kits.


CONCLUSIONS
we describe a ddpcr assay that allows us to probe the efficiency of the most critical step in the library preparation, ligation, and to draw conclusion on which kits is more likely to preserve the sample heterogeneity and reduce the need of amplification.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dna library preparationnext generation sequencingngsillumina sequencingdroplet digital pcrhttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100004440wellcome trust098051issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

