BACKGROUND
weevils of the genus otiorhynchus are regarded as devastating pests in a wide variety of horticultural crops worldwide. so far, little is known on the presence of endosymbionts in otiorhynchus spp.. investigation of endosymbiosis in this genus may help to understand the evolution of different reproductive strategies in these weevils , host-symbiont interactions, and may provide a future basis for novel pest management strategy development. here, we used a multitag  <dig> pyrosequencing approach to assess the bacterial endosymbiont diversity in larvae of four economically important otiorhynchus species.


RESULTS
high-throughput tag-encoded flx amplicon pyrosequencing of a bacterial 16s rdna fragment was used to characterise bacterial communities associated with different otiorhynchus spp. larvae. by sequencing a total of ~ <dig>  pcr amplicons, we identified  <dig> different operational taxonomic units  as bacterial endosymbionts in the four studied otiorhynchus species. more than 90% of all sequence reads belonged either to the genus rickettsia or showed homology to the phylogenetic group of “candidatus blochmannia” and to endosymbionts of the lice pedicinus obtusus and p. badii. by using specific primers for the genera rickettsia and “candidatus blochmannia”, we identified a new phylogenetic clade of rickettsia as well as “candidatus nardonella” endosymbionts in otiorhynchus spp. which are closely related to “candidatus blochmannia” bacteria.


CONCLUSIONS
here, we used multitag  <dig> pyrosequencing for assessment of insect endosymbiotic communities in weevils. as  <dig> pyrosequencing generates only quite short sequences, results of such studies can be regarded as a first step towards identifying respective endosymbiotic species in insects. in the second step of our study, we analysed sequences of specific gene regions for a more detailed phylogeny of selected endosymbiont genera. as a result we identified the presence of rickettsia and “candidatus nardonella” endosymbionts in otiorhynchus spp.. this knowledge is an important step in exploring bacteria-insect associations for potential use in insect pest control.

