BACKGROUND
the xanthomonas citri pv. citri  is a phytopathogenic bacterium that infects different species of citrus plants where it causes canker disease. the adaptation to different habitats is related to the ability of the cells to metabolize and to assimilate diverse compounds, including sulfur, an essential element for all organisms. in escherichia coli, the necessary sulfur can be obtained by a set of proteins whose genes belong to the cys regulon. although the cys regulon proteins and their importance have been described in many other bacteria, there are no data related to these proteins in x. citri or in the xanthomonas genus. the study of the relevance of these systems in these phytopathogenic bacteria that have distinct mechanisms of infection is one essential step toward understanding their physiology. in this work, we used bioinformatics, molecular modeling and transcription analysis  to identify and characterize the putative cys regulon genes in x. citri.


RESULTS
we showed that the atp binding cassette transporter  sbpcysuwa for sulfate uptake is conserved in x. citri and translated in presence of sulfate. on the other hand, differently from what is predicted in databases, according molecular modeling and phylogenetic analysis, x. citri does not show a proper taurine transporter, but two different abc systems related to the alkanesulfonate/sulfonate transport that were recently acquired during evolution. rt-pcr analysis evidenced that these genes and their putative transcriptional regulator cysb are rather transcripted in xam <dig>  a medium with defined concentration of sulfate, than lb.


CONCLUSIONS
the presence of at least three distinct systems for sulfate and sulfonates  assimilation in x. citri evidenced the importance of these compounds for the bacterium. the transcription of genes involved with alkanesulfonate/sulfur compounds in xam <dig> along to cysb suggests that despite the differences in the transporters, the regulation of these systems might be similar to the described for e. coli. altogether, these results will serve as a foundation for further studies aimed to understanding the relevance of sulfur in growth, virulence and pathogenesis of x. citri and related bacteria.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cys regulonxanthomonas citrisulfatealkanesulfonate transportabc transporterissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

