BACKGROUND
genetic manipulation of brassinosteroid  biosynthesis or signaling is a promising strategy to improve crop yield and quality. however, the relationships between the br-promoted growth and photosynthesis and the exact mechanism of br-regulated photosynthetic capacity are not clear. here, we generated transgenic tomato plants by overexpressing dwarf, a br biosynthetic gene that encodes the cyp85a <dig>  and compared the photosynthetic capacity with the br biosynthetic mutant dim and wild type.


RESULTS
overexpression of dwarf promoted net photosynthetic rate , whereas br deficiency in dim led to a significant inhibition in pn as compared with wt. the activation status of rubisco, and the protein content and activity of rubisco activase, but not the total content and transcripts of rubisco were closely related to the endogenous br levels in different genotypes. however, endogenous br positively regulated the expression and activity of fructose- <dig> -bisphosphatase. dwarf overexpression enhanced the activity of dehydroascorbate reductase and glutathione reductase, leading to a reduced redox status, whereas br deficiency had the contrasting effects. in addition, br induced a reduction of 2-cystein peroxiredoxin without altering the protein content.


CONCLUSIONS
br plays a role in the regulation of photosynthesis. br can increase the photosynthetic capacity by inducing a reduced redox status that maintains the activation states of calvin cycle enzymes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
brassinosteroids2-cystein peroxiredoxinsdwarfglutathionephotosynthesisrubiscostate key program of national natural science foundation of china31430076yu jing-quan http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china312721553100090531000905yu jing-quan xia xiao-jian special fund for agro-scientific research in the public interest201203004zhou yan-hong foundation for the author of national excellent doctoral dissertation of pr china201263xia xiao-jian issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

