BACKGROUND
crocodilians  are an ancient vertebrate group of tremendous ecological, social, and evolutionary importance. they are the only extant reptilian members of archosauria, a monophyletic group that also includes birds, dinosaurs, and pterosaurs. consequently, crocodilian genomes represent a gateway through which the molecular evolution of avian lineages can be explored. to facilitate comparative genomics within crocodylia and between crocodilians and other archosaurs, we have constructed a bacterial artificial chromosome  library for the australian saltwater crocodile, crocodylus porosus. this is the first bac library for a crocodile and only the second bac resource for a crocodilian.


RESULTS
the c. porosus bac library consists of  <dig>  individually archived clones stored in 384-well microtiter plates. noti digestion of random clones indicates an average insert size of  <dig> kb. based on a genome size estimate of  <dig> mb, the library affords  <dig>  fold  coverage of the c. porosus genome. to investigate the utility of the library in studying sequence distribution, probes derived from cr1a and cr1b, two crocodilian cr1-like retrotransposon subfamilies, were hybridized to c. porosus macroarrays. the results indicate that there are a minimum of  <dig>  cr1a/b elements in c. porosus and that their distribution throughout the genome is decidedly non-random. to demonstrate the utility of the library in gene isolation, we probed the c. porosus macroarrays with an overgo designed from a c-mos  partial cdna. a bac containing c-mos was identified and the c-mos locus was sequenced. nucleotide and amino acid sequence alignment of the c. porosus c-mos coding sequence with avian and reptilian c-mos orthologs reveals greater sequence similarity between c. porosus and birds  than between c. porosus and squamates .


CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated the utility of the crocodylus porosus bac library as a tool in genomics research. the bac library should expedite complete genome sequencing of c. porosus and facilitate detailed analysis of genome evolution within crocodylia and between crocodilians and diverse amniote lineages including birds, mammals, and other non-avian reptiles.

19– <dig> may  <dig> avian genomics conference and go annotation workshop starkville, ms, usa

