BACKGROUND
the flower colour of agricultural products is very important for their commercial value, which is mainly attributed to the accumulation of anthocyanins. light is one of the key environmental factors that affect the anthocyanin biosynthesis. however, the deep molecular mechanism remains elusive, and many problems regarding the phenotypic change and the corresponding gene regulation are still unclear. in the present study, chrysanthemum × morifolium ‘purple reagan’, a light-responding pigmentation cultivar, was selected to investigate the mechanism of light-induced anthocyanin biosynthesis using transcriptomic analyses.


RESULTS
only cyanidin derivatives were identified based on the analyses of the pigmentation in ray florets. shading experiments revealed that the capitulum was the key organ and that its bud stage was the key phase responding to light. these results were used to design five libraries for transcriptomic analyses, including three capitulum developmental stages and two light conditions. rna sequences were de novo assembled into  <dig>  unigenes, of which  <dig>  were annotated against four public protein databases. as many as  <dig>  unigenes were differentially expressed between the light and dark libraries with  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig>  down-regulated unigenes in response to shading. next, interactive pathway analysis showed that the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway was the only complete metabolic pathway both modulated in response to light and related to capitulum development. following the shading treatment, nearly all structural genes involved in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway were down-regulated. moreover, three cmmyb genes and one cmbhlh gene were identified as key transcription factors that might participate in the regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis under light conditions based on clustering analysis and validation by rt-qpcr. finally, a light-induced anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway in chrysanthemums was inferred.


CONCLUSIONS
the pigmentation of the ray florets of chrysanthemum cultivar ‘purple reagan’ is dependent on light. during the light-induced pigmentation process, the expression of seven structural genes in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway  are the main contributors to the pigmentation of chrysanthemums. this information will further our understanding of the molecular mechanisms governing light-induced anthocyanin biosynthesis in ornamental plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
anthocyaninbioinformaticscapitulum developmentchrysanthemum × morifoliumflower colourlight inductiontranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

