BACKGROUND
alfalfa  is a widely adapted perennial forage crop that has high biomass production potential. enhanced cellulose content in alfalfa stems would increase the value of the crop as a bioenergy feedstock. we examined if increased expression of sucrose synthase  would increase cellulose in stem cell walls.


RESULTS
alfalfa plants were transformed with a truncated alfalfa phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase gene promoter  fused to an alfalfa nodule-enhanced sus cdna  or the β-glucuronidase  gene. strong gus expression was detected in xylem and phloem indicating that the pepc7-p <dig> promoter was active in stem vascular tissue. in contrast to expectations, mssus <dig> transcript accumulation was reduced 75–90 % in alfalfa plants containing the pepc7-p4::mssus <dig> transgene compared to controls. enzyme assays indicated that sus activity in stems of selected down-regulated transformants was reduced by greater than 95 % compared to the controls. although sus activity was detected in xylem and phloem of control plants by in situ enzyme assays, plants with the pepc7-p4::mssus <dig> transgene lacked detectable sus activity in post-elongation stem  internodes and had very low sus activity in elongating stem  internodes. loss of sus protein in pes internodes of down-regulated lines was confirmed by immunoblots. down-regulation of sus expression and activity in stem tissue resulted in no obvious phenotype or significant change in cell wall sugar composition. however, alkaline/neutral  invertase activity increased in sus down-regulated lines and high levels of acid invertase activity were observed. in situ enzyme assays of stem tissue showed localization of neutral invertase in vascular tissues of es and pes internodes.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that invertases play a primary role in providing glucose for cellulose biosynthesis or compensate for the loss of sus <dig> activity in stem vascular tissue.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
biofuelscell wall biosynthesiscellulosegene silencingphloemxylemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

