BACKGROUND
growth regulating factors  have been shown to play important roles in plant growth and development. grf genes represent a large multigene family in plants. recently, genome-wide structural and evolutionary analyses of the grf gene families in arabidopsis, rice, and maize have been reported. chinese cabbage  is one of the most important vegetables for agricultural production, and a full genome assembly for this plant has recently been released. however, to our knowledge, the grf gene family from chinese cabbage has not been characterized in detail.


RESULTS
in this study, genome-wide analysis was carried out to identify all the grf genes in chinese cabbage. based on the complete chinese cabbage genome sequence,  <dig> nonredundant grf genes, named brgrfs, were identified and classified into six groups. phylogenetic analysis of the translated grf protein sequences from chinese cabbage, arabidopsis, and rice indicated that the chinese cabbage grf proteins were more closely related to the grf proteins of arabidopsis than to those of rice. expression profile analysis showed that the brgrf genes had uneven transcript levels in different organs or tissues, and the transcription of most brgrf genes was induced by gibberellic acid  treatment. additionally, over-expression of brgrf <dig> in transgenic arabidopsis plants increased the sizes of the leaves and other organs by regulation of cell proliferation.


CONCLUSIONS
the data obtained from this investigation will contribute to a better understanding of the characteristics of the grf gene family in chinese cabbage, and provide a basis for further studies to investigate grf protein function during development as well as for chinese cabbage-breeding programs to improve yield and/or head size.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chinese cabbageexpressiongene familygrftransgenic linesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

