BACKGROUND
the reconstruction of protein complexes from the physical interactome of organisms serves as a building block towards understanding the higher level organization of the cell. over the past few years, several independent high-throughput experiments have helped to catalogue enormous amount of physical protein interaction data from organisms such as yeast. however, these individual datasets show lack of correlation with each other and also contain substantial number of false positives . over these years, several affinity scoring schemes have also been devised to improve the qualities of these datasets. therefore, the challenge now is to detect meaningful as well as novel complexes from protein interaction  networks derived by combining datasets from multiple sources and by making use of these affinity scoring schemes. in the attempt towards tackling this challenge, the markov clustering algorithm  has proved to be a popular and reasonably successful method, mainly due to its scalability, robustness, and ability to work on scored  networks. however, mcl produces many noisy clusters, which either do not match known complexes or have additional proteins that reduce the accuracies of correctly predicted complexes.


RESULTS
inspired by recent experimental observations by gavin and colleagues on the modularity structure in yeast complexes and the distinctive properties of "core" and "attachment" proteins, we develop a core-attachment based refinement method coupled to mcl for reconstruction of yeast complexes from scored  ppi networks. we combine physical interactions from two recent "pull-down" experiments to generate an unscored ppi network. we then score this network using available affinity scoring schemes to generate multiple scored ppi networks. the evaluation of our method  on these networks shows that:  mcl-caw derives larger number of yeast complexes and with better accuracies than mcl, particularly in the presence of natural noise;  affinity scoring can effectively reduce the impact of noise on mcl-caw and thereby improve the quality  of its predicted complexes;  mcl-caw responds well to most available scoring schemes. we discuss several instances where mcl-caw was successful in deriving meaningful complexes, and where it missed a few proteins or whole complexes due to affinity scoring of the networks. we compare mcl-caw with several recent complex detection algorithms on unscored and scored networks, and assess the relative performance of the algorithms on these networks. further, we study the impact of augmenting physical datasets with computationally inferred interactions for complex detection. finally, we analyse the essentiality of proteins within predicted complexes to understand a possible correlation between protein essentiality and their ability to form complexes.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that core-attachment based refinement in mcl-caw improves the predictions of mcl on yeast ppi networks. we show that affinity scoring improves the performance of mcl-caw.

