BACKGROUND
adaptive decision making requires the adjustment of behaviour following an error. some theories suggest that repetitive thoughts and behaviours in obsessive compulsive disorder  are driven by malfunctioning error monitoring. this malfunction may relate to demonstrated hyperactivity in the medial prefrontal cortex , including the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. in this study, we measured aspects of error monitoring in individuals with ocd and administered deep low frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation  in an attempt to modulate error monitoring capacity.

methods
for this pilot study, ten ocd patients and  <dig> aged-matched healthy controls completed modified versions of the eriksen flanker task before and after one session of deep 1 hz rtms  over the mpfc . ocd patients received nine additional sessions of daily rtms to assess their clinical response. flanker tasks were repeated with patients post-treatment.


RESULTS
overall error rates were higher for patients compared to controls. when subjects were asked to report their errors, ocd patients were able to report fewer of their errors than the control group. in contrast to controls, patients did not demonstrate a normal post-error slowing  phenomenon. this abnormal pes was mainly driven by abnormally slow response times  following correct responses rather than a failure to slow down after errors. patients’ symptoms and slowed rts following correct responses improved after ten sessions of rtms.


CONCLUSIONS
certain aspects of error monitoring, namely conscious error report and post error slowing, are impaired in ocd. these impairments can at least be partly corrected by 1 hz deep rtms over the mpfc. simultaneous improvement of ocd symptoms by this method might suggest a correlation between error monitoring impairment and ocd pathophysiology.

trial registration: clinicaltrials.gov nct02541812; 09/02/2015

keywords
obsessive compulsive disordererror monitoringtranscranial magnetic stimulationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

