BACKGROUND
soil salinity affects growth and yield of crop plants. plants respond to salinity by physiological and biochemical adjustments through a coordinated regulation and expression of a cascade of genes. recently, halophytes have attracted attention of the biologists to understand their salt adaptation mechanisms. spartina alterniflora  is a louisiana native monocot halophyte that can withstand salinity up to double the strength of sea water. to dissect the molecular mechanisms underlying its salinity adaptation, leaf and root transcriptome of s. alterniflora was sequenced using 454/gs-flx.


RESULTS
altogether,  <dig>  high quality reads with an average length 324-bp were assembled de novo into  <dig>  contigs  with  <dig> x sequence coverage. most unigenes  annotated to proteins with known functions, and had more than 90 % similarity to rice genes. about 28 % unigenes were considered specific to s. alterniflora. digital expression profiles revealed significant enrichment  of transporters, vacuolar proton pump members and transcription factors under salt stress, which suggested the role of ion homeostasis and transcriptional regulation in the salinity adaptation of this grass. also,  <dig>  ssrs markers from  <dig> unigenes were generated and validated through genetic diversity analysis among  <dig> accessions of s. alterniflora.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study explores the transcriptome of s. alterniflora to understand the gene regulation under salt stress in halophytes. the sequenced transcriptome  of s. alterniflora provides a platform for further gene finding studies in grasses. this study and our previously published studies suggested that s. alterniflora is a rich reservoir of salt tolerance genes that can be used to develop salt tolerant cereal crops, especially rice, a major food crop of global importance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gene expressiongs-flxsalinityspartina alternifloratranscriptomehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100005825national institute of food and agriculturelsu agcenter baitissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

