BACKGROUND
adaptive responses in fungi result from the interaction of membrane receptors and extracellular ligands. many different classes of receptors have been described in eukaryotic cells. recently a new family of receptors classified as belonging to the progesterone-adiponectin receptor  family has been identified. these receptors have the seven transmembrane domains characteristic of g-protein coupled receptors, but their activity has not been associated directly to g proteins. they share sequence similarity to the eubacterial hemolysin iii proteins.


RESULTS
a new receptor, sspaqr <dig> , was identified as interacting with sporothrix schenckii g protein alpha subunit ssg- <dig> in a yeast two-hybrid assay. the receptor was identified as a member of the paqr family. the cdna sequence revealed a predicted orf of  <dig> bp encoding a  <dig> amino acids protein with a calculated molecular weight of  <dig>  kda. protein domain analysis of sspaqr <dig> showed the  <dig> transmembrane domains  characteristic of g protein coupled receptors and the presence of the distinctive motifs that characterize paqrs. a yeast-based assay specific for paqrs identified progesterone as the agonist. s. schenckii yeast cells exposed to progesterone  showed an increase in intracellular levels of 3′, 5′ cyclic adenosine monophosphate  within the first min of incubation with the hormone. different progesterone concentrations were tested for their effect on the growth of the fungus. cultures incubated at 35°c did not grow at concentrations of progesterone of  <dig>  mm or higher. cultures incubated at 25°c grew at all concentrations tested  with growth decreasing gradually with the increase in progesterone concentration.


CONCLUSIONS
this work describes a receptor associated with a g protein alpha subunit in s. schenckii belonging to the paqr family. progesterone was identified as the ligand. exposure to progesterone increased the levels of camp in fungal yeast cells within the first min of incubation suggesting the connection of this receptor to the camp signalling pathway. progesterone inhibited the growth of both the yeast and mycelium forms of the fungus, with the yeast form being the most affected by the hormone.

