BACKGROUND
depiction of the genetic diversity, linkage disequilibrium  and population structure is essential for the efficient organization and exploitation of genetic resources. the objectives of this study were to  to evaluate the genetic diversity and to detect the patterns of ld,  to estimate the levels of population structure and  to identify a ‘core collection’ suitable for association genetic studies in sweet cherry.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> genotypes including modern cultivars and landraces from  <dig> countries were genotyped using the rosbreed cherry 6 k snp array v <dig>  two groups, mainly bred cultivars and landraces, respectively, were first detected using structure software and confirmed by principal coordinate analysis . further analyses identified nine subgroups using structure and discriminant analysis of principal components . several sub-groups correspond to different eco-geographic regions of landraces distribution. linkage disequilibrium was evaluated showing lower values than in peach, the reference prunus species. a ‘core collection’ containing  <dig> accessions was selected using the maximum length sub tree method.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study constitutes the first population genetics analysis in cultivated sweet cherry using a medium-density snp  marker array. we provided estimations of linkage disequilibrium, genetic structure and the definition of a first inra’s sweet cherry core collection useful for breeding programs, germplasm management and association genetics studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
association geneticscore collectiondiscriminant analysisgenetic diversitygermplasm managementlinkage disequilibriumpopulation structureprunus aviumhttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006488institut national de la recherche agronomiquefrench ministry for agriculture and food maap n° c-2011-05quero-garcía josé aquitaine region and cep innovation aquipru project 2014-1r20102-2971campoy josé antonio inra and aquitaine region aquipru project 2014-1r20102-2971beauvieux rémi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

