BACKGROUND
n-butanol has favorable characteristics for use as either an alternative fuel or platform chemical. bio-based n-butanol production using microbes is an emerging technology that requires further development. although bio-industrial microbes such as escherichia coli have been engineered to produce n-butanol, reactive oxygen species -mediated toxicity may limit productivity. previously, we show that outer-membrane-targeted tilapia metallothionein  is more effective as an ros scavenger than human and mouse metallothioneins to reduce oxidative stress in the host cell.


RESULTS
the host strain  containing the clostridial n-butanol pathway displayed a decreased growth rate and limited n-butanol productivity, likely due to ros accumulation. the clostridial n-butanol pathway was co-engineered with inducible ompc-tmt in e. coli  for simultaneous ros removal, and its effect on n-butanol productivity was examined. the ros scavenging ability of cells overexpressing ompc-tmt was examined and showed an approximately twofold increase in capacity. the modified strain improved n-butanol productivity to 320 mg/l, whereas the control strain produced only  <dig>  mg/l. transcriptomic analysis revealed three major kegg pathways that were significantly differentially expressed in the but3-de strain compared with their expression in the but1-de strain, including genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation, fructose and mannose metabolism and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis.


CONCLUSIONS
these results indicate that ompc-tmt can increase n-butanol production by scavenging ros. the transcriptomic analysis suggested that n-butanol causes quinone malfunction, resulting in oxidative-phosphorylation-related nuo operon downregulation, which would diminish the ability to convert nadh to nad+ and generate proton motive force. however, fructose and mannose metabolism-related genes  were upregulated, and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis-related genes  were downregulated, which further assisted in regulating nadh/nad+ redox and preventing additional atp depletion. these results indicated that more nadh and atp were required in the n-butanol synthetic pathway. our study demonstrates a potential approach to increase the robustness of microorganisms and the production of toxic chemicals through the ability to reduce oxidative stress.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tilapia metallothioneinompcn-butanole. colioxidative stresstranscriptomic analysishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001868national science councilmost 104-2621-m-005-003-my3huang chieh-chen issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

