BACKGROUND
it is increasingly appreciated that electrical controls acting at the cellular and supra-cellular levels influence development and initiate rapid responses to environmental cues. an emerging method for non-invasive optical imaging of electrical activity at cell membranes uses genetically-encoded voltage indicators . developed by neuroscientists to chart neuronal circuits in animals, gevis comprise a fluorescent protein that is fused to a voltage-sensing domain. one well-known gevi, arclight, undergoes strong shifts in fluorescence intensity in response to voltage changes in mammalian cells. arclight consists of super-ecliptic  phluorin  with an a227d substitution, which confers voltage sensitivity in neurons, fused to the voltage-sensing domain of the voltage-sensing phosphatase of cionaintestinalis . in an ongoing effort to adapt tools of optical electrophysiology for plants, we describe here the expression and testing of arclight and various derivatives in different membranes of root cells in arabidopsis thaliana.


RESULTS
transgenic constructs were designed to express arclight and various derivatives targeted to the plasma membrane and nuclear membranes of arabidopsis root cells. in transgenic seedlings, changes in fluorescence intensity of these reporter proteins following extracellular atp  application were monitored using a fluorescence microscope equipped with a high speed camera. coordinate reductions in fluorescence intensity of arclight and ci-vsd-containing derivatives were observed at both the plasma membrane and nuclear membranes following eatp treatments. however, similar responses were observed for derivatives lacking the ci-vsd. the dispensability of the ci-vsd suggests that in plants, where h+ ions contribute substantially to electrical activities, the voltage-sensing ability of arclight is subordinate to the ph sensitivity of its sephluorin base. the transient reduction of arclight fluorescence triggered by eatp most likely reflects changes in ph and not membrane voltage.


CONCLUSIONS
the ph sensitivity of arclight precludes its use as a direct sensor of membrane voltage in plants. nevertheless, arclight and derivatives situated in the plasma membrane and nuclear membranes may offer robust, fluorescence intensity-based ph indicators for monitoring concurrent changes in ph at these discrete membrane systems. such tools will assist analyses of ph as a signal and/or messenger at the cell surface and the nuclear periphery in living plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
arclightelectrical signallinggenetically-encoded voltage indicatorph-sensitive indicatorsuper ecliptic phluorinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

