BACKGROUND
production and wild animals are major sources of human salmonellosis and animals raised for food also play an important role in transmission of antimicrobial resistant salmonella strains to humans. furthermore, in sub-saharan africa non-typhoidal salmonella serotypes are common bloodstream isolates in febrile patients. yet, little is known about the environmental reservoirs and predominant modes of transmission of these pathogens. the purpose of this study was to discover potential sources and distribution vehicles of salmonella by isolating strains from apparently healthy slaughtered food animals and wild hedgehogs and by determining the genetic relatedness between the strains and human isolates. for this purpose,  <dig> feces samples from apparently healthy slaughtered cattle , poultry , swine  and hedgehogs  were examined for the presence of salmonella enterica in burkina faso. the isolates were characterized by serotyping, antimicrobial-susceptibility testing, phage typing, and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis  with xbai and blni restriction enzymes.


RESULTS
of the  <dig> feces samples,  <dig>  contained salmonella, representing a total of  <dig> different serotypes. salmonella was present in 52% of the cattle, 55% of the poultry, 16% of the swine and 96% of the hedgehog feces samples. antimicrobial resistance was detected in 14% of the isolates. s. typhimurium isolates from poultry and humans  were multiresistant to the same antimicrobials , had the same phage type dt  <dig> and were closely related in pfge. s. muenster isolates from hedgehogs had similar pfge patterns as the domestic animals.


CONCLUSIONS
based on our results it seems that production and wild animals can share the same salmonella serotypes and potentially transmit some of them to humans. as the humans and animals often live in close vicinity in africa and the hygiene control of the meat retail chain is defective, high salmonella carriage rates of the animals can pose a major public health risk in burkina faso. this underlines the necessity for a joint and coordinated surveillance and monitoring programs for salmonellosis in africa.

salmonellaserotypesantimicrobial resistancegenetic relatednesspfge

