BACKGROUND
partial pollen and embryo sac sterilities are the two main reasons for low fertility in autotetraploid rice. our previous study revealed that small rnas changes may associate with pollen fertility in autotetraploid rice. however, knowledge on comparative analysis between the development of pollen and embryo sac by small rnas in autotetraploid rice is still unknown. in the present study, we-clsm  and high-throughput sequencing technology was employed to examine the cytological variations and to analyze small rnas changes during pollen and embryo sac development in autotetraploid rice compared with its diploid counterpart.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed mirnas  were detected during pollen and embryo sac development in autotetraploid rice, respectively. gene ontology enrichment analysis on the targets of dem associated with embryo sac and pollen development revealed  <dig> prominent functional gene classes, such as cell differentiation and signal transduction during embryo sac development, while only  <dig> prominent functional gene classes, such as flower development and transcription factor activity, were detected during pollen development in autotetraploid rice. the expression levels of  <dig> dem, which revealed interaction with meiosis-related genes, showed opposite expression patterns during pollen and embryo sac development. of these dem, osa-mir1436_l + 3_1ss5ct and osa-mir167h-3p were associated with the female meiosis, while osa-mir159a. <dig> and osa-mir159a-p <dig> were related with the male meiosis. 21 nt-phasirnas were detected during both pollen and embryo sac development, while 24 nt-phasirnas were found only in pollen development, which displayed down-regulation in autotetraploid compared to diploid rice and their spatial-temporal expression patterns were similar to osa-mir2275d. 24 nt tes-sirnas were found to be up-regulated in embryo sac but down-regulated in pollen development.


CONCLUSIONS
the above results not only provide the small rnas changes during four landmark stages of pollen and embryo sac development in autotetraploid rice but also have identified specifically expressed mirnas, especially meiosis-related mirnas, pollen-specific-24 nt-phasirnas and tes-sirnas in autotetraploid rice. together, these findings provide a foundation for understanding the effect of polyploidy on small rnas expression patterns during pollen and embryo sac development that may lead to different abnormalities in autotetraploid rice.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
female gametophytemale gametophytemicrornaspolyploidphasirnastes-sirnashttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31571625guangzhou science and technology program key projects 201606201026123guangdong science and technology program2014a030304055issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

