BACKGROUND
campylobacter jejuni is commonly found in the gastrointestinal tract of many food-animals including sheep without causing visible clinical symptoms of disease. however, c. jejuni has been implicated in ovine abortion cases worldwide. specifically, in the usa, the c. jejuni sheep abortion  clone has been increasingly associated with sheep abortion. in vivo studies in sheep  are needed to better characterize the virulence potential and pathogenesis of this clone.


RESULTS
pregnant ewes intravenously  or orally inoculated with ovine or bovine abortion-associated c. jejuni sa clones exhibited partial or complete uterine prolapse with retained placenta, and abortion or stillbirth, whereas delivery of healthy lambs occurred in pregnant ewes inoculated with c. jejuni 81– <dig> or in the uninfected group. in sheep inoculated with the sa clone, histopathological lesions including suppurative necrotizing placentitis and/or endometritis coincided with: 1) increased apoptotic death of trophoblasts, 2) increased expression of the host genes  related to cellular necrosis and pro-inflammatory responses in uterus, and 3) decreased expression of the genes encoding gata binding protein  <dig>  chordin, and insulin-like  <dig>  that account for embryonic development in uterus. immunohistochemistry revealed localization of bacterial antigens in trophoblasts lining the chorioallantoic membrane of ewes inoculated with the c. jejuni sa clone.


CONCLUSIONS
the results showed that c. jejuni sa clones are capable of causing abortion or stillbirth in experimentally infected sheep. furthermore, down- or up-regulation of specific genes in the uterus of infected pregnant ewes might implicate host genes in facilitating the disease progression. since the c. jejuni sa strains share genotypic similarities with clones that have been isolated from human clinical cases of gastroenteritis, these strains might represent a potential public health risk.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
campylobacter jejunisheep abortionpathogenesispublic healthpregnant ewesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

