BACKGROUND
microarrays have revolutionized breast cancer  research by enabling studies of gene expression on a transcriptome-wide scale. recently, rna-sequencing  has emerged as an alternative for precise readouts of the transcriptome. to date, no study has compared the ability of the two technologies to quantify clinically relevant individual genes and microarray-derived gene expression signatures  in a set of bc samples encompassing the known molecular bc’s subtypes. to accomplish this, the rna from  <dig> bcs representing the four main molecular subtypes , was profiled with affymetrix hg-u <dig> plus  <dig>  chips and sequenced using the illumina hiseq  <dig> platform. the correlations of three clinically relevant bc genes, six molecular subtype classifiers, and a selection of  <dig> ges were evaluated.


RESULTS
 <dig>  genes common to the two platforms were retained for downstream analysis. gene-wise comparison of microarray and rna-seq data revealed that 52% had a spearman’s correlation coefficient greater than  <dig>  with highly correlated genes displaying significantly higher expression levels. we found excellent correlation between microarray and rna-seq for the estrogen receptor , progesterone receptor , and human epidermal growth factor receptor  <dig> , while a few discordances between er and pgr quantified by immunohistochemistry and rna-seq/microarray were observed. all the subtype classifiers evaluated agreed well  and all the proliferation-based ges showed excellent spearman correlations between microarray and rna-seq . immune-, stroma- and pathway-based ges showed a lower correlation relative to prognostic signatures .


CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, this is the first study to report a systematic comparison of rna-seq to microarray for the evaluation of single genes and ges clinically relevant to bc. according to our results, the vast majority of single gene biomarkers and well-established ges can be reliably evaluated using the rna-seq technology.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
breast cancergene expression signaturesaffymetrixmicroarrayilluminarna-seqimmunohistochemistryestrogen receptorprogesterone receptorher <dig> receptorissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

