BACKGROUND
neuroprotective strategies for prevention of the neuropathological sequelae of traumatic brain injury  have largely failed in translation to clinical treatment. thus, there is a substantial need for further understanding the molecular mechanisms and pathways which lead to secondary neuronal cell death in the injured brain. the intracerebral activation of the complement cascade was shown to mediate inflammation and tissue destruction after tbi. however, the exact pathways of complement activation involved in the induction of posttraumatic neurodegeneration have not yet been assessed. in the present study, we investigated the role of the alternative complement activation pathway in contributing to neuronal cell death, based on a standardized tbi model in mice with targeted deletion of the factor b gene , a "key" component required for activation of the alternative complement pathway.


RESULTS
after experimental tbi in wild-type  mice, there was a massive time-dependent systemic complement activation, as determined by enhanced c5a serum levels for up to  <dig> days. in contrast, the extent of systemic complement activation was significantly attenuated in fb-/- mice . tunel histochemistry experiments revealed that posttraumatic neuronal cell death was clearly reduced for up to  <dig> days in the injured brain hemispheres of fb-/- mice, compared to fb+/+ littermates. furthermore, a strong upregulation of the anti-apoptotic mediator bcl- <dig> and downregulation of the pro-apoptotic fas receptor was detected in brain homogenates of head-injured fb-/- vs. fb+/+ mice by western blot analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
the alternative pathway of complement activation appears to play a more crucial role in the pathophysiology of tbi than previously appreciated. this notion is based on the findings of  the significant attenuation of overall complement activation in head-injured fb-/- mice, as determined by a reduction of serum c5a concentrations to constitutive levels in normal mice, and  by a dramatic reduction of tunel-positive neurons in conjunction with an upregulation of bcl- <dig> and downregulation of the fas receptor in head-injured fb-/- mice, compared to fb+/+ littermates. pharmacological targeting of the alternative complement pathway during the "time-window of opportunity" after tbi may represent a promising new strategy to be pursued in future studies.

