BACKGROUND
the hemichordata comprises solitary-living enteropneusta and colonial-living pterobranchia, sharing morphological features with both chordata and echinodermata. despite their key role for understanding deuterostome evolution, hemichordate phylogeny is controversial and only few molecular data are available for phylogenetic analysis. furthermore, mitochondrial sequences are completely lacking for pterobranchs. therefore, we determined and analyzed the complete mitochondrial genome of the pterobranch rhabdopleura compacta to elucidate deuterostome evolution. thereby, we also gained important insights in mitochondrial trna evolution.


RESULTS
the mitochondrial dna of rhabdopleura compacta corresponds in size and gene content to typical mitochondrial genomes of metazoans, but shows the strongest known strand-specific mutational bias in the nucleotide composition among deuterostomes with a very gt-rich main-coding strand. the order of the protein-coding genes in r. compacta is similar to that of the deuterostome ground pattern. however, the protein-coding genes have been highly affected by a strand-specific mutational pressure showing unusual codon frequency and amino acid composition. this composition caused extremely long branches in phylogenetic analyses. the unusual codon frequency points to a selection pressure on the trna translation system to codon-anticodon sequences of highest versatility instead of showing adaptations in anticodon sequences to the most frequent codons. furthermore, an assignment of the codon agg to lysine has been detected in the mitochondrial genome of r. compacta, which is otherwise observed only in the mitogenomes of some arthropods. the genomes of these arthropods do not have such a strong strand-specific bias as found in r. compacta but possess an identical mutation in the anticodon sequence of the trnalys.


CONCLUSIONS
a strong reversed asymmetrical mutational constraint in the mitochondrial genome of rhabdopleura compacta may have arisen by an inversion of the replication direction and adaptation to this bias in the protein sequences leading to an enigmatic mitochondrial genome. although, phylogenetic analyses of protein coding sequences are hampered, features of the trna system of r. compacta support the monophyly of ambulacraria. the identical reassignment of agg to lysine in two distinct groups may have occurred by convergent evolution in the anticodon sequence of the trnalys.

hemichordatapterobranchiadeuterostome evolutioncodon reassignmentcodon-anticodon adaptation

