BACKGROUND
although metatranscriptomics—the study of diverse microbial population activity based on rna-seq data—is rapidly growing in popularity, there are limited options for biologists to analyze this type of data. current approaches for processing metatranscriptomes rely on restricted databases and a dedicated computing cluster, or metagenome-based approaches that have not been fully evaluated for processing metatranscriptomic datasets. we created a new bioinformatics pipeline, designed specifically for metatranscriptome dataset analysis, which runs in conjunction with metagenome-rast  servers. designed for use by researchers with relatively little bioinformatics experience, samsa offers a breakdown of metatranscriptome transcription activity levels by organism or transcript function, and is fully open source. we used this new tool to evaluate best practices for sequencing stool metatranscriptomes.


RESULTS
working with the mg-rast annotation server, we constructed the simple annotation of metatranscriptomes by sequence analysis  software package, a complete pipeline for the analysis of gut microbiome data. samsa can summarize and evaluate raw annotation results, identifying abundant species and significant functional differences between metatranscriptomes.

using pilot data and simulated subsets, we determined experimental requirements for fecal gut metatranscriptomes. sequences need to be either long reads  or joined paired-end reads. each sample needs 40– <dig> million raw sequences, which can be expected to yield the 5– <dig> million annotated reads necessary for accurate abundance measures. we also demonstrated that ribosomal rna depletion does not equally deplete ribosomes from all species within a sample, and remaining rrna sequences should be discarded. using publicly available metatranscriptome data in which rrna was not depleted, we were able to demonstrate that overall organism transcriptional activity can be measured using mrna counts. we were also able to detect significant differences between control and experimental groups in both organism transcriptional activity and specific cellular functions.


CONCLUSIONS
by making this new pipeline publicly available, we have created a powerful new tool for metatranscriptomics research, offering a new method for greater insight into the activity of diverse microbial communities. we further recommend that stool metatranscriptomes be ribodepleted and sequenced in a 100 bp paired end format with a minimum of  <dig> million reads per sample.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
metatranscriptomepipelinemicrobiomemetagenomerna-seqbig datasoftware packagebest practiceshttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of health1s10od010786-01http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healtht32-gm008799peter j. shields endowed chair in dairy food scienceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

