BACKGROUND
tomato yellow leaf curl virus  is a member of the family geminiviridae, genus begomovirus. the virus is a widespread plant virus that causes important economic losses in tomatoes. genetic engineering strategies have increasingly been adopted to improve the resistance of tomatoes to tylcv.


RESULTS
in this study, a proteomic approach was used to investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in tomato leaf defense against tylcv infection. proteins extracted from leaves of resistant tomato cultivar ‘zheza-301’ and susceptible cultivar ‘jinpeng-1’ after tylcv infection were analyzed using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. eighty-six differentially expressed proteins were identified and classified into seven groups based on their functions. for several of the proteins, including cdc <dig>  chi and hsc <dig>  expression patterns measured using quantitative real-time pcr differed from the results of the proteomic analysis. a putative interaction network between tomato leaves and tylcv infection provides us with important information about the cellular activities that are involved in the response to tylcv infection.


CONCLUSIONS
we conducted a comparative proteomic study of tylcv infection in resistant and susceptible tomato cultivars. the proteins identified in our work show a variety of functions and expression patterns in the process of tomato–tylcv interaction, and these results contribute to our understanding of the mechanism underlying tylcv resistance in tomatoes at the protein level.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tylcvproteomic approach2-deexpression patterntomatohttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004608natural science foundation of jiangsu provincebk20130027xiong ai-sheng priority academic program development of jiangsu higher education institutions projectpapdxiong ai-sheng http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004602program for new century excellent talents in universityncet-11-0670xiong ai-sheng issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

