BACKGROUND
thoroughbred racehorses are subject to non-traumatic distal limb bone fractures that occur during racing and exercise. susceptibility to fracture may be due to underlying disturbances in bone metabolism which have a genetic cause. fracture risk has been shown to be heritable in several species but this study is the first genetic analysis of fracture risk in the horse.


RESULTS
fracture cases  were horses that sustained catastrophic distal limb fractures while racing on uk racecourses, necessitating euthanasia. control horses  were over 4 years of age, were racing during the same time period as the cases, and had no history of fracture at the time the study was carried out. the horses sampled were bred for both flat and national hunt  jump racing.  <dig>  snps were employed to perform a genome-wide association analysis and to estimate the proportion of genetic variance attributable to the snps on each chromosome using restricted maximum likelihood . significant genetic variation associated with fracture risk was found on chromosomes  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  three snps on chromosome  <dig>  and one snp on chromosome  <dig>  reached genome-wide significance  in a genome-wide association study . two of the snps on eca  <dig> were located in a haplotype block containing the gene zinc finger protein 804a . one haplotype within this block has a protective effect , while a second haplotype increases fracture risk .


CONCLUSIONS
fracture risk in the thoroughbred horse is a complex condition with an underlying genetic basis. multiple genomic regions contribute to susceptibility to fracture risk. this suggests there is the potential to develop snp-based estimators for genetic risk of fracture in the thoroughbred racehorse, using methods pioneered in livestock genetics such as genomic selection. this information would be useful to racehorse breeders and owners, enabling them to reduce the risk of injury in their horses.

fracture riskhorsegenome-wide associationgenetic variation

