BACKGROUND
starch and protein are two major components of polished rice, and the amylose and protein contents affect eating and cooking qualities . in the present study, genome-wide association study with high-quality re-sequencing data was performed for  <dig> ecqs in a panel of  <dig> non-glutinous rice accessions and four derived panels.


RESULTS
population structure accounted for high phenotypic variation in three routine panels and had minor effects on subspecies-based panels. using the mixed linear model method based on the p + k model, we detected  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> loci that were significant for ecq parameters in each of the five panels. some of these loci were close to starch synthesis-related genes. two quantitative trait loci   for several starch paste viscosity properties detected in four panels were close to the isoamylase  <dig> gene, one qtl  for consistency detected in three panels was close to the starch synthase iv- <dig> gene. the qtl  for breakdown , detected in the whole panel and japonica panel, and one qtl  for bd and setback , detected in the whole panel and indica panel, may be specific gene alleles in japonica or indica panels. one previously detected qtl  for protein content and one new qtl  for many ecq traits detected in more than two panels, may represent valuable targets for future cloning of the underlying genes.


CONCLUSIONS
this study detected minor-effect qtls affecting ecqs, and may increase our understanding of the genetic differences regulating the formation of ecq between indica and japonica varieties.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
riceeating and cooking qualitysubpopulationsgwascooperative research program for agriculture science and technology developmentpj01116101park yong-jin bio-industry technology development program, ministry of agriculture, food and rural affairs115078-2park yong-jin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

