BACKGROUND
despite recent sequencing efforts, local genetic resources remain underexploited, even though they carry alleles that can bring agronomic benefits. taking advantage of the recent genotyping with  <dig>  single-nucleotide polymorphism markers of a core collection of  <dig> vietnamese rice varieties originating from provinces from north to south vietnam and from different agrosystems characterized by contrasted water regimes, we have performed a genome-wide association study for different root parameters. roots contribute to water stress avoidance and are a still underexploited target for breeding purpose due to the difficulty to observe them.


RESULTS
the panel of  <dig> rice varieties was phenotyped under greenhouse conditions for several root traits in an experimental design with  <dig> replicates. the phenotyping system consisted of long plastic bags that were filled with sand and supplemented with fertilizer. root length, root mass in different layers, root thickness, and the number of crown roots, as well as several derived root parameters and shoot traits, were recorded. the results were submitted to association mapping using a mixed model involving structure and kinship to enable the identification of significant associations. the analyses were conducted successively on the whole panel and on its indica  and japonica  subcomponents. the two associations with the highest significance were for root thickness on chromosome  <dig> and for crown root number on chromosome  <dig>  no common associations were detected between the indica and japonica subpanels, probably because of the polymorphism repartition between the subspecies. based on orthology with arabidopsis, the possible candidate genes underlying the quantitative trait loci are reviewed.


CONCLUSIONS
some of the major quantitative trait loci we detected through this genome-wide association study contain promising candidate genes encoding regulatory elements of known key regulators of root formation and development.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ricegenotyping by sequencingroot developmentassociation mappingstructuregrispnot relevantphung nhung thi phuong biotechnology program of the ministry of agriculture and rural development of vietnamunknownmai chung duc issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

