BACKGROUND
the photosynthetic oxygen-evolving photo system ii  produces almost the entire oxygen in the atmosphere. this unique biochemical system comprises a functional core complex that is encoded by psba  and other genes. unraveling the evolutionary dynamics of this gene is of particular interest owing to its direct role in oxygen production. psba  underwent gene duplication in leptosporangiates, in which both copies have been preserved since. because gene duplication is often followed by the non-fictionalization of one of the copies and its subsequent erosion, preservation of both psba  copies pinpoint functional or regulatory specialization events. the aim of this study was to investigate the molecular evolution of psba  among fern lineages.


RESULTS
we sequenced psba , which encodes d <dig> protein in the core complex of psii, in  <dig> species representing  <dig> orders of extant ferns; then we searched for selection and convolution signatures in psba  across the  <dig> fern orders. collectively, our results indicate that:  selective constraints among d <dig> protein relaxed after the duplication in  <dig> leptosporangiate orders;  a handful positively selected codons were detected within species of single copy psba, but none in duplicated ones;  a few sites among d <dig> protein were involved in co-evolution process which may intimate significant functional/structural communications between them.


CONCLUSIONS
the strong competition between ferns and angiosperms for light may have been the main cause for a continuous fixation of adaptive amino acid changes in psba , in particular after its duplication. alternatively, a single psba  copy may have undergone bursts of adaptive changes at the molecular level to overcome angiosperms competition. the strong signature of positive darwinian selection in a major part of d <dig> protein is testament to this. at the same time, species own two psba  copies hardly have positive selection signals among the d <dig> protein coding sequences. in this study, eleven co-evolving sites have been detected via different molecules, which may be more important than others.

