BACKGROUND
clostridium botulinum is a taxonomic designation for at least four diverse species that are defined by the expression of one  or two  of seven different c. botulinum neurotoxins . the four species have been classified as c. botulinum groups i-iv. the presence of bont genes in strains representing the different groups is probably the result of horizontal transfer of the toxin operons between the species.


RESULTS
chromosome and plasmid sequences of several c. botulinum strains representing a, b, e and f serotypes and a c. butyricum type e strain were compared to examine their genomic organization, or synteny, and the location of the botulinum toxin complex genes. these comparisons identified synteny among proteolytic  strains or nonproteolytic  strains but not between the two groups. the bont complex genes within the strains examined were not randomly located but found within three regions of the chromosome or in two specific sites within plasmids. a comparison of sequences from a bf strain revealed homology to the plasmid pclj with similar locations for the bont/bv b genes but with the bont/a <dig> gene replaced by the bont/f gene. an analysis of the toxin cluster genes showed that many recombination events have occurred, including several events within the ntnh gene. one such recombination event resulted in the integration of the bont/a <dig> gene into the serotype toxin b ha cluster, resulting in a successful lineage commonly associated with food borne botulism outbreaks. in c. botulinum type e and c. butyricum type e strains the location of the bont/e gene cluster appears to be the result of insertion events that split a rara, recombination-associated gene, independently at the same location in both species.


CONCLUSIONS
the analysis of the genomic sequences representing different strains reveals the presence of insertion sequence  elements and other transposon-associated proteins such as recombinases that could facilitate the horizontal transfer of the bonts; these events, in addition to recombination among the toxin complex genes, have led to the lineages observed today within the neurotoxin-producing clostridia.

