BACKGROUND
in recent years, many studies focused on the description and comparison of large sets of related bacteriophage genomes. due to the peculiar mosaic structure of these genomes, few informative approaches for comparing whole genomes exist: dot plots diagrams give a mostly qualitative assessment of the similarity/dissimilarity between two or more genomes, and clustering techniques are used to classify genomes. multiple alignments are conspicuously absent from this scene. indeed, whole genome aligners interpret lack of similarity between sequences as an indication of rearrangements, insertions, or losses. this behavior makes them ill-prepared to align bacteriophage genomes, where even closely related strains can accomplish the same biological function with highly dissimilar sequences.


RESULTS
in this paper, we propose a multiple alignment strategy that exploits functional collinearity shared by related strains of bacteriophages, and uses partial orders to capture mosaicism of sets of genomes. as classical alignments do, the computed alignments can be used to predict that genes have the same biological function, even in the absence of detectable similarity. the alpha aligner implements these ideas in visual interactive displays, and is used to compute several examples of alignments of staphylococcus aureus and mycobacterium bacteriophages, involving up to  <dig> genomes. using these datasets, we prove that alpha alignments are at least as good as those computed by standard aligners. comparison with the progressivemauve aligner – which implements a partial order strategy, but whose alignments are linearized – shows a greatly improved interactive graphic display, while avoiding misalignments.


CONCLUSIONS
multiple alignments of whole bacteriophage genomes work, and will become an important conceptual and visual tool in comparative genomics of sets of related strains.

a python implementation of alpha, along with installation instructions for ubuntu and osx, is available on bitbucket .

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacteriophageswhole genome alignmentscomparative genomicspartial ordershttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002790canadian network for research and innovation in machining technology, natural sciences and engineering research council of canada05729-2014bergeron anne http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000781european research councileu h2020-phc-32- <dig> #634650swenson krister m. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001665agence nationale de la rechercheanr-10-labx-20bérard sèverine issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

