BACKGROUND
processes of anterograde and retrograde membrane trafficking play an important role in cellular homeostasis and dynamic rearrangements of the plasma membrane  in all eukaryotes. these processes depend on the activity of adenosine ribosylation factors , a family of gtp-binding proteins and their guanine exchange factors . however, knowledge on the function and specificity of individual arf-gefs for individual steps of membrane trafficking pathways is still limited in plants.


RESULTS
in this work, treatments with various trafficking inhibitors showed that the endocytosis of fm 4– <dig> is largely dynamin-dependent and relies on proteins containing endocytic tyrosine-based internalization motif and intact cytoskeleton. interestingly, brefeldin a , reported previously as an inhibitor of anterograde membrane trafficking in plants, appeared to be the most potent inhibitor of endocytosis in tobacco. in concert with this finding, we demonstrate that the point mutation in the sec <dig> domain of the gnom-like protein1a  confers intracellular trafficking pathway-specific bfa resistance. the internalization of fm 4– <dig> and trafficking of pin-formed <dig>  auxin efflux carrier in by- <dig> tobacco cells were studied to reveal the function of the arf-gef ntgnl1a in these.


CONCLUSIONS
altogether, our observations uncovered the role of ntgnl1a in endocytosis, including endocytosis of pm proteins . moreover these data emphasize the need of careful evaluation of mode of action of non-native inhibitors in various species. in addition, they demonstrate the potential of tobacco by- <dig> cells for selective mapping of arf-gef-regulated endomembrane trafficking pathways.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
endocytosispin <dig> protein traffickinginhibitors of endomembrane traffickingbrefeldin aadenosine ribosylation factor -guanine exchange factor by- <dig> tobacco cellsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

