BACKGROUND
micrornas are key regulators of plant growth and development with important roles in environmental adaptation. the micrornas from the halophyte species thellungiella salsuginea , which exhibits extreme salt stress tolerance, remain to be investigated. the sequenced genome of t. salsuginea and the availability of high-throughput sequencing technology enabled us to discover the conserved and novel mirnas in this plant species. it is interesting to identify the micrornas from t. salsuginea genome wide and study their roles in salt stress response.


RESULTS
in this study, two t. salsuginea small rna libraries were constructed and sequenced using solexa technology. we identified  <dig> mirnas that had previously been reported in other plant species. a total of  <dig> novel mirna candidates were identified, among which the mir* sequence of  <dig> mirnas was detected. in addition,  <dig> and  <dig> target mrnas were predicted for the previously identified and thellungiella-specific mirnas, respectively. a quarter of these putative targets encode transcription factors. furthermore, numerous signaling factor encoding genes, defense-related genes, and transporter encoding genes were amongst the identified targets, some of which were shown to be important for salt tolerance. cleavage sites of seven target genes were validated by 5’ race, and some of the mirnas were confirmed by qrt-pcr analysis. the expression levels of  <dig> known mirnas in the roots and leaves of plants subjected to nacl treatment were determined by affymetrix microarray analysis. the expression of most tested mirna families was up- or down-regulated upon nacl treatment. differential response patterns between the leaves and roots were observed for these mirnas.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicated that diverse set of mirnas of t. salsuginea were responsive to salt stress and could play an important role in the salt stress response.

thellungiella salsugineasalt stressmirna identificationsolexa sequencingexpression analysis

