BACKGROUND
female reproductive potential plays a significant role in the survival and stability of species, and sexual maturation and mating processes are crucial. however, our knowledge of the reproductive genes involved in sexual maturation and mating has been largely limited to model organisms. the oriental fruit fly bactrocera dorsalis is a highly invasive agricultural pest, known to cause major economic losses; thus, it is of great value to understand the transcriptional changes involved in sexual maturation and mating processes as well as the related genes. here, we used a high-throughput sequencing method to identify multiple genes potentially involved in sexual maturation and mating in female b. dorsalis.


RESULTS
we sequenced  <dig>  unique genes with an average length of 883 bp. in total,  <dig> differentially expressed genes  were detected between mature virgin and immature bactrocera dorsalis libraries, whereas only  <dig> degs were identified between flies that had mated or were mature virgins. these degs were functionally annotated using the go and kegg pathway annotation tools. results showed that the main go terms associated with the degs from the mature virgin vs. immature groups were primarily assigned to the metabolic and developmental processes, which we focused on, whereas those from the mated vs. mature virgin group largely belonged to the response to stimulus and immune system processes. additionally, we identified multiple degs during sexual maturation that are involved in reproduction, and expression pattern analysis revealed that the majority degs detected were highly enriched in those linked to the ovaries or fat bodies. several mating responsive genes differentially expressed after mating were also identified, and all antimicrobial peptides detected were highly enriched in fat body and significantly up-regulated approximately 2- to 10-fold at 24 h after mating.


CONCLUSIONS
this study supplied female reproductive genes involved in sexual maturation and the post-mating response in b. dorsalis, based on rna-seq. our data will facilitate molecular research related to reproduction and provide abundant target genes for effective control of this agricultural pest.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rnaseqtranscriptometephritidmaturitypost-matingreproductiongene expressionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of chinaid0esnai8701zheng weiwei http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of chinaid0e1tai8702zheng weiwei the fundamental research funds for the central universitiesid0ec1ai8703zheng weiwei china agriculture research systemid0eiabi8704zhang hongyu issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

