BACKGROUND
yam  is an important tuber crop and purple pigmented elite cultivar has recently become popular because of associated health benefits. identifying candidate genes responsible for flavonoid biosynthesis pathway  will facilitate understanding the molecular mechanism of controlling pigment formation in yam tubers. here, we used illumina sequencing to characterize the transcriptome of tubers from elite purple-flesh cultivar  and conventional white-flesh cultivar  of yam. in this process, we also designed high quality molecular markers to assist molecular breeding for tuber trait improvement.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  unigenes were identified from the dp and dw cdna libraries, of which about  <dig> %  were annotated by blastx analysis using the publicly available protein database. these unigenes were further annotated functionally and subject to biochemical pathway analysis.  <dig> genes were identified to be more than 2-fold  differentially expressed between the two yam cultivars, of which  <dig> genes were up-regulated and  <dig> genes were down-regulated in the dp tubers. transcriptome analysis detected  <dig> unigenes encoding multiple well-known enzymes in the fbp. furthermore, the unigenes encoding chalcone isomerase , flavanone 3-hydroxylase , flavonoid 3′-monooxygenase , dihydroflavonol 4-reductase , leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase , and flavonol 3-o-glucosyltransferase  were found to be significantly up-regulated in the dp, implying that these genes were potentially associated with tuber color formation in this elite cultivar. the expression of these genes was further confirmed by qrt-pcr. finally,  <dig>  ssrs were successfully identified with these unigenes and  <dig>  ssr markers were developed using primer  <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the first comprehensive transcriptomic dataset for yam tubers, which will significantly contribute to genomic research of this and other related species. some key genes associated with purple-flesh trait were successfully identified, thus providing valuable information about molecular process of regulating pigment accumulation in elite yam tubers. in the future, this information might be directly used to genetically manipulate the conventional white-fleshed tuber cultivars to enable them to produce purple flesh. in addition, our ssr marker sets will facilitate identification of qtls for various tuber traits in yam breeding programs.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomeflavonoid biosynthesisdioscorea alata ltuber colordifferentially expressed genesmicrosatellite markersissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

