BACKGROUND
recently, genomic sequencing efforts were finished for oryza sativa  and arabidopsis thaliana . additionally, these two plant species have extensive cdna and expressed sequence tag  libraries. we employed the program to assemble spliced alignments  to identify and analyze alternatively spliced isoforms in both species.


RESULTS
a comprehensive analysis of alternative splicing was performed in rice that started with > <dig>  million publicly available spliced ests and over  <dig>  full length cdnas in conjunction with the newly enhanced pasa software. a parallel analysis was performed with arabidopsis to compare and ascertain potential differences between monocots and dicots. alternative splicing is a widespread phenomenon  and we have described nine alternative splicing variations. while alternative splicing has the potential to create many rna isoforms from a single locus, the majority of loci generate only two or three isoforms and transcript support indicates that these isoforms are generally not rare events. for the alternate donor  and acceptor  classes, the distance between the splice sites for the majority of events was found to be less than  <dig> basepairs . in both species, the most frequent distance between aa is  <dig> bp, consistent with reports in mammalian systems. conversely, the most frequent distance between ad is  <dig> bp in both plant species, as previously observed in mouse. most alternative splicing variations are localized to the protein coding sequence and are predicted to significantly alter the coding sequence.


CONCLUSIONS
alternative splicing is widespread in both rice and arabidopsis and these species share many common features. interestingly, alternative splicing may play a role beyond creating novel combinations of transcripts that expand the proteome. many isoforms will presumably have negative consequences for protein structure and function, suggesting that their biological role involves post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression.

