BACKGROUND
there are three basic brassica genomes  and three parallel sets of subgenomes distinguished in the diploid brassica  and the derived allotetraploid species . to understand subgenome differentiation in b. juncea in comparison to other a genome-carrying brassica species , we constructed a dense genetic linkage map of b. juncea, and conducted population genetic analysis on diverse lines of the three a-genome carrying brassica species using a genotyping-by-sequencing approach .


RESULTS
a dense genetic linkage map of b. juncea was constructed using an f <dig> population derived from sichuan yellow/purple mustard. the map included  <dig> dart-seq markers on  <dig> linkage groups and covered 1579 cm with an average density of two markers per cm. based on this map and the alignment of the marker sequences with the physical genome of arabidopsis thaliana, we observed strong co-linearity of the ancestral blocks among the different a subgenomes but also considerable block variation. comparative analyses at the level of genome sequences of b. rapa and b. napus, and marker sequence anchored on the genetic map of b. juncea, revealed a total of  <dig> potential inversion events across large segments and  <dig> potential translocation events among the three a subgenomes. population genetic analysis on  <dig> accessions of the three a genome-carrying brassica species showed that the highest genetic distance were estimated when comparing aj-an than between an-ar and aj-ar subgenome pairs.


CONCLUSIONS
the development of the dense genetic linkage map of b. juncea with informative dart-seq marker sequences and availability of the reference sequences of the ar, and ancn genomes allowed us to compare the a subgenome structure of b. juncea  . our results suggest that strong co-linearity exists among the three a brassica genomes  but with apparent subgenomic variation. population genetic analysis on three a-genome carrying brassica species support the idea that b. juncea has distinct genomic diversity, and/or evolved from a different a genome progenitor of b. napus.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
brassica junceadense genetic mapsubgenomegenome organizationco-linearitydivergencethe national basic research program of china2015cb150200zou jun http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31271762liu zhongsong the open research fund by national key laboratory of crop genetic improvement of huazhong agricultural universityzk201212zou jun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

