BACKGROUND
stoat  and weasel  populations in south-west england are declining whilst polecats , absent for over a century, are increasing. little is known about the health status of these species nationally. this study aimed at investigating respiratory disease in specimens found dead in south-west england.


RESULTS
trauma caused by road traffic, predator attack or being trapped was the predominant cause of death in  <dig> stoats,  <dig> weasels and  <dig> polecats; most were in good physical condition. skrjabingylus nasicola was present in all species  and infected animals showed no evidence of loss of body condition. even in carcases stored frozen l <dig> larvae were frequently alive and highly motile. angiostrongylus vasorum infection was diagnosed in two stoats and one weasel: in stoats infections were patent and the lung lesions were likely of clinical significance. these are believed to be the first records of a. vasorum in small mustelids. pleuritis and pyothorax was seen in two polecats, in one case due to a migrating grass awn. histological examination of lungs showed granulomata in stoats , weasels  and polecats . spherules consistent with emmonsia spp. adiaspores were present in the granulomata of stoats , weasels  and polecats . adiaspore diameter in all three species was similar ; these are markedly smaller than that normally recorded for e. crescens. although they lie within the accepted range for spores of emmonsia parva this arid-zone species is not found in britain, thus raising a question over the identity of the fungus. cases showing numerous granulomata but few or no adiaspores were ziehl-neelsen-stain negative for acid-fast bacilli and ihc negative for mycobacterium spp. however, in some cases pcr analyses revealed mycobacteria, including mycobacterium kumamotonense and mycobacterium avium complex. one stoat had numerous unidentified small organisms present centrally within granulomata.


CONCLUSIONS
stoats, weasels and polecats in south-west england share several respiratory diseases, often of high prevalence, but the pathology would appear insufficient to impact on the health status of the populations and other ultimate causes of death should be investigated when examining these species.

keywords
mustelidrespiratory diseaseangiostrongylusskrjabingyluspyothoraxgranulomaadiasporeemmonsiamycobacteriumissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

