BACKGROUND
a number of researchers have speculated that neurological disorders are mostly due to the interaction of common susceptibility genes with environmental, epigenetic and stochastic factors. genetic factors such as mutations, insertions, deletions and copy number variations  are responsible for only a small subset of cases, suggesting unknown environmental contaminants play a role in triggering neurological disorders like idiopathic autism. psychoactive pharmaceuticals have been considered as potential environmental contaminants as they are detected in the drinking water at very low concentrations. preliminary studies in our laboratory identified gene sets associated with neuronal systems and human neurological disorders that were significantly enriched after treating fish brains with psychoactive pharmaceuticals at environmental concentrations. these gene expression inductions were associated with changes in fish behavior. here, we tested the hypothesis that similar treatments would alter in vitro gene expression associated with neurological disorders  in human neuronal cells. we differentiated and treated human sk-n-sh neuroblastoma cells with a mixture  and valproate , followed by transcriptome analysis with rna-seq approach.


RESULTS
we found that psychoactive pharmaceuticals and valproate significantly altered neuronal gene sets associated with human neurological disorders . moreover, we observed that altered expression profiles in human cells were similar to gene expression profiles previously identified in fish brains.


CONCLUSIONS
psychoactive pharmaceuticals at environmental concentrations altered in vitro gene expression profiles of neuronal growth, development and regulation. these expression patterns were associated with potential neurological disorders including autism, suggested psychoactive pharmaceuticals at environmental concentrations might mimic, aggravate, or induce neurological disorders.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

12th annual biotechnology and bioinformatics symposium  provo, ut, usa 10- <dig> december  <dig> http://biotconf.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

