BACKGROUND
accurate delimitation of plant pathogenic fungi is critical for the establishment of quarantine regulations, screening for genetic resistance to plant pathogens, and the study of ecosystem function. concatenation analysis of multi-locus dna sequence data represents a powerful and commonly used approach to recognizing evolutionary independent lineages in fungi. it is however possible to mask the discordance between individual gene trees, thus the speciation events might be erroneously estimated if one simply recognizes well supported clades as distinct species without implementing a careful examination of species boundary. to investigate this phenomenon, we studied colletotrichum siamense s. lat., which is a cosmopolitan pathogen causing serious diseases on many economically important plant hosts. presently there are significant disagreements among mycologists as to what constitutes a species in c. siamense s. lat., with the number of accepted species ranging from one to seven.


RESULTS
in this study, multiple approaches were used to test the null hypothesis “c. siamense is a species complex”, using a global strain collection. results of molecular analyses based on the genealogical concordance phylogenetic species recognition  and coalescent methods  do not support the recognition of any independent evolutionary lineages within c. siamense s. lat. as distinct species, thus rejecting the null hypothesis. this conclusion is reinforced by the recognition of genetic recombination, cross fertility, and the comparison of ecological and morphological characters. our results indicate that reproductive isolation, geographic and host plant barriers to gene flow are absent in c. siamense s. lat.


CONCLUSIONS
this discovery emphasized the importance of a polyphasic approach when describing novel species in morphologically conserved genera of plant pathogenic fungi.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
coalescentgcpsrmating testphylogenyspecies delimitationexternal cooperation program of the chinese academy of sciencesgjhz1310cai lei http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of chinansfc 31400017liu fang issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

