BACKGROUND
dental caries and periodontal disease are the commonest bacterial diseases of man and can result in tooth loss. the principal method of prevention is the mechanical removal of dental plaque augmented by active agents incorporated into toothpastes and mouthrinses. in-vitro assays that include complex oral bacterial biofilms are required to accurately predict the efficacy of novel active agents in vivo. the aim of this study was to develop an oral biofilm model using the calgary biofilm device  seeded with a natural saliva inoculum and analysed by next generation sequencing. the specific objectives were to determine the reproducibility and stability of the model by comparing the composition of the biofilms over time derived from  the same volunteers at different time points, and  different panels of volunteers.


RESULTS
pyrosequencing yielded  <dig>  sequences with a mean length of  <dig> bases after filtering. a mean of  <dig> and  <dig> otus were detected in pooled saliva and biofilm samples, respectively. principal coordinates analysis  plots based on community membership and structure showed that replicate biofilm samples were highly similar and clustered together. in addition, there were no significant differences between biofilms derived from the same panel at different times using analysis of molecular variance . there were significant differences between biofilms from different panels . pcoa revealed that there was a shift in biofilm composition between seven and 14 days . veillonella parvula, veillonella atypica/dispar/parvula and peptostreptococcus stomatis were the predominant otus detected in seven-day biofilms, whilst prevotella oralis, v. parvula and streptococcus constellatus were predominant in 14-day biofilms.


CONCLUSIONS
diverse oral biofilms were successfully grown and maintained using the cbd. biofilms derived from the same panel of volunteers were highly reproducible. this model could be used to screen both antimicrobial-containing oral care products and also novel approaches aiming to modify plaque composition, such as pre- or probiotics.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
16s rrnabacteriasalivaplaquemicrobiomemicrobiotaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

