BACKGROUND
hydrocharitaceae is a fully aquatic monocot family, consists of  <dig> genera with approximately  <dig> species. the family includes both fresh and marine aquatics and exhibits great diversity in form and habit including annual and perennial life histories; submersed, partially submersed and floating leaf habits and linear to orbicular leaf shapes. the family has a cosmopolitan distribution and is well represented in the tertiary fossil record in europe. at present, the historical biogeography of the family is not well understood and the generic relationships remain controversial. in this study we investigated the phylogeny and biogeography of hydrocharitaceae by integrating fossils and dna sequences from eight genes. we also conducted ancestral state reconstruction for three morphological characters.


RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses produced a phylogeny with most branches strongly supported by bootstrap values greater than  <dig> and bayesian posterior probability values of  <dig> . stratiotes is the first diverging lineage with the remaining genera in two clades, one clade consists of lagarosiphon, ottelia, blyxa, apalanthe, elodea and egeria; and the other consists of hydrocharis-limnobium, thalassia, enhalus, halophila, najas, hydrilla, vallisneria, nechamandra and maidenia. biogeographic analyses  and divergence time estimates  resolved the most recent common ancestor of hydrocharitaceae as being in asia during the late cretaceous and palaeocene . dispersals  probably played major roles in the intercontinental distribution of this family. ancestral state reconstruction suggested that in hydrocharitaceae evolution of dioecy is bidirectional, viz., from dioecy to hermaphroditism, and from hermaphroditism to dioecy, and that the aerial-submerged leaf habit and short-linear leaf shape are the ancestral states.


CONCLUSIONS
our study has shed light on the previously controversial generic phylogeny of hydrocharitaceae. the study has resolved the historical biogeography of this family and supported dispersal as the most likely explanation for the intercontinental distribution. we have also provided valuable information for understanding the evolution of breeding system and leaf phenotype in aquatic monocots.

hydrocharitaceaephylogenyhistorical biogeographydispersalvicariancemorphological character evolution

