BACKGROUND
ngs  has been widely used in studies of biological processes, ranging from microbial evolution to cancer genomics. however, the error rate of ngs  is still remaining a great challenge for comprehensively investigating the low frequency variations, and the current solution methods have suffered severe amplification bias or low efficiency.


RESULTS
we creatively developed droplet-cirseq for relatively efficient, low-bias and ultra-sensitive identification of variations by combining millions of picoliter uniform-sized droplets with cir-seq. droplet-cirseq is entitled with an incredibly low error rate of 3 ~  <dig> x 10- <dig>  to systematically evaluate the performances of amplification uniformity and capability of mutation identification for droplet-cirseq, we took the mixtures of two e. coli strains as specific instances to simulate the circumstances of mutations with different frequencies. compared with cir-seq, the coefficient of variance of read depth for droplet-cirseq was  <dig> times less , and the identified allele frequency presented more concentrated to the authentic frequency of mixtures , illustrating a significant improvement of amplification bias and accuracy in allele frequency determination. additionally, droplet-cirseq detected  <dig>  times genuine snps , achieved a  <dig>  times lower false positive rate  and a  <dig>  times lower false negative rate , in the case of a 3 pg dna input. intriguingly, the false positive sites predominantly represented in two types of base substitutions . our findings indicated that 30 pg dna input accommodated in 5 ~  <dig> million droplets resulted in maximal detection of authentic mutations compared to 3 pg  and 300 pg input .


CONCLUSIONS
we developed a method namely droplet-cirseq to significantly improve the amplification bias, which presents obvious superiority over the currently prevalent methods in exploitation of ultra-low frequency mutations. droplet-cirseq would be promisingly used in the identification of low frequency mutations initiated from extremely low input dna, such as dna of uncultured microorganisms, captured dna of target region, circulation dna of plasma et al, and its creative conception of rolling circle amplification in droplets would also be used in other low input dna amplification fields.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
accurate sequencinglow frequency mutation detectionlow bias amplificationdroplet  based amplificationlow input ngs librarythe strategic priority research program of the chinese academy of sciencesxdb13040300wu chung-i national basic research program of china, the key research program of the chinese academy of scienceskjzd-ew-l06-1wu chung-i natural science foundation of china <dig> and 91131011lu xuemei http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004739youth innovation promotion association of the chinese academy of sciences2015081hou yali issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

