BACKGROUND
high-throughput molecular biology techniques yield vast amounts of data, often by detecting small portions of ribonucleotides corresponding to specific identifiers. existing bioinformatic methodologies categorize and compare these elements using inferred descriptive annotation given this sequence information irrespective of the fact that it may not be representative of the identifier as a whole.


RESULTS
all annotations, no matter the granularity, can be aligned to genomic sequences and therefore annotated by genomic intervals. we have developed absidconvert, a methodology for converting between genomic identifiers by first mapping them onto a common universal coordinate system using an interval tree which is subsequently queried for overlapping identifiers. absidconvert has many potential uses, including gene identifier conversion, identification of features within a genomic region, and cross-species comparisons. the utility is demonstrated in three case studies: 1) comparative genomic study mapping plasmodium gene sequences to corresponding human and mosquito transcriptional regions; 2) cross-species study of incyte clone sequences; and 3) analysis of human ensembl transcripts mapped by affymetrix®; and agilent microarray probes. absidconvert currently supports id conversion of  <dig> species for a given list of input identifiers, genomic sequence, or genome intervals.


CONCLUSIONS
absidconvert provides an efficient and reliable mechanism for conversion between identifier domains of interest. the flexibility of this tool allows for custom definition identifier domains contingent upon the availability and determination of a genomic mapping interval. as the genomes and the sequences for genetic elements are further refined, this tool will become increasingly useful and accurate. absidconvert is freely available as a web application or downloadable as a virtual machine at:
http://bioinformatics.louisville.edu/abid/.

annotationgene id conversionmeta-analysisgenomic rangeinterval treescomparative analysisgranularityuniversal identifierabsidconvert

