BACKGROUND
nutrient availabilities and needs have to be tightly coordinated between organs to ensure a balance between uptake and consumption for metabolism, growth, and defense reactions. since plants often have to grow in environments with sub-optimal nutrient availability, a fine tuning is vital. to achieve this, information has to flow cell-to-cell and over long-distance via xylem and phloem. recently, specific mirnas emerged as a new type of regulating molecules during stress and nutrient deficiency responses, and mir <dig> was suggested to be a phloem-mobile long-distance signal involved in the phosphate starvation response.


RESULTS
we used mirna microarrays containing all known plant mirnas and a set of unknown small  rnas earlier cloned from brassica phloem sap  <cit> , to comprehensively analyze the phloem response to nutrient deficiency by removing sulfate, copper or iron, respectively, from the growth medium. we show that phloem sap contains a specific set of srnas that is distinct from leaves and roots, and that the phloem also responds specifically to stress. upon s and cu deficiencies phloem sap reacts with an increase of the same mirnas that were earlier characterized in other tissues, while no clear positive response to -fe was observed. however, -fe led to a reduction of cu- and p-responsive mirnas. we further demonstrate that under nutrient starvation mir <dig> and mir <dig> can be translocated through graft unions from wild type scions to rootstocks of the mirna processing hen1- <dig> mutant. in contrast, mir <dig> was not transported. translocation of mir <dig> led to a down-regulation of one of its targets in rootstocks, suggesting that this transport is of functional relevance, and that mir <dig>  in addition to the well characterized mir <dig>  could potentially act as a long-distance information transmitter.


CONCLUSIONS
phloem sap contains a specific set of srnas, of which some specifically accumulate in response to nutrient deprivation. from the observation that mir <dig> and mir <dig> are phloem-mobile in grafting experiments we conclude that translocatable mirnas might be candidates for information-transmitting molecules, but that grafting experiments alone are not sufficient to convincingly assign a signaling function.

