BACKGROUND
understanding the evolution of the vertebrate pancreas is key to understanding its functions. the chondrichthyes  have often been suggested to possess the most ancient example of a distinct pancreas with both hormonal  and digestive  roles. the lack of genetic, genomic and transcriptomic data for cartilaginous fish has hindered a more thorough understanding of the molecular-level functions of the chondrichthyan pancreas, particularly with respect to their “unusual” energy metabolism  and their paradoxical ability to both maintain stable blood glucose levels and tolerate extensive periods of hypoglycemia. in order to shed light on some of these processes, we carried out the first large-scale comparative transcriptomic survey of multiple cartilaginous fish tissues: the pancreas, brain and liver of the lesser spotted catshark, scyliorhinus canicula.


RESULTS
we generated a mutli-tissue assembly comprising  <dig>  contigs, of which  <dig>  were assigned to a particular tissue or combination of tissues based on mapping of sequencing reads. we have characterised transcripts encoding genes involved in insulin regulation, glucose sensing, transcriptional regulation, signaling and digestion, as well as many peptide hormone precursors and their receptors for the first time. comparisons to mammalian pancreas transcriptomes reveals that mechanisms of glucose sensing and insulin regulation used to establish and maintain a stable internal environment are conserved across jawed vertebrates and likely pre-date the vertebrate radiation. conservation of pancreatic hormones and genes encoding digestive proteins support the single, early evolution of a distinct pancreatic gland with endocrine and exocrine functions in jawed vertebrates. in addition, we demonstrate that chondrichthyes lack pancreatic polypeptide  and that reports of pp in the literature are likely due cross-reaction with pyy and/or npy in the pancreas. a three hormone islet organ is therefore the ancestral jawed vertebrate condition, later elaborated upon only in the tetrapod lineage.


CONCLUSIONS
the cartilaginous fish are a great untapped resource for the reconstruction of patterns and processes of vertebrate evolution and new approaches such as those described in this paper will greatly facilitate their incorporation into the rank of “model organism”.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
catsharkpancreas transcriptomepdx1pdx2insulin regulationpyypancreatic polypeptideissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

