BACKGROUND
vitis vinifera  is the primary grape species cultivated for wine production, with an industry valued annually in the billions of dollars worldwide. in order to sustain and increase grape production, it is necessary to understand the genetic makeup of grape species. here we performed mrna profiling using massively parallel signature sequencing  and combined it with available expressed sequence tag  data. these tag-based technologies, which do not require a priori knowledge of genomic sequence, are well-suited for transcriptional profiling. the sequence depth of mpss allowed us to capture and quantify almost all the transcripts at a specific stage in the development of the grape berry.


RESULTS
the number and relative abundance of transcripts from stage ii grape berries was defined using massively parallel signature sequencing . a total of  <dig> , <dig> 17-base and  <dig> , <dig> 20-base signatures were obtained, representing at least  <dig>  and  <dig>  distinct sequences. the average normalized abundance per signature was ~ <dig> tpm . comparisons of the mpss signatures with available vitis species' ests and a unigene set demonstrated that  <dig>  distinct contigs and  <dig>  singletons have a perfect match to at least one mpss signature. among the matched sequences, ests were identified from tissues other than berries or from berries at different developmental stages. additional mpss signatures not matching to known grape ests can extend our knowledge of the v. vinifera transcriptome, particularly when these data are used to assist in annotation of whole genome sequences from vitis vinifera.


CONCLUSIONS
the mpss data presented here not only achieved a higher level of saturation than previous est based analyses, but in doing so, expand the known set of transcripts of grape berries during the unique stage in development that immediately precedes the onset of ripening. the mpss dataset also revealed evidence of antisense expression not previously reported in grapes but comparable to that reported in other plant species. finally, we developed a novel web-based, public resource for utilization of the grape mpss data  <cit> .

