BACKGROUND
warmer seawater as a result of climate change may impose environmental challenges for atlantic salmon aquaculture in its southernmost geographic range. seawater temperatures above optimal level for growth may be reached in the warmest summer weeks. caged fish can experience temperature and low oxygen saturation stress during such episodes, raising fish welfare and productivity concerns. in this work we compare the transcriptional responses in atlantic salmon exposed to chronic high temperature  and low oxygen saturation  stress.


RESULTS
we used next-generation sequencing and rt-qpcr to screen for effects, and focused on growth regulation and oxidative stress in fish exposed to sub-optimal conditions. both prolonged temperature  and low oxygen  stress had a significant negative effect on growth. the main effect of heat stress appears to be a general reduced transcriptional rate in salmon liver, while mechanisms typically associated with responses induced by chemical drugs were stimulated. heat stress significantly down-regulated several transcripts encoding proteins involved in the protection against oxidative stress, including cuzn sod, mn sod, gpx <dig> and gr, as well as additional stress markers hif1a, cyp1a, mtor and psmc <dig> . in salmon held at low oxygen concentration for four months protein ubiquitination  was the most strongly affected pathway. according to the rt-qpcr data, low oxygen stress significantly up-regulated the transcriptional levels of igfbp1b and down-regulated the levels of gr. pathway analysis suggests that high temperature and low oxygen saturation stress affects many similar mechanisms in atlantic salmon. based on the gene lists, six out of the top ten predicted upstream transcriptional regulators,  <dig> -dithiol-3-thione sirolimus, cd <dig>  5-fluorouracil, hnf4a and nfe2l <dig>  were similar between the two treatments.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, temperature and low oxygen saturation stress affect many identical mechanisms in liver cells resulting in a metabolic depression, but these effects are not necessarily mediated through altered transcription of the same genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
farmed salmonclimate changetemperature and hypoxia stressnext-generation sequencingissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013

