BACKGROUND
zinc  deficiency is one of the most widespread mineral nutritional problems that affect normal development in plants. because zn cannot passively diffuse across cell membranes, it must be transported into intracellular compartments for all biological processes where zn is required. several members of the zinc-regulated transporters, iron-regulated transporter-like protein  gene family have been characterized in plants, and have shown to be involved in metal uptake and transport. this study describes the first putative zn transporter in grapevine. unravelling its function may explain an important symptom of zn deficiency in grapevines, which is the production of clusters with fewer and usually smaller berries than normal.


RESULTS
we identified and characterized a putative zn transporter from berries of vitis vinifera l., named vvzip <dig>  compared to other members of the zip family identified in the vitis vinifera l. genome, vvzip <dig> is mainly expressed in reproductive tissue - specifically in developing flowers - which correlates with the high zn accumulation in these organs. contrary to this, the low expression of vvzip <dig> in parthenocarpic berries shows a relationship with the lower zn accumulation in this tissue than in normal seeded berries where its expression is induced by zn. the predicted protein sequence indicates strong similarity with several members of the zip family from arabidopsis thaliana and other species. moreover, vvzip <dig> complemented the growth defect of a yeast zn-uptake mutant, zhy <dig>  and is localized in the plasma membrane of plant cells, suggesting that vvzip <dig> has the function of a zn uptake transporter.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that vvzip <dig> encodes a putative plasma membrane zn transporter protein member of the zip gene family that might play a role in zn uptake and distribution during the early reproductive development in vitis vinifera l., indicating that the availability of this micronutrient may be relevant for reproductive development.

