BACKGROUND
gene copy number variation plays a large role in the evolution of genomes. in rattus norvegicus and other rodent species, the y-chromosome has accumulated multiple copies of sry loci. these copy number variations have been previously linked with changes in phenotype of animal models such as the spontaneously hypertensive rat . this study characterizes the y-chromosome in the sry region of rattus norvegicus, while addressing functional variations seen in the sry protein products.


RESULTS
eleven sry loci have been identified in the shr with one  containing a frame shift mutation. the nonhmgsry is found and conserved in the related wky and sd rat strains. three new, previously unidentified, sry loci were identified in this study  in both shr and wky. repetitive element analysis revealed numerous line-l <dig> elements at regions where conservation is lost among the sry copies. in addition we have identified a retrotransposed copy of med <dig> originating from spliced mrna, two autosomal genes  and a normal mammalian y-chromosome gene  in the sry region of the rat y-chromosome. translation of the sequences of each sry gene reveals eight proteins with amino acid differences leading to changes in nuclear localization and promoter activation of a sry-responsive gene. sry-β  has an increased cytoplasmic fraction due to alterations at amino acid  <dig>  sry-γ has altered gene regulation of the sry <dig> promoter due to changes at amino acid  <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
the duplication of sry on the rattus norvegicus y-chromosome has led to proteins with altered functional ability that may have been selected for functions in addition to testis determination. additionally, several other genes not normally found on the y-chromosome have duplicated new copies into the region around the sry genes. these suggest a role of active transposable elements in the evolution of the mammalian y-chromosome in species such as rattus norvegicus.

y-chromosomesryshrrattus norvegicuscopy number variationsy-chromosome evolution

