BACKGROUND
specific glutamates in the methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins  of escherichia coli are modified during sensory adaptation. attractants that bind to mcps are known to increase the rate of receptor modification, as with serine and the serine receptor , which contributes to an increase in the steady-state  methylation level. however, mcps form ternary complexes with two cytoplasmic signaling proteins, the kinase  and an adaptor protein , but their influences on receptor methylation are unknown. here, the influence of chew on the rate of tsr methylation has been studied to identify contributions to the process of adaptation.


RESULTS
methyl group incorporation was measured in a series of membrane samples in which the tsr molecules were engineered to have one available methyl-accepting glutamate residue . the relative rates at these sites  differed from those found previously for the aspartate receptor , which was in part due to sequence differences between tar and tsr near site four. the addition of chew generated unexpectedly large and site-specific rate increases, equal to or larger than the increases produced by serine. the increases produced by serine and chew  were the largest at site one, ~ <dig> and 6-fold, respectively, and the least at site four, no change and ~2-fold, respectively. the rate increases were even larger when serine and chew were added together, larger than the sums of the increases produced by serine and chew added separately . this resulted in substantially larger serine-stimulated increases when chew was present. also, chew enhanced methylation rates when either two or all four sites were available.


CONCLUSIONS
the increase in the rate of receptor methylation upon chew binding contributes significantly to the ligand specificity and kinetics of sensory adaptation. the synergistic effect of serine and chew binding to tsr is attributed to distinct influences on receptor structure; changes in the conformation of the tsr dimer induced by serine binding improve methylation efficiency, and chew binding changes the arrangement among tsr dimers, which increases access to methylation sites.

