BACKGROUND
spiroplasma citri is a cell wall-less, plant pathogenic bacteria that colonizes two distinct hosts, the leafhopper vector and the host plant. given the absence of a cell wall, surface proteins including lipoproteins and transmembrane polypeptides are expected to play key roles in spiroplasma/host interactions. important functions in spiroplasma/insect interactions have been shown for a few surface proteins such as the major lipoprotein spiralin, the transmembrane s. citri adhesion-related proteins  and the sugar transporter subunit sc <dig>  s. citri efficient transmission from the insect to the plant is expected to rely on its ability to adapt to the different environments and more specifically to regulate the expression of genes encoding surface-exposed proteins.


RESULTS
genes encoding s. citri lipoproteins and scarps were investigated for their expression level in axenic medium, in the leafhopper vector circulifer haematoceps and in the host plant  either insect-infected or graft-inoculated. the vast majority of the lipoprotein genes tested  differentially responded to the various host environments. considering their relative expression levels in the different environments, the possible involvement of the targeted genes in spiroplasma host adaptation was discussed. in addition, two s. citri strains differing notably in their ability to express adhesin scarp2b and pyruvate dehydrogenase e <dig> component differed in their capacity to multiply in the two hosts, the plant and the leafhopper vector.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provided us with a list of genes differentially expressed in the different hosts, leading to the identification of factors that are thought to be involved in the process of s. citri host adaptation. the identification of such factors is a key step for further understanding of s. citri pathogenesis. moreover the present work highlights the high capacity of s. citri in tightly regulating the expression level of a large set of surface protein genes, despite the small size of its genome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
spiroplasmaspiroplasma citrilipoproteinsadhesinsgene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

