BACKGROUND
the p-type ii atpase gene family encodes proteins with an important role in adaptation of the cell to variation in external k+, ca2+ and na2+ concentrations. the presence of p-type ii gene subfamilies that are specific for certain kingdoms has been reported but was sometimes contradicted by discovery of previously unknown homologous sequences in newly sequenced genomes. members of this gene family have been sampled in all of the fungal phyla except the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi , which are known to play a key-role in terrestrial ecosystems and to be genetically highly variable within populations. here we used highly degenerate primers on amf genomic dna to increase the sampling of fungal p-type ii atpases and to test previous predictions about their evolution. in parallel, homologous sequences of the p-type ii atpases have been used to determine the nature and amount of polymorphism that is present at these loci among isolates of glomus intraradices harvested from the same field.


RESULTS
in this study, four p-type ii atpase sub-families have been isolated from three amf species. we show that, contrary to previous predictions, p-type iic atpases are present in all basal fungal taxa. additionally, p-type iie atpases should no longer be considered as exclusive to the ascomycota and the basidiomycota, since we also demonstrate their presence in the zygomycota. finally, a comparison of homologous sequences encoding p-type iid atpases showed unexpectedly that indel mutations among coding regions, as well as specific gene duplications occur among amf individuals within the same field.


CONCLUSIONS
on the basis of these results we suggest that the diversification of p-type iic and e atpases followed the diversification of the extant fungal phyla with independent events of gene gains and losses. consistent with recent findings on the human genome, but at a much smaller geographic scale, we provided evidence that structural genomic changes, such as exonic indel mutations and gene duplications are less rare than previously thought and that these also occur within fungal populations.

