BACKGROUND
it has been pointed out that environmental factors or chemicals can cause diseases that are developmental in origin. to detect abnormal epigenetic alterations in dna methylation, convenient and cost-effective methods are required for such research, in which multiple samples are processed simultaneously. we here present methylated site display , a unique technique for the preparation of dna libraries. by combining it with amplified fragment length polymorphism  analysis, we developed a new method, msd-aflp.


RESULTS
methylated site display libraries consist of only dnas derived from dna fragments that are cpg methylated at the 5′ end in the original genomic dna sample. to test the effectiveness of this method, cpg methylation levels in liver, kidney, and hippocampal tissues of mice were compared to examine if msd-aflp can detect subtle differences in the levels of tissue-specific differentially methylated cpgs. as a result, many cpg sites suspected to be tissue-specific differentially methylated were detected. nucleotide sequences adjacent to these methyl-cpg sites were identified and we determined the methylation level by methylation-sensitive restriction endonuclease -pcr analysis to confirm the accuracy of aflp analysis. the differences of the methylation level among tissues were almost identical among these methods. by msd-aflp analysis, we detected many cpgs showing less than 5% statistically significant tissue-specific difference and less than 10% degree of variability. additionally, msd-aflp analysis could be used to identify cpg methylation sites in other organisms including humans.


CONCLUSIONS
msd-aflp analysis can potentially be used to measure slight changes in cpg methylation level. regarding the remarkable precision, sensitivity, and throughput of msd-aflp analysis studies, this method will be advantageous in a variety of epigenetics-based research.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dna methylation profilingaflpepigeneticshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of science2331004420380168ohsako seiichiroh issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

