BACKGROUND
the outcome of an entamoeba histolytica infection is variable and can result in either asymptomatic carriage, immediate or latent disease . an e. histolytica multilocus genotyping system based on trna gene-linked arrays has shown that genetic differences exist among parasites isolated from patients with different symptoms however, the trna gene-linked arrays cannot be located in the current assembly of the e. histolytica reference genome  and are highly variable.


RESULTS
to probe the population structure of e. histolytica and identify genetic markers associated with clinical outcome we identified in e. histolytica positive samples selected single nucleotide polymorphisms  by multiplexed massive parallel sequencing. profile snps were selected which, compared to the reference strain hm-1:imss sequence, changed an encoded amino acid at the snp position, and were present in independent e. histolytica isolates from different geographical origins. the samples used in this study contained dna isolated from either xenic strains of e. histolytica trophozoites established in culture or e. histolytica positive clinical specimens . a record of the snps present at  <dig> loci out of the original  <dig> candidate targets was obtained for  <dig> of the initial  <dig> samples . the sequences in all the  <dig> samples both passed sequence quality control metrics and also had the required greater than 8x sequence coverage for all  <dig> snps in order to confidently identify variants.


CONCLUSIONS
our work is in agreement with previous findings of extensive diversity among e. histolytica isolates from the same geographic origin. in phylogenetic trees, only four of the  <dig> samples were able to group in two sets of two with greater than 50% confidence. two snps in the cylicin- <dig> gene  were associated with disease . this study demonstrated that there are genetic differences between virulent and avirulent e. histolytica strains and that this approach has the potential to define genetic changes that influence infection outcomes.

