BACKGROUND
a steep drop in the cost of next-generation sequencing during recent years has made the technology affordable to the majority of researchers, but downstream bioinformatic analysis still poses a resource bottleneck for smaller laboratories and institutes that do not have access to substantial computational resources. sequencing instruments are typically bundled with only the minimal processing and storage capacity required for data capture during sequencing runs. given the scale of sequence datasets, scientific value cannot be obtained from acquiring a sequencer unless it is accompanied by an equal investment in informatics infrastructure.


RESULTS
cloud biolinux is a publicly accessible virtual machine  that enables scientists to quickly provision on-demand infrastructures for high-performance bioinformatics computing using cloud platforms. users have instant access to a range of pre-configured command line and graphical software applications, including a full-featured desktop interface, documentation and over  <dig> bioinformatics packages for applications including sequence alignment, clustering, assembly, display, editing, and phylogeny. each tool's functionality is fully described in the documentation directly accessible from the graphical interface of the vm. besides the amazon ec <dig> cloud, we have started instances of cloud biolinux on a private eucalyptus cloud installed at the j. craig venter institute, and demonstrated access to the bioinformatic tools interface through a remote connection to ec <dig> instances from a local desktop computer. documentation for using cloud biolinux on ec <dig> is available from our project website, while a eucalyptus cloud image and virtualbox appliance is also publicly available for download and use by researchers with access to private clouds.


CONCLUSIONS
cloud biolinux provides a platform for developing bioinformatics infrastructures on the cloud. an automated and configurable process builds virtual machines, allowing the development of highly customized versions from a shared code base. this shared community toolkit enables application specific analysis platforms on the cloud by minimizing the effort required to prepare and maintain them.

