BACKGROUND
marbling  is a valuable trait that impacts on meat quality and an important factor determining price of beef in the korean beef market. animals that are destined for this high marbling market are fed a high concentrate ration for approximately  <dig> months in the korean finishing farms. however, this feeding strategy leads to inefficiencies and excessive fat production. this study aimed to identify candidate genes and pathways associated with intramuscular fat deposition on highly divergent marbling phenotypes in adult hanwoo cattle.


RESULTS
bovine genome array analysis was conducted to detect differentially expressed genes  in m. longissimus with divergent marbling phenotype . three data-processing methods  were used to test for differential expression . statistical analysis identified  <dig> significant transcripts from at least two data-processing methods . all  <dig> differentially expressed genes were validated by real-time pcr. results showed a high concordance in the gene expression fold change between the microarrays and the real time pcr data. gene ontology  and pathway analysis demonstrated that some genes  over expressed in high marbled animals are involved in a protein catabolic process and a cholesterol biosynthesis process. in addition, pathway analysis also revealed that adamts <dig> is activated by three regulators . qrt-pcr was used to investigate gene expression of these regulators in muscle with divergent intramuscular fat contents. the results demonstrate that adamts <dig> and tgfβ <dig> are associated with increasing marbling fat. an adamts4/tgfβ <dig> pathway seems to be associated with the phenotypic differences between high and low marbled groups.


CONCLUSIONS
marbling differences are possibly a function of complex signaling pathway interactions between muscle and fat. these results suggest that adamts <dig>  which is involved in connective tissue degradation, could play a role in an important biological pathway for building up marbling in cattle. moreover, adamts <dig> and tgfβ1could potentially be used as an early biological marker for marbling fat content in the early stages of growth.

