BACKGROUND
most disease-resistance  genes in plants encode nbs-lrr proteins and belong to one of the largest and most variable gene families among plant genomes. however, the specific evolutionary routes of nbs-lrr encoding genes remain elusive. recently in coffee tree , a region spanning the sh <dig> locus that confers resistance to coffee leaf rust, one of the most serious coffee diseases, was identified and characterized. using comparative sequence analysis, the purpose of the present study was to gain insight into the genomic organization and evolution of the sh <dig> locus.


RESULTS
sequence analysis of the sh <dig> region in three coffee genomes, ea and ca subgenomes from the allotetraploid c. arabica and cc genome from the diploid c. canephora, revealed the presence of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> r genes in ea, ca, and cc genomes, respectively. all these r-gene sequences appeared to be members of a cc-nbs-lrr  gene family that was only found at the sh <dig> locus in c. arabica. furthermore, while homologs were found in several dicot species, comparative genomic analysis failed to find any cnl r-gene in the orthologous regions of other eudicot species. the orthology relationship among the sh3-cnl copies in the three analyzed genomes was determined and the duplication/deletion events that shaped the sh <dig> locus were traced back. gene conversion events were detected between paralogs in all three genomes and also between the two sub-genomes of c. arabica. significant positive selection was detected in the solvent-exposed residues of the sh3-cnl copies.


CONCLUSIONS
the ancestral sh3-cnl copy was inserted in the sh <dig> locus after the divergence between solanales and rubiales lineages. moreover, the origin of most of the sh3-cnl copies predates the divergence between coffea species. the sh3-cnl family appeared to evolve following the birth-and-death model, since duplications and deletions were inferred in the evolution of the sh <dig> locus. gene conversion between paralog members, inter-subgenome sequence exchanges and positive selection appear to be the major forces acting on the evolution of sh3-cnl in coffee trees.

