BACKGROUND
long noncoding rnas  are now considered important regulatory factors, with a variety of biological functions in many species including insects. some lncrnas have the ability to show rapid responses to diverse stimuli or stress factors and are involved in responses to insecticide. however, there are no reports to date on the characterization of lncrnas associated with chlorantraniliprole resistance in plutella xylostella.


RESULTS
nine rna libraries constructed from one susceptible  and two chlorantraniliprole-resistant p. xylostella strains  were sequenced, and  <dig> lncrnas were identified, including  <dig> intergenic lncrnas,  <dig> intronic lncrnas,  <dig> anti-sense lncrnas and  <dig> sense-overlapping lncrnas. of the identified lncrnas,  <dig> were novel. furthermore, we found that  <dig> lncrnas were differentially expressed between chr and chs and  <dig> were differentially expressed between zz and chs, of which  <dig> were differentially expressed in both chr and zz. most of the differentially expressed lncrnas were hypothesized to be associated with chlorantraniliprole resistance in p. xylostella. the targets of lncrnas via cis-  or trans-  regulatory effects were also identified; many of the differently expressed lncrnas were correlated with various important protein-coding genes involved in insecticide resistance, such as the ryanodine receptor, uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase , cytochrome p <dig>  esterase and the atp-binding cassette transporter.


CONCLUSIONS
our results represent the first global identification of lncrnas associated with chlorantraniliprole resistance in p. xylostella. these results will facilitate future studies of the regulatory mechanisms of lncrnas in chlorantraniliprole and other insecticide resistance and in other biological processes in p. xylostella.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lncrnaplutella xylostellachlorantraniliprolerna-seqthis work was supported by the national natural science foundation of china31572023liang pei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

