BACKGROUND
emerging studies of human pluripotent stem cells  raise new prospects for neurodegenerative disease modeling and cell replacement therapies. therefore, understanding the mechanisms underlying the commitment of neural progenitor cells  is important for the application of hpscs in neurodegenerative disease therapies. it has been reported that epigenetic modifications of histones play important roles in neural differentiation, but the exact mechanisms in regulating hpsc differentiation towards npcs are not fully elucidated.


RESULTS
we demonstrated that suppression of histone deacetylases  promoted the differentiation of hpscs towards npcs. application of hdac inhibitors  increased the expression of neuroectodermal markers and enhanced the neuroectodermal specification once neural differentiation was initiated, thereby leading to more npc generation. similarly, the transcriptome analysis showed that hdaci increased the expression levels of ectodermal markers and triggered the npc differentiation related pathways, while decreasing the expression levels of endodermal and mesodermal markers. furthermore, we documented that hdac <dig> but not hdac <dig> or hdac <dig> was the critical regulator participating in npc differentiation, and knockdown of hdac3′s cofactor smrt exhibited a similar effect as hdac <dig> on npc generation.


CONCLUSIONS
our study reveals that hdacs, especially hdac <dig>  negatively regulate the differentiation of hpscs towards npcs at an earlier stage of neural differentiation. moreover, hdac <dig> might function by forming a repressor complex with its cofactor smrt during this process. thus, our findings uncover an important epigenetic mechanism of hdac <dig> in the differentiation of hpscs towards npcs.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
histone deacetylationhistone deacetylase inhibitorsneuroectodermal specificationneural progenitor cellshuman pluripotent stem cellsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

