BACKGROUND
monoterpenes present a large and versatile group of unsaturated hydrocarbons of plant origin with widespread use in the fragrance as well as food industry. the anaerobic β-myrcene degradation pathway in castellaniella defragrans strain 65phen differs from well known aerobic, monooxygenase-containing pathways. the initial enzyme linalool dehydratase-isomerase ldi/ldi catalyzes the hydration of β-myrcene to --linalool and its isomerization to geraniol. a high-affinity geraniol dehydrogenase geoa/gedh and a geranial dehydrogenase geob/gadh contribute to the formation of geranic acid.

a genetic system was for the first time applied for the betaproteobacterium to prove in vivo the relevance of the linalool dehydratase-isomerase and the geraniol dehydrogenase. in-frame deletion cassettes were introduced by conjugation and two homologous recombination events.


RESULTS
polar effects were absent in the in-frame deletion mutants c. defragrans Δldi and c. defragrans Δgeoa. the physiological characterization of the strains demonstrated a requirement of the linalool dehydratase-isomerase for growth on acyclic monoterpenes, but not on cyclic monoterpenes. the deletion of geoa resulted in a phenotype with hampered growth rate on monoterpenes as sole carbon and energy source as well as reduced biomass yields. enzyme assays revealed the presence of a second geraniol dehydrogenase. the deletion mutants were in trans complemented with the broad-host range expression vector pbbr1mcs-4ldi and pbbr1mcs-2geoa, restoring in both cases the wild type phenotype.


CONCLUSIONS
in-frame deletion mutants of genes in the anaerobic β-myrcene degradation revealed novel insights in the in vivo function. the deletion of a high-affinity geraniol dehydrogenase hampered, but did not preclude growth on monoterpenes. a second geraniol dehydrogenase activity was present that contributes to the β-myrcene degradation pathway. growth on cyclic monoterpenes independent of the initial enzyme ldi suggests the presence of a second enzyme system activating unsaturated hydrocarbons.

β-myrcenephellandreneanaerobic degradationgeraniol dehydrogenaselinalool dehydratase-isomerasegenetic system

