BACKGROUND
alzheimer’s disease  and fronto temporal lobar dementia  are common causes of dementia in the aging population for which limited therapeutical options are available. these disorders are associated with tau accumulation. we have previously shown that cerebrolysintm , a neuropeptide mixture with neurotrophic effects, ameliorates the behavioral deficits and neuropathological alterations in amyloid precursor protein  transgenic  mouse model of ad by reducing hyper-phosphorylated tau. cbl has been tested in clinical trials for ad, however it’s potential beneficial effects in ftld are unknown. for this purpose we sought to investigate the effects of cbl in a tg model of tauopathy. accordingly, double tg mice expressing mutant tau under the mthy- <dig> promoter and gsk3β  were treated with cbl and evaluated neuropathologically.


RESULTS
compared to single tau tg mice the tau/gsk3β double tg model displayed elevated levels of tau phosphorylation and neurodegeneration in the hippocampus. cbl treatment reduced the levels of tau phosphorylation in the dentate gyrus and the degeneration of pyramidal neurons in the temporal cortex and hippocampus of the tau/gsk3β double tg mice. interestingly, the tau/gsk3β double tg mice also displayed elevated levels of dynamin-related protein- <dig> , a protein that hydrolyzes gtp and is required for mitochondrial division. ultrastructural analysis of the mitochondria in the tau/gsk3β double tg mice demonstrated increased numbers and fragmentation of mitochondria in comparison to non-tg mice. cbl treatment normalized levels of drp- <dig> and restored mitochondrial structure.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that the ability of cbl to ameliorate neurodegenerative pathology in the tauopathy model may involve reducing accumulation of hyper-phosphorylated tau and reducing alterations in mitochondrial biogenesis associated with tau.

keywords
taugsk3βdrp-1neuroprotectionalzheimer’s diseasetauopathiesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

