BACKGROUND
the contribution of alternative splicing and isoform expression to cellular response is emerging as an area of considerable interest, and the newly developed exon arrays allow for systematic study of these processes. we use this pilot study to report on the feasibility of exon array implementation looking to replace the 3' in vitro transcription expression arrays in our laboratory.

one of the most widely studied models of cellular response is t-cell activation from exogenous stimulation. microarray studies have contributed to our understanding of key pathways activated during t-cell stimulation. we use this system to examine whole genome transcription and alternate exon usage events that are regulated during lymphocyte proliferation in an attempt to evaluate the exon arrays.


RESULTS
peripheral blood mononuclear cells form healthy donors were activated using phytohemagglutinin, il <dig> and ionomycin and harvested at  <dig> points over a  <dig> day period. flow cytometry measured cell cycle events and the affymetrix exon array platform was used to identify the gene expression and alternate exon usage changes. gene expression changes were noted in a total of  <dig> transcripts, and alternate exon usage identified in  <dig> transcript clusters. there was an overlap of  <dig> transcripts which showed both differential expression and alternate exon usage over time. gene ontology enrichment analysis showed a broader range of biological changes in biological processes for the differentially expressed genes, which include cell cycle, cell division, cell proliferation, chromosome segregation, cell death, component organization and biogenesis and metabolic process ontologies. the alternate exon usage ontological enrichments are in metabolism and component organization and biogenesis. we focus on alternate exon usage changes in the transcripts of the spliceosome complex. the real-time pcr validation rates were 86% for transcript expression and 71% for alternate exon usage.


CONCLUSIONS
this study illustrates that the exon array technology has the potential to provide information on both transcript expression and isoform usage, with very little increase in expense.

