BACKGROUND
micrornas  are small non-coding rnas that act as key players in the post-transcriptional regulation of protein synthesis. although little is known about their role in complex physiological processes such as development and immunity, our knowledge is expanding rapidly, thanks to the use of model systems. the larvae of the greater wax moth galleria mellonella are now established as model hosts for pathogens that infect insects or humans. to build on our previously-reported comprehensive g. mellonella transcriptome, here we describe the identification and analysis of development and immunity-related mirnas, thus providing valuable additional data to promote the use of this model host for the analysis of complex processes.


RESULTS
to screen for mirnas that are differentially expressed in g. mellonella  during metamorphosis or  following infection with the entomopathogenic bacterium serratia entomophila or  with the parasitic fungus metarhizium anisopliae, we designed a microarray containing more than  <dig> insect mirna probe sequences. we identified mirnas that were significantly expressed in pre-pupae , pupae  and last-instar larvae infected with m. anisopliae  in comparison with untreated last-instar larvae which were used as a reference. we then used our transcriptomic database to identify potential 3′ untranslated regions that form mirna–mrna duplexes by considering both base pair complementarity and minimum free energy hybridization. we confirmed the co-expression of selected mirnas  with their predicted target mrnas in last-instar larvae, pre-pupae and pupae by rt-pcr. we also identified mirnas that were expressed in response to infection with bacterial or fungal pathogens, and one mirna that may act as a candidate mediator of trans-generational immune priming.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study to identify mirnas that are predicted to regulate genes expressed during metamorphosis or in response to infection in the lepidopteran model host g. mellonella.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
micrornamicrorna target predictiondevelopmentmetamorphosisimmunitytrans-generational immune priminggalleria mellonellametarhizium anisopliaeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

