BACKGROUND
the nymphaeales  lineage has diverged as the second branch of basal angiosperms and comprises of two families: cabombaceae and nymphaceae. the classification of nymphaeales and phylogeny within the flowering plants are quite intriguing as several systems  have attempted to redefine the nymphaeales taxonomy. there have been also fossil records consisting especially of seeds, pollen, stems, leaves and flowers as early as the lower cretaceous. here we present an in silico study of the order nymphaeales taking maturasek  and internal transcribed spacer  as biomarkers for phylogeny reconstruction  and identification of motifs for dna barcoding.


RESULTS
the maximum likelihood  and bayesian approach yielded congruent fully resolved and well-supported trees using a concatenated  supermatrix aligned dataset. the taxon sampling corroborates the monophyly of cabombaceae. nuphar emerges as a monophyletic clade in the family nymphaeaceae while there are slight discrepancies in the monophyletic nature of the genera nymphaea owing to victoria-euryale and ondinea grouping in the same node of nymphaeaceae. its <dig> secondary structures alignment corroborate the primary sequence analysis. hydatellaceae emerged as a sister clade to nymphaeaceae and had a basal lineage amongst the water lilly clades. species from cycas and ginkgo were taken as outgroups and were rooted in the overall tree topology from various methods.


CONCLUSIONS
matk genes are fast evolving highly variant regions of plant chloroplast dna that can serve as potential biomarkers for dna barcoding and also in generating primers for angiosperms with identification of unique motif regions. we have reported unique genus specific motif regions in the order nymphaeles from matk dataset which can be further validated for barcoding and designing of pcr primers. our analysis using a novel approach of sequence-structure alignment and phylogenetic reconstruction using molecular morphometrics congrue with the current placement of hydatellaceae within the early-divergent angiosperm order nymphaeales. the results underscore the fact that more diverse genera, if not fully resolved to be monophyletic, should be represented by all major lineages.

3- <dig> october  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  eleventh international conference on bioinformatics  bangkok, thailand

