BACKGROUND
perkinsea are a parasitic lineage within the eukaryotic superphylum alveolata. recent studies making use of environmental small sub-unit ribosomal rna gene  sequencing methodologies have detected a significant diversity and abundance of perkinsea-like phylotypes in freshwater environments. in contrast only a few perkinsea environmental sequences have been retrieved from marine samples and only two groups of perkinsea have been cultured and morphologically described and these are parasites of marine molluscs or marine protists. these two marine groups form separate and distantly related phylogenetic clusters, composed of closely related lineages on ssu rdna trees. here, we test the hypothesis that perkinsea are a hitherto under-sampled group in marine environments. using  <dig> diversity ‘tag’ sequencing we investigate the diversity and distribution of these protists in marine sediments and water column samples taken from the deep chlorophyll maximum  and sub-surface using both dna and rna as the source template and sampling four european offshore locations.


RESULTS
we detected the presence of  <dig> sequences branching with known perkinsea, the majority of them recovered from marine sediments. moreover, 27% of these sequences were sampled from rna derived cdna libraries. phylogenetic analyses classify a large proportion of these sequences into  <dig> cluster groups , which share less than 97% sequence similarity suggesting this diversity encompasses a range of biologically and ecologically distinct organisms.


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate that the perkinsea lineage is considerably more diverse than previously detected in marine environments. this wide diversity of perkinsea-like protists is largely retrieved in marine sediment with a significant proportion detected in rna derived libraries suggesting this diversity represents ribosomally ‘active’ and intact cells. given the phylogenetic range of hosts infected by known perkinsea parasites, these data suggest that perkinsea either play a significant but hitherto unrecognized role as parasites in marine sediments and/or members of this group are present in the marine sediment possibly as part of the ‘seed bank’ microbial community.

 <dig> pyrosequencingperkinsusparviluciferafood webprotistparasite

