BACKGROUND
the zebrafish intestine is a simple tapered tube that is folded into three sections. however, whether the intestine is functionally similar along its length remains unknown. thus, a systematic structural and functional characterization of the zebrafish intestine is desirable for future studies of the digestive tract and the intestinal biology and development.


RESULTS
to characterize the structure and function of the adult zebrafish intestine, we divided the intestine into seven roughly equal-length segments, s1-s <dig>  and systematically examined the morphology of the mucosal lining, histology of the epithelium, and molecular signatures from transcriptome analysis. prominent morphological features are circumferentially-oriented villar ridges in segments s1-s <dig> and the absence of crypts. molecular characterization of the transcriptome from each segment shows that segments s1-s <dig> are very similar while s <dig> and s <dig> unique. gene ontology analyses reveal that s1-s <dig> express genes whose functions involve metabolism of carbohydrates, transport of lipids and energy generation, while the last two segments display relatively limited function. based on comparative gene set enrichment analysis, the first five segments share strong similarity with human and mouse small intestine while s <dig> shows similarity with human cecum and rectum, and s <dig> with human rectum. the intestinal tract does not display the anatomical, morphological, and molecular signatures of a stomach and thus we conclude that this organ is absent from the zebrafish digestive system.


CONCLUSIONS
our genome-wide gene expression data indicate that, despite the lack of crypts, the rostral, mid, and caudal portions of the zebrafish intestine have distinct functions analogous to the mammalian small and large intestine, respectively. organization of ridge structures represents a unique feature of zebrafish intestine, though they produce similar cross sections to mammalian intestines. evolutionary lack of stomach, crypts, paneth cells and submucosal glands has shaped the zebrafish intestine into a simpler but unique organ in vertebrate intestinal biology.

