BACKGROUND
sixteen, spring-born, single suckled, castrated male calves of limousin × holstein-friesian and simmental × holstein-friesian dams respectively, were used to investigate the effect of weaning on total leukocyte and differential counts, neutrophil functional activity, lymphocyte immunophenotypes, and acute phase protein response. calves grazed with their dams until the end of the grazing season when they were housed in a slatted floor shed. on the day of housing, calves were assigned to a treatment,  abruptly weaned  or  non-weaned  . weaned calves were housed in pens without their dams, whereas non-weaned  calves were housed with their dams. blood was collected on day - <dig>   <dig> ,  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> to determine total leukocyte and differential counts and concentration of fibrinogen and haptoglobin. lymphocyte immunophenotypes were characterised using selected surface antigens , mhc class ii+ lymphocytes), and the functional activities of neutrophils , phagocytic and oxidative burst activity) were investigated using flow cytometry.


RESULTS
treatment × sampling time interactions  were detected for total leukocyte and neutrophil counts, all lymphocyte subsets, mean fluorescence intensity of cd62l+ neutrophils, and percentage neutrophils performing phagocytosis. on d  <dig>  total leukocyte and neutrophil count increased , and percentage cd4+ and cd8+ lymphocytes, percentage phagocytic neutrophils, mean fluorescence intensity of cd62l+ neutrophils decreased  in w compared with baseline , whereas they were unchanged  in c. on d  <dig>  percentage wc1+ lymphocytes decreased , whereas percentage mhc class ii+ lymphocytes increased  in w and c, however the magnitude of change was greater in w than c. there were no treatment × sampling time interactions  for monocyte, eosinophil, and basophil counts, percentage g1+ neutrophils, or percentage oxidative burst positive neutrophils.


CONCLUSIONS
abrupt weaning resulted in increased neutrophil counts and impaired trafficking and phagocytic function. together with the changes in lymphocyte subsets, the results suggest that there was a greater transitory reduction in immune function at housing in abruptly weaned than non-weaned beef calves.

