BACKGROUND
cell-penetrating peptides  have been widely used as carriers to transport different molecules into living cells, whereas messenger rnas  have been utilized as target molecules for the prevention and treatment of various diseases. however, the instability of cpps and mrnas has limited their application. bacteriophage pp <dig> virus-like particles  may protect peptides and rnas from degradation through displaying foreign peptides on their surface and encapsidating rna linked with the pac site.


RESULTS
in this study, the cdna of the pp <dig> coat protein single-chain dimer carrying low molecular weight protamine  and the cdna of green fluorescent protein  were inserted into two multiple cloning sites of petduet- <dig>  respectively. pp <dig> vlps carrying the lmwp peptide and gfp mrna were subsequently expressed in escherichia coli bl <dig>  with high yield and thermal stability, and were easily purified. the vlps were also non-replicative, non-infectious, and non-toxic. moreover, they penetrated the mouse prostate cancer cells rm- <dig> after 24 h incubation. last, pp <dig> vlps carrying the lmwp could encapsidate the gfp mrna, which was translated into mature protein in mammalian cells.


CONCLUSIONS
recombinant pp <dig> vlps can be used simultaneously as a targeted delivery vector for both peptides and mrna due to their abilities to package rna and display peptides.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
low molecular weight protaminemessenger rnapeptide displaypp <dig> bacteriophagevirus-like particleproject of shandong provincial natural science foundation of chinazr2015hl036sun yanli project of shandong province higher educational science and technology program of chinaj14lk14sun yanli project of science and technology program of weifang medical university of chinak1301004sun yanli research fund for the doctoral program of weifang medical university of china2013-04sun yanli issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

