BACKGROUND
the development of genome-wide association studies  in crops has made it possible to mine interesting alleles hidden in gene bank resources. however, only a small fraction of the rice genetic diversity of any given country has been exploited in the studies with worldwide sampling conducted to date. this study presents the development of a panel of rice varieties from vietnam for gwas purposes.


RESULTS
the panel, initially composed of  <dig> accessions, was characterized for simple agronomic traits  commonly used to classify rice varieties. we first genotyped the panel using diversity array technology  markers. we analyzed the panel structure, identified two subpanels corresponding to the indica and japonica sub-species and selected  <dig> non-redundant accessions. however, the number of usable dart markers  was too small for gwas purposes. therefore, we characterized the panel of  <dig> accessions with  <dig>  markers using genotyping by sequencing. the same indica and japonica subpanels were identified. the indica subpanel was further divided into six populations  using a model-based approach. the japonica subpanel, which was more highly differentiated, was divided into  <dig> populations , including a temperate type . passport data and phenotypic traits were used to characterize these populations. some populations were exclusively composed of glutinous types . some of the upland rice varieties appeared to belong to indica populations, which is uncommon in this region of the world. linkage disequilibrium decayed faster in the indica subpanel  than in the japonica subpanel , likely because of the strongest differentiation of the japonica subpanel. a matrix adapted for gwas was built by eliminating the markers with a minor allele frequency below 5% and imputing the missing data. this matrix contained  <dig>  markers. a gwas was conducted on time to flowering to prove the utility of this panel.


CONCLUSIONS
this publicly available panel constitutes an important resource giving access to original allelic diversity. it will be used for gwas on root and panicle traits.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dart markerssnpgenetic diversitylinkage disequilibriumricevietnamissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

