BACKGROUND
eukaryotic cellular machineries are intricately regulated by several molecular mechanisms involving transcriptional control, post-translational control and post-translational modifications of proteins . reversible protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation process, which involves kinases as well as phosphatases, represents an important regulatory mechanism for diverse pathways and systems in all organisms including human malaria parasite, plasmodium falciparum. earlier analysis on p. falciparum protein-phosphatome revealed presence of  <dig> phosphatases in plasmodium genome. recently, we re-analysed p. falciparum phosphatome aimed at identifying parasite specific phosphatases.


RESULTS
plasmodium database  search, combined with pfam and cdd searches, revealed  <dig> candidate phosphatases in p. falciparum. while this number is far less than the number of phosphatases present in homo sapiens, it is almost the same as in other plasmodium species. these plasmodium phosphatase proteins were classified into  <dig> super families based on ncbi cdd search. analysis of proteins expression profiles of the  <dig> phosphatases revealed that  <dig> phosphatases are expressed in both schizont as well as gametocytes stages. fourteen phosphatases are common in schizont, ring and trophozoite stages, four phosphatases are restricted to gametocytes, whereas another three restricted to schizont stage. the phylogenetic trees for each of the known phosphatase super families reveal a considerable phylogenetic closeness amongst apicomplexan organisms and a considerable phylogenetic distance with other eukaryotic model organisms included in the study. the go assignments and predicted interaction partners of the parasite phosphatases indicate its important role in diverse cellular processes.


CONCLUSIONS
in the study presented here, we reviewed the p. falciparum phosphatome to show presence of  <dig> candidate phosphatases in p. falciparum genomes/proteomes. intriguingly, amongst these phosphatases, we could identify six plasmodium specific phosphatases and  <dig> putative phosphatases that do not have human orthologs, thereby suggesting that these phosphatases have the potential to be explored as novel antimalarial drug targets.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
posttranslational modificationsptmpfamcddphosphatomephosphatasedephosphorylationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

