BACKGROUND
circadian rhythm pathways influence the expression patterns of as much as 31% of the arabidopsis genome through complicated interaction pathways, and have been found to be significantly disrupted by biotic and abiotic stress treatments, complicating treatment-response gene discovery methods due to clock pattern mismatches in the fold change-based statistics. the priism  algorithm outlined in this paper is designed to separate pattern changes induced by different forces, including treatment-response pathways and circadian clock rhythm disruptions.


RESULTS
using the fourier transform, high-resolution time-series microarray data is projected to the frequency domain. by identifying the clock frequency range from the core circadian clock genes, we separate the frequency spectrum to different sections containing treatment-frequency , clock-frequency  and noise-frequency components. then, we project the components’ spectra back to the expression domain to reconstruct isolated, independent gene expression patterns representing the effects of the different influences.

by applying priism on a high-resolution time-series arabidopsis microarray dataset under a cold treatment, we systematically evaluated our method using maximum fold change and principal component analyses. the results of this study showed that the ranked treatment-frequency fold change results produce fewer false positives than the original methodology, and the 26-hour timepoint in our dataset was the best statistic for distinguishing the most known cold-response genes. in addition, six novel cold-response genes were discovered. priism also provides gene expression data which represents only circadian clock influences, and may be useful for circadian clock studies.


CONCLUSIONS
priism is a novel approach for overcoming the problem of circadian disruptions from stress treatments on plants. priism can be integrated with any existing analysis approach on gene expression data to separate circadian-influenced changes in gene expression, and it can be extended to apply to any organism with regular oscillations in gene expression patterns across a large portion of the genome.

