BACKGROUND

sleep is regulated by two main processes. 
the circadian process provides a 24-h rhythm and the homeostatic process reflects sleep pressure, which increases in the course of wakefulness and decreases during sleep. both of these processes undergo major changes during development. for example, sleep homeostasis, measured by means of electroencephalogram  slow-wave activity , peaks around puberty and decreases during adolescence. in humans and rats these changes have been related to cortical maturation. we aimed to explore whether additional parameters as state dynamic  parameters of movement velocity, trajectories and micro-arousals provide markers of rat maturation. the state dynamics reflect the stability of sleep within a specific sleep stage. we applied a state space technique , a quantitative and unbiased method, based on frequency band ratios of the eeg to analyze the development of different sleep/wake states and state dynamics between vigilance states. eeg of recording electrodes at the frontal and parietal lobe were analyzed using conventional scoring criteria and sst.



RESULTS
we found that movement velocity, trajectories between sleep states and micro-arousals changed as an inverse u-shaped curve across maturation. at all ages, movement velocity over the frontal lobe is higher compared to the parietal lobe, while the number of trajectories and micro-arousals are reduced. furthermore, we showed that swa correlates negatively with movement velocity and the number of micro-arousals. the velocity in the parietal lobe correlates positively with the number of micro-arousals. as for swa, trajectories seem primarily to depend on sleep homeostasis regulatory mechanisms while the movement velocity seems to be modulated by other sleep regulators like the circadian rhythms.


CONCLUSIONS
new insights in sleep/wake state dynamics are established with the sst, because trajectories, micro-arousals and velocities are not evident by traditional scoring methods. these dynamic measures may represent new indicators for changes in sleep regulatory processes across maturation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
state dynamiceegmaturationlobesratissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

