BACKGROUND
the tightly bound to dna proteins  is a protein group that remains attached to dna with covalent or non-covalent bonds after its deproteinisation. the functional role of this group is as yet not completely understood. the main goal of this study was to evaluate tissue specific changes in the tbp distribution in barley genes and chromosomes in different phases of shoot and seed development. we have:  <dig>  investigated the tbp distribution along amy32b and bmy <dig> genes encoding low pi α-amylase a and endosperm specific β-amylase correspondingly using oligonucleotide dna arrays;  <dig>  characterized the polypeptide spectrum of tbp and proteins with affinity to tbp-associated dna;  <dig>  localized the distribution of dna complexes with tbp  on barley 1h and 7h chromosomes using mapped markers;  <dig>  compared the chromosomal distribution of tbp-dna complexes to the distribution of the nuclear matrix attachment sites.


RESULTS
in the amy32b gene transition from watery ripe to the milky ripeness stage of seed development was followed by the decrease of tbp binding along the whole gene, especially in the promoter region and intron ii. expression of the bmy <dig> gene coupled to ripening was followed by release of the exon iii and intron iii sequences from complexes with tbps. marker analysis revealed changes in the association of chromosome 1h and 7h sites with tbps between first leaf and coleoptile and at zadoks  <dig> and zadoks  <dig> stages of barley shoot development. tight dna-protein complexes of the nuclear matrix and those detected by npc-chromatography were revealed as also involved in tissue- and development-dependent transitions, however, in sites different from tbp-dna interactions. the spectrum of tbps appeared to be organ and developmental-stage specific. development of the first leaf and root system  was shown as followed by a drastic increase in the tbp number in contrast to coleoptile, where the tbps spectrum became poor during senescence. it was demonstrated that a nuclear protein of low molecular weight similar to the described tbps possessed a high affinity to the dna involved in tbp-dna complexes.


CONCLUSIONS
plant development is followed by redistribution of tbp along individual genes and chromosomes.

