BACKGROUND
endurance exercise in horses requires adaptive processes involving physiological, biochemical, and cognitive-behavioral responses in an attempt to regain homeostasis. we hypothesized that the identification of the relationships between blood metabolome, transcriptome, and mirnome during endurance exercise in horses could provide significant insights into the molecular response to endurance exercise.

for this reason, the serum metabolome and whole-blood transcriptome and mirnome data were obtained from ten horses before and after a 160 km endurance competition.


RESULTS
we obtained a global regulatory network based on  <dig> unique metabolites,  <dig> metabolic genes and  <dig> mirnas whose expression was significantly altered at t <dig>  relative to t <dig> . this network provided new insights into the cross talk between the distinct molecular pathways  that were not detectable when analyzing single metabolites or transcripts alone. single metabolites and transcripts were carrying out multiple roles and thus sharing several biochemical pathways.

using a regulatory impact factor metric analysis, this regulatory network was further confirmed at the transcription factor and mirna levels.

in an extended cohort of  <dig> independent animals, multiple factor analysis confirmed the strong associations between lactate, methylene derivatives, mir-21-5p, mir-16-5p, let- <dig> family and genes that coded proteins involved in metabolic reactions primarily related to energy, ubiquitin proteasome and lipopolysaccharide immune responses after the endurance competition. multiple factor analysis also identified potential biomarkers at t <dig> for an increased likelihood for failure to finish an endurance competition.


CONCLUSIONS
to the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first to provide a comprehensive and integrated overview of the metabolome, transcriptome, and mirnome co-regulatory networks that may have a key role in regulating the metabolic and immune response to endurance exercise in horses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
endurance exercisehorsemetabolomemirnomemultiple factor analysisregulometranscriptomesystems biologyfonds eperon and institut français du cheval et de l’equitation nabarrey eric issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

