BACKGROUND
grapevine phylloxera, an insect related to true aphids, is a major historic pest of viticulture only controlled through the selection of resistant rootstocks or through quarantine regulations where grapevine is cultivated own-rooted. transcriptomic data could help understand the bases of its original life-traits, including a striking case of polyphenism, with forms feeding on roots and forms feeding in leaf-galls. comparisons with true aphids  should also allow to link differences in life-traits of the two groups with changes in gene repertoires or shifts in patterns of expression.


RESULTS
we sequenced transcriptomes of the grapevine phylloxera , choosing three life-stages  to cover a large catalogue of transcripts, and performed a de novo assembly. this resulted in  <dig>  contigs, which were annotated: most contigs had a best blastx hit to the pea aphid , while very few bacterial hits were recorded . coding sequences were predicted from this data set , revealing an extremely high at-bias . differential expression  analysis among root-feeding and gall-feeding showed that i) the root-feeding form displayed a much larger number of differentially expressed transcripts ii) root-feeding biased genes were enriched in some categories, for example cuticular proteins and genes associated with cell-cell signaling iii) leaf-galling-biased genes were enriched in genes associated with the nucleus and dna-replication, suggesting a metabolism more oriented towards fast and active multiplication. we also identified a gene family with a very high expression level  in the grapevine phylloxera , but usually expressed at very low levels in true aphids . these transcripts thus appear to be associated with oviparity.


CONCLUSIONS
our study illustrated major intraspecific changes in transcriptome profiles, related with different life-styles . at a different scale, we could also illustrate one major shift in expression levels associated with changes in life-traits that occurred along evolution and that respectively characterize  grapevine phylloxera and  true aphids.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
daktulosphaira vitifoliaeradicicolegallicolepolyphenismoviparitygene duplicationaphidpolyphenismvitisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

