BACKGROUND
the presence of closely related genomes in polyploid species makes the assembly of total genomic sequence from shotgun sequence reads produced by the current sequencing platforms exceedingly difficult, if not impossible. genomes of polyploid species could be sequenced following the ordered-clone sequencing approach employing contigs of bacterial artificial chromosome  clones and bac-based physical maps. although bac contigs can currently be constructed for virtually any diploid organism with the snapshot high-information-content-fingerprinting  technology, it is currently unknown if this is also true for polyploid species. it is possible that bac clones from orthologous regions of homoeologous chromosomes would share numerous restriction fragments and be therefore included into common contigs. because of this and other concerns, physical mapping utilizing the snapshot hicf of bac libraries of polyploid species has not been pursued and the possibility of doing so has not been assessed. the sole exception has been in common wheat, an allohexaploid in which it is possible to construct single-chromosome or single-chromosome-arm bac libraries from dna of flow-sorted chromosomes and bypass the obstacles created by polyploidy.


RESULTS
the potential of the snapshot hicf technology for physical mapping of polyploid plants utilizing global bac libraries was evaluated by assembling contigs of fingerprinted clones in an in silico merged bac library composed of single-chromosome libraries of two wheat homoeologous chromosome arms, 3as and 3ds, and complete chromosome 3b. because the chromosome arm origin of each clone was known, it was possible to estimate the fidelity of contig assembly. on average  <dig> % or more clones, depending on the library, were from a single chromosome arm. a large portion of the remaining clones was shown to be library contamination from other chromosomes, a feature that is unavoidable during the construction of single-chromosome bac libraries.


CONCLUSIONS
the negligibly low level of incorporation of clones from homoeologous chromosome arms into a contig during contig assembly suggested that it is feasible to construct contigs and physical maps using global bac libraries of wheat and almost certainly also of other plant polyploid species with genome sizes comparable to that of wheat. because of the high purity of the resulting assembled contigs, they can be directly used for genome sequencing. it is currently unknown but possible that equally good bac contigs can be also constructed for polyploid species containing smaller, more gene-rich genomes.

