BACKGROUND
collagen type iii glomerulopathy , also known as collagenofibrotic glomerulonephropathy, is a rare renal disease with unknown pathogenesis that occurs in animals and humans. we recently described a naturally occurring canine autosomal recessive model of col3gp, and the aim of the present work was to study the clinical features of canine col3gp and compare with the human phenotype. in humans two different clinical syndromes with different age at onset  have been observed. in children a more aggressive course with familial occurrence is described, characterized by progressively increasing proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome, hypertension and chronic renal failure. a markedly increased serum level of the aminoterminal propeptide of type iii procollagen  is considered a useful marker for the disease. since col3gp and concurrent hypocomplementemia have been observed in humans, we also aimed to investigate if hypocomplementemia was present in col3gp affected dogs. a litter consisting of seven puppies, four col3gp affected and three healthy unaffected, was observed from the day of birth until the affected puppies developed a mild or moderate renal azotemia.


RESULTS
during the period of observation growth retardation, increasing blood pressure, progressive proteinuria, azotemia, hypoalbuminemia, hypercholesterolemia and increased serum piiinp were observed in all the affected dogs. hypocomplementemia was not detected. affected dogs were euthanized between  <dig> and 144 days of age, and pathological examinations revealed ascites and massive glomerular accumulations of collagen type iii, consistent with col3gp.


CONCLUSIONS
dogs with col3gp develop juvenile chronic renal failure, preceded by nephrotic syndrome, elevated serum piiinp and hypertension, thus have similar clinical features as the juvenile col3gp in humans. further studies of this naturally occurring canine phenotype may provide more information on the pathogenesis and genetics of col3gp in both animals and humans.

animal modelcaninecollagen type iiicollagenofibroticdogglomerulopathyhereditaryjuvenilenephropathy

