BACKGROUND
ionizing radiation composed of accelerated ions of high atomic number  and energy  deposits energy and creates damage in cells in a discrete manner as compared to the random deposition of energy and damage seen with low energy radiations such as γ- or x-rays. such radiations can be highly effective at cell killing, transformation, and oncogenesis, all of which are concerns for the manned space program and for the burgeoning field of hze particle radiotherapy for cancer. furthermore, there are differences in the extent to which cells or tissues respond to such exposures that may be unrelated to absorbed dose. therefore, we asked whether the energy deposition patterns produced by different radiation types would cause different molecular responses. we performed transcriptome profiling using human bronchial epithelial cells  after exposure to γ-rays and to two different hze particles  with different energy transfer properties to characterize the molecular response to hze particles and γ-rays as a function of dose, energy deposition pattern, and time post-irradiation.


RESULTS
clonogenic assay indicated that the relative biological effectiveness  for 56fe was  <dig>  and for 28si was  <dig>  at 34% cell survival. unsupervised clustering analysis of gene expression segregated samples according to the radiation species followed by the time after irradiation, whereas dose was not a significant parameter for segregation of radiation response. while a subset of genes associated with p53-signaling, such as cdkn1a, trim <dig> and btg <dig> showed very similar responses to all radiation qualities, distinct expression changes were associated with the different radiation species. gene enrichment analysis categorized the differentially expressed genes into functional groups related to cell death and cell cycle regulation for all radiation types, while gene pathway analysis revealed that the pro-inflammatory acute phase response signaling was specifically induced after hze particle irradiation. a  <dig> gene signature capable of predicting with 96% accuracy the radiation species to which cells were exposed, was developed.


CONCLUSIONS
these data suggest that the molecular response to the radiation species used here is a function of the energy deposition characteristics of the radiation species. this novel molecular response to hze particles may have implications for radiotherapy including particle selection for therapy and risk for second cancers, risk for cancers from diagnostic radiation exposures, as well as nasa’s efforts to develop more accurate lung cancer risk estimates for astronaut safety. lastly, irrespective of the source of radiation, the gene expression changes observed set the stage for functional studies of initiation or progression of radiation-induced lung carcinogenesis.

gene expressionhze particlesionizing radiationhuman bronchial epithelial cells

