BACKGROUND
the identification of factors involved in the host range definition and evolution is a pivotal challenge in the goal to predict and prevent the emergence of plant bacterial disease. to trace the evolution and find molecular differences between three pathotypes of xanthomonas citri pv. citri that may explain their distinctive host ranges,  <dig> strains of x. citri pv. citri and one outgroup strain, xanthomonas citri pv. bilvae were sequenced and compared.


RESULTS
the strains from each pathotype form monophyletic clades, with a short branch shared by the aw and a pathotypes. pathotype-specific recombination was detected in seven regions of the alignment. using ancestral character estimation,  <dig> snps were mapped to the four branches at the base of the a, a*, aw and a/aw clades. several genes containing pathotype-specific nonsynonymous mutations have functions related to pathogenicity. the a pathotype is enriched for snp-containing genes involved in defense mechanisms, while a* is significantly depleted for genes that are involved in transcription. the pathotypes differ by four gene islands that largely coincide with regions of recombination and include genes with a role in virulence. both a* and aw are missing genes involved in defense mechanisms. in contrast to a recent study, we find that there are an extremely small number of pathotype-specific gene presences and absences.


CONCLUSIONS
the three pathotypes of x. citri pv. citri that differ in their host ranges largely show genomic differences related to recombination, horizontal gene transfer and single nucleotide polymorphism. we detail the phylogenetic relationship of the pathotypes and provide a set of candidate genes involved in pathotype-specific evolutionary events that could explain to the differences in host range and pathogenicity between them.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
xanthomonas citriplant pathogengenome evolutionpathotype evolutionhost range determinationrecombinationgene islandsancestral character estimationpathogenicitygene presence/absencehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004963seventh framework programme 263958gordon jonathan l. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001665agence nationale de la rechercheanr-10-inbs-09issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

