BACKGROUND
network component analysis  has been used to deduce the activities of transcription factors  from gene expression data and the tf-gene binding relationship. however, the tf-gene interaction varies in different environmental conditions and tissues, but such information is rarely available and cannot be predicted simply by motif analysis. thus, it is beneficial to identify key tf-gene interactions under the experimental condition based on transcriptome data. such information would be useful in identifying key regulatory pathways and gene markers of tfs in further studies.


RESULTS
we developed an algorithm to trim network connectivity such that the important regulatory interactions between the tfs and the genes were retained and the regulatory signals were deduced. theoretical studies demonstrated that the regulatory signals were accurately reconstructed even in the case where only three independent transcriptome datasets were available. at least 80% of the main target genes were correctly predicted in the extreme condition of high noise level and small number of datasets. our algorithm was tested with transcriptome data taken from mice under rapamycin treatment. the initial network topology from the literature contains  <dig> tfs,  <dig> genes, and  <dig> edges between the tfs and genes. our method retained  <dig> edges  and identified  <dig> tfs as being significantly perturbed under the experimental condition. twelve of these tfs are involved in mapk signaling or myeloid leukemia pathways defined in the kegg database, or are known to physically interact with each other. additionally, four of these tfs, which are hif1a, cebpb, nfkb <dig>  and atf <dig>  are known targets of rapamycin. furthermore, the trimmed network was able to predict eno <dig> as an important target of hif1a; this key interaction could not be detected without trimming the regulatory network.


CONCLUSIONS
the advantage of our new algorithm, relative to the original nca, is that our algorithm can identify the important tf-gene interactions. identifying the important tf-gene interactions is crucial for understanding the roles of pleiotropic global regulators, such as p <dig>  also, our algorithm has been developed to overcome nca's inability to analyze large networks where multiple tfs regulate a single gene. thus, our algorithm extends the applicability of nca to the realm of mammalian regulatory network analysis.

