BACKGROUND
whole exome sequencing  is one of the most used and cost-effective next generation technologies that allows sequencing of all nuclear exons. off-target regions may be captured if they present high sequence similarity with baits. bioinformatics tools have been optimized to retrieve a large amount of wes off-target mitochondrial dna , by exploiting the aspecificity of probes, partially overlapping to nuclear mitochondrial sequences . the  <dig> genomes project represents one of the widest resources to extract mtdna sequences from wes data, considering the large effort the scientific community is undertaking to reconstruct human population history using mtdna as marker, and the involvement of mtdna in pathology.


RESULTS
a previously published pipeline aimed at assembling mitochondrial genomes from off-target wes reads and further improved to detect insertions and deletions  and heteroplasmy in a dataset of  <dig> samples from the  <dig> genomes project, enabled to obtain a nearly complete mitochondrial genome from  <dig> samples . the robustness of our computational strategy was highlighted by the reduction of reads amount recognized as mitochondrial in the original annotation produced by the consortium, due to numts filtering.

an accurate survey was carried out on  <dig> individuals.  <dig> indels, mostly heteroplasmic, and  <dig> single base variants were mapped. a homogeneous mismatches distribution was observed along the whole mitochondrial genome, while a lower frequency of indels was found within protein-coding regions, where frameshift mutations may be deleterious. the majority of indels and mismatches found were not previously annotated in mitochondrial databases since conventional sequencing methods were limited to homoplasmy or quasi-homoplasmy detection. intriguingly, upon filtering out non haplogroup-defining variants, we detected a widespread population occurrence of rare events predicted to be damaging. eventually, samples were stratified into blood- and lymphoblastoid-derived to detect possibly different trends of mutability in the two datasets, an analysis which did not yield significant discordances.


CONCLUSIONS
to the best of our knowledge, this is likely the most extended population-scale mitochondrial genotyping in humans enriched with the estimation of heteroplasmies.

21- <dig> may  <dig> tenth annual meeting of the italian society of bioinformatics   udine, italy

