BACKGROUND
for accurate and reliable gene expression analysis, normalization of gene expression data against reference genes is essential. in most studies on ticks where quantitative rt-pcr is employed, normalization occurs with a single reference gene, usually β-actin, without validation of its presumed expression stability. the first goal of this study was to evaluate the expression stability of commonly used reference genes in rhipicephalus appendiculatus and rhipicephalus  microplus ticks. to demonstrate the usefulness of these results, an unresolved issue in tick vaccine development was examined. commercial vaccines against r. microplus were developed based on the recombinant antigen bm <dig>  but despite a high degree of sequence homology, these vaccines are not effective against r. appendiculatus. in fact, bm86-based vaccines give better protection against some tick species with lower bm <dig> sequence homology. one possible explanation is the variation in bm <dig> expression levels between r. microplus and r. appendiculatus. the most stable reference genes were therefore used for normalization of the bm <dig> expression profile in all life stages of both species to examine whether antigen abundance plays a role in bm <dig> vaccine susceptibility.


RESULTS
the transcription levels of nine potential reference genes: β-actin , β-tubulin , elongation factor 1α , glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase , glutathione s-transferase , h <dig> histone family 3a , cyclophilin , ribosomal protein l <dig>  and tata box binding protein  were measured in all life stages of r. microplus and r. appendiculatus. elf1a was found to be the most stable expressed gene in both species following analysis by both genorm and normfinder software applications, gst showed the least stability. the expression profile of bm <dig> in r. appendiculatus and r. microplus revealed a more continuous bm <dig> antigen abundance in r. microplus throughout its one-host life cycle compared to the three-host tick r. appendiculatus where large variations were observed between different life stages.


CONCLUSIONS
based on these results, elf1a can be proposed as an initial reference gene for normalization of quantitative rt-pcr data in whole r. microplus and r. appendiculatus ticks. the observed differences in bm <dig> expression profile between the two species alone can not adequately explain the lack of a bm <dig> vaccination effect in r. appendiculatus.

