BACKGROUND
abiotic stresses are serious threats to plant growth, productivity and result in crop loss worldwide, reducing average yields of most major crops. although abiotic stresses might elicit different plant responses, most induce the accumulation of reactive oxygen species  in plant cells leads to oxidative damage. l-ascorbic acid  is known as an antioxidant and h2o2-scavenger that defends plants against abiotic stresses. in addition, vitamin c is also an important component of human nutrition that has to be obtained from different foods. therefore, increasing the vitamin c content is important for improving abiotic stresses tolerance and nutrition quality in crops production.


RESULTS
here, we show that the expression of atoxr gene is response to multiple abiotic stresses  in both the leaves and roots of arabidopsis. atoxr protein was localized to the endoplasmic reticulum  in yeast and arabidopsis cells by co-localization analysis with er specific dye. atoxr-overexpressing transgenic arabidopsis plants enhance the tolerance to abiotic stresses. overexpression of atoxr gene resulted in asa accumulation and decreased h2o <dig> content in transgenic plants.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, our results show that atoxr responds to multiple abiotic stresses. overexpressing atoxr improves tolerance to abiotic stresses and increase vitamin c content in arabidopsis thaliana. atoxr will be useful for the improvement of important crop plants through moleculer breeding.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
abiotic stressesl-ascorbic acid hydrogen peroxide transgenic plantsheilongjiang province government postdoctoral science foundationlbh-z15003bu yuanyuan heilongjiang province foundation for returneeslc201405bu yuanyuan the program for changjiang scholars and innovative research team in universityirt13053liu shenkui china postdoctoral science foundation 2016m590272bu yuanyuan issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

