BACKGROUND
the heterogeneity observed regarding persistence, and subsequent fecal shedding pattern of the salmonella senftenberg  serovar in chicken’s calls for development of the optimized immunization strategy which can provide protection against various s. senftenberg isolated. optimization of an immunization strategy with a live attenuated s. senftenberg  vaccine candidate  was undertaken in this study to evaluate the ability of a homologous prime-boost immunization strategy  to confer protection against four different s. senftenberg isolates in chickens.


RESULTS
after oral immunization with jol <dig>  the humoral, mucosal and cell-mediated immune responses were significantly higher in double immunized chickens than in single immunized and control group chickens. a significant increase in the multifunctional cytokine il- <dig> and in helper and cytotoxic t cell populations after a booster immunization also indicated the advantage of double over single immunization. the four different s. senftenberg field isolates were characterized by their persistence levels in chickens, and were subsequently used for challenge experiments to evaluate the differences in protective efficacy conferred by single and double immunization. chickens from the doubleimmunized group exhibited significant reduction in the shedding of all four wild-type s. senftenberg challenge strains below the detection limit in the fecal samples. single immunized chickens showed a decrease in fecal shedding, but failed to exhibit complete protection against all the challenge strains.


CONCLUSIONS
although single immunization with jol <dig> showed a reduction in the fecal shedding of challenge strains, only the homologous prime-boost immunization strategy provided an adequate immune response for increased protection against all four challenge strains of s. senftenberg from the feces of chickens.

keywords
salmonella senftenbergmucosal immunitypersistencefecal sheddinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003725national research foundation of korea2015r1a2a1a14001011lee john hwa issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

