BACKGROUND
according to regulation  no 619/ <dig>  trace amounts of non-authorised genetically modified organisms  in feed are tolerated within the eu if certain prerequisites are met. tolerable traces must not exceed the so-called ‘minimum required performance limit’ , which was defined according to the mentioned regulation to correspond to  <dig> % mass fraction per ingredient. therefore, not yet authorised gmo  have to be quantified at very low level following the qualitative detection in genomic dna extracted from feed samples. as the results of quantitative analysis can imply severe legal and financial consequences for producers or distributors of feed, the quantification results need to be utterly reliable.


RESULTS
we developed a statistical approach to investigate the experimental measurement variability within one 96-well pcr plate. this approach visualises the frequency distribution as zygosity-corrected relative content of genetically modified material resulting from different combinations of transgene and reference gene cq values. one application of it is the simulation of the consequences of varying parameters on measurement results. parameters could be for example replicate numbers or baseline and threshold settings, measurement results could be for example median  and relative standard deviation . all calculations can be done using the built-in functions of excel without any need for programming. the developed excel spreadsheets are available . in most cases, the combination of four pcr replicates for each of the two dna isolations already resulted in a relative standard deviation of 15% or less.


CONCLUSIONS
the aims of the study are scientifically based suggestions for minimisation of uncertainty of measurement especially in —but not limited to— the field of gmo quantification at low concentration levels. four pcr replicates for each of the two dna isolations seem to be a reasonable minimum number to narrow down the possible spread of results.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genetically modified organism real-time pcr quantificationlow-level presence  no 619/2011)feed analysissimulation of frequency distributionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

