BACKGROUND

n
6-methyladenosine  is the most prevalent internal form of modification in messenger rna in higher eukaryotes and potential regulatory functions of reversible m6a methylation on mrna have been revealed by mapping of m6a methylomes in several species. m6a modification in active gene regulation manifests itself as altered methylation profiles in a tissue-specific manner or in response to changing cellular or species living environment. however, up to date, there has no data on m6a porcine transcriptome-wide map and its potential biological roles in adipose deposition and muscle growth.

methods
in this work, we used methylated rna immunoprecipitation with next-generation sequencing  technique to acquire the first ever m6a porcine transcriptome-wide map. transcriptomes of muscle and adipose tissues from three different pig breeds, the wild boar, landrace, and rongchang pig, were used to generate these maps.


RESULTS
our findings show that there were  <dig>  and  <dig>  m6a peaks respectively, in the porcine muscle and adipose tissue transcriptomes. stop codons, 3′-untranslated regions, and coding regions were found to be mainly enriched for m6a peaks. gene ontology analysis revealed that common m6a peaks in nuclear genes are associated with transcriptional factors, suggestive of a relationship between m6a mrna methylation and nuclear genome transcription. some genes showed tissue- and breed-differential methylation, and have novel biological functions. we also found a relationship between the m6a methylation extent and the transcript level, suggesting a regulatory role for m6a in gene expression.


CONCLUSIONS
this comprehensive map provides a solid basis for the determination of potential functional roles for rna m6a modification in adipose deposition and muscle growth.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
differentially methylated genesmerip-seqn6-methyladenosineporcinetranscriptional regulationthe key program of national natural science foundation of china31530073li xuewei the changjiang scholars and innovative research team in universityirt13083li xuewei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

