BACKGROUND
the evolution of oogamy from isogamy, an important biological event, can be summarized as follows: morphologically similar gametes  differentiated into small “male” and large “female” motile gametes during anisogamy, from which immotile female gametes  evolved. the volvocine green algae represent a model lineage to study this type of sex evolution and show two types of gametic unions: conjugation between isogametes outside the parental colonies  and fertilization between small motile gametes  and large gametes  inside the female colony . although recent cultural studies on volvocine algae revealed morphological diversity and molecular genetic data of sexual reproduction, an intermediate type of union between these two gametic unions has not been identified.


RESULTS
we identified a novel colonial volvocine genus, colemanosphaera, which produces bundles of spindle-shaped male gametes through successive divisions of colonial cells. obligately anisogamous conjugation between male and female motile gametes occurred outside the female colony . this new genus contains 16- or 32-celled spheroidal colonies similar to those of the volvocine genera yamagishiella and eudorina. however, colemanosphaera can be clearly distinguished from these two genera based on its sister phylogenetic position to the enigmatic flattened colonial volvocine platydorina and external fertilization during anisogamy. two species of colemanosphaera were found in a japanese lake; these species are also distributed in european freshwaters based on a published sequence of an austrian strain and the original description of pandorina charkowiensis from ukraine.


CONCLUSIONS
based on phylogeny and morphological data, this novel genus exhibits a missing link between platydorina and the typical spheroidal colonial volvocine members such as pandorina or yamagishiella. considering the external obligate anisogamy, oogamy evolution may have been preceded by the transition from external to internal fertilization during anisogamy within the volvocine green algae.

