BACKGROUND
 <dig> , <dig> –tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dixion  is the most potent of the dioxin congeners, capable of causing a wide range of toxic effects across numerous animal models. previous studies have demonstrated that males and females of the same species can display divergent sensitivity phenotypes to tcdd toxicities. although it is now clear that most tcdd-induced toxic outcomes are mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor , the mechanism of differential responses to tcdd exposure between sexes remains largely unknown. to investigate the differential sensitivities in male and female mice, we profiled the hepatic transcriptomic responses 4 days following exposure to various amounts of tcdd  in adult male and female c57bl/6kuo mice.


RESULTS
several key findings were revealed by our study. 1) hepatic transcriptomes varied significantly between the sexes at all doses examined. 2) the liver transcriptome of males was more dysregulated by tcdd than that of females. 3) the alteration of “ahr-core” genes was consistent in magnitude, regardless of sex. 4) a subset of genes demonstrated sex-dependent tcdd-induced transcriptional changes, including fmo <dig> and nr1i <dig>  which were significantly induced in livers of male mice only. in addition, a meta-analysis was performed to contrast transcriptomic profiles of various organisms and tissues following exposure to equitoxic doses of tcdd. minimal overlap was observed in the differences between tcdd-sensitive or tcdd-resistant models.


CONCLUSIONS
sex-dependent sensitivities to tcdd exposure are associated with a set of sex-specific tcdd-responsive genes. in addition, complex interactions between the aryl hydrocarbon and sex hormone receptors may affect the observable differences in sensitivity phenotypes between the sexes. further work is necessary to better understand the roles of those genes altered by tcdd in a sex-dependent manner, and their association with changes to sex hormones and receptors.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
 <dig> , <dig> -tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxintcddaryl hydrocarbon receptorahrsex differencesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

