BACKGROUND
small-secreted peptides are emerging as important components in cell-cell communication during basic developmental stages of plant cell growth and development. plant peptide containing sulfated tyrosine  <dig>  has been reported to promote cell expansion and differentiation in the elongation zone of roots. psy <dig> action is dependent on a receptor psy1r that triggers a signaling cascade leading to cell elongation. however little is known about cellular functions and the components involved in psy1-based signaling cascade.


RESULTS
differentially expressed genes were identified in a wild type plant line and in a psy1r receptor mutant line of arabidopsis thaliana after treatment with psy <dig>  seventy-seven genes were found to be responsive to the psy <dig> peptide in wild type plants while  <dig> genes were responsive in the receptor mutant plants. psy <dig> activates the transcripts of genes involved in cell wall modification. gene enrichment analysis revealed that psy1-responsive genes are involved in responses to stimuli, metabolic processes and biosynthetic processes. the significant enrichment terms of psy1-responsive genes were higher in psy1r mutant plants compared to in wild type plants. two parallel responses to psy <dig> were identified, differing in their dependency on the psy1r receptor. promoter analysis of the differentially expressed genes identified a light regulatory motif in some of these.


CONCLUSIONS
psy1-responsive genes are involved in cellular functions and stimuli responses suggesting a crosstalk between developmental cues and environmental stimuli. possibly, two parallel responses to psy <dig> exist. a motif involved in light regulation was identified in the promoter region of the differentially expressed genes. reduced hypocotyl growth was observed in etiolated receptor mutant seedlings.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cellular functionsgene enrichment analysismicroarraysignaling cascadesmall signaling peptidesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

