BACKGROUND
with the availability of large-scale, high-density single-nucleotide polymorphism  markers, substantial effort has been made in identifying disease-causing genes using linkage disequilibrium  mapping by haplotype analysis of unrelated individuals. in addition to complex diseases, many continuously distributed quantitative traits are of primary clinical and health significance. however the development of association mapping methods using unrelated individuals for quantitative traits has received relatively less attention.


RESULTS
we recently developed an association mapping method for complex diseases by mining the sharing of haplotype segments  in affected individuals that are rarely present in normal individuals. in this paper, we extend our previous work to address the problem of quantitative trait mapping from unrelated individuals. the method is non-parametric in nature, and statistical significance can be obtained by a permutation test. it can also be incorporated into the one-way ancova  framework so that other factors and covariates can be easily incorporated. the effectiveness of the approach is demonstrated by extensive experimental studies using both simulated and real data sets. the results show that our haplotype-based approach is more robust than two statistical methods based on single markers: a single snp association test  and the mann-whitney u-test . the algorithm has been incorporated into our existing software package called hapminer, which is available from our website at .


CONCLUSIONS
for qtl  fine mapping, to identify qtns  with realistic effects , large samples sizes  are needed for all the methods. the overall performance of hapminer is better than that of the other two methods. its effectiveness further depends on other factors such as recombination rates and the density of typed snps. haplotype-based methods might provide higher power than methods based on a single snp when using tag snps selected from a small number of samples or some other sources . rank-based statistics usually have much lower power, as shown in our study.

