BACKGROUND
widespread and more frequently occurring drought conditions are a consequence of global warming and increase the demand for tolerant crop varieties to feed the growing world population. a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the water deficit response of crops will enable targeted breeding strategies to develop robust cultivars.


RESULTS
in the present study, the transcriptional response of maize  primary roots to low water potentials was monitored by rna sequencing  experiments. after 6 h and 24 h of mild  and severe  water deficit conditions, the primary root transcriptomes of seedlings grown under water deficit and control conditions were compared. the number of responsive genes was dependent on and increased with intensification of water deficit treatment. after short-term mild and severe water deficit  <dig> and  <dig>  genes were differentially expressed, respectively. after a 24 h treatment the number of affected genes increased to  <dig>  and  <dig>  for mild and severe water deficit, respectively, including more than 80% of the short-term responsive genes. about half of the differentially expressed genes were up-regulated and maximal fold-changes increased with treatment intensity to more than 300-fold. a consensus set of  <dig> genes was differentially regulated independently of the nature of deficit treatment. characterization revealed an overrepresentation of the gene ontology  categories “oxidoreductase activity” and “heme binding” among regulated genes connecting the water deficit response to ros metabolism.


CONCLUSIONS
this study gives a comprehensive insight in water deficit responsive genes in young maize primary roots and provides a set of candidate genes that merit further genetic analyses in the future.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
droughtlow water potentialmaizerna-seqroottranscriptomewater deficitissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

