BACKGROUND
anuran vocalizations, especially their advertisement calls, are largely species-specific and can be used to identify taxonomic affiliations. because anurans are not vocal learners, their vocalizations are generally assumed to have a strong genetic component. this suggests that the degree of similarity between advertisement calls may be related to large-scale phylogenetic relationships. to test this hypothesis, advertisement calls from  <dig> species belonging to four large clades  were analyzed. phylogenetic distances were estimated based on the dna sequences of the 12s mitochondrial ribosomal rna gene, and, for a subset of  <dig> species, on the rhodopsin gene. mean values for five acoustic parameters  were computed for each species. we then tested for phylogenetic signal on the body-size-corrected residuals of these five parameters, using three statistical tests  and three models of genetic distance .


RESULTS
a significant phylogenetic signal was detected for most acoustic parameters on the 12s dataset, across statistical tests and genetic distance models, both for the entire sample of  <dig> species and within clades in several cases. a further analysis on a subset of  <dig> species using genetic distances derived from rhodopsin and from 12s broadly confirmed the results obtained on the larger sample, indicating that the phylogenetic signals observed in these acoustic parameters can be detected using a variety of genetic distance models derived either from a variable mitochondrial sequence or from a conserved nuclear gene.


CONCLUSIONS
we found a robust relationship, in a large number of species, between anuran phylogenetic relatedness and acoustic similarity in the advertisement calls in a taxon with no evidence for vocal learning, even after correcting for the effect of body size. this finding, covering a broad sample of species whose vocalizations are fairly diverse, indicates that the intense selection on certain call characteristics observed in many anurans does not eliminate all acoustic indicators of relatedness. our approach could potentially be applied to other vocal taxa.

anuransmolecular phylogenyphylogenetic signalacousticsadvertisement callsmitochondrial dna <dig> srhodopsinbufohylinaeleptodactylusrana

