BACKGROUND
qualitative pathogen resistance in both dicotyledenous and monocotyledonous plants has been attributed to the action of resistance  genes, including those encoding nucleotide binding site – leucine rich repeat  proteins and receptor-like kinase enzymes. this study describes the large-scale isolation and characterisation of candidate r genes from perennial ryegrass. the analysis was based on the availability of an expressed sequence tag  resource and a functionally-integrated bioinformatics database.


RESULTS
amplification of r gene sequences was performed using template est data and information from orthologous candidate using a degenerate consensus pcr approach. a total of  <dig> unique partial r genes were cloned, sequenced and functionally annotated. analysis of motif structure and r gene phylogeny demonstrated that lolium r genes cluster with putative ortholoci, and evolved from common ancestral origins. single nucleotide polymorphisms  predicted through resequencing of amplicons from the parental genotypes of a genetic mapping family were validated, and  <dig> distinct r gene loci were assigned to multiple genetic maps. clusters of largely non-related nbs-lrr genes were located at multiple distinct genomic locations and were commonly found in close proximity to previously mapped defence response  genes. a comparative genomics analysis revealed the co-location of several candidate r genes with disease resistance quantitative trait loci .


CONCLUSIONS
this study is the most comprehensive analysis to date of qualitative disease resistance candidate genes in perennial ryegrass. snps identified within candidate genes provide a valuable resource for mapping in various ryegrass pair cross-derived populations and further germplasm analysis using association genetics. in parallel with the use of specific pathogen virulence races, such resources provide the means to identify gene-for-gene mechanisms for multiple host pathogen-interactions and ultimately to obtain durable field-based resistance.

