BACKGROUND
the leading edge of the global problem of antibiotic resistance necessitates novel therapeutic strategies. this study develops a novel systems biology driven approach for killing antibiotic resistant pathogens using benign metabolites.


RESULTS
controlled laboratory evolutions established chloramphenicol and streptomycin resistant pathogens of chromobacterium. these resistant pathogens showed higher growth rates and required higher lethal doses of antibiotic. growth and viability testing identified malate, maleate, succinate, pyruvate and oxoadipate as resensitising agents for antibiotic therapy. resistant genes were catalogued through whole genome sequencing. intracellular metabolomic profiling identified violacein as a potential biomarker for resistance. the temporal variance of metabolites captured the linearized dynamics around the steady state and correlated to growth rate. a constraints-based flux balance model of the core metabolism was used to predict the metabolic basis of antibiotic susceptibility and resistance.


CONCLUSIONS
the model predicts electron imbalance and skewed nad/nadh ratios as a result of antibiotics – chloramphenicol and streptomycin. the resistant pathogen rewired its metabolic networks to compensate for disruption of redox homeostasis. we foresee the utility of such scalable workflows in identifying metabolites for clinical isolates as inevitable solutions to mitigate antibiotic resistance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
antibiotic resistancemetabolomicflux balance analysisflux variability analysisredox homeostasisnadnadhmetabolismhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001407department of biotechnology , ministry of science and technologygap302126raghunathan anu science and engineering research board gap292826raghunathan anu http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001412council of scientific and industrial researchhcp003raghunathan anu issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

