BACKGROUND
compensatory growth  is an accelerated growth phenomenon observed in animals upon re-alimentation following a period of dietary restriction. it is typically utilised in livestock systems to reduce feed costs during periods of reduced feed availability. the biochemical mechanisms controlling this phenomenon, however, are yet to be elucidated. this study aimed to uncover the molecular mechanisms regulating the hepatic expression of cg in cattle, utilising rnaseq. rnaseq was performed on hepatic tissue of bulls following 125 days of dietary restriction  and again following 55 days of subsequent re-alimentation during which the animals exhibited significant cg. the data were compared with those of control animals offered the same diet on an ad libitum basis throughout . elucidation of the molecular control of cg may yield critical information on genes and pathways which could be targeted as putative molecular biomarkers for the selection of animals with improved cg potential.


RESULTS
following a period of differential feeding, body-weight and liver weight were  <dig> and 4 kg higher, respectively, for adlib compared with res animals. at this time rnaseq analysis of liver tissue revealed  <dig> significantly differentially expressed genes  between the two treatments. degs indicated down-regulation of processes including nutrient transport, cell division and proliferation in res. in addition, protein synthesis genes were up-regulated in res following a period of restricted feeding. the subsequent 55 days of ad libitum feeding for both groups resulted in the body-weight difference reduced to 84 kg, with no difference in liver weight between treatment groups. at the end of 55 days of unrestricted feeding,  <dig> genes were differentially expressed between animals undergoing cg and their continuously fed counterparts. in particular, hepatic expression of cell proliferation and growth genes were greater in animals undergoing cg.


CONCLUSIONS
greater expression of cell cycle and cell proliferation genes during cg was associated with a 100 % recovery of liver weight during re-alimentation. additionally, an apparent up-regulation in capacity for cellular protein synthesis during restricted feeding may contribute to and sustain cg during re-alimentation. degs identified are potential candidate genes for the identification of biomarkers for cg, which may be incorporated into future breeding programmes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dietary restrictioncompensatory growthcattleliverrnaseqhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001602science foundation ireland09/rfp/gen2447issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

