BACKGROUND
although modern soybean cultivars feature yellow seed coats, with the only color variation found at the hila, the ancestral condition is black seed coats. both seed coat and hila coloration are due to the presence of phenylpropanoid pathway derivatives, principally anthocyanins. the genetics of soybean seed coat and hilum coloration were first investigated during the resurgence of genetics during the 1920s, following the rediscovery of mendel's work. despite the inclusion of this phenotypic marker into the extensive genetic maps developed for soybean over the last twenty years, the genetic basis behind the phenomenon of brown seed coats  has remained undetermined until now.


RESULTS
in order to identify the gene responsible for the r gene effect , we utilized bulk segregant analysis and identified recombinant lines derived from a population segregating for two phenotypically distinct alleles of the r locus. fine mapping was accelerated through use of a novel, bioinformatically determined set of simple sequence repeat  markers which allowed us to delimit the genomic region containing the r gene to less than  <dig> kbp, despite the use of a mapping population of only  <dig> f <dig> lines. candidate gene analysis identified a loss of function mutation affecting a seed coat-specific expressed r2r <dig> myb transcription factor gene  as a strong candidate for the brown hilum phenotype. we observed a near perfect correlation between the mrna expression levels of the functional r gene candidate and an udp-glucose:flavonoid 3-o-glucosyltransferase  gene, which is responsible for the final step in anthocyanin biosynthesis. in contrast, when a null allele of glyma09g <dig> is expressed no upregulation of the uf3gt gene was found.


CONCLUSIONS
we discovered an allelic series of four loss of function mutations affecting our r locus gene candidate. the presence of any one of these mutations was perfectly correlated with the brown seed coat/hilum phenotype in a broadly distributed survey of soybean cultivars, barring the presence of the epistatic dominant i allele or gray pubescence, both of which can mask the effect of the r allele, resulting in yellow or buff hila. these findings strongly suggest that loss of function for one particular seed coat-expressed r2r <dig> myb gene is responsible for the brown seed coat/hilum phenotype in soybean.

