BACKGROUND
although a large body of knowledge about both brain structure and function has been gathered over the last decades, we still have a poor understanding of their exact relationship. graph theory provides a method to study the relation between network structure and function, and its application to neuroscientific data is an emerging research field. we investigated topological changes in large-scale functional brain networks in patients with alzheimer's disease  and frontotemporal lobar degeneration  by means of graph theoretical analysis of resting-state eeg recordings. eegs of  <dig> patients with mild to moderate ad,  <dig> ftld patients, and  <dig> non-demented individuals were recorded in an eyes-closed resting-state. the synchronization likelihood , a measure of functional connectivity, was calculated for each sensor pair in  <dig> – <dig> hz, 4– <dig> hz, 8– <dig> hz, 10– <dig> hz, 13– <dig> hz and 30– <dig> hz frequency bands. the resulting connectivity matrices were converted to unweighted graphs, whose structure was characterized with several measures: mean clustering coefficient , characteristic path length  and degree correlation . all results were normalized for network size and compared with random control networks.


RESULTS
in ad, the clustering coefficient decreased in the lower alpha and beta bands , and the characteristic path length decreased in the lower alpha and gamma bands  compared to controls. in ftld no significant differences with controls were found in these measures. the degree correlation decreased in both alpha bands in ad compared to controls , but increased in the ftld lower alpha band compared with controls .


CONCLUSIONS
with decreasing local and global connectivity parameters, the large-scale functional brain network organization in ad deviates from the optimal 'small-world' network structure towards a more 'random' type. this is associated with less efficient information exchange between brain areas, supporting the disconnection hypothesis of ad. surprisingly, ftld patients show changes in the opposite direction, towards a  more 'ordered' network structure, possibly reflecting a different underlying pathophysiological process.

