BACKGROUND
the transition from water to land was a key event in the evolution of vertebrates that occurred over a period of 15– <dig> million years towards the end of the devonian. tetrapods, including all land-living vertebrates, are thought to have evolved from lobe-finned  fish that developed adaptations for an amphibious existence. however, while many of the biomechanical and physiological modifications necessary to achieve this feat have been studied in detail, little is known about the sensory adaptations accompanying this transition. in this study, we investigated the visual system and visual ecology of the australian lungfish neoceratodus forsteri, which is the most primitive of all the lungfish and possibly the closest living relative to the ancestors of tetrapods.


RESULTS
juvenile neoceratodus have five spectrally distinct retinal visual pigments. a single type of rod photoreceptor contains a visual pigment with a wavelength of maximum absorbance  at  <dig> nm. four spectrally distinct single cone photoreceptors contain visual pigments with λmax at  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> nm . no double cones were found. adult lungfish do not possess uvs cones and, unlike juveniles, have ocular media that prevent ultraviolet light from reaching the retina. yellow ellipsoidal/paraboloidal pigments in the mws cones and red oil droplets in the lws cones narrow the spectral sensitivity functions of these photoreceptors and shift their peak sensitivity to  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm, respectively. modelling of the effects of these intracellular spectral filters on the photoreceptor colour space of neoceratodus suggests that they enhance their ability to discriminate objects, such as plants and other lungfishes, on the basis of colour.


CONCLUSIONS
the presence of a complex colour vision system based on multiple cone types and intracellular spectral filters in lungfishes suggests that many of the ocular characteristics seen in terrestrial or secondarily aquatic vertebrates, such as birds and turtles, may have evolved in shallow water prior to the transition onto land. moreover, the benefits of spectral filters for colour discrimination apply equally to purely aquatic species as well as semi-aquatic and terrestrial animals. the visual system of the australian lungfish resembles that of terrestrial vertebrates far more closely than that of other sarcopterygian fish. this supports the idea that lungfishes, and not the coelacanth, are the closest living relatives of the ancestors of tetrapods.

