BACKGROUND
the andes-amazon basin of peru and bolivia is one of the most data-poor, biologically rich, and rapidly changing areas of the world. conservation scientists agree that this area hosts extremely high endemism, perhaps the highest in the world, yet we know little about the geographic distributions of these species and ecosystems within country boundaries. to address this need, we have developed conservation data on endemic biodiversity  and terrestrial ecological systems  with which we conduct a fine scale conservation prioritization across the amazon watershed of peru and bolivia. we modelled the geographic distributions of  <dig> endemic plants and all  <dig> endemic vertebrate species, from existing museum and herbaria specimens at a regional conservation practitioner's scale , based on the best available tools and geographic data. we mapped ecological systems, endemic species concentrations, and irreplaceable areas with respect to national level protected areas.


RESULTS
we found that sizes of endemic species distributions ranged widely  across the study area. bird and mammal endemic species richness was greatest within a narrow 2500- <dig> m elevation band along the length of the andes mountains. endemic amphibian richness was highest at 1000- <dig> m elevation and concentrated in the southern half of the study area. geographical distribution of plant endemism was highly taxon-dependent. irreplaceable areas, defined as locations with the highest number of species with narrow ranges, overlapped slightly with areas of high endemism, yet generally exhibited unique patterns across the study area by species group. we found that many endemic species and ecological systems are lacking national-level protection; a third of endemic species have distributions completely outside of national protected areas. protected areas cover only 20% of areas of high endemism and 20% of irreplaceable areas. almost 40% of the  <dig> ecological systems are in serious need of protection .


CONCLUSIONS
we identify for the first time, areas of high endemic species concentrations and high irreplaceability that have only been roughly indicated in the past at the continental scale. we conclude that new complementary protected areas are needed to safeguard these endemics and ecosystems. an expansion in protected areas will be challenged by geographically isolated micro-endemics, varied endemic patterns among taxa, increasing deforestation, resource extraction, and changes in climate. relying on pre-existing collections, publically accessible datasets and tools, this working framework is exportable to other regions plagued by incomplete conservation data.

andes-amazonconservation planningecological systemsendemic species richnessirreplaceabilitylatin america

