BACKGROUND
current scoring functions are not very successful in protein-ligand binding affinity prediction albeit their popularity in structure-based drug designs. here, we propose a general knowledge-guided scoring  strategy to tackle this problem. our kgs strategy computes the binding constant of a given protein-ligand complex based on the known binding constant of an appropriate reference complex. a good training set that includes a sufficient number of protein-ligand complexes with known binding data needs to be supplied for finding the reference complex. the reference complex is required to share a similar pattern of key protein-ligand interactions to that of the complex of interest. thus, some uncertain factors in protein-ligand binding may cancel out, resulting in a more accurate prediction of absolute binding constants.


RESULTS
in our study, an automatic algorithm was developed for summarizing key protein-ligand interactions as a pharmacophore model and identifying the reference complex with a maximal similarity to the query complex. our kgs strategy was evaluated in combination with two scoring functions  on three test sets, containing  <dig> hiv protease complexes,  <dig> carbonic anhydrase complexes, and  <dig> trypsin complexes, respectively. our results obtained on crystal structures as well as computer-generated docking poses indicated that application of the kgs strategy produced more accurate predictions especially when x-score or plp alone did not perform well.


CONCLUSIONS
compared to other targeted scoring functions, our kgs strategy does not require any re-parameterization or modification on current scoring methods, and its application is not tied to certain systems. the effectiveness of our kgs strategy is in theory proportional to the ever-increasing knowledge of experimental protein-ligand binding data. our kgs strategy may serve as a more practical remedy for current scoring functions to improve their accuracy in binding affinity prediction.

