BACKGROUND
de novo genome sequencing of previously uncharacterized microorganisms has the potential to open up new frontiers in microbial genomics by providing insight into both functional capabilities and biodiversity. until recently, roche  <dig> pyrosequencing was the ngs method of choice for de novo assembly because it generates hundreds of thousands of long reads , which are presumed to aid in the analysis of uncharacterized genomes. the array of tools for processing ngs data are increasingly free and open source and are often adopted for both their high quality and role in promoting academic freedom.


RESULTS
the error rate of pyrosequencing the alcanivorax borkumensis genome was such that thousands of insertions and deletions were artificially introduced into the finished genome. despite a high coverage , it did not allow the reference genome to be fully mapped. reads from regions with errors had low quality, low coverage, or were missing. the main defect of the reference mapping was the introduction of artificial indels into contigs through lower than 100% consensus and distracting gene calling due to artificial stop codons. no assembler was able to perform de novo assembly comparable to reference mapping. automated annotation tools performed similarly on reference mapped and de novo draft genomes, and annotated most cdss in the de novo assembled draft genomes.


CONCLUSIONS
free and open source software  tools for assembly and annotation of ngs data are being developed rapidly to provide accurate results with less computational effort. usability is not high priority and these tools currently do not allow the data to be processed without manual intervention. despite this, genome assemblers now readily assemble medium short reads into long contigs . a notable gap in pyrosequencing technology is the quality of base pair calling and conflicting base pairs between single reads at the same nucleotide position. regardless, using draft whole genomes that are not finished and remain fragmented into tens of contigs allows one to characterize unknown bacteria with modest effort.

reference mappingde novo sequencingde novo assemblyautomated annotationmarine bacteria

