BACKGROUND
crispr  is a prokaryotic adaptive defence system that provides resistance against alien replicons such as viruses and plasmids. spacers in a crispr cassette confer immunity against viruses and plasmids containing regions complementary to the spacers and hence they retain a footprint of interactions between prokaryotes and their viruses in individual strains and ecosystems. the human gut is a rich habitat populated by numerous microorganisms, but a large fraction of these are unculturable and little is known about them in general and their crispr systems in particular.


RESULTS
we used human gut metagenomic data from three open projects in order to characterize the composition and dynamics of crispr cassettes in the human-associated microbiota. applying available crispr-identification algorithms and a previously designed filtering procedure to the assembled human gut metagenomic contigs, we found  <dig> crispr cassettes,  <dig> of which had repeats not observed previously in complete genomes or other datasets. only  <dig> of  <dig>  identified spacers were coupled with protospacers from the human gut metagenomic contigs. the number of matches to genbank sequences was negligible, providing protospacers for  <dig> spacers.

reconstruction of crispr cassettes allowed us to track the dynamics of spacer content. in agreement with other published observations we show that spacers shared by different cassettes  tend to the trailer ends, whereas spacers with matches in the metagenomes are distributed unevenly across cassettes, demonstrating a preference to form clusters closer to the active end of a crispr cassette, adjacent to the leader, and hence suggesting dynamical interactions between prokaryotes and viruses in the human gut. remarkably, spacers match protospacers in the metagenome of the same individual with frequency comparable to a random control, but may match protospacers from metagenomes of other individuals.


CONCLUSIONS
the analysis of assembled contigs is complementary to the approach based on the analysis of original reads and hence provides additional data about composition and evolution of crispr cassettes, revealing the dynamics of crispr-phage interactions in metagenomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
crisprhuman gutmicrobiomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

