BACKGROUND
fit  is the central regulator of iron uptake in arabidopsis thaliana roots. we performed transcriptome analyses of six day-old seedlings and roots of six week-old plants using wild type, a fit knock-out mutant and a fit over-expression line grown under iron-sufficient or iron-deficient conditions. we compared genes regulated in a fit-dependent manner depending on the developmental stage of the plants. we assembled a high likelihood dataset which we used to perform co-expression and functional analysis of the most stably iron deficiency-induced genes.


RESULTS
 <dig> genes were found fit-regulated. out of these,  <dig> genes were robustly fit-regulated in root and seedling samples and included  <dig> novel fit-dependent genes. three hundred thirty-one genes showed differential regulation in response to the presence and absence of fit only in the root samples, while this was the case for  <dig> genes in the seedling samples. we assembled a virtual dataset of iron-regulated genes based on a total of  <dig> transcriptomic analyses of iron-deficient and iron-sufficient wild-type plants to pinpoint the best marker genes for iron deficiency and analyzed this dataset in depth. co-expression analysis of this dataset revealed  <dig> distinct regulons part of which predominantly contained functionally related genes.


CONCLUSIONS
we could enlarge the list of fit-dependent genes and discriminate between genes that are robustly fit-regulated in roots and seedlings or only in one of those. fit-regulated genes were mostly induced, few of them were repressed by fit. with the analysis of a virtual dataset we could filter out and pinpoint new candidates among the most reliable marker genes for iron deficiency. moreover, co-expression and functional analysis of this virtual dataset revealed iron deficiency-induced and functionally distinct regulons.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
plantsarabidopsisiron homeostasisfitdifferential gene expressionmicroarrayissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

