BACKGROUND
plant calcium  signals are involved in a wide array of intracellular signalling pathways following pathogen invasion. ca2+-binding sensory proteins such as ca2+-dependent protein kinases  have been predicted to mediate signalling following ca2+ influx after pathogen infection. however, to date this prediction has remained elusive.


RESULTS
we conducted a genome-wide identification of the malus x domestica cpk  gene family and identified  <dig> cpk genes. comparative phylogenetic analysis of malus cpks with cpks of arabidopsis thaliana , oryza sativa , populous trichocarpa  and zea mays  revealed four different groups. from the phylogenetic tree, we found that mdcpks are closely related to atcpks and ptcpks rather than oscpks and zmcpks, indicating their dicot-specific origin. furthermore, comparative quantitative real time pcr and intracellular cytosolic calcium  analysis were carried out on fire blight resistant and susceptible m. x domestica apple cultivars following infection with a pathogen  and/or mechanical damage. calcium analysis showed an increased cyt over time in resistant cultivars as compared to susceptible cultivars. gene expression studies showed that  <dig> out of the  <dig> mdcpks were differentially expressed following pathogen infection.


CONCLUSIONS
we studied the genome-wide analysis of mdcpk gene family in malus x domestica and analyzed their differential gene expression along with cytosolic calcium variation upon pathogen infection. there was a striking difference in mdcpks gene expressions and cyt variations between resistant and susceptible m. x domestica cultivars in response to e. amylovora and mechanical wounding. our genomic and bioinformatic analysis provided an important insight about the role of mdcpks in modulating defence responses in susceptible and resistant apple cultivars. it also provided further information on early signalling and downstream signalling cascades in response to pathogenic and mechanical stress.

malus x domesticacalcium dependent protein kinaseserwinia amylovoraphylogenetic analysisgene expressioncytosolic calcium variations

