BACKGROUND
genomes of bacteria and archaea  appear to exist in incessant flux, expanding via horizontal gene transfer and gene duplication, and contracting via gene loss. however, the actual rates of genome dynamics and relative contributions of different types of event across the diversity of prokaryotes are largely unknown, as are the sizes of microbial supergenomes, i.e. pools of genes that are accessible to the given microbial species.


RESULTS
we performed a comprehensive analysis of the genome dynamics in  <dig> groups  of closely related microbial genomes using a phylogenetic birth-and-death maximum likelihood model to quantify the rates of gene family gain and loss, as well as expansion and reduction. the results show that loss of gene families dominates the evolution of prokaryotes, occurring at approximately three times the rate of gain. the rates of gene family expansion and reduction are typically seven and twenty times less than the gain and loss rates, respectively. thus, the prevailing mode of evolution in bacteria and archaea is genome contraction, which is partially compensated by the gain of new gene families via horizontal gene transfer. however, the rates of gene family gain, loss, expansion and reduction vary within wide ranges, with the most stable genomes showing rates about  <dig> times lower than the most dynamic genomes. for many groups, the supergenome estimated from the fraction of repetitive gene family gains includes about tenfold more gene families than the typical genome in the group although some groups appear to have vast, ‘open’ supergenomes.


CONCLUSIONS
reconstruction of evolution for groups of closely related bacteria and archaea reveals an extremely rapid and highly variable flux of genes in evolving microbial genomes, demonstrates that extensive gene loss and horizontal gene transfer leading to innovation are the two dominant evolutionary processes, and yields robust estimates of the supergenome size.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

