BACKGROUND
snails belong to the molluscan class gastropoda, which inhabit land, freshwater and marine environments. several land snail species, including theba pisana, are crop pests of major concern, causing extensive damage to agriculture and horticulture. a deeper understanding of their molecular biology is necessary in order to develop methods to manipulate land snail populations.


RESULTS
the present study used in silico gene data mining of t. pisana tissue transcriptomes to predict  <dig>  central nervous system  proteins,  <dig>  foot muscle proteins and  <dig>  hepatopancreas proteins, which together have  <dig>  unique protein functional domains. neuropeptides, metabolic enzymes and epiphragmin genes dominated expression within the cns, hepatopancreas and muscle, respectively. further investigation of the cns transcriptome demonstrated that it might contain as many as  <dig>  genes that encode for proteins destined for extracellular secretion. neuropeptides form an important class of cell-cell messengers that control or influence various complex metabolic events. a total of  <dig> full-length neuropeptide genes were abundantly expressed within t. pisana cns, encoding precursors that release molluscan-type bioactive neuropeptide products. these included achatin, allototropin, conopressin, elevenin, fmrfamide, lfrfamide, lrfnvamide, myomodulins, neurokinin y, pkymdt, pxfvamide, scapamides and several insulin-like peptides. liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry of neural ganglia confirmed the presence of many of these neuropeptides.


CONCLUSIONS
our results provide the most comprehensive picture of the molecular genes and proteins associated with land snail functioning, including the repertoire of neuropeptides that likely play significant roles in neuroendocrine signalling. this information has the potential to expedite the study of molluscan metabolism and potentially stimulate advances in the biological control of land snail pest species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
snailtheba pisananeuropeptidescentral nervous systemmusclehepatopancreasissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

