BACKGROUND
waterlogging or flooding is one of the most challenging abiotic stresses experienced by plants. unlike many flooding-tolerant plants, floating-leaved aquatic plants respond actively to flooding stress by fast growth and elongation of its petioles to make leaves re-floating. however, the molecular mechanisms of this plant group responding to flood have not been investigated before. here, we investigated the genetic basis of this adaptive response by characterizing the petiole transcriptomes of a floating-leaved species nymphoides peltata under normal and flooding conditions.


RESULTS
clean reads under normal and flooding conditions with pooled sampling strategy were assembled into  <dig>  unigenes. a total of  <dig> unigenes were revealed to be differentially expressed between normal and flooding conditions. among them, top ranked differentially expressed genes were mainly involved in antioxidant process, photosynthesis process and carbohydrate metabolism, including the glycolysis and a modified tricarboxylic acid cycle – alanine metabolism. eight selected unigenes with significantly differentiated expression changes between normal and flooding conditions were validated by qrt-pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
among these processes, antioxidant process and glycolysis are commonly induced by waterlogging or flooding environment in plants, whereas photosynthesis and alanine metabolism are rarely occurred in other flooding-tolerant plants, suggesting the significant contributions of the two processes in the active response of n. peltata to flooding stress. our results provide a valuable genomic resource for future studies on n. peltata and deepen our understanding of the genetic basis underlying the response to flooding stress in aquatic plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nymphoides peltatatranscriptomeflooding stressqrt-pcrgrants from the national natural science foundation of china31270265xu xinwei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

