BACKGROUND
the selective breeding of cattle with high-feed efficiencies  is an important goal of beef and dairy cattle producers. global gene expression patterns in relevant tissues can be used to study the functions of genes that are potentially involved in regulating fe. in the present study, high-throughput rna sequencing data of liver biopsies from  <dig> dairy cows were used to identify differentially expressed genes  between high- and low-fe groups of cows . subsequently, a profile of the pathways connecting the degs to fe was generated, and a list of candidate genes and biomarkers was derived for their potential inclusion in breeding programmes to improve fe.


RESULTS
the bovine rna-seq gene expression data from the liver was analysed to identify degs and, subsequently, identify the molecular mechanisms, pathways and possible candidate biomarkers of feed efficiency. on average,  <dig> million reads  were sequenced,  <dig> million reads were mapped, and  <dig>  known transcripts were quantified according to the bovine reference genome. a comparison of the high- and low-rfi groups revealed  <dig> and  <dig> significantly degs in holstein and jersey cows, respectively. the interaction analysis  showed no interaction effects in the holstein cows, while two genes showed interaction effects in the jersey cows. the analyses showed that degs act through certain pathways to affect or regulate fe, including steroid hormone biosynthesis, retinol metabolism, starch and sucrose metabolism, ether lipid metabolism, arachidonic acid metabolism and drug metabolism cytochrome p <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
we used rna-seq-based liver transcriptomic profiling of high- and low-rfi dairy cows in two breeds and identified significantly degs, their molecular mechanisms, their interactions with other genes and functional enrichments of different molecular pathways. the degs that were identified were the cyp’s and gimap genes for the holstein and jersey cows, respectively, which are related to the primary immunodeficiency pathway and play a major role in feed utilization and the metabolism of lipids, sugars and proteins.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqfeed efficiencyresidual feed intakedifferentially expressed genespathwaysdairy cattledanish milk levy foundationministry of education of malaysia and universiti putra malaysia issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

