BACKGROUND
non-ribosomal peptide synthetases  are large multimodular enzymes that synthesize a wide range of biologically active natural peptide compounds, of which many are pharmacologically important. peptide bond formation is catalyzed by the condensation  domain. various functional subtypes of the c domain exist: an lcl domain catalyzes a peptide bond between two l-amino acids, a dcl domain links an l-amino acid to a growing peptide ending with a d-amino acid, a starter c domain  acylates the first amino acid with a β-hydroxy-carboxylic acid , and heterocyclization  domains catalyze both peptide bond formation and subsequent cyclization of cysteine, serine or threonine residues. the homologous epimerization  domain flips the chirality of the last amino acid in the growing peptide; dual e/c domains catalyze both epimerization and condensation.


RESULTS
in this paper, we report on the reconstruction of the phylogenetic relationship of nrps c domain subtypes and analyze in detail the sequence motifs of recently discovered subtypes  and their characteristic sequence differences, mutually and in comparison with lcl domains. based on their phylogeny and the comparison of their sequence motifs, lcl and starter domains appear to be more closely related to each other than to other subtypes, though pronounced differences in some segments of the protein account for the unequal donor substrates . furthermore, on the basis of phylogeny and the comparison of sequence motifs, we conclude that dual e/c and dcl domains share a common ancestor. in the same way, the evolutionary origin of a c domain of unknown function in glycopeptide  nrpss can be determined to be an lcl domain. in the case of two gp c domains which are most similar to dcl but which have lcl activity, we postulate convergent evolution.


CONCLUSIONS
we systematize all c domain subtypes including the novel starter c domain. with our results, it will be easier to decide the subtype of unknown c domains as we provide profile hidden markov models  for the sequence motifs as well as for the entire sequences. the determined specificity conferring positions will be helpful for the mutation of one subtype into another, e.g. turning dcl to lcl, which can be a useful step for obtaining novel products.

