BACKGROUND
purple carrots accumulate large quantities of anthocyanins in their roots and leaves. these flavonoid pigments possess antioxidant activity and are implicated in providing health benefits. informative, saturated linkage maps associated with well characterized populations segregating for anthocyanin pigmentation have not been developed. to investigate the genetic architecture conditioning anthocyanin pigmentation we scored root color visually, quantified root anthocyanin pigments by high performance liquid chromatography in segregating f <dig>  f <dig> and f <dig> generations of a mapping population, mapped quantitative trait loci  onto a dense gene-derived single nucleotide polymorphism -based linkage map, and performed comparative trait mapping with two unrelated populations.


RESULTS
root pigmentation, scored visually as presence or absence of purple coloration, segregated in a pattern consistent with a two gene model in an f <dig>  and progeny testing of f3-f <dig> families confirmed the proposed genetic model. purple petiole pigmentation was conditioned by a single dominant gene that co-segregates with one of the genes conditioning root pigmentation. root total pigment estimate  was scored as the percentage of the root with purple color.

all five anthocyanin glycosides previously reported in carrot, as well as rtpe, varied quantitatively in the f <dig> population. for the purpose of qtl analysis, a high resolution gene-derived snp-based linkage map of carrot was constructed with  <dig> markers covering  <dig>  cm with a  <dig>  cm map resolution. a total of  <dig> significant qtl for all anthocyanin pigments and for rtpe mapped to six chromosomes. eight qtl with the largest phenotypic effects mapped to two regions of chromosome  <dig> with co-localized qtl for several anthocyanin glycosides and for rtpe. a single dominant gene conditioning anthocyanin acylation was identified and mapped.

comparative mapping with two other carrot populations segregating for purple color indicated that carrot anthocyanin pigmentation is controlled by at least three genes, in contrast to monogenic control reported previously.


CONCLUSIONS
this study generated the first high resolution gene-derived snp-based linkage map in the apiaceae. two regions of chromosome  <dig> with co-localized qtl for all anthocyanin pigments and for rtpe, largely condition anthocyanin accumulation in carrot roots and leaves. loci controlling root and petiole anthocyanin pigmentation differ across diverse carrot genetic backgrounds.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
carrotanthocyaninsqtl mappinglinkage mapsingle nucleotide polymorphismissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

