BACKGROUND
the peptide hormone ghrelin has many important physiological and pathophysiological roles, including the stimulation of growth hormone  release, appetite regulation, gut motility and proliferation of cancer cells. we previously identified a gene on the opposite strand of the ghrelin gene, ghrelinos , which spans the promoter and untranslated regions of the ghrelin gene . here we further characterise ghrlos.


RESULTS
we have described ghrlos mrna isoforms that extend over  <dig>  kb of the promoter region and  <dig> nucleotides of exon  <dig> of the ghrelin gene, ghrl. these ghrlos transcripts initiate  <dig>  kb downstream of the terminal exon  <dig> of ghrl and are present in the 3' untranslated exon of the adjacent gene tatdn <dig> . interestingly, we have also identified a putative non-coding tatdn2-ghrlos chimaeric transcript, indicating that ghrlos rna biogenesis is extremely complex. moreover, we have discovered that the 3' region of ghrlos is also antisense, in a tail-to-tail fashion to a novel terminal exon of the neighbouring sec <dig> gene, which is important in protein transport. sequence analyses revealed that ghrlos is riddled with stop codons, and that there is little nucleotide and amino-acid sequence conservation of the ghrlos gene between vertebrates. the gene spans  <dig> kb on 3p <dig> , is extensively spliced and harbours multiple variable exons. we have also investigated the expression of ghrlos and found evidence of differential tissue expression. it is highly expressed in tissues which are emerging as major sites of non-coding rna expression , as well as in the ovary and uterus. in contrast, very low levels were found in the stomach where sense, ghrl derived rnas are highly expressed.


CONCLUSIONS
ghrlos rna transcripts display several distinctive features of non-coding  genes, including 5' capping, polyadenylation, extensive splicing and short open reading frames. the gene is also non-conserved, with differential and tissue-restricted expression. the overlapping genomic arrangement of ghrlos with the ghrelin gene indicates that it is likely to have interesting regulatory and functional roles in the ghrelin axis.

