BACKGROUND
a comprehensive map of the human-m. tuberculosis  protein interactome would help fill the gaps in our understanding of the disease, and computational prediction can aid and complement experimental studies towards this end. several sequence-based in silico approaches tap the existing data on experimentally validated protein-protein interactions ; these ppis serve as templates from which novel interactions between pathogen and host are inferred. such comparative approaches typically make use of local sequence alignment, which, in the absence of structural details about the interfaces mediating the template interactions, could lead to incorrect inferences, particularly when multi-domain proteins are involved.


RESULTS
we propose leveraging the domain-domain interaction  information in pdb complexes to score and prioritize candidate ppis between host and pathogen proteomes based on targeted sequence-level comparisons. our method picks out a small set of human-mtb protein pairs as candidates for physical interactions, and the use of functional meta-data suggests that some of them could contribute to the in vivo molecular cross-talk between pathogen and host that regulates the course of the infection. further, we present numerical data for pfam domain families that highlights interaction specificity on the domain level. not every instance of a pair of domains, for which interaction evidence has been found in a few instances , is likely to functionally interact. our sorting approach scores candidates according to how “distant” they are in sequence space from known examples of ddis . thus, it provides a natural way to deal with the heterogeneity in domain-level interactions.


CONCLUSIONS
our method represents a more informed application of local alignment to the sequence-based search for potential human-microbial interactions that uses available ppi data as a prior. our approach is somewhat limited in its sensitivity by the restricted size and diversity of the template dataset, but, given the rapid accumulation of solved protein complex structures, its scope and utility are expected to keep steadily improving.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
protein-protein interactionshost-pathogen interactionsdomain-domain interactionslocal sequence alignmentdepartment of science and technology, government of indiagrant int/rus/rfbr/p-154mande shekhar c. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

