BACKGROUND
micrornas , a ubiquitous class of short rnas, play vital roles in physiological and biochemical processes in plants by mediating gene silencing at post-transcriptional  level. tomato is a model system to study molecular basis of fleshy fruit ripening and senescence, ethylene biosynthesis and signal transduction owing to its genetic and molecular tractability. to study the functions of mirnas in tomato fruit ripening and senescence, and their possible roles in ethylene response, the next generation sequencing method was employed to identify mirnas in tomato fruit. bioinformatics and molecular biology approaches were combined to profile the mirnas expression patterns at three different fruit ripening stages and by exogenous ethylene treatment.


RESULTS
in addition to  <dig> novel mirna families,  <dig> conserved mirnas belonging to  <dig> families and  <dig> non-conserved mirnas matching  <dig> families were identified in our libraries. the targets of many these mirnas were predicted to be transcriptional factors. other targets are known to play roles in the regulation of metabolic processes. interestingly, some targets were predicted to be involved in fruit ripening and softening, such as pectate lyase, beta-galactosidase, while a few others were predicted to be involved in ethylene biosynthesis and signaling pathway, such as acs, ein <dig> and ctr <dig>  the expression patterns of a number of such mirnas at three ripening stages were confirmed by stem-loop rt-pcr, which showed a strong negative correlation with that of their targets. the regulation of exogenous ethylene on mirnas expression profiles were analyzed simultaneously, and  <dig> down-regulated,  <dig> up-regulated mirnas were found in this study.


CONCLUSIONS
a combination of high throughput sequencing and molecular biology approaches was used to explore the involvement of mirnas during fruit ripening. several mirnas showed differential expression profiles during fruit ripening, and a number of mirnas were influenced by ethylene treatment. the results suggest the importance of mirnas in fruit ripening and ethylene response.

