BACKGROUND
non-coding rnas  are involved in a wide spectrum of regulatory functions. within recent years, there have been increasing reports of observed polyadenylated ncrnas and mrna like ncrnas in eukaryotes. to investigate this further, we examined the large data set in the sino-danish pigest resource  which also contains expression information distributed on  <dig> non-normalized cdna libraries.


RESULTS
we constructed a pipeline, est2ncrna, to search for known and novel ncrnas. the pipeline utilises sequence similarity to ncrna databases , structure similarity to rfam  as well as multiple alignments to predict conserved novel putative rna structures . est2ncrna was fed with  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons available from the pigest resource. using the pipeline we identified known rna structures in  <dig> contigs and single reads , and predicted high confidence rna structures in non-protein coding regions of additional  <dig>  conreads. of these, structures in  <dig> conreads overlap with existing predictions in human. to sum up, the pigest resource comprises trans-acting elements  in  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons as well as cis-acting elements  in  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons, of which  <dig> conreads contain both predictions of trans- and cis-acting elements. the predicted rnaz candidates were compared with the pigest expression information and we identify  <dig> contigs with an rnaz prediction and expression in at least ten of the non-normalised cdna libraries. we conclude that the contigs with rnaz and known predictions are in general expressed at a much lower level than protein coding transcripts. in addition, we also observe that our ncrna candidates constitute about one to two percent of the genes expressed in the cdna libraries. intriguingly, the cdna libraries from developmental  tissues contain the highest amount of ncrna candidates, about two percent. these observations are related to existing knowledge and hypotheses about the role of ncrnas in higher organisms. furthermore, about 80% porcine coding transcripts  as well as less than one-third orf-free transcripts are conserved at least in the closely related bovine genome. approximately one percent of the coding and 10% of the remaining matches are unique between the pigest data and cow genome. based on the pig-cow alignments, we searched for similarities to  <dig> other organisms by ucsc available alignments, which resulted in a 87% coverage by the human genome for instance.


CONCLUSIONS
besides recovering several of the already annotated functional rna structures, we predicted a large number of high confidence conserved secondary structures in polyadenylated porcine transcripts. our observations of relatively low expression levels of predicted ncrna candidates together with the observations of higher relative amount in cdna libraries from developmental stages are in agreement with the current paradigm of ncrna roles in higher organisms and supports the idea of polyadenylated ncrnas.

