BACKGROUND
agrobacterium sp. atcc <dig> is an efficient curdlan producer at low ph and under nitrogen starvation. the helix-turn-helix transcriptional regulatory protein  essential for curdlan production has been analyzed, but whether crdr directly acts to cause expression of the curdlan biosynthesis operon  is uncertain. to elucidate the molecular function of crdr in curdlan biosynthesis, we constructed a crdr knockout mutant along with pbqcrdr and pbqncrdr vectors with crdr expression driven by a t <dig> promoter and crdr native promoter, respectively. also, we constructed a pag with the green fluorescent protein  gene driven by a curdlan biosynthetic operon promoter  to measure the effects of crdr expression on curdlan biosynthesis.


RESULTS
compared with wild-type  strain biomass production, the biomass of the crdr knockout mutant was not significantly different in either exponential or stationary phases of growth. mutant cells were non-capsulated and planktonic and produced significantly less curdlan. wt cells were curdlan-capsulated and aggregated in the stationery phase. pbqcrdr transformed to the wt strain had a 38% greater curdlan yield and pbqcrdr and pbqncrdr transformed to the crdr mutant strain recovered 18% and 105% curdlan titers of the wt atcc <dig> strain, respectively. consistent with its function of promoting curdlan biosynthesis, curdlan biosynthetic operon promoter  controlled gfp expression caused the transgenic strain to have higher gfp relative fluorescence in the wt strain, and no color change was observed with low gfp relative fluorescence in the crdr mutant strain as evidenced by fluorescent microscopy and spectrometric assay. q-rt-pcr revealed that crdr expression in the stationary phase was greater than in the exponential phase, and crdr overexpression in the wt strain increased crda, crds, and crdc expression. we also confirmed that purified crdr protein can specifically bind to the crd operon promoter region, and we inferred that crdr directly acts to cause expression of the curdlan biosynthesis operon .


CONCLUSIONS
crdr is a positive transcriptional regulator of the crd operon for promoting curdlan biosynthesis in atcc <dig>  the potential binding region of crdr is located within the −98 bp fragment upstream from the crda start codon

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
crdrcurdlanagrobacteriumtranscriptional regulatorissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

