BACKGROUND
filarial nematode parasites cause serious diseases such as elephantiasis and river blindness in humans, and heartworm infections in dogs. third stage filarial larvae  are a critical stage in the life cycle of filarial parasites, because this is the stage that is transmitted by arthropod vectors to initiate infections in mammals. improved understanding of molecular mechanisms associated with this transition may provide important leads for development of new therapies and vaccines to prevent filarial infections. this study explores changes in gene expression associated with the transition of brugia malayi third stage larvae  from mosquitoes into mammalian hosts and how these changes are affected by radiation. radiation effects are especially interesting because irradiated l <dig> induce partial immunity to filarial infections. the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for the efficacy of such vaccines are unkown.


RESULTS
expression profiles were obtained using a new filarial microarray with  <dig>   <dig> 64-mer elements.  <dig> genes were identified as differentially expressed in two-way comparative analyses of the three l <dig> types.  <dig> genes were up-regulated in mosquito l <dig>  relative to cultured l <dig> . these genes are important for establishment of filarial infections in mammalian hosts. other genes were up-regulated in l3c relative to l3i  or irradiated l <dig>  . these culture-induced transcripts include key molecules required for growth and development.  <dig> genes were up-regulated in l3ir relative to l3c; these genes encode highly immunogenic proteins and proteins involved in radiation repair. l3ir and l3i have similar transcription profiles for genes that encode highly immunogenic proteins, antioxidants and cuticle components.


CONCLUSIONS
changes in gene expression that normally occur during culture under conditions that support l <dig> development and molting are prevented or delayed by radiation. this may explain the enhanced immunogenicity of l3ir. gene ontology and kegg analyses revealed altered pathways between l <dig> types. energy and "immune pathways" are up-regulated and may be needed for l3i invasion and survival, while growth and development are priorities for l3c. this study has improved our understanding of molecules involved in parasite invasion and immune evasion, potential targets of protective immunity, and molecules required for parasite growth and development.

