BACKGROUND
the development of an effective vaccine against visceral leishmaniasis  caused by leishmania donovani is an essential aim for controlling the disease. use of the right adjuvant is of fundamental importance in vaccine formulations for generation of effective cell-mediated immune response. earlier we reported the protective efficacy of cationic liposome-associated l. donovani promastigote antigens  against experimental vl. the aim of the present study was to compare the effectiveness of two very promising adjuvants, bacille calmette-guerin  and monophosphoryl lipid a  plus trehalose dicorynomycolate  with cationic liposomes, in combination with lag, to confer protection against murine vl.


RESULTS
all the three formulations afforded significant protection against l. donovani in both the visceral organs, liver and spleen. although comparable level of protection was observed in bcg+lag and mpl-tdm+lag immunized mice, highest level of protection was exhibited by the liposomal lag immunized group. significant increase in anti-lag igg levels were detected in both mpl-tdm+lag and liposomal lag immunized animals with higher levels of igg2a than igg <dig>  but bcg+lag failed to induce any antibody response. as an index of cell-mediated immunity dth responses were measured and significant response was observed in mice vaccinated with all the three different formulations. however, highest responses were observed with liposomal vaccine immunization. comparative evaluation of ifn-γ and il- <dig> responses in immunized mice revealed that mpl-tdm+lag group produced the highest level of ifn-γ but lowest il- <dig> level, while bcg+lag demonstrated generation of suboptimum levels of both ifn-γ and il- <dig> response. elicitation of moderate levels of prechallenge ifn-γ along with optimum il- <dig> corresponds with successful vaccination with liposomal lag.


CONCLUSIONS
this comparative study reveals greater effectiveness of the liposomal vaccine for protection against progressive vl in balb/c. again, evaluation of the immune responses by vaccination emphasizes the need of stimulation of potent cellular immunity based on both th <dig> and th <dig> cell responses to confer protection against vl.

