BACKGROUND
the adrenals are known as an important link in pathogenesis of arterial hypertensive disease. the study was directed to the adrenal transcriptome analysis in isiah rats with stress-sensitive arterial hypertension and predominant involvement in pathogenesis of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal and sympathoadrenal systems.


RESULTS
the rna-seq approach was used to perform the comparative adrenal transcriptome profiling in hypertensive isiah and normotensive wag rats. multiple differentially expressed genes  related to different biological processes and metabolic pathways were detected.

the discussion of the results helped to prioritize the several degs as the promising candidates for further studies of the genetic background underlying the stress-sensitive hypertension development in the isiah rats. two of these were transcription factor genes , which may be related to the predominant activation of the sympathetic-adrenal medullary axis in isiah rats. the other genes are known as associated with hypertension and were defined in the current study as degs making the most significant contribution to the inter-strain differences. four of them  may provoke the hypertension development, and mpo may contribute to insulin resistance and inflammation in the isiah rats.


CONCLUSIONS
the study strongly highlighted the complex nature of the pathogenesis of stress-sensitive hypertension. the data obtained may be useful for identifying the common molecular determinants in different animal models of arterial hypertension, which may be potentially used as therapeutic targets for pharmacological intervention.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
stress-sensitive hypertensionadrenal glandtranscriptional profilingrna-seqpls-daisiah ratsthe international conference on bioinformatics of genome regulation and structure\systems biology  novosibirsk, russia  <dig> august- <dig> september  <dig> http://conf.bionet.nsc.ru/bgrssb2016issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

