BACKGROUND
quantitative proteomics holds great promise for identifying proteins that are differentially abundant between populations representing different physiological or disease states. a range of computational tools is now available for both isotopically labeled and label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry  based quantitative proteomics. however, they are generally not comparable to each other in terms of functionality, user interfaces, information input/output, and do not readily facilitate appropriate statistical data analysis. these limitations, along with the array of choices, present a daunting prospect for biologists, and other researchers not trained in bioinformatics, who wish to use lc-ms-based quantitative proteomics.


RESULTS
we have developed corra, a computational framework and tools for discovery-based lc-ms proteomics. corra extends and adapts existing algorithms used for lc-ms-based proteomics, and statistical algorithms, originally developed for microarray data analyses, appropriate for lc-ms data analysis. corra also adapts software engineering technologies  so that computationally intense data processing and statistical analyses can run on a remote server, while the user controls and manages the process from their own computer via a simple web interface. corra also allows the user to output significantly differentially abundant lc-ms-detected peptide features in a form compatible with subsequent sequence identification via tandem mass spectrometry . we present two case studies to illustrate the application of corra to commonly performed lc-ms-based biological workflows: a pilot biomarker discovery study of glycoproteins isolated from human plasma samples relevant to type  <dig> diabetes, and a study in yeast to identify in vivo targets of the protein kinase ark <dig> via phosphopeptide profiling.


CONCLUSIONS
the corra computational framework leverages computational innovation to enable biologists or other researchers to process, analyze and visualize lc-ms data with what would otherwise be a complex and not user-friendly suite of tools. corra enables appropriate statistical analyses, with controlled false-discovery rates, ultimately to inform subsequent targeted identification of differentially abundant peptides by ms/ms. for the user not trained in bioinformatics, corra represents a complete, customizable, free and open source computational platform enabling lc-ms-based proteomic workflows, and as such, addresses an unmet need in the lc-ms proteomics field.

