BACKGROUND
transgenerational plasticity provides phenotypic variation that contributes to adaptation. for plants, the timing of seed germination is critical for offspring survival in stressful environments, as germination timing can alter the environmental conditions a seedling experiences. stored seed transcripts are important determinants of seed germination, but have not previously been linked with transgenerational plasticity of germination behavior. in this study we used rnaseq and growth chamber experiments of the model legume m. trucantula to test whether parental exposure to salinity stress influences the expression of stored seed transcripts and early offspring traits and test for genetic variation.


RESULTS
we detected genotype-dependent parental environmental effects  on the expression levels of stored seed transcripts, seed size, and germination behavior of four m. truncatula genotypes. more than 50% of the transcripts detected in the mature, ungerminated seed transcriptome were annotated as regulating seed germination, some of which are involved in abiotic stress response and post-embryonic development. some genotypes showed increased seed size in response to parental exposure to salinity stress, but no parental environmental influence on germination timing. in contrast, other genotypes showed no seed size differences across contrasting parental conditions but displayed transgenerational plasticity for germimation timing, with significantly delayed germination in saline conditions when parental plants were exposed to salinity. in genotypes that show significant transgenerational plastic germination response, we found significant coexpression networks derived from salt responsive transcripts involved in post-transcriptional regulation of the germination pathway. consistent with the delayed germination response to saline conditions in these genotypes, we found genes associated with dormancy and up-regulation of abscisic acid .


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate genetic variation in transgenerational plasticity within m. truncatula and show that parental exposure to salinity stress influences the expression of stored seed transcripts, seed weight, and germination behavior. furthermore, we show that the parental environment influences gene expression to modulate biological pathways that are likely responsible for offspring germination responses to salinity stress.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transgenerational plasticityparental environmental effectsstored seed transcriptsgerminationgenetic variationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

