BACKGROUND
the amazonian rainforest is predicted to suffer from ongoing environmental changes. despite the need to evaluate the impact of such changes on tree genetic diversity, we almost entirely lack genomic resources.


RESULTS
in this study, we analysed the transcriptome of four tropical tree species  with contrasting ecological features, belonging to four widespread botanical families . we sequenced cdna libraries from three organs  using  <dig> pyrosequencing. we have developed an r and bioperl-based bioinformatic procedure for de novo assembly, gene functional annotation and marker discovery. mismatch identification takes into account single-base quality values as well as the likelihood of false variants as a function of contig depth and number of sequenced chromosomes. between  <dig>  and  <dig>  contigs were assembled. organs varied in the numbers of unigenes they apparently express, with higher number in roots. patterns of gene expression were similar across species, with metabolism of aromatic compounds standing out as an overrepresented gene function. transcripts corresponding to several gene functions were found to be over- or underrepresented in each organ. we identified between  <dig>  and  <dig>  well-supported mismatches. the resulting overall mismatch density was comprised between  <dig>   and  <dig>   mismatches/ <dig> bp in variation-containing contigs.


CONCLUSIONS
the relative representation of gene functions in the four transcriptomes suggests that secondary metabolism may be particularly important in tropical trees. the differential representation of transcripts among tissues suggests differential gene expression, which opens the way to functional studies in these non-model, ecologically important species. we found substantial amounts of mismatches in the four species. these newly identified putative variants are a first step towards acquiring much needed genomic resources for tropical tree species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
454-pyrosequencingtropical rainforest tree speciespolymorphism discoveryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

