BACKGROUND
the growth properties and self-renewal capacity of embryonic stem  cells are regulated by their immediate microenvironment such as the extracellular matrix . integrins, a central family of cellular ecm receptors, have been implicated in these processes but their specific role in es cell self-renewal remains unclear.


RESULTS
here we have studied the effects of different ecm substrates and integrins in mouse es cells in the absence of leukemia inhibitory factor  using short-term assays as well as long-term cultures. removal of lif from es cell culture medium induced morphological differentiation of es cells into polarized epistem cell-like cells. these cells maintained epithelial morphology and expression of key stemness markers for at least  <dig> passages in the absence of lif when cultured on laminin, fibronectin or collagen iv substrates. the specific functional roles of α6-, αv- and β1-integrin subunits were dissected using stable lentivirus-mediated rnai methodology. β1-integrins were required for es cell survival in long-term cultures and for the maintenance of stem cell marker expression. inhibition of α6-integrin expression compromised self-renewal on collagen while αv-integrins were required for robust es cell adhesion on laminin. analysis of the stemness marker expression revealed subtle differences between α6- and αv-depleted es cells but the expression of both was required for optimal self-renewal in long-term es cell cultures.


CONCLUSIONS
in the absence of lif, long-term es cell cultures adapt an epistem cell-like epithelial phenotype and retain the expression of multiple stem cell markers. long-term maintenance of such self-renewing cultures depends on the expression of β1-, α6- and αv-integrins.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
embryonic stem cellsintegrinextracellular matrixself-renewaladhesionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

