BACKGROUND
clostridial co-culture containing cellulolytic and solventogenic species is a potential consolidated bioprocessing  approach for producing biochemicals and biofuels from cellulosic biomass. it has been demonstrated that the rate of cellulose utilization in the co-culture of clostridium acetobutylicum and clostridium cellulolyticum is improved compared to the mono-culture of c. cellulolyticum . however, the metabolic interactions in this co-culture are not well understood. to investigate the metabolic interactions in this co-culture we dynamically characterized the physiology and microbial composition using qpcr.


RESULTS
the qpcr data suggested a higher growth rate of c. cellulolyticum in the co-culture compared to its mono-culture. our results also showed that in contrast to the mono-culture of c. cellulolyticum, which did not show any cellulolytic activity under conditions similar to those of co-culture, the co-culture did show cellulolytic activity even superior to the c. cellulolyticum mono-culture at its optimal ph of  <dig> . moreover, experiments indicated that the co-culture cellulolytic activity depends on the concentration of c. acetobutylicum in the co-culture, as no cellulolytic activity was observed at low concentration of c. acetobutylicum, and thus confirming the essential role of c. acetobutylicum in improving c. cellulolyticum growth in the co-culture. furthermore, butanol concentration of  <dig> mg/l was detected in the co-culture batch experiments.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest the presence of synergism between these two species, while c. acetobutylicum metabolic activity significantly improves the cellulolytic activity in the co-culture, and allows c. cellulolyticum to survive under harsh co-culture conditions, which do not allow c. cellulolyticum to grow and metabolize cellulose independently. it is likely that c. acetobutylicum improves the cellulolytic activity of c. cellulolyticum in the co-culture through exchange of metabolites such as pyruvate, enabling it to grow and metabolize cellulose under harsh co-culture conditions.

consolidated bioprocessingclostridial co-cultureqpcr analysisclostridium acetobutylicumclostridium cellulolyticum

