BACKGROUND
primary immunodeficiency diseases  comprise a heterogeneous group of disorders mainly characterized by increased susceptibility to infections. the aims of this study were to estimate the occurrence rate of pid in the paediatric  population of southern sweden  and to describe their demographic, clinical and immunological characteristics. during a period of 4 years, in four paediatric speciality clinics in skåne county in southern sweden, children being seen for infections and fulfilling specific criteria were evaluated according to a predefined examination schedule. the initial analysis consisted of complete blood counts with analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations , measurement of immunoglobulins , and assessment of the complement system . in addition, results of these immunological analyses in other children from the same area and time period were evaluated.


RESULTS
in total,  <dig> children  met the criteria and were included. the most common infection was recurrent otitis media. immunological analyses results for about two thirds of the patients were outside age-related reference intervals. further examination in this latter group identified  <dig> children with pid ;  <dig>  had genetically defined pid, representing  <dig> different diagnoses, and another  <dig>  had a clinically defined pid - common variable immunodeficiency. no additional pid patient was identified from the evaluation of laboratory results in children not included in the study. the median age at diagnosis was  <dig>  years .


CONCLUSIONS
the occurrence rate of pid was about  <dig> new cases per year in this population. several different pid diagnoses were found, and the application of specified criteria to identify pid patients was useful. in children who are prone to infection, the use of a predefined set of immunological laboratory analyses at their first examination was beneficial for early identification of patients with pid.

keywords
childrencomplementimmunodeficiencyimmunoglobulinimmunoglobulin subclasslymphocyteissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

