BACKGROUND
gsk <dig>  genes encode signal transduction proteins with roles in a variety of biological processes in eukaryotes. in contrast to the low copy numbers observed in animals, gsk <dig> genes have expanded into a multi-gene family in land plants , and have also evolved functions in diverse plant specific processes, including floral development in angiosperms. however, despite previous efforts, the phylogeny of land plant gsk <dig> genes is currently unclear. here, we analyze genes from a representative sample of phylogenetically pivotal taxa, including basal angiosperms, gymnosperms, and monilophytes, to reconstruct the evolutionary history and functional diversification of the gsk <dig> gene family in land plants.


RESULTS
maximum likelihood phylogenetic analyses resolve a gene tree with four major gene duplication events that coincide with the emergence of novel land plant clades. the single gsk <dig> gene inherited from the ancestor of land plants was first duplicated along the ancestral branch to extant vascular plants, and three subsequent duplications produced three gsk <dig> loci in the ancestor of euphyllophytes, four in the ancestor of seed plants, and at least five in the ancestor of angiosperms. a single gene in the amborella trichopoda genome may be the sole survivor of a sixth gsk <dig> locus that originated in the ancestor of extant angiosperms. homologs of two arabidopsis gsk <dig> genes with genetically confirmed roles in floral development, atsk <dig> and atsk <dig>  exhibit floral preferential expression in several basal angiosperms, suggesting evolutionary conservation of their floral functions. members of other gene lineages appear to have independently evolved roles in plant reproductive tissues in individual taxa.


CONCLUSIONS
our phylogenetic analyses provide the most detailed reconstruction of gsk <dig> gene evolution in land plants to date and offer new insights into the origins, relationships, and functions of family members. notably, the diversity of this “green” branch of the gene family has increased in concert with the increasing morphological and physiological complexity of land plant life forms. expression data for seed plants indicate that the functions of gsk <dig> genes have also diversified during evolutionary time.

gsk3land plant evolutiongene duplicationgene expression

