BACKGROUND
high-throughput sequencing using targeted enrichment and transcriptomic methods enables rapid construction of phylogenomic data sets incorporating hundreds to thousands of loci. these advances have enabled access to an unprecedented amount of nucleotide sequence data, but they also pose new questions. given that the loci targeted for enrichment are often highly conserved, how informative are they at different taxonomic scales, especially at the intraspecific/phylogeographic scale? we investigate this question using australian scincid lizards in the eugongylus group . we sequenced  <dig> anchored hybrid enriched  loci for  <dig> individuals and mined  <dig> exons  from transcriptomes  from  <dig> individuals, including multiple phylogeographic lineages within several species of carlia, lampropholis, and saproscincus skinks. we assessed the phylogenetic information content of these loci at the intergeneric, interspecific, and phylogeographic scales. as a further test of the utility at the phylogeographic scale, we used the anchor hybrid enriched loci to infer lineage divergence parameters using coalescent models of isolation with migration.


RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses of both data sets inferred very strongly supported trees at all taxonomic levels. further, ahe loci yielded estimates of divergence times between closely related lineages that were broadly consistent with previous population-level analyses.


CONCLUSIONS
anchored-enriched loci are useful at the deep phylogeny and phylogeographic scales. although overall phylogenetic support was high throughout the australian eugongylus group phylogeny, there were nonetheless some conflicting or unresolved relationships, especially regarding the placement of pseudemoia, cryptoblepharus, and the relationships amongst closely-related species of tasmanian niveoscincus skinks.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
anchored phylogenomicscoalescencephylogeographyskinktranscriptomeultraconserved elementsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

