BACKGROUND
ocimum l. of family lamiaceae is a well known genus for its ethnobotanical, medicinal and aromatic properties, which are attributed to innumerable phenylpropanoid and terpenoid compounds produced by the plant. to enrich genomic resources for understanding various pathways, de novo transcriptome sequencing of two important species, o. sanctum and o. basilicum, was carried out by illumina paired-end sequencing.


RESULTS
the sequence assembly resulted in  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts with an average length of 1646 ±  <dig>  bp and 1363 ±  <dig>  bp for o. sanctum and o. basilicum, respectively. out of the total transcripts,  <dig>  and  <dig>  from o. sanctum and o. basilicum, and respectively were annotated by uniprot blastx against arabidopsis, rice and lamiaceae. kegg analysis identified  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts from o. sanctum and o. basilicum, respectively, related to secondary metabolism with higher percentage of transcripts for biosynthesis of terpenoids in o. sanctum and phenylpropanoids in o. basilicum. higher digital gene expression in o. basilicum was validated through qpcr and correlated to higher essential oil content and chromosome number . several cyp <dig>  and tf  families were identified having probable roles in primary and secondary metabolism. also ssr and snp markers were identified in the transcriptomes of both species with many ssrs linked to phenylpropanoid and terpenoid pathway genes.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first report of a comparative transcriptome analysis of ocimum species and can be utilized to characterize genes related to secondary metabolism, their regulation, and breeding special chemotypes with unique essential oil composition in ocimum.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
comparative transcriptomicschromosomeocimum sanctumocimum basilicumphenylpropanoidsterpenoidsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

