BACKGROUND
mucins are large glycoproteins that cover epithelial surfaces of the body. all mucins contain at least one pts domain, a region rich in proline, threonine and serine. mucins are also characterized by von willebrand d  domains or sea domains. we have developed computational methods to identify mucin genes and proteins based on these properties of the proteins. using such methods we are able to characterize different organisms where genome sequence is available with respect to their mucin repertoire.


RESULTS
we have here made a comprehensive analysis of potential mucins encoded by the chicken  genome. three transmembrane mucins  and four gel-forming mucins  were identified. the gel-forming mucins are encoded within a locus similar to the corresponding human mucins. however, the chicken has an additional gene inserted between muc <dig> and muc5ac that encodes the the α-subunit of ovomucin, a protein similar to muc <dig>  but it is lacking a pts domain. we also show that the β-subunit of ovomucin is the orthologue of human muc <dig>  the transmembrane muc <dig> gene is in chicken as well as in mammals adjacent to the heg  gene. heg has pts, egf and transmembrane domains like muc <dig>  suggesting that these two proteins are evolutionary related. unlike previously known mucins, the pts domain of muc <dig> is encoded by multiple exons, where each exon encodes a repeat unit of the pts domain.


CONCLUSIONS
we report new mucin homologues in chicken and this information will aid in understanding the evolution of mucins in vertebrates. the fact that ovomucin, a protein not found in mammals, was located in the same locus as other gel-forming mucins provides strong support that these proteins are evolutionary related. furthermore, a relationship of heg and the transmembrane muc <dig> is suggested on the basis of their biochemical properties and their presence in the same locus. finally, our finding that the chicken muc <dig> is distributed between multiple exons raises the interesting possibility that the length of the pts domain could be controlled by alternative splicing.

