BACKGROUND
the emergence, resurgence and spread of human food-borne pathogenic vibrios are one of the major contributors to disease burden and mortality particularly in developing countries with disputable sanitary conditions. previous research on pathogenic vibrio cholerae and vibrio parahaemolitycus derived from clinical samples has proposed links between acquisition of virulence and multiple drug resistance traits and intercellular transmissibility of mobile genetic elements in the environment. to date, very few information is available on environmental vibrio isolates. in this study, we characterized eleven vibrio strains bearing the sxt/r391-like integrative and conjugative elements  derived from aquatic products and environment in the yangtze river estuary, china.


RESULTS
the eleven vibrio strains were isolated in  <dig> to  <dig>  and taxonomically identified, which included six vibrio cholerae, three vibrio parahaemolyticus, one vibrio alginolyticus and one vibrio natriegens. most of the strains displayed strong resistance phenotypes to ampicillin, mercury and chromium. the majority of their ices, which belong to s and r exclusion system groups, contain ices-chromosome junction sequences and highly conserved core-genes required for ice transfer. however, comparative sequence analysis uncovered interesting diversity in their mosaic accessory gene structures, which carry many novel genes that have not been described in any known ices to date. in addition, antibiotic resistance was transmitted by icevchchn <dig> and icevpachn <dig> from v. cholerae, v. parahaemolyticus to e. coli mg <dig> via conjugation, respectively. our data also revealed that the ices characterized in this study are phylogenetically distant from most of the sxt/r <dig> ices reported previously, which may represent a novel cluster likely shaped by the ecological environment in the yangtze river estuary, china.


CONCLUSIONS
this study constitutes the first investigation of ices-positive vibrio spp. in the yangze river estuary, china. the newly identified ices were characterized with mosaic accessory gene structures and many novel genes. the results demonstrated self-transmissibility of antibiotic resistance mediated by two of the ices from v. cholerae, v. parahaemolyticus to e. coli via conjugation, respectively. our results also revealed that the ices examined in this study may represent a novel cluster in the sxt/r <dig> family.

vibriosicesdrug and heavy metal resistanceaquatic productsestuary

