BACKGROUND
guard cells  are specialised cells within the plant epidermis which form stomatal pores, through which gas exchange can occur. the gcs derive through a specialised lineage of cell divisions which is specified by the transcription factor speechless , the expression of which can be detected in undifferentiated epidermal cells prior to asymmetric division. other transcription factors may act before gc specification and be required for correct gc patterning. previously, the dof transcription factor stomatal carpenter  <dig>  was shown to be involved in gc function, by activating a set of gc–specific genes required for gc maturation and activity. it is thus far unknown whether scap <dig> can also affect stomatal development.


RESULTS
here we show that scap <dig> expression can also be observed in young leaf primordia, before any gc differentiation occurs. the study of transgenic plants carrying a proscap1:gus-gfp transcriptional fusion, coupled with qpcr analyses, indicate that scap <dig> expression peaks in a temporal window which is coincident with expression of stomatal patterning genes. independent scap <dig> loss-of-function mutants have a reduced number of gcs whilst scap <dig> over expression lines have an increased number of gcs, in addition to altered gc distribution and spacing patterns. the study of early markers for stomatal cell lineage in a background carrying gain–of–function alleles of scap <dig> revealed that, compared to the wild type, an increased number of protodermal cells are recruited in the gc lineage, which is reflected in an increased number of meristemoids.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest an early role for scap <dig> in gc differentiation. we propose that a function of scap <dig> is to integrate different aspects of gc biology including specification, spacing, maturation and function.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
arabidopsisscap <dig> guard cells developmentdof-type transcription factorsspch atmyb <dig> miurprin tonelli chiara fondazione umberto veronesi project agrisostgalbiati massimo issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

