BACKGROUND
kalmegh  has been widely exploited in traditional medicine for the treatment of infectious diseases and health disorders. ent-labdane-related diterpene  specialized  metabolites of kalmegh such as andrographolide, neoandrographolide and 14-deoxy- <dig> -didehydroandrographolide, are known for variety of pharmacological activities. however, due to the lack of genomic and transcriptomic information, underlying molecular basis of ent-lrds biosynthesis has remained largely unknown. to identify candidate genes of the ent-lrd biosynthetic pathway, we performed comparative transcriptome analysis using leaf and root tissues that differentially accumulate ent-lrds.


RESULTS
de novo assembly of illumina hiseq <dig> platform-generated paired-end sequencing reads resulted into  <dig>  leaf and  <dig>  root transcripts which were assembled into a total of  <dig>  unique transcripts. annotation of these transcripts to the uniprot, kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  and carbohydrate-active enzymes  databases identified candidate transcripts of the ent-lrd biosynthetic pathway. these included transcripts that encode enzymes of the plastidial 2c-methyl-d-erythritol-4-phosphate pathway which provides c <dig> isoprenoid precursors for the ent-lrds biosynthesis, geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase, class ii diterpene synthase , cytochrome p <dig> monooxygenase and glycosyltransferase. three class ii ditpss  that showed distinct tissue-specific expression profiles and are phylogenetically related to the dicotyledon ent-copalyl diphosphate synthases, are identified. apcps <dig>  apcps <dig> and apcps <dig> encode for 832-, 817- and 797- amino acids proteins of 55–63 % identity, respectively. spatio-temporal patterns of transcripts and ent-lrds accumulation are consistent with the involvement of apcps <dig> in general  metabolism for the biosynthesis of phytohormone gibberellin, apcps <dig> in leaf specialized ent-lrds biosynthesis and apcps <dig> in root diterpene biosynthesis. moreover, simple sequence repeats  that might assist in genotyping and developing specific chemotypes were identified in transcripts of the specialized metabolic pathways, including ent-lrds.


CONCLUSIONS
comparative analysis of root and leaf transcriptomes disclosed novel genes of the ent-lrd biosynthetic pathway, including three class ii ditpss that showed discrete spatio-temporal expression patterns; thus, suggesting their participation into distinct diterpene metabolic pathways of kalmegh. overall, these results will be useful in understanding molecular basis of the medicinal ent-lrds biosynthesis and developing breeding strategies for improving their yields.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
andrographis paniculataent-labdane-related diterpenemedicinal compoundspecialized metabolismtranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

