BACKGROUND
perinatal infections with feline panleukopenia virus  have long been known to be associated with cerebellar hypoplasia in kittens due to productive infection of dividing neuroblasts. fpv, like other parvoviruses, requires dividing cells to replicate which explains the usual tropism of the virus for the digestive tract, lymphoid tissues and bone marrow in older animals.


RESULTS
in this study, the necropsy and histopathological analyses of a series of  <dig> cats which died from parvovirus infection in  <dig> were performed. infections were confirmed by real time pcr and immunohistochemistry in several organs. strikingly, while none of these cats showed cerebellar atrophy or cerebellar positive immunostaining, some of them, including one adult, showed a bright positive immunostaining for viral antigens in cerebral neurons . furthermore, infected neurons were negative by immunostaining for p27kip <dig>  a cell cycle regulatory protein, while neighboring, uninfected, neurons were positive, suggesting a possible re-entry of infected neurons into the mitotic cycle. next-generation sequencing and pcr analyses showed that the virus infecting cat brains was fpv and presented a unique substitution in ns <dig> protein sequence. given the role played by this protein in the control of cell cycle and apoptosis in other parvoviral species, it is tempting to hypothesize that a cause-to-effect between this ns <dig> mutation and the capacity of this fpv strain to infect neurons in adult cats might exist.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the first evidence of infection of cerebral neurons by feline panleukopenia virus in cats, including an adult. a possible re-entry into the cell cycle by infected neurons has been observed. a mutation in the ns <dig> protein sequence of the fpv strain involved could be related to its unusual cellular tropism. further research is needed to clarify this point.

keywords
feline panleukopenia viruscatneuronsneurological disordersissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

