BACKGROUND
the european badger is an important wildlife reservoir of mycobacterium bovis implicated in the spread of bovine tuberculosis in the united kingdom and ireland. infected badgers are known to shed m. bovis in their urine and faeces, which may contaminate the environment. to aid bovine tuberculosis control efforts novel diagnostic tests for detecting infected and shedding badgers are needed. we proposed development of a novel, rapid immunochromatographic lateral flow device  as a non-invasive test to detect m. bovis cells in badger faeces. its application in combination with immunomagnetic separation  to detect mycobacterium bovis cells in badger faeces is reported here.


RESULTS
a novel prototype lfd for m. bovis cells was successfully developed, with unique specificity for m. bovis and a limit of detection 50%  of  <dig>  × 104 m. bovis cells/ml. when ims was employed to selectively capture and concentrate m. bovis cells from badger faeces prior to lfd testing, the lod50% of the ims-lfd assay was  <dig>  × 105 m. bovis cells/ml faecal homogenate. faeces samples collected from latrines at badger setts in a region of endemic bovine tuberculosis infection were tested;  <dig>  of  <dig> samples tested ims-lfd assay positive, whereas  <dig>  tested ims-qpcr positive . subsequently, when  <dig> faeces samples from live captured, or captive, badgers of known infection status  were tested, the ims-lfd assay had higher relative diagnostic specificity , but poorer relative diagnostic sensitivity , than ims-qpcr  and ims-culture .


CONCLUSIONS
the novel ims-lfd assay, although very specific for m. bovis, has low analytical sensitivity  and would only detect badgers shedding high numbers of m. bovis  in their faeces. the novel lfd would, therefore, have limited value as a non-invasive test for badger tb surveillance purposes but it may have value for alternative veterinary diagnostic applications.

keywords
mycobacterium boviseuropean badger faecesimmunomagnetic separationlateral flow devicenon-invasive testdiagnostic specificitydiagnostic sensitivityuk dept of environment, food and rural affairsse3271issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

