BACKGROUND
purely epistatic multi-locus interactions cannot generally be detected via single-locus analysis in case-control studies of complex diseases. recently, many two-locus and multi-locus analysis techniques have been shown to be promising for the epistasis detection. however, exhaustive multi-locus analysis requires prohibitively large computational efforts when problems involve large-scale or genome-wide data. furthermore, there is no explicit proof that a combination of multiple two-locus analyses can lead to the correct identification of multi-locus interactions.


RESULTS
the proposed 2lomb algorithm performs an omnibus permutation test on ensembles of two-locus analyses. the algorithm consists of four main steps: two-locus analysis, a permutation test, global p-value determination and a progressive search for the best ensemble. 2lomb is benchmarked against an exhaustive two-locus analysis technique, a set association approach, a correlation-based feature selection  technique and a tuned relieff  technique. the simulation results indicate that 2lomb produces a low false-positive error. moreover, 2lomb has the best performance in terms of an ability to identify all causative single nucleotide polymorphisms  and a low number of output snps in purely epistatic two-, three- and four-locus interaction problems. the interaction models constructed from the 2lomb outputs via a multifactor dimensionality reduction  method are also included for the confirmation of epistasis detection. 2lomb is subsequently applied to a type  <dig> diabetes mellitus  data set, which is obtained as a part of the uk genome-wide genetic epidemiology study by the wellcome trust case control consortium . after primarily screening for snps that locate within or near  <dig> candidate genes and exhibit no marginal single-locus effects, the t2d data set is reduced to  <dig>  snps from  <dig> genes. the 2lomb search in the reduced t2d data reveals that four intronic snps in pgm <dig> , two intronic snps in lmx1a , two intronic snps in park <dig>   <dig>  parkin) and three intronic snps in gys <dig> ) are associated with the disease. the 2lomb result suggests that there is no interaction between each pair of the identified genes that can be described by purely epistatic two-locus interaction models. moreover, there are no interactions between these four genes that can be described by purely epistatic multi-locus interaction models with marginal two-locus effects. the findings provide an alternative explanation for the aetiology of t2d in a uk population.


CONCLUSIONS
an omnibus permutation test on ensembles of two-locus analyses can detect purely epistatic multi-locus interactions with marginal two-locus effects. the study also reveals that snps from large-scale or genome-wide case-control data which are discarded after single-locus analysis detects no association can still be useful for genetic epidemiology studies.

