BACKGROUND
rhodospirillum centenum is a photosynthetic member of the gram-negative azospirillum clade members of which exhibit a complex developmental life-cycle featuring morphologically distinct cell types. under periods of nutrient deprivation, replicative vegetative cells differentiate into metabolically dormant cysts that survive harsh environmental stresses such as desiccation. encystment involves a multi-stage developmental process that includes the rounding of cells, production of large intracellular storage granules of poly-hydroxybutyrate  and the excretion of a protective exopolysaccharide coating that envelops dormant cysts.


RESULTS
to study the process of cyst development, we performed rna-seq studies on cells that were induced to undergo cyst development. to assay for temporal changes in gene expression, rna was extracted at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  96 hours during development and subjected to deep sequence analysis. these results show that  <dig> genes exhibit log2 ≥  <dig> -fold changes in expression over a 96 hour cyst induction period demonstrating large global changes in gene expression during cyst development.


CONCLUSIONS
notable changes in expression occurred in numerous genes involved in cell wall and lipid biosynthesis, metabolic enzymes, and numerous regulatory genes such as histidine kinases and transcription factors. many genes involved in protein synthesis and dna replication were also significantly reduced during late stages of cyst development. genes previously identified by genetic screens as being critical for cyst development also exhibited changes of expression during cyst induction. this study provides the first transcriptome profile of global changes in gene expression that occur during development of cysts in a gram-negative species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
photosynthetic azospirillumencystmentdesiccation resistanceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

