BACKGROUND
describing the microbial populations present in small grain silage and understanding their changes during ensiling is of interest for improving the nutrient value of these important forage crops. barley, oat and triticale forages as well as an intercropped mixture of the  <dig> crops were harvested and ensiled in mini silos for a period of  <dig> days, followed by  <dig> days of aerobic exposure. changes in fermentation characteristics and nutritive value were assessed in terminal silages and bacterial and fungal communities during ensiling and aerobic exposure were described using 16s and 18s rdna sequencing, respectively.


RESULTS
all small grain silages exhibited chemical traits that were associated with well ensiled forages, such as low ph value  and high levels of lactic acid . the number of microbial core genome operational taxonomic units  decreased with time of ensiling. taxonomic bacterial community profiles were dominated by the lactobacillales after fermentation, with a notable increase in bacillales as a result of aerobic exposure. diversity of the fungal core microbiome was shown to also be reduced during ensiling. operational taxonomic units assigned to filamentous fungi were found in the core microbiome at ensiling and after aerobic exposure, whereas the saccharomycetales were the dominate yeast population after  <dig> days of ensiling and aerobic exposure. bacterial and fungal orders typically associated with silage spoilage were identified in the core microbiome after aerobic exposure.


CONCLUSIONS
next generation sequencing was successfully used to describe bacterial communities and the first record of fungal communities throughout the process of ensiling and utilization. adequately describing the microbial ecology of silages could lead to improved ensiling practices and the selection of silage inoculants that act synergistically with the natural forage microbiome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
barleyoatstriticalesilagemicrobiomebacteriafungiaerobic exposurebarley cluster of agriculture and agri-food canadaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

