BACKGROUND
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification  is a powerful tool to identify genomic polymorphisms. we have previously developed a single nucleotide polymorphism  and large sequence polymorphisms -based mlpa assay using a read out on a liquid bead array to screen for  <dig> genetic markers in the mycobacterium tuberculosis genome. in our assay we obtain information regarding the mycobacterium tuberculosis lineage and drug resistance simultaneously. previously we called the presence or absence of a genotypic marker based on a threshold signal level. here we present a more elaborate data analysis method to standardize and streamline the interpretation of data generated by mlpa. the new data analysis method also identifies intermediate signals in addition to classification of signals as positive and negative. intermediate calls can be informative with respect to identifying the simultaneous presence of sensitive and resistant alleles or infection with multiple different mycobacterium tuberculosis strains.


RESULTS
to validate our analysis method  <dig> dna isolates of mycobacterium tuberculosis extracted from cultured patient material collected at the national tb reference laboratory of the national center for tuberculosis and lung diseases in tbilisi, republic of georgia were tested by mlpa. the data generated were interpreted blindly and then compared to results obtained by reference methods. mlpa profiles containing intermediate calls are flagged for expert review whereas the majority of profiles, not containing intermediate calls, were called automatically. no intermediate signals were identified in 74/ <dig> isolates and in the remaining  <dig> isolates at least one genetic marker produced an intermediate signal.


CONCLUSIONS
based on excellent agreement with the reference methods we conclude that the new data analysis method performed well. the streamlined data processing and standardized data interpretation allows the comparison of the mycobacterium tuberculosis mlpa results between different experiments. all together this will facilitate the implementation of the mlpa assay in different settings.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mycobacterium tuberculosismlpadata analysissnp typingmagpixdrug resistancemtbc lineagerepublic of georgiaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

