BACKGROUND
the notochord is a defining feature of the chordate clade, and invertebrate chordates, such as tunicates, are uniquely suited for studies of this structure. here we used a well-characterized set of  <dig> notochord genes known to be targets of the notochord-specific brachyury transcription factor in one tunicate, ciona intestinalis , to begin determining whether the same genetic toolkit is employed to build the notochord in another tunicate, oikopleura dioica . we identified oikopleura orthologs of the ciona notochord genes, as well as lineage-specific duplicates for which we determined the phylogenetic relationships with related genes from other chordates, and we analyzed their expression patterns in oikopleura embryos.


RESULTS
of the  <dig> ciona notochord genes that were used as a reference, only  <dig> had clearly identifiable orthologs in oikopleura. two of these conserved genes appeared to have undergone oikopleura- and/or tunicate-specific duplications, and one was present in three copies in oikopleura, thus bringing the number of genes to test to  <dig>  we were able to clone and test  <dig> of these genes. thirteen of the  <dig> oikopleura orthologs of ciona notochord genes showed clear expression in all or in part of the oikopleura notochord, seven were diffusely expressed throughout the tail, six were expressed in tissues other than the notochord, while two probes did not provide a detectable signal at any of the stages analyzed. one of the notochord genes identified, oikopleura netrin, was found to be unevenly expressed in notochord cells, in a pattern reminiscent of that previously observed for one of the oikopleura hox genes.


CONCLUSIONS
a surprisingly high number of ciona notochord genes do not have apparent counterparts in oikopleura, and only a fraction of the evolutionarily conserved genes show clear notochord expression. this suggests that ciona and oikopleura, despite the morphological similarities of their notochords, have developed rather divergent sets of notochord genes after their split from a common tunicate ancestor. this study demonstrates that comparisons between divergent tunicates can lead to insights into the basic complement of genes sufficient for notochord development, and elucidate the constraints that control its composition.

