BACKGROUND
the importance of in silico predictions for understanding cellular processes is now widely accepted, and a variety of algorithms useful for studying different biological features have been designed. in particular, the prediction of cis regulatory modules in non-coding human genome regions represents a major challenge for understanding gene regulation in several diseases. recently, studies of the wnt signaling pathway revealed a connection with neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer's. in this article, we construct a classification tool that uses the transcription factor binding site motifs composition of some gene promoters to identify new wnt/β-catenin pathway target genes potentially involved in brain diseases.


RESULTS
in this study, we propose  <dig> new wnt/β-catenin pathway target genes predicted in silico by using a method based on multiple classification and regression tree  analysis. we used as decision variables the presence of transcription factor binding site motifs in the upstream region of each gene. this prediction was validated by rt-qpcr in a sample of  <dig> genes. as expected, lef <dig>  a member of the t-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor family , was relevant for the classification algorithm and, remarkably, other factors related directly or indirectly to the inflammatory response and amyloidogenic processes also appeared to be relevant for the classification. among the  <dig> new wnt/β-catenin pathway targets, we found a group expressed in brain tissue that could be involved in diverse responses to neurodegenerative diseases, like alzheimer's disease . these genes represent new candidates to protect cells against amyloid β toxicity, in agreement with the proposed neuroprotective role of the wnt signaling pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
our multiple cart strategy proved to be an effective tool to identify new wnt/β-catenin pathway targets based on the study of their regulatory regions in the human genome. in particular, several of these genes represent a new group of transcriptional dependent targets of the canonical wnt pathway. the functions of these genes indicate that they are involved in pathophysiology related to alzheimer's disease or other brain disorders.

