BACKGROUND
the hunt bumble bee  is a holometabolous, social insect important as a pollinator in natural and agricultural ecosystems in western north america. bumble bees spend a significant amount of time foraging on a wide variety of flowering plants, and this activity exposes them to both plant toxins and pesticides, posing a threat to individual and colony survival. little is known about what detoxification pathways are active in bumble bees, how the expression of detoxification genes changes across life stages, or how the number of detoxification genes expressed in b. huntii compares to other insects.


RESULTS
we found b. huntii expressed at least  <dig> genes associated with detoxification and stress responses. the expression levels of some of these genes, such as those encoding the cytochrome p450s, glutathione s-transferases  and glycosidases, vary among different life stages to a greater extent than do other genes. we also found that the number of p450s, gsts and esterase genes expressed by b. huntii is similar to the number of these genes found in the genomes of other bees, namely bombus terrestris, bombus impatiens, apis mellifera and megachile rotundata, but many fewer than are found in the fly drosophila melanogaster.


CONCLUSIONS
bombus huntii has transcripts for a large number of detoxification and stress related proteins, including oxidation and reduction enzymes, conjugation enzymes, hydrolytic enzymes, abc transporters, cadherins, and heat shock proteins. the diversity of genes expressed within some detoxification pathways varies among the life stages and castes, and we typically identified more genes in the adult females than in larvae, pupae, or adult males, for most pathways. meanwhile, we found the numbers of detoxification and stress genes expressed by b. huntii to be more similar to other bees than to the fruit fly. the low number of detoxification genes, first noted in the honey bee, appears to be a common phenomenon among bees, and perhaps results from their symbiotic relationship with plants. many flowering plants benefit from pollinators, and thus offer these insects rewards  rather than defensive plant toxins.

beesbombus huntiibumble beesdetoxification genestranscriptome

