BACKGROUND
cardiac contractility is regulated by dynamic phosphorylation of sarcomeric proteins by kinases such as camp-activated protein kinase a . efficient phosphorylation requires that pka be anchored close to its targets by a-kinase anchoring proteins . cardiac myosin binding protein-c  and cardiac troponin i  are hypertrophic cardiomyopathy -causing sarcomeric proteins which regulate contractility in response to pka phosphorylation.


RESULTS
during a yeast 2-hybrid  library screen using a trisphosphorylation mimic of the c1-c <dig> region of cmybpc, we identified isoform  <dig> of myomegalin  as an interactor of this n-terminal cmybpc region. as mmgl has previously been shown to interact with phosphodiesterase 4d, we speculated that it may be a pka-anchoring protein .

to investigate this possibility, we assessed the ability of mmgl isoform  <dig> to interact with pka regulatory subunits r1a and r2a using y2h-based direct protein-protein interaction assays. additionally, to further elucidate the function of mmgl, we used it as bait to screen a cardiac cdna library. other pka targets, viz. carp, commd <dig>  eno <dig>  eno <dig> and ctni were identified as putative interactors, with ctni being the most frequent interactor.

we further assessed and confirmed these interactions by fluorescent 3d-co-localization in differentiated h9c <dig> cells as well as by in vivo co-immunoprecipitation. we also showed that quantitatively more interaction occurs between mmgl and ctni under β-adrenergic stress. moreover, sirna-mediated knockdown of mmgl leads to reduction of cmybpc levels under conditions of adrenergic stress, indicating that mmgl-assisted phosphorylation is requisite for protection of cmybpc against proteolytic cleavage.


CONCLUSIONS
this study ascribes a novel function to mmgl isoform 4: it meets all criteria for classification as an akap, and we show that is involved in the phosphorylation of cmybpc as well as ctni, hence mmgl is an important regulator of cardiac contractility. this has further implications for understanding the patho-aetiology of hcm-causing mutations in the genes encoding cmybpc and ctni, and raises the question of whether mmgl might itself be considered a candidate hcm-causing or modifying factor.

