BACKGROUND
bioinformatics and medical informatics are two research fields that serve the needs of different but related communities. both domains share the common goal of providing new algorithms, methods and technological solutions to biomedical research, and contributing to the treatment and cure of diseases. although different microarray techniques have been successfully used to investigate useful information for cancer diagnosis at the gene expression level, the true integration of existing methods into day-to-day clinical practice is still a long way off. within this context, case-based reasoning emerges as a suitable paradigm specially intended for the development of biomedical informatics applications and decision support systems, given the support and collaboration involved in such a translational development. with the goals of removing barriers against multi-disciplinary collaboration and facilitating the dissemination and transfer of knowledge to real practice, case-based reasoning systems have the potential to be applied to translational research mainly because their computational reasoning paradigm is similar to the way clinicians gather, analyze and process information in their own practice of clinical medicine.


RESULTS
in addressing the issue of bridging the existing gap between biomedical researchers and clinicians who work in the domain of cancer diagnosis, prognosis and treatment, we have developed and made accessible a common interactive framework. our genecbr system implements a freely available software tool that allows the use of combined techniques that can be applied to gene selection, clustering, knowledge extraction and prediction for aiding diagnosis in cancer research. for biomedical researches, genecbr expert mode offers a core workbench for designing and testing new techniques and experiments. for pathologists or oncologists, genecbr diagnostic mode implements an effective and reliable system that can diagnose cancer subtypes based on the analysis of microarray data using a cbr architecture. for programmers, genecbr programming mode includes an advanced edition module for run-time modification of previous coded techniques.


CONCLUSIONS
genecbr is a new translational tool that can effectively support the integrative work of programmers, biomedical researches and clinicians working together in a common framework. the code is freely available under the gpl license and can be obtained at .

