BACKGROUND
research into various aspects of coral biology has greatly increased in recent years due to anthropogenic threats to coral health including pollution, ocean warming and acidification. however, knowledge of coral early development has lagged. the present paper describes the embryonic development of two previously uncharacterized robust corals, favia lizardensis  and ctenactis echinata  and compares it to that of the previously characterized complex coral, acropora millepora, both morphologically and in terms of the expression of a set of key developmental genes.


RESULTS
illumina sequencing of mixed age embryos was carried out, resulting in embryonic transcriptomes consisting of  <dig> contigs for c.echinata  and  <dig> contigs for f.lizardensis . the transcriptomes have been annotated against swiss-prot and were sufficiently complete to enable the identification of orthologs of many key genes controlling development in bilaterians. developmental series of images of whole mounts and sections reveal that the early stages of both species contain a blastocoel, consistent with their membership of the robust clade. in situ hybridization was used to examine the expression of the developmentally important genes brachyury, chordin and forkhead. the expression of brachyury and forkhead was consistent with that previously reported for acropora and allowed us to confirm that the pseudo-blastopore sometimes seen in robust corals such as favia spp. is not directly associated with gastrulation. c.echinata chordin expression, however, differed from that seen in the other two corals.


CONCLUSIONS
embryonic transcriptomes were assembled for the brain coral favia lizardensis and the solitary coral ctenactis echinata. both species have a blastocoel in their early developmental stages, consistent with their phylogenetic position as members of the robust clade. expression of the key developmental genes brachyury, chordin and forkhead was investigated, allowing comparison to that of their orthologs in acropora, nematostella and bilaterians and demonstrating that even within the anthozoa there are significant differences in expression patterns.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
coral developmentfaviactenactisacroporatranscriptomein situ hybridizationbrachyurychordinforkheadhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of sciencekakenhi 15k18599okubo nami tokyo keizai university research grant 2015okubo nami research institute of marine invertebrates research grant 2015ko-3okubo nami arc centre of excellence for coral reef studiesce140100020forêt sylvain arc discovery grantsdp1095343forêt sylvain issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

