BACKGROUND
selection of the best oocyte for subsequent steps of fertilization and embryo transfer was shown to be the crucial step in human infertility treatment procedure. oocyte selection using morphological criteria mainly zona pellucida  has been the gold standard method in assisted reproductive technologies  clinics, but this selection approach has limitations in terms of accuracy, objectivity and constancy. recent studies using omics-based approaches have allowed the identification of key molecular markers that quantitatively and non-invasively predict the oocyte quality for higher pregnancy rates and efficient infertility treatment. these biomarkers are a valuable reinforcement of the morphological selection criteria widely used in in vitro fertilization  clinics. in this context, this study was designed to investigate the relationship between transcriptomic predictors of oocyte quality found by our group and the conventional morphological parameters of oocyte quality mainly the zp birefringence.


RESULTS
microarray data revealed that  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed candidate genes in cumulus cells  were respectively overexpressed and underexpressed in the zgp  versus zbnp  groups. more than 70% of previously reported transcriptomic biomarkers of oocyte developmental competence were confirmed in this study. the analysis of possible association between zp birefringence versus molecular markers approach showed an absence of correlation between them using the current set of markers.


CONCLUSIONS
this study suggested a new integrative approach that matches morphological and molecular approaches used to select developmentally competent oocytes able to lead to successful pregnancy and the delivery of healthy baby. for each zp birefringence score, oocytes displayed a particular ccs' gene expression pattern. however, no correlations were found between the  <dig> gene biomarkers of oocyte developmental potential and the zp birefringence score. further studies using larger lists of candidate markers are required to identify suitable genes that are highly correlated with the morphological criteria, and therefore able to reinforce the accuracy of oocyte selection and the effectiveness of infertility treatment.

24- <dig> november  <dig> 2nd international genomic medicine conference  jeddah, kingdom of saudi arabia

