BACKGROUND
drought tolerance is an attribute maintained in plants by cross-talk between multiple and cascading metabolic pathways. without a sequenced genome available for horse gram, it is difficult to comprehend such complex networks and intercalated genes associated with drought tolerance of horse gram . therefore, de novo transcriptome discovery and associated analyses was done for this highly drought tolerant yet under exploited legume to decipher its genetic makeup.


RESULTS
eight samples comprising of shoot and root tissues of two horse gram genotypes  were used for comparison under control and polyethylene glycol-induced drought stress conditions. using illumina sequencing technology, a total of  <dig> , <dig> paired end read pairs were generated and utilized for de novo assembly of horse gram. significant blast hits were obtained for  <dig>  transcripts while,  <dig>  transcripts had no hits but contained important conserved domains. a total of  <dig>  unigenes were identified. ssrs containing sequences covered  <dig> % of the transcriptome with predominant tri- and mono-nucleotides . the total gc content of the transcriptome was found to be  <dig> %. under gene ontology response to stimulus, dna binding and catalytic activity was highly expressed during drought stress conditions. serine/threonine protein kinase was found to dominate in enzyme classification while pathways belonging to ribosome metabolism followed by plant pathogen interaction and plant hormone signal transduction were predominant in kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes analysis. independent search on plant metabolic network pathways suggested valine degradation, gluconeogenesis and purine nucleotide degradation to be highly influenced under drought stress in horse gram. transcription factors belonging to nac, myb-related, and wrky families were found highly represented under drought stress. qrt-pcr validated the expression profile for  <dig> out of  <dig> genes analyzed in response to drought stress.


CONCLUSIONS
de novo transcriptome discovery and analysis has generated enormous information over horse gram genomics. the genes and pathways identified suggest efficient regulation leading to active adaptation as a basal defense response against drought stress by horse gram. the knowledge generated can be further utilized for exploring other underexploited plants for stress responsive genes and improving plant tolerance.

horse gramillumina sequencingde novo assemblydrought responsive genes

