BACKGROUND
next-generation sequencing  is revolutionizing molecular epidemiology by providing new approaches to undertake whole genome sequencing  in diagnostic settings for a variety of human and veterinary pathogens. previous sequencing protocols have been subject to biases such as those encountered during pcr amplification and cell culture, or are restricted by the need for large quantities of starting material. we describe here a simple and robust methodology for the generation of whole genome sequences on the illumina miseq. this protocol is specific for foot-and-mouth disease virus  or other polyadenylated rna viruses and circumvents both the use of pcr and the requirement for large amounts of initial template.


RESULTS
the protocol was successfully validated using five fmdv positive clinical samples from the  <dig> epidemic in the united kingdom, as well as a panel of representative viruses from all seven serotypes. in addition, this protocol was successfully used to recover 94% of an fmdv genome that had previously been identified as cell culture negative. genome sequences from three other non-fmdv polyadenylated rna viruses  were also obtained with minor protocol amendments. we calculated that a minimum coverage depth of  <dig> reads was required to produce an accurate consensus sequence for fmdv o. this was achieved in  <dig> fmdv/o/ukg isolates and the type o fmdv from the serotype panel with the exception of the 5′ genomic termini and area immediately flanking the poly region.


CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a universal wgs method for fmdv and other polyadenylated rna viruses. this method works successfully from a limited quantity of starting material and eliminates the requirement for genome-specific pcr amplification. this protocol has the potential to generate consensus-level sequences within a routine high-throughput diagnostic environment.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
next generation sequencingwhole genome sequencingfoot-and-mouth disease virusgenomernavirusfmdvissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

