BACKGROUND
protein complexes carry out nearly all signaling and functional processes within cells. the study of protein complexes is an effective strategy to analyze cellular functions and biological processes. with the increasing availability of proteomics data, various computational methods have recently been developed to predict protein complexes. however, different computational methods are based on their own assumptions and designed to work on different data sources, and various biological screening methods have their unique experiment conditions, and are often different in scale and noise level. therefore, a single computational method on a specific data source is generally not able to generate comprehensive and reliable prediction results.


RESULTS
in this paper, we develop a novel two-layer integrative complex detection  model to detect protein complexes, leveraging the information from both clustering results and raw data sources. in particular, we first integrate various clustering results to construct consensus matrices for proteins to measure their overall co-complex propensity. second, we combine these consensus matrices with the co-complex score matrix derived from tandem affinity purification/mass spectrometry  data and obtain an integrated co-complex similarity network via an unsupervised metric fusion method. finally, a novel graph regularized doubly stochastic matrix decomposition model is proposed to detect overlapping protein complexes from the integrated similarity network.


CONCLUSIONS
extensive experimental results demonstrate that tincd performs much better than  <dig> state-of-the-art complex detection techniques, including ensemble clustering and data integration techniques.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
protein complexprotein interaction dataco-complex matrixconsensus matrixmatrix fusionmatrix decompositionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

