BACKGROUND
predictive microbiology develops mathematical models that can predict the growth rate of a microorganism population under a set of environmental conditions. many primary growth models have been proposed. however, when primary models are applied to bacterial growth curves, the biological variability is reduced to a single curve defined by some kinetic parameters , and sometimes the models give poor fits in some regions of the curve. the development of a prediction band  using non-parametric and bootstrap methods permits to overcome that problem and include the biological variability of the microorganism into the modelling process.


RESULTS
absorbance data from listeria monocytogenes cultured at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 42째c were selected under different environmental conditions of ph  and percentage of nacl . transformation of absorbance data to viable count data was carried out. a random effect multiplicative heteroscedastic model was considered to explain the dynamics of bacterial growth. the concept of a prediction band for microbial growth is proposed. the bootstrap method was used to obtain resamples from this model. an iterative procedure is proposed to overcome the computer intensive task of calculating simultaneous prediction intervals, along time, for bacterial growth. the bands were narrower below the inflection point , and wider to the right of it . a wider band was observed at 42째c than at 22째c when the curves reach their upper asymptote. similar bands have been obtained for  <dig> and 38째c.


CONCLUSIONS
the combination of nonparametric models and bootstrap techniques results in a good procedure to obtain reliable prediction bands in this context. moreover, the new iterative algorithm proposed in this paper allows one to achieve exactly the prefixed coverage probability for the prediction band. the microbial growth bands reflect the influence of the different environmental conditions on the microorganism behaviour, helping in the interpretation of the biological meaning of the growth curves obtained experimentally.

