BACKGROUND
spermatogenesis is a complex process characterized by the activation and/or repression of a number of genes in a spatio-temporal manner. pubertal development in males starts with the onset of the first spermatogenesis and implies the division of primary spermatogonia and their subsequent entry into meiosis. this study is aimed at the characterization of genes involved in the onset of puberty in european sea bass, and constitutes the first transcriptomic approach focused on meiosis in this species.


RESULTS
european sea bass testes collected at the onset of puberty  were grouped in stage i , and stage ii . transition from stage i to stage ii was marked by an increase of 11ketotestosterone , the main fish androgen, whereas the transcriptomic study resulted in  <dig> genes differentially expressed between the two stages. the onset of puberty induced 1) an up-regulation of genes involved in cell proliferation, cell cycle and meiosis progression, 2) changes in genes related with reproduction and growth, and 3) a down-regulation of genes included in the retinoic acid  signalling pathway. the analysis of go-terms and biological pathways showed that cell cycle, cell division, cellular metabolic processes, and reproduction were affected, consistent with the early events that occur during the onset of puberty. furthermore, changes in the expression of three ra nuclear receptors point at the importance of the ra-signalling pathway during this period, in agreement with its role in meiosis.


CONCLUSIONS
the results contribute to boost our knowledge of the early molecular and endocrine events that trigger pubertal development and the onset of spermatogenesis in fish. these include an increase in 11kt plasma levels and changes in the expression of several genes involved in cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, meiosis or ra-signalling pathway. moreover, the results can be applied to study meiosis in this economically important fish species for mediterranean countries, and may help to develop tools for its sustainable aquaculture.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
spermatogenesiscell cyclemeiosisretinoic acidteleostsspanish ministry of science and innovation aquagenomics zanuy silvia spanish ministry of science and innovation agl2011-28890gómez ana http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003359generalitat valencianaprometeo ii/2014/051zanuy silvia issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

