BACKGROUND
evidence suggests that early life infections, presence of older siblings and furred pets in the household affect the risk of developing allergic diseases through altered microbial exposure. recently, low gut microbial diversity during infancy has also been linked with later development of allergies. we investigated whether presence of older siblings, furred pets and early life infections affected gut microbial communities at  <dig> and 18 months of age and whether these differences were associated with the cumulative prevalence of atopic symptoms of eczema and asthmatic bronchitis at  <dig> years of age. bacterial compositions and diversity indices were determined in fecal samples collected from  <dig> infants in the skot i cohort at age  <dig> and 18 months by 16s rrna gene sequencing. these were compared to the presence of older siblings, furred pets and early life infections and the cumulative prevalence of diagnosed asthmatic bronchitis and self-reported eczema at  <dig> years of age.


RESULTS
the number of older siblings correlated positively with bacterial diversity , diversity of the phyla firmicutes  and bacteroidetes  and bacterial richness  at 18 months. further, having older siblings was associated with increased relative abundance of several bacterial taxa at both  <dig> and 18 months of age. compared to the effect of having siblings, presence of household furred pets and early life infections had less pronounced effects on the gut microbiota. gut microbiota characteristics were not significantly associated with cumulative occurrence of eczema and asthmatic bronchitis during the first  <dig> years of life.


CONCLUSIONS
presence of older siblings is associated with increased gut microbial diversity and richness during early childhood, which could contribute to the substantiation of the hygiene hypothesis. however, no associations were found between gut microbiota and atopic symptoms of eczema and asthmatic bronchitis during early childhood and thus further studies are required to elucidate whether sibling-associated gut microbial changes influence development of allergies later in childhood.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
alpha diversityasthmatic bronchitisearly life infectionseczema furred petsinfantsgut microbiotaolder siblingsrichnessskot i cohortissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

