BACKGROUND
the domestic pig sus scrofa domesticus originated from the wild boar s. scrofa about  <dig>  years ago. during domestication, drastic morphological, physiological, and behavioral changes developed between domestic pigs and wild boars through artificial and natural selection. the long non-coding rna  h <dig>  which is located within the imprinting gene cluster h19-igf <dig>  plays an important role in regulating muscle development in humans and mice. this study systematically analyzed the molecular evolution of h <dig> and its possible epigenetic changes during pig domestication and breeding to explore the genetic and epigenetic contributions of h <dig> to pig domestication.


RESULTS
the molecular evolution of h <dig> was initially analyzed on a large phylogenetic scale. results showed that the gene was highly conserved within a broad range, especially in the 5′ terminal sequence. the molecular evolution of the gene was then analyzed using published re-sequencing data of  <dig> wild boars from tibet,  <dig> wild boars from sichuan, and  <dig> native pigs from other regions in china. eight polymorphic sites were identified, and the nucleotide diversity  value within the h <dig> gene body was significantly higher  in domesticated pigs than in wild pigs. however, no significant divergence occurred between domesticated and wild pigs. single nucleotide polymorphisms in the 3′ terminal sequence were surveyed in other chinese local breeds and foreign pig breeds. we observed a consistently higher diversity in domesticated pigs than in wild pigs. the methylation pattern of the h <dig> gene in pigs was subsequently analyzed using published methylated dna immunoprecipitation data and an unpublished single-base resolution liver methylome. analysis results showed distinct methylation levels in some tissues. among the samples surveyed, landrace showed the lowest methylation level, followed by the guizhou wild boar, whereas the enshi pig exhibited the highest methylation level in the 2 kb upstream region of the h <dig> gene. liver transcriptome data suggested that landrace harbored the highest expression of the h <dig> gene, followed by the guizhou wild boar, whereas the enshi pig harbored the lowest expression of the gene. differential methylation sites  among the three breeds were mainly identified in the 2 kb upstream region of the h <dig> gene. in the enshi pig, we detected allele-specific methylation  regions in the 2 kb upstream region of the h <dig> gene. most of the dmss in the upstream 2 kb region of the gene were also located in the asm region in this breed.


CONCLUSIONS
molecular analyses suggest that the h <dig> gene was highly conserved during large-scale evolution and exhibited genotype differentiation during domestication and breed differentiation. the drastic diversity pattern between domestic and wild pigs in the h <dig> gene body, which was highly conserved during large-scale evolution, suggests that this gene might have played roles in the breed differentiation of domestic pigs. methylation analysis indicates an opposite epigenetic regulation direction between chinese and european pig  domestication, which resulted in opposite expression changes in this gene between the two domesticated groups. our preliminary analyses on dmss among different pig breeds and asm imply that imprinting was associated with methylation differences. this study systematically demonstrates the genetic and epigenetic patterns of h <dig> during pig domestication and provide valuable cues and basis for further research on the function of h <dig> in pig domestication.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
piglong non-coding geneh19molecular evolutionmethylationdomesticationbreed divergencethe research project of chinese ministry of education113048axiang hui the science fund for distinguished young scholars of hubei province of china2014cfa024xiang hui the fundamental research funds for the central universities2662015py029xiang hui  <dig> project2013cb835205wang wen issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

