BACKGROUND
classification methods of dna most commonly use comparison of the differences in dna symbolic records, which requires the global multiple sequence alignment. this solution is often inappropriate, causing a number of imprecisions and requires additional user intervention for exact alignment of the similar segments. the similar segments in dna represented as a signal are characterized by a similar shape of the curve. the dna alignment in genomic signals may adjust whole sections not only individual symbols. the dynamic time warping  is suitable for this purpose and can replace the multiple alignment of symbolic sequences in applications, such as phylogenetic analysis.

methods
the proposed method is composed of three main parts. the first part represent conversion of symbolic representation of dna sequences in the form of a string of a,c,g,t symbols to signal representation in the form of cumulated phase of complex components defined for each symbol. next part represents signals size adjustment realized by standard signal preprocessing methods: median filtration, detrendization and resampling. the final part necessary for genomic signals comparison is position and length alignment of genomic signals by dynamic time warping .


RESULTS
the application of the dtw on set of genomic signals was evaluated in dendrogram construction using cluster analysis. the resulting tree was compared with a classical phylogenetic tree reconstructed using multiple alignment. the classification of genomic signals using the dtw is evolutionary closer to phylogeny of organisms. this method is more resistant to errors in the sequences and less dependent on the number of input sequences.


CONCLUSIONS
classification of genomic signals using dynamic time warping is an adequate variant to phylogenetic analysis using the symbolic dna sequences alignment; in addition, it is robust, quick and more precise technique.

10- <dig> june  <dig> 10th international workshop on computational systems biology tampere, finland

