BACKGROUND
every year, substantial crop loss occurs globally, as a result of bacterial, fungal, parasite and viral infections in rice. here, we present an in-depth investigation of the transcriptomic response to infection with the destructive bacterial pathogen xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae in both resistant and susceptible varieties of oryza sativa. a comparative analysis to fungal, parasite and viral infection in rice is also presented.


RESULTS
within  <dig> h of xoo inoculation, significant reduction of cell wall components and induction of several signalling components, membrane bound receptor kinases and specific wrky and nac transcription factors was prominent, providing a framework for how the presence of this pathogen was signalled and response mounted. extensive comparative analyses of various other pathogen responses, including in response to infection with another bacterium , resistant and susceptible parasite infection, fungal, and viral infections, led to a proposed model for the rice biotic stress response. in this way, a conserved induction of calcium signalling functions, and specific wrky and nac transcription factors, was identified in response to all biotic stresses. comparison of these responses to abiotic stress , enabled the identification of unique genes responsive only to bacterial infection,  <dig> genes responsive to both abiotic and biotic stress, and  <dig> genes responsive to biotic, but not abiotic stresses. functional significance of a number of these genes, using genetic inactivation or over-expression, has revealed significant stress-associated phenotypes. while only a few antagonistic responses were observed between biotic and abiotic stresses, e.g. for a number of endochitinases and kinase encoding genes, some of these may be crucial in explaining greater pathogen infection and damage under abiotic stresses.


CONCLUSIONS
the analyses presented here provides a global view of the responses to multiple stresses, further validates known resistance-associated genes, and highlights new potential target genes, some lineage specific to rice, that play important roles in response to stress, providing a roadmap to develop varieties of rice that are more resistant to multiple biotic and abiotic stresses, as encountered in nature.

