BACKGROUND
the golgi apparatus in mammals appears as a ribbon made up of interconnected
                  stacks of flattened cisternae that is positioned close to the centrosome in a
                  microtubule-dependent manner. how this organisation is achieved and retained is
                  not well understood. gmap <dig> is a long coiled-coil cis-golgi associated protein
                  that plays a role in maintaining golgi ribbon integrity and position and
                  contributes to the formation of the primary cilium. an amphipathic alpha-helix
                  able to bind liposomes in vitro has been recently identified at
                  the first  <dig> amino acids of the protein ,
                  and an arf1-binding domain  was found at the
                  c-terminus. to which type of membranes these two gmap <dig> regions bind in
                     vivo and how this contributes to gmap <dig> localisation and function
                  remains to be investigated.


RESULTS
by using truncated as well as chimeric mutants and videomicroscopy we found that
                  both the n-terminus and the c-terminus of gmap <dig> are targeted to the cis-golgi
                     in vivo. the alps motif was identified as the n-terminal
                  binding motif and appeared concentrated in the periphery of golgi elements and
                  between golgi stacks. on the contrary, the c-terminal domain appeared uniformly
                  distributed in the cis-cisternae of the golgi apparatus. strikingly, the two ends
                  of the protein also behave differently in response to the drug brefeldin a. the
                  n-terminal domain redistributed to the endoplasmic reticulum  exit sites, as
                  does the full-length protein, whereas the c-terminal domain rapidly dissociated
                  from the golgi apparatus to the cytosol. mutants comprising the full-length
                  protein but lacking one of the terminal motifs also associated with the cis-golgi
                  with distribution patterns similar to those of the corresponding terminal end
                  whereas a mutant consisting in fused n- and c-terminal ends exhibits identical
                  localisation as the endogenous protein.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the golgi localisation of gmap <dig> is the result of the combined
                  action of the two n- and c-terminal domains that recognise different sub-regions
                  of the cis-ga. based on present and previous data, we propose a model in which
                  gmap <dig> would participate in homotypic fusion of cis-cisternae by anchoring the
                  surface of cisternae via its c-terminus and projecting its distal n-terminus to
                  bind the rims or to stabilise tubular structures connecting neighbouring
                  cis-cisternae.

