BACKGROUND
the random forest  method is a commonly used tool for classification with
high dimensional data as well as for ranking candidate predictors based on
the so-called random forest variable importance measures . however the
classification performance of rf is known to be suboptimal in case of
strongly unbalanced data, i.e. data where response class sizes differ
considerably. suggestions were made to obtain better classification
performance based either on sampling procedures or on cost sensitivity
analyses. however to our knowledge the performance of the vims has not yet
been examined in the case of unbalanced response classes. in this paper we
explore the performance of the permutation vim for unbalanced data settings
and introduce an alternative permutation vim based on the area under the
curve  that is expected to be more robust towards class imbalance.


RESULTS
we investigated the performance of the standard permutation vim and of our
novel auc-based permutation vim for different class imbalance levels using
simulated data and real data. the results suggest that the new auc-based
permutation vim outperforms the standard permutation vim for unbalanced data
settings while both permutation vims have equal performance for balanced
data settings.


CONCLUSIONS
the standard permutation vim loses its ability to discriminate between
associated predictors and predictors not associated with the response for
increasing class imbalance. it is outperformed by our new auc-based
permutation vim for unbalanced data settings, while the performance of both
vims is very similar in the case of balanced classes. the new auc-based vim
is implemented in the r package party for the unbiased rf variant based on
conditional inference trees. the codes implementing our study are available
from the companion website:
http://www.ibe.med.uni-muenchen.de/organisation/mitarbeiter/070_drittmittel/janitza/index.html.

random forestconditional inference treesvariable importance measurefeature selectionunbalanced dataclass imbalancearea under the curve.

