BACKGROUND
brucellosis is considered the world’s most widespread zoonotic infection. it causes abortion and sterility in livestock leading to serious economic losses and has even more serious medical impact in humans, since it can be a trigger to more than  <dig>  infections per year worldwide. the aim of this study was to evaluate the role of haematopinus tuberculatus, a louse that can parasitize several ruminants, as a new host of brucellosis. louse specimens were collected from seropositive and seronegative water buffaloes and divided in  <dig> developmental stages: adults, nymphs and nits. all samples were separately screened for brucella spp. dna and rna detection by real time pcr. in particular, primers and probes potentially targeting the 16s rrna and the brucella cell surface  <dig> kdalton protein  genes were used for real time pcr and buffalo β actin was used as a housekeeping gene to quantify host dna in the sample. a known amount of b. abortus purified dna was utilized for standard curve preparation and the target dna amount was divided by the housekeeping gene amount to obtain a normalized target value. a further molecular characterization was performed for brucella strain typing and genotyping by the bruce-ladder, amos-pcr and mlva assays. data were statistically analysed by anova.


RESULTS
brucella abortus dna and rna were detected in all developmental stages of the louse, suggesting the presence of viable bacteria. data obtained by mlva characterization support this finding, since the strains present in animals and the relative parasites were not always identical, suggesting bacterial replication. furthermore, the detection of brucella dna and rna in nits samples demonstrate, for the first time, a trans-ovarial transmission of the bacterium into the louse.


CONCLUSIONS
these findings identified h. tuberculatus as a new host of brucellosis. further studies are needed to establish the role of this louse in the epidemiology of the disease, such as vector or reservoir.

haematopinus tuberculatusbrucella sppzoonosislousereal time pcr

