BACKGROUND
rna interference  is a powerful platform utilized to target transcription of specific genes and downregulate the protein product. to achieve effective silencing, rnai is usually applied to cells or tissue with a transfection reagent to enhance entry into cells. a commonly used control is the same transfection reagent plus a “noncoding rnai”. however, this does not control for the genomic response to the transfection reagent alone or in combination with the noncoding rnai. these control effects while not directly targeting the gene in question may influence expression of other genes that in turn alter expression of the target. the current study was prompted by our work focused on prevention of vascular bypass graft failure and our experience with gene silencing in human aortic smooth muscle cells  where we suspected that off target effects through this mechanism might be substantial. we have used next generation sequencing  technology and bioinformatics analysis to examine the genomic response of haosmcs to the transfection reagent alone ) or in combination with commercially obtained control small interfering rna  .


RESULTS
compared to untreated cells, global gene expression of haosmcs after transfection either with pei or in combination with control sirnas displayed significant alterations in gene transcriptome after  <dig> h. haosmcs transfected by pei alone revealed alterations of  <dig> genes mainly involved in inflammatory and immune responses. haosmcs transfected by pei complexed with sirna from either dharmacon or invitrogen showed substantial gene variation of  <dig> and  <dig> genes respectively. transfection of cells with only pei or with pei and control sirnas resulted in identification of  <dig> set of overlapping altered genes. further, systems biology analysis revealed key master regulators in cells transfected with control sirnas including the cytokine, interleukin - <dig>  transcription factor gata binding protein - <dig> and the methylation enzyme, enhancer of zeste homolog  <dig>  a cytokine with an apical role in initiating the inflammatory response.


CONCLUSIONS
significant off-target effects in haosmcs transfected with pei alone or in combination with control sirnas may lead to misleading conclusions concerning the effectiveness of a targeted sirna strategy. the lack of structural information about transfection reagents and “non coding” sirna is a hindrance in the development of sirna based therapeutics.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rnaitransfection reagentpeicontrol sirnahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of health5t32hl0077345r01hl0217965r01hl086741logerfo frank w. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

