BACKGROUND
fungi are organisms with the highest natural capacity to degrade lignocellulose substrates, which is enabled by complex systems of extracellular enzymes, whose expression and secretion depend on the characteristics of substrates and the environment.


RESULTS
this study reports a secretome analysis for white-rot basidiomycete trametes hirsuta cultivated on a synthetic media and a lignocellulose substrate. we demonstrate that t. hirsuta st.  <dig> produces multiple extracellular ligninolytic, cellulolytic, hemicellulolytic, peroxide generating, and proteolytic enzymes, as well as cerato-platanins. in contrast to other white rot species described earlier, which mostly secreted glucanases and mannosidases in response to the presence of the lignocellulose substrate, t. hirsuta expressed a spectrum of extracellular cellulolytic enzymes containing predominantly cellobiases and xylanases. as proteomic analysis could not detect lignin peroxidase  among the secreted lignin degrading enzymes, we attributed the observed extracellular lip - like activity to the expressed versatile peroxidase . an accessory enzyme, glyoxal oxidase, was found among the proteins secreted in the media during submerged cultivation of t. hirsuta both in the presence and in the absence of copper. however, aryl-alcohol oxidase  was not identified, despite the presence of aao enzymatic activity secreted by the fungus.

the spectra of the expressed enzymes dramatically changed depending on the growth conditions. transfer from submerged cultivation to surface cultivation with the lignocellulose substrate switched off expression of exo-β- <dig> -glucanase and α-amylase and turned on secretion of endo-β- <dig> -glucanase and a range of glycosidases. in addition, an aspartic peptidase started being expressed instead of family s <dig> protease. for the first time, we report production of cerato-platanin proteins by trametes species. the secretion of cerato-platanins was observed only in response to contact with lignocellulose, thus indicating a specific role of these proteins in degradation of the lignocellulose substrates.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest a sequential mechanism of natural substrate degradation by t. hirsuta, in which the fungus produces different sets of enzymes to digest all main components of the substrate during cultivation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
white-rot fungisecretome profilinglignolytic enzymeslignocellulose degradationrussian science foundation#14-14-00620issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

