BACKGROUND
t cell receptor  molecules are involved in the adaptive immune response as they distinguish between self- and foreign-peptides, presented in major histocompatibility complex molecules . former studies showed that the association angles of the tcr variable domains  can differ significantly and change upon binding to the pmhc complex. these changes can be described as a rotation of the domains around a general center of rotation, characterized by the interaction of two highly conserved glutamine residues.

methods
we developed a computational method, dynadom, for the prediction of tcr vα/vβ inter-domain and tcr/pmhc orientations in tcrpmhc complexes, which allows predicting the orientation of multiple protein-domains. in addition, we implemented a new approach to predict the correct orientation of the carboxamide endgroups in glutamine and asparagine residues, which can also be used as an external, independent tool.


RESULTS
the approach was evaluated for the remodeling of  <dig> and  <dig> experimental structures of tcr and tcrpmhc  complexes, respectively. we show that the dynadom method predicts the correct orientation of the tcr vα/vβ angles in  <dig> and 89% of the cases, for the poses with the best rmsd and best interaction energy, respectively. for the concurrent prediction of the tcr vα/vβ and pmhc orientations, the respective rates reached  <dig> and 72%. through an exhaustive analysis, we could show that the pmhc placement can be further improved by a straightforward, yet very time intensive extension of the current approach.


CONCLUSIONS
the results obtained in the present remodeling study prove the suitability of our approach for interdomain-angle optimization. in addition, the high prediction rate obtained specifically for the energetically highest ranked poses further demonstrates that our method is a powerful candidate for blind prediction. therefore it should be well suited as part of any accurate atomistic modeling pipeline for tcrpmhc complexes and potentially other large molecular assemblies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
t-cell recognitiontcr structural modelingepitope predictionglutamine side chain predictionprotein domain association anglesimmunoinformaticsadoptive t-cell therapyvaccine designdeutsche forschungsgemeinschaft sfb <dig> project a10hoffmann thomas deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft cipsm cluster of excellenceantes iris deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft sfb749marion antoine issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

