BACKGROUND
although chickpea , an important food legume crop, is sensitive to salinity, considerable variation for salinity tolerance exists in the germplasm. to improve any existing cultivar, it is important to understand the genetic and physiological mechanisms underlying this tolerance.


RESULTS
in the present study,  <dig> recombinant inbred lines  derived from the cross iccv 2 × jg  <dig> were used to assess yield and related traits in a soil with 0 mm nacl  and 80 mm nacl  over two consecutive years. salinity significantly  affected almost all traits across years and yield reduction was in large part related to a reduction in seed number but also a reduction in above ground biomass. a genetic map was constructed using  <dig> polymorphic markers . the qtl analysis revealed two key genomic regions on calg <dig>  and on calg <dig> , that harboured qtls for six and five different salinity tolerance associated traits, respectively, and imparting either higher plant vigour  or higher reproductive success . two major qtls for yield in the salinity treatment  were identified within the two key genomic regions. comparison with already published chickpea genetic maps showed that these regions conferred salinity tolerance across two other populations and the markers can be deployed for enhancing salinity tolerance in chickpea. based on the gene ontology annotation, forty eight putative candidate genes responsive to salinity stress were found on calg <dig>  and calg <dig>  in a distance of  <dig>  mb and  <dig>  mb on chickpea reference genome. most of the genes were known to be involved in achieving osmoregulation under stress conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
identification of putative candidate genes further strengthens the idea of using calg <dig> and calg <dig> genomic regions for marker assisted breeding . further fine mapping of these key genomic regions may lead to novel gene identification for salinity stress tolerance in chickpea.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chickpeasalinity treatmentquantitative trait lociyieldgenomic regioncandidate genesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

