BACKGROUND
melon  is one of the most important horticultural species, which includes several taxonomic groups. with the advent of next-generation sequencing, single nucleotide polymorphism  markers are widely used in the study of genetic diversity and genomics.


RESULTS
we report the first successful application of genotyping-by-sequencing  technology in melon. we detected  <dig>  snps by the analysis of  <dig> accessions collected in apulia, a secondary centre of diversity in southern italy. analyses of genetic structure, principal components, and hierarchical clustering support the identification of three distinct subpopulations. one of them includes accessions known with the folk name of ‘carosello’, referable to the chate taxonomic group. this is one of the oldest domesticated forms of c. melo, once widespread in europe and now exposed to the risk of genetic erosion. the second subpopulation contains landraces of ‘barattiere’, a regional vegetable production that was never characterized at the dna level and we show was erroneously considered another form of chate melon. the third subpopulation includes genotypes of winter melon . genetic analysis within each subpopulation revealed patterns of diversity associated with fruit phenotype and geographical origin. we used snp data to describe, for each subpopulation, the average linkage disequilibrium  decay, and to highlight genomic regions possibly resulting from directional selection and associated with phenotypic variation.


CONCLUSIONS
we used gbs to characterize patterns of genetic diversity and genomic features within c. melo. we provide useful information to preserve endangered gene pools and to guide the use of germplasm in breeding. finally, our findings lay a foundation for molecular breeding approaches and the identification of genes underlying phenotypic traits.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cucumis melogenetic diversitygenomicsgenotyping-by-sequencingmolecular breedingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

