BACKGROUND
transcriptome analysis of porcine whole blood has several applications, which include deciphering genetic mechanisms for host responses to viral infection and vaccination. the abundance of alpha- and beta-globin transcripts in blood, however, impedes the ability to cost-effectively detect transcripts of low abundance. although protocols exist for reduction of globin transcripts from human and mouse/rat blood, preliminary work demonstrated these are not useful for porcine blood globin reduction . our objectives were to develop a porcine specific gr protocol and to evaluate the gr effects on gene discovery and sequence read coverage in rna-sequencing  experiments.


RESULTS
a gr protocol for porcine blood samples was developed using rnase h with antisense oligonucleotides specifically targeting porcine hemoglobin alpha  and beta  mrnas. whole blood samples  collected in tempus tubes were used for evaluating the efficacy and effects of gr on rna-seq. the hba and hbb mrna transcripts comprised an average of  <dig> % of the mapped reads in pre-gr samples, but those reads reduced to an average of  <dig> % in post-gr samples. differential gene expression analysis showed that the expression level of  <dig>  genes were increased, whereas  <dig> genes, excluding hba and hbb, showed decreased expression after gr . an additional  <dig> genes were detected only in post-gr samples.


CONCLUSIONS
our porcine specific gr primers and protocol minimize the number of reads of globin transcripts in whole blood samples and provides increased coverage as well as accuracy and reproducibility of transcriptome analysis. increased detection of low abundance mrnas will ensure that studies relying on transcriptome analyses do not miss information that may be vital to the success of the study.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pigbloodglobin reductionrna-seqtranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

