BACKGROUND
bacterial populations are highly successful at colonizing new habitats and adapting to changing environmental conditions, partly due to their capacity to evolve novel virulence and metabolic pathways in response to stress conditions and to shuffle them by horizontal gene transfer . a common theme in the evolution of new functions consists of gene duplication followed by functional divergence. ulag, a unique manganese-dependent metallo-β-lactamase  enzyme involved in l-ascorbate metabolism by commensal and symbiotic enterobacteria, provides a model for the study of the emergence of new catalytic activities from the modification of an ancient fold. furthermore, ulag is the founding member of the so-called ulag-like  protein family, a recently established and poorly characterized family comprising divalent  metal-binding mbls that catalyze transformations on phosphorylated sugars and nucleotides.


RESULTS
here we combined protein structure-guided and sequence-only molecular phylogenetic analyses to dissect the molecular evolution of ulag and to study its phylogenomic distribution, its relatedness with present-day ulagl protein sequences and functional conservation. phylogenetic analyses indicate that ulagl sequences are present in bacteria and archaea, with bona fide orthologs found mainly in mammalian and plant-associated gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. the incongruence between the ulagl tree and known species trees indicates exchange by hgt and suggests that the ulagl-encoding genes provided a growth advantage under changing conditions. our search for more distantly related protein sequences aided by structural homology has uncovered that ulagl sequences have a common evolutionary origin with present-day rna processing and metabolizing mbl enzymes widespread in bacteria, archaea, and eukarya. this observation suggests an ancient origin for the ulagl family within the broader trunk of the mbl superfamily by duplication, neofunctionalization and fixation.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that the forerunner of ulag was present as an rna metabolizing enzyme in the last common ancestor, and that the modern descendants of that ancestral gene have a wide phylogenetic distribution and functional roles. we propose that the ulagl family evolved new metabolic roles among bacterial and possibly archeal phyla in the setting of a close association with metazoans, such as in the mammalian gastrointestinal tract or in animal and plant pathogens, as well as in environmental settings. accordingly, the major evolutionary forces shaping the ulagl family include vertical inheritance and lineage-specific duplication and acquisition of novel metabolic functions, followed by hgt and numerous lineage-specific gene loss events.

