BACKGROUND
maize  is an important model for plant basic and applied research. in  <dig>  the b <dig> maize genome sequencing made a great step forward, using clone by clone strategy; however, functional annotation and gene classification of the maize genome are still limited. thus, a well-annotated datasets and informative database will be important for further research discoveries. signal transduction is a fundamental biological process in living cells, and many protein families participate in this process in sensing, amplifying and responding to various extracellular or internal stimuli. therefore, it is a good starting point to integrate information on the maize functional genes involved in signal transduction.


RESULTS
here we introduce a comprehensive database 'profits' , which endeavours to identify and classify protein kinases/phosphatases, transcription factors and ubiquitin-proteasome-system related genes in the b <dig> maize genome. users can explore gene models, corresponding transcripts and flcdnas using the three abovementioned protein hierarchical categories, and visualize them using an ajax-based genome browser  or generic genome browser . functional annotations such as go annotation, protein signatures, protein best-hits in the arabidopsis and rice genome are provided. in addition, pre-calculated transcription factor binding sites of each gene are generated and mutant information is incorporated into profits. in short, profits provides a user-friendly web interface for studies in signal transduction process in maize.


CONCLUSIONS
profits, which utilizes both the b <dig> maize genome and full length cdna  datasets, provides users a comprehensive platform of maize annotation with specific focus on the categorization of families involved in the signal transduction process. profits is designed as a user-friendly web interface and it is valuable for experimental researchers. it is freely available now to all users at http://bioinfo.cau.edu.cn/profits.

