BACKGROUND
recent advances in high-throughput sequencing allow for much deeper exploitation of natural and engineered microbial communities, and to unravel so-called “microbial dark matter” . metagenomic analyses result in a large number of genomic fragments  that need to be grouped  in order to reconstruct draft microbial genomes. while several contig binning algorithms have been developed in the past 2 years, they often lack consensus. furthermore, these software tools typically lack a provision for the visualization of data and bin characteristics.


RESULTS
we present icover, the interactive contig-bin verification and refinement tool, which allows the visualization of genome bins. more specifically, icover allows curation of bin assignments based on multiple binning algorithms. its visualization window is composed of two connected and interactive main views, including a parallel coordinates view and a dimensionality reduction plot. to demonstrate icover’s utility, we used it to refine disparate genome bins automatically generated using metabat, concoct and mycc for an anaerobic digestion metagenomic  dataset. out of  <dig> refined genome bins,  <dig> were characterized with higher completeness and lower contamination in comparison to their respective, automatically generated, genome bins. additionally, to benchmark icover against a previously validated dataset, we used sharon’s dataset representing an infant gut metagenome.


CONCLUSIONS
icover is an open source software package that allows curation of disparate genome bins generated with automatic binning algorithms. it is freely available under the gplv <dig> license at https://git.list.lu/escience/icover. the data management and analytical functions of icover are implemented in r, therefore the software can be easily installed on any system for which r is available. installation and usage guide together with the example files ready to be visualized are also provided via the project wiki. icover running instance preloaded with ad microbiome and sharon’s datasets can be accessed via the website.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
contig bin visualizationgenome reconstructionmetagenomicssoftwarehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001866fonds national de la recherche luxembourgco11/sr/1280949delfosse philippe luxembourg institute of science and technologyhydvigaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

