BACKGROUND
sexual selection is thought to promote evolutionary changes and diversification. however, the impact of sexual selection in relation to other selective forces is difficult to evaluate. male digger wasps of the tribe philanthini  scent mark territories to attract receptive females. consequently, the organs for production and storage of the marking secretion, the mandibular gland  and the postpharyngeal gland , are subject to sexual selection. in female philanthini, these glands are most likely solely subject to natural selection and show very little morphological diversity. according to the hypothesis that sexual selection drives interspecific diversity, we predicted that the mg and ppg show higher interspecific variation in males than in females. using histological methods, 3d-reconstructions, and multivariate statistical analysis of morphological characters, we conducted a comparative analysis of the mg and the ppg in males of  <dig> species of philanthini and three species of the cercerini and aphilanthopsini, two related tribes within the philanthinae.


RESULTS
we found substantial interspecific diversity in gland morphology with regard to gland incidence, size, shape and the type of associated secretory cells. overall there was a phylogenetic trend: ensuing from the large mgs and small ppgs of male cercerini and aphilanthopsini, the size and complexity of the mg was reduced in male philanthini, while their ppg became considerably enlarged, substantially more complex, and associated with an apparently novel type of secretory cells. in some clades of the philanthini the mg was even lost and entirely replaced by the ppg. however, several species showed reversals of and exceptions from this trend. head gland morphology was significantly more diverse among male than among female philanthinae.


CONCLUSIONS
our results show considerable variation in male head glands including the loss of an entire gland system and the evolution of a novel kind of secretory cells, confirming the prediction that interspecific diversity in head gland morphology is higher in male than in female philanthini. we discuss possible causes for the remarkable evolutionary changes in males and we conclude that this high diversity has been caused by sexual selection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
philanthinaebeewolvessexual selectioninterspecific variationpostpharyngeal glandmandibular glandcomparative morphologycategorical principal components analysisancestral state reconstructionuniversität bayern e.v.ph.d. fellowshipweiss katharina issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

