BACKGROUND
the small brown planthopper  is an important agricultural pest that not only damages rice plants by sap-sucking, but also acts as a vector that transmits rice stripe virus , which can cause even more serious yield loss. despite being a model organism for studying entomology, population biology, plant protection, molecular interactions among plants, viruses and insects, only a few genomic sequences are available for this species. to investigate its transcriptome and determine the differences between viruliferous and na誰ve l. striatellus, we employed 454-flx high-throughput pyrosequencing to generate est databases of this insect.


RESULTS
we obtained  <dig>  and  <dig>  high-quality reads from viruliferous and na誰ve l. striatellus, respectively, with an average read length as  <dig> bp. these reads were assembled into contigs and two est databases were generated. when all reads were combined,  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons  were obtained, which represents a transcriptome of the insect. blastx search against the ncbi-nr database revealed that only  <dig>   of these unigenes have significant matches. comparison of the distribution of go classification among viruliferous, na誰ve, and combined est databases indicated that these libraries are broadly representative of the l. striatellus transcriptomes. functionally diverse transcripts from rsv, endosymbiotic bacteria wolbachia and yeast-like symbiotes were identified, which reflects the possible lifestyles of these microbial symbionts that live in the cells of the host insect. comparative genomic analysis revealed that l. striatellus encodes similar innate immunity regulatory systems as other insects, such as rna interference, jak/stat and partial imd cascades, which might be involved in defense against viral infection. in addition, we determined the differences in gene expression between vector and na誰ve samples, which generated a list of candidate genes that are potentially involved in the symbiosis of l. striatellus and rsv.


CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, the present study is the first description of a genomic project for l. striatellus. the identification of transcripts from rsv, wolbachia, yeast-like symbiotes and genes abundantly expressed in viruliferous insect, provided a starting-point for investigating the molecular basis of symbiosis among these organisms.

