BACKGROUND
burkholderia pseudomallei is a soil-dwelling saprophyte and the cause of melioidosis. horizontal gene transfer contributes to the genetic diversity of this pathogen and may be an important determinant of virulence potential. the genome contains genomic island  regions that encode a broad array of functions. although there is some evidence for the variable distribution of genomic islands in b. pseudomallei isolates, little is known about the extent of variation between related strains or their association with disease or environmental survival.


RESULTS
five islands from b. pseudomallei strain k <dig> were chosen as representatives of different types of genomic islands present in this strain, and their presence investigated in other b. pseudomallei. in silico analysis of  <dig> b. pseudomallei genome sequences provided evidence for the variable presence of these regions, together with micro-evolutionary changes that generate gi diversity. the diversity of gis in  <dig> isolates from ne thailand  was investigated using multiplex pcr screening. the proportion of all isolates positive by pcr ranged from 12% for a prophage-like island , to 76% for a metabolic island . the presence of each of the five gis did not differ between environmental and disease-associated isolates . the cumulative number of gis per isolate for the  <dig> isolates ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> . the distribution of cumulative gi number did not differ between environmental and disease-associated isolates . the presence of gis was defined for the three largest clones in this collection ; these were st  <dig> , st  <dig> , and st  <dig> . the rapid loss and/or acquisition of gene islands was observed within individual clones. comparisons were drawn between isolates obtained from the environment and from patients with melioidosis in order to examine the role of genomic islands in virulence and clinical associations. there was no reproducible association between the individual or cumulative presence of five gis and a range of clinical features in  <dig> patients with melioidosis.


CONCLUSIONS
horizontal gene transfer of mobile genetic elements can rapidly alter the gene repertoire of b. pseudomallei. this study confirms the utility of a range of approaches in defining the presence and significance of genomic variation in natural populations of b. pseudomallei.

