BACKGROUND
although more than  <dig> loci/genes are associated with inherited retinal diseases, the mechanistic events that link genetic mutations to photoreceptor cell death are poorly understood. mirnas play a relevant role during retinal development and disease. thus, as a first step in characterizing mirna involvement during disease expression and progression, we examined mirnas expression changes in normal retinal development and in four canine models of retinal degenerative disease.


RESULTS
the initial microarray analysis showed that  <dig> mirnas were differentially expressed  early  in normal retina development, while only  <dig> were de between  <dig> and  <dig> wks, when the dog retina is fully mature. mirna expression profiles were similar between dogs affected with xlpra <dig>  an early-onset retinal disease caused by a microdeletion in rpgrorf <dig>  and normal dogs early in development  and at the peak of photoreceptor death , when only  <dig> mirnas were de. however, the expression varied much more markedly during the chronic cell death stage at  <dig> wks . functional analyses indicated that these de mirnas are associated with an increased inflammatory response, as well as cell death/survival. qrt-pcr of selected apoptosis-related mirnas  confirmed the microarray results in xlpra <dig>  and extended the analysis to the early-onset retinal diseases rcd <dig>  and erd , as well as the slowly progressing prcd . the results showed up-regulation of anti-apoptotic  and down-regulation of pro-apoptotic  apoptomirs in the early-onset diseases and, with few exceptions, also in the prcd-mutants.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that apoptomirs might be expressed by diseased retinas in an attempt to counteract the degenerative process. the pattern of expression in diseased retinas mirrored the morphology and cell death kinetics previously described for these diseases. this study suggests that common mirna regulatory mechanisms may be involved in retinal degeneration processes and provides attractive opportunities for the development of novel mirna-based therapies to delay the progression of the degenerative process.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
apoptomirscanine modelserdinherited retinal disordersmicroarraymirna expression profilesprcdqrt-pcrrcd1xlpra2issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

