BACKGROUND
vascular wilt caused by fusarium oxysporum is the most important disease in cape gooseberry  in colombia. the development of resistant cultivars is considered one of the most cost-effective means to reduce the impact of this disease. in order to do so, it is necessary to provide breeders with molecular markers and promising germplasm for introgression of different resistance loci as part of breeding schemes. here we described an association mapping study in cape gooseberry with the goal to:  select promising materials for use in plant breeding and  identify snps associated with the cape gooseberry resistance response to the f. oxysporum pathogen under greenhouse conditions, as potential markers for cape gooseberry breeding.


RESULTS
we found a total of  <dig> accessions with different resistance responses within a diversity panel of  <dig> cape gooseberry accessions. a total of  <dig>  snps were also identified within the same panel by means of gbs . model-based population structure and neighbor-joining analyses showed three populations comprising the cape gooseberry panel. after correction for population structure and kinship, we identified snps markers associated with the resistance response against f. oxysporum. the identification of markers was based on common tags using the reference genomes of tomato and potato as well as the root/stem transcriptome of cape gooseberry. by comparing their location with the tomato genome,  <dig> snps were found in genes involved in defense/resistance response to pathogens, likewise when compared with the genome of potato,  <dig> markers were related.


CONCLUSIONS
the work presented herein provides the first association mapping study in cape gooseberry showing both the identification of promising accessions with resistance response phenotypes and the identification of a set of snp markers mapped to defense/resistance response genes of reference genomes. thus, the work also provides new knowledge on candidate genes involved in the p. peruviana – f. oxysporum pathosystem as a foundation for further validation in marker-assisted selection. the results have important implications for conservation and breeding strategies in cape gooseberry.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
association mappingcape gooseberryfusarium oxysporumgenotyping by sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

