BACKGROUND
the reliable identification of proteins containing  <dig> or fewer amino acids is difficult due to the limited information content in short sequences. the  <dig> amino acid cydx protein in escherichia coli is a member of the cytochrome bd oxidase complex, an enzyme found throughout eubacteria. to investigate the extent of cydx conservation and prevalence and evaluate different methods of small protein homologue identification, we surveyed  <dig> eubacteria species for the presence of the small protein.


RESULTS
over  <dig> homologues were identified, including  <dig> unannotated genes. the ability of both closely-related and divergent homologues to complement the e. coli Δcydx mutant supports our identification techniques, and suggests that cydx homologues retain similar function among divergent species. however, sequence analysis of these proteins shows a great degree of variability, with only a few highly-conserved residues. an analysis of the co-variation between cydx homologues and their corresponding cyda and cydb genes shows a close synteny of the small protein with the cyda long q-loop. phylogenetic analysis suggests that the cydabx operon has undergone horizontal gene transfer, although the cydx gene likely evolved in a progenitor of the alpha, beta, and gammaproteobacteria. further investigation of cydab operons identified two additional conserved hypothetical small proteins: cydy encoded in cydaqlong operons that lack cydx, and cydz encoded in more than  <dig> cydaqshort operons.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a systematic analysis of bioinformatics techniques required for the unique challenges present in small protein identification and phylogenetic analyses. these results elucidate the prevalence of cydx throughout the proteobacteria, provide insight into the selection pressure and sequence requirements for cydx function, and suggest a potential functional interaction between the small protein and the cyda q-loop, an enigmatic domain of the cytochrome bd oxidase complex. finally, these results identify other conserved small proteins encoded in cytochrome bd oxidase operons, suggesting that small protein subunits may be a more common component of these enzymes than previously thought.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cydxcytochrome bd oxidasesmall proteinsphylogeneticssmall protein conservationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

