BACKGROUND
the detection of rare single nucleotide variants  is important for understanding genetic heterogeneity using next-generation sequencing  data. various computational algorithms have been proposed to detect variants at the single nucleotide level in mixed samples. yet, the noise inherent in the biological processes involved in ngs technology necessitates the development of statistically accurate methods to identify true rare variants.


RESULTS
we propose a bayesian statistical model and a variational expectation maximization  algorithm to estimate non-reference allele frequency  and identify snvs in heterogeneous cell populations. we demonstrate that our variational em algorithm has comparable sensitivity and specificity compared with a markov chain monte carlo  sampling inference algorithm, and is more computationally efficient on tests of relatively low coverage  data. furthermore, we show that our model with a variational em inference algorithm has higher specificity than many state-of-the-art algorithms. in an analysis of a directed evolution longitudinal yeast data set, we are able to identify a time-series trend in non-reference allele frequency and detect novel variants that have not yet been reported. our model also detects the emergence of a beneficial variant earlier than was previously shown, and a pair of concomitant variants.


CONCLUSIONS
we developed a variational em algorithm for a hierarchical bayesian model to identify rare variants in heterogeneous next-generation sequencing data. our algorithm is able to identify variants in a broad range of read depths and non-reference allele frequencies with high sensitivity and specificity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
single nucleotide variant detectionnext-generation sequencingbayesian statistical methodvariational inferencepharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america foundation 2013080079issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

