BACKGROUND
wheat seeds provide a staple food and an important protein source for the world’s population. seed germination is vital to wheat growth and development and directly affects grain yield and quality. in this study, we performed the first comparative proteomic analysis of wheat embryo and endosperm during seed germination.


RESULTS
the proteomic changes in embryo and endosperm during the four different seed germination stages of elite chinese bread wheat cultivar zhengmai  <dig> were first investigated. in total,  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed protein  spots representing  <dig> and  <dig> unique proteins were identified in embryo and endosperm, respectively. eight common dep were present in both tissues, and  <dig> and  <dig> dep were specific to embryo and endosperm, respectively. these identified dep spots could be sorted into  <dig> functional groups, in which the main group was involved in different metabolism pathways, particularly in the reserves necessary for mobilization in preparation for seed germination. the deps from the embryo were mainly related to carbohydrate metabolism, proteometabolism, amino acid metabolism, nucleic acid metabolism, and stress-related proteins, whereas those from the endosperm were mainly involved in protein storage, carbohydrate metabolism, inhibitors, stress response, and protein synthesis. during seed germination, both embryo and endosperm had a basic pattern of oxygen consumption, so the proteins related to respiration and energy metabolism were up-regulated or down-regulated along with respiration of wheat seeds. when germination was complete, most storage proteins from the endosperm began to be mobilized, but only a small amount was degraded during germination. transcription expression of six representative dep genes at the mrna level was consistent with their protein expression changes.


CONCLUSIONS
wheat seed germination is a complex process with imbibition, stirring, and germination stages, which involve a series of physiological, morphological, and proteomic changes. the first process is a rapid water uptake, in which the seed coat becomes softer and the physical state of storage materials change gradually. then the germinated seed enters the second process  and the third process . seed embryo and endosperm display distinct differentially expressed proteins, and their synergistic expression mechanisms provide a basis for the normal germination of wheat seeds.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
wheat seedsgerminationembryoendospermproteomeqrt-pcrissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

