BACKGROUND
nocturnal insects such as moths are ideal models to study the molecular bases of olfaction that they use, among examples, for the detection of mating partners and host plants. knowing how an odour generates a neuronal signal in insect antennae is crucial for understanding the physiological bases of olfaction, and also could lead to the identification of original targets for the development of olfactory-based control strategies against herbivorous moth pests. here, we describe an expressed sequence tag  project to characterize the antennal transcriptome of the noctuid pest model, spodoptera littoralis, and to identify candidate genes involved in odour/pheromone detection.


RESULTS
by targeting cdnas from male antennae, we biased gene discovery towards genes potentially involved in male olfaction, including pheromone reception. a total of  <dig> ests were obtained from a normalized library and were assembled in  <dig> unigenes.  <dig> were annotated based on blast analyses and gene prediction software identified  <dig> orfs. the unigenes were compared to the bombyx mori proteome and to ests derived from lepidoptera transcriptome projects. we identified a large number of candidate genes involved in odour and pheromone detection and turnover, including  <dig> candidate chemosensory receptor genes, but also genes potentially involved in olfactory modulation.


CONCLUSIONS
our project has generated a large collection of antennal transcripts from a lepidoptera. the normalization process, allowing enrichment in low abundant genes, proved to be particularly relevant to identify chemosensory receptors in a species for which no genomic data are available. our results also suggest that olfactory modulation can take place at the level of the antennae itself. these est resources will be invaluable for exploring the mechanisms of olfaction and pheromone detection in s. littoralis, and for ultimately identifying original targets to fight against moth herbivorous pests.

