BACKGROUND
kraits  and cobras  are two representative toxic genera of elapids in the old world. although they are closely related genera and both of their venoms are very toxic, the compositions of their venoms are very different. to unveil their detailed venoms and their evolutionary patterns, we constructed venom gland cdna libraries and genomic bacterial artificial chromosome  libraries for bungarus multicinctus and naja atra, respectively. we sequenced about  <dig> cdna clones for each of the venom cdna libraries and screened bac libraries of the two snakes by blot analysis using four kinds of toxin probes; i.e., three-finger toxin , phospholipase a <dig> , kunitz-type protease inhibitor , and natriuretic peptide .


RESULTS
in total,  <dig> valid expressed sequences tags  for b. multicinctus and  <dig> ests for n. atra were generated. about 70% of these ests can be annotated as snake toxin transcripts. 3ftx  and β bungarotoxin  comprise the main toxin classes in b. multicinctus, while 3ftx  is the dominant toxin in n. atra. we also observed several less abundant venom families in b. multicinctus and n. atra, such as pla <dig>  c-type lectins, and kunitz. peculiarly a cluster of np precursors with tandem nps was detected in b. multicinctus. a total of  <dig> positive toxin bac clones in b. multicinctus and n. atra were identified using four kinds of toxin probes , among which  <dig> 3ftx-postive bacs were sequenced to reveal gene structures of 3ftx toxin genes.


CONCLUSIONS
based on the toxin ests and 3ftx gene sequences, the major components of b. multicinctus venom transcriptome are neurotoxins, including long chain alpha neurotoxins  and the recently originated β bungarotoxin, whereas the n. atra venom transcriptome mainly contains 3ftxs with cytotoxicity and neurotoxicity . the data also revealed that tandem duplications contributed the most to the expansion of toxin multigene families. analysis of nonsynonymous to synonymous nucleotide substitution rate ratios  indicates that not only multigene toxin families but also other less abundant toxins might have been under rapid diversifying evolution.

