BACKGROUND
recent advances in bioimaging and automated analysis methods have enabled the large-scale systematic analysis of cellular dynamics during the embryonic development of caenorhabditis elegans. most of these analyses have focused on cell lineage tracing rather than cell shape dynamics. cell shape analysis requires cell membrane segmentation, which is challenging because of insufficient resolution and image quality. this problem is currently solved by complicated segmentation methods requiring laborious and time consuming parameter adjustments.


RESULTS
our new framework bcoms  automates the extraction of the cell shape of c. elegans embryos. both the segmentation and evaluation processes are automated. to automate the evaluation, we solve an optimization problem under biological constraints. the performance of bcoms was validated against a manually created ground truth of the 24-cell stage embryo. the average deviation of  <dig> cell shape features was  <dig> %. the deviation was mainly caused by membranes parallel to the focal planes, which either contact the surfaces of adjacent cells or make no contact with other cells. because segmentation of these membranes was difficult even by manual inspection, the automated segmentation was sufficiently accurate for cell shape analysis. as the number of manually created ground truths is necessarily limited, we compared the segmentation results between two adjacent time points. across all cells and all cell cycles, the average deviation of the  <dig> cell shape features was  <dig> %, smaller than that between the automated segmentation result and ground truth.


CONCLUSIONS
bcoms automated the accurate extraction of cell shapes in developing c. elegans embryos. by replacing image processing parameters with easily adjustable biological constraints, bcoms provides a user-friendly framework. the framework is also applicable to other model organisms. creating the biological constraints is a critical step requiring collaboration between an experimentalist and a software developer.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bioimage informaticscell membrane segmentationimage processingc. elegansembryonic developmenthttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006321national institutes of natural sciencesis271003azuma yusuke http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002241japan science and technology agencycore research for evolutionary science and technology onami shuichi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

