BACKGROUND
the whiteflies under the name bemisia tabaci   are species complex of at least  <dig> cryptic species some of which are globally invasive agricultural pests. previously, the mitochondrial genome  of the indigenous new world b. tabaci species was sequenced and major differences of gene order from the postulated whitefly ancestral gene order were found. however, the sequence and gene order of mitogenomes in other b. tabaci species are unknown. in addition, the sequence divergences and gene expression profiles of mitogenomes in the b. tabaci species complex remain completely unexplored.


RESULTS
in this study, we obtained the complete mitogenome  of the invasive mediterranean , which has been identified as the type species of the b. tabaci complex. it encodes  <dig> genes, including  <dig> protein-coding genes ,  <dig> ribosomal rnas and  <dig> transfer rnas . comparative analyses of the mitogenomes from med and new world  species reveal that there are no gene arrangements. based on the illumina sequencing data, the gene expression profile of the med mitogenome was analyzed. we found that a number of genes were polyadenylated and the partial stop codons in cox <dig>  cox <dig> and nd <dig> are completed via polyadenylation that changed t to the taa stop codon. in addition, combining the transcriptome with the sequence alignment data, the possible termination site of some pcgs were defined. our analyses also revealed that atp <dig> and atp <dig>  nd <dig> and nd4l, nd <dig> and cytb were found on the same cistronic transcripts, whereas the other mature mitochondrial transcripts were monocistronic. furthermore, rt-pcr analyses of the mitochondrial pcgs expression in different developmental stages revealed that the expression level of individual mitochondrial genes varied in each developmental stage of nymph, pupa and adult. interestingly, mrna levels showed significant differences among genes located in the same transcription unit suggesting that mitochondrial mrna abundance is heavily modulated by post-transcriptional regulation.


CONCLUSIONS
this work provides novel insights into the mitogenome evolution of b. tabaci species and demonstrates that utilizing rna-seq data to obtain the mitogenome and analyze mitochondrial gene expression characteristics is practical.

bemisia tabacigene expressionmediterraneanmitochondrial genomemitogenomicswhitefly

