BACKGROUND
candidate genes for color pattern formation in butterfly wings have been known based on gene expression patterns since the 1990s, but their functions remain elusive due to a lack of a functional assay. several methods of transferring and expressing a foreign gene in butterfly wings have been reported, but they have suffered from low success rates or low expression levels. here, we developed a simple, practical method to efficiently deliver and express a foreign gene using baculovirus-mediated gene transfer in butterfly wings in vivo.


RESULTS
a recombinant baculovirus containing a gene for green fluorescent protein  was injected into pupae of the blue pansy butterfly junonia orithya . gfp fluorescence was detected in the pupal wings and other body parts of the injected individuals three to five days post-injection at various degrees of fluorescence. we obtained a high gfp expression rate at relatively high virus titers, but it was associated with pupal death before color pattern formation in wings. to reduce the high mortality rate caused by the baculovirus treatment, we administered an anti-gp <dig> antibody, which was raised against baculovirus coat protein gp <dig>  to infected pupae after the baculovirus injection. this treatment greatly reduced the mortality rate of the infected pupae. gfp fluorescence was observed in pupal and adult wings and other body parts of the antibody-treated individuals at various degrees of fluorescence. importantly, we obtained completely developed wings with a normal color pattern, in which fluorescent signals originated directly from scales or the basal membrane after the removal of scales. gfp fluorescence in wing tissues spatially coincided with anti-gfp antibody staining, confirming that the fluorescent signals originated from the expressed gfp molecules.


CONCLUSIONS
our baculovirus-mediated gene transfer system with an anti-gp <dig> antibody is reasonably efficient, and it can be an invaluable tool to transfer, express, and functionally examine foreign genes in butterfly wings and also in other non-model insect systems.

butterfly winggene transferbaculovirus vectorgreen fluorescent proteingp64virus infectionantibody injectionimmunohistochemistry

