BACKGROUND
staphylococcus aureus is a major cause of nosocomial and community-acquired infections. however, the rapid emergence of antibiotic resistance limits the choice of therapeutic options for treating infections caused by this organism. muralytic enzymes from bacteriophages have recently gained attention for their potential as antibacterial agents against antibiotic-resistant gram-positive organisms. phage k is a polyvalent virulent phage of the myoviridae family that is active against many staphylococcus species.


RESULTS
we identified a phage k gene, designated orf <dig>  as encoding the phage tail-associated muralytic enzyme . the gene product  contains a c-terminal domain corresponding to cysteine, histidine-dependent amidohydrolase/peptidase , which demonstrated muralytic activity on a staphylococcal cell wall substrate and was lethal to s. aureus cells. we constructed n-terminal truncated forms of orf <dig> and arrived at a 16-kda protein  that retained antistaphylococcal activity. we then generated a chimeric gene construct encoding lys <dig> and a staphylococcal cell wall-binding sh3b domain. this chimeric protein  showed potent antistaphylococcal activity on global clinical isolates of s. aureus including methicillin-resistant strains. in addition, p <dig> was effective in decolonizing rat nares of s. aureus usa <dig> in an experimental model.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified a phage k gene that encodes a protein associated with the phage tail structure. the muralytic activity of the phage k tame was localized to the c-terminal chap domain. this potent antistaphylococcal tame was combined with an efficient staphylococcus-specific cell-wall targeting domain sh3b, resulting in the chimeric protein p <dig>  this protein shows bactericidal activity against globally prevalent antibiotic resistant clinical isolates of s. aureus and against the genus staphylococcus in general. in vivo, p <dig> was efficacious against methicillin-resistant s. aureus in a rat nasal colonization model.

