BACKGROUND
technology used for the purification of recombinant proteins is a key issue for the biochemical and structural analyses of proteins. in general, affinity tags, such as glutathione-s-transferase or six-histidines, are used to purify recombinant proteins. since such affinity tags often interfere negatively with the structural and functional analyses of proteins, they are usually removed by treatment with proteases. previously, dr. h. mao reported self-cleavage purification of a target protein by fusing the sortase protein to its n-terminal end, and subsequently obtained tag-free recombinant protein following expression in escherichia coli. this method, however, is yet to be applied to the cell-free based protein production.


RESULTS
the histidine tag-based self-cleavage method for purifying proteins produced by the wheat cell-free protein synthesis system showed high background, low recovery, and unexpected cleavage between the n-terminally fused sortase and target protein during the protein synthesis. addition of calcium chelator bapta to the cell-free reaction inhibited the cleavage. in order to adapt the sortase-based purification method to the cell-free system, we next used biotin as the affinity tag. the biotinylated sortase self-cleavage purification  method provided tag-free, highly purified proteins due to improved recovery of proteins from the resin. the n-terminal sequence analysis of the gfp produced by the bisop method revealed that the cleavage indeed occurred at the right cleavage site. using this method, we also successfully purified the e <dig> heterocomplex of use2n and use2v <dig>  the c-terminal src kinase  obtained by the bisop method showed high activity in phosphorylating the src protein. furthermore, we demonstrated that this method is suitable for automatically synthesizing and purifying proteins using robots.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that the newly developed bisop method is very useful for obtaining high quality, tag-free recombinant proteins, produced using the cell-free system, for biochemical and structural analyses.

