BACKGROUND
sucking lice  are obligate, permanent ectoparasites of eutherian mammals, parasitizing members of  <dig> of the  <dig> recognized mammalian orders and approximately 20% of all mammalian species. these host specific, blood-sucking insects are morphologically adapted for life on mammals: they are wingless, dorso-ventrally flattened, possess tibio-tarsal claws for clinging to host hair, and have piercing mouthparts for feeding. although there are more than  <dig> described species of anoplura and despite the potential economical and medical implications of sucking louse infestations, this study represents the first attempt to examine higher-level anopluran relationships using molecular data. in this study, we use molecular data to reconstruct the evolutionary history of  <dig> sucking louse taxa with phylogenetic analyses and compare the results to findings based on morphological data. we also estimate divergence times among anopluran taxa and compare our results to host  relationships.


RESULTS
this study represents the first phylogenetic hypothesis of sucking louse relationships using molecular data and we find significant conflict between phylogenies constructed using molecular and morphological data. we also find that multiple families and genera of sucking lice are not monophyletic and that extensive taxonomic revision will be necessary for this group. based on our divergence dating analyses, sucking lice diversified in the late cretaceous, approximately  <dig> ma, and soon after the cretaceous-paleogene boundary  these lice proliferated rapidly to parasitize multiple mammalian orders and families.


CONCLUSIONS
the diversification time of sucking lice approximately  <dig> ma is in agreement with mammalian evolutionary history: all modern mammal orders are hypothesized to have diverged by  <dig> ma thus providing suitable habitat for the colonization and radiation of sucking lice. despite the concordant timing of diversification events early in the association between anoplurans and mammals, there is substantial conflict between the host and parasite phylogenies. this conflict is likely the result of a complex history of host switching and extinction events that occurred throughout the evolutionary association between sucking lice and their mammalian hosts. it is unlikely that there are any ectoparasite groups  that tracked the early and rapid radiation of eutherian mammals.

