BACKGROUND
recent work has shown that fusarium species and genotypes most commonly associated with human infections, particularly of the cornea , are the same as those most commonly isolated from plumbing systems. the species most dominant in plumbing biofilms is fusarium keratoplasticum, a cosmopolitan fungus known almost exclusively from animal infections and biofilms. to better understand its diversity and population dynamics, we developed and utilized a nine-locus sequence-based typing system to make inferences about clonality, recombination, population structure, species boundaries and hybridization.


RESULTS
high levels of genetic diversity and evidence for recombination and clonality were detected among  <dig> clinical and  <dig> environmental isolates of fusarium keratoplasticum. the multilocus sequence typing system  resolved  <dig> unique nine-locus sequence types . the single locus bifactorial determinants of mating compatibility , were found in a ratio of 70: <dig>  all but one of the  <dig> isolates of the most common st  came from human infections, mostly of the cornea, and from biofilms associated with contact lenses and plumbing surfaces. significant levels of phylogenetic incongruence were found among loci. putative clonal relationships among genotypes were estimated, showing a mixture of large clonal complexes and unrelated singletons. discordance between the nuclear ribosomal rrna and other gene genealogies is consistent with introgression of ribosomal rna alleles of phylogenetic species fssc  <dig> into f. keratoplasticum. no significant population subdivision based on clinical versus non-clinical sources was found.


CONCLUSIONS
incongruent phylogenetic trees and the presence of both mating types within otherwise identical sts were observed, providing evidence for sexuality in f. keratoplasticum. cryptic speciation suggested in a published three-locus mlst system was not supported with the addition of new loci, but evidence of introgression of ribosomal rna genes from another strongly supported phylogenetic species , also known from plumbing systems and human infections, was detected in two isolates. overall, f. keratoplasticum is a diverse and geographically unstructured species with a mixed clonal and recombinant life history.

biofilmclonalityfusariumhybridizationmlstmycotic pathogenpopulation dynamicsrecombination

