BACKGROUND
phylogeographic studies of aquatic insects provide valuable insights into mechanisms that shape the genetic structure of communities, yet studies that include broad geographic areas are uncommon for this group. we conducted a broad scale phylogeographic analysis of the least salmonfly pteronarcella badia  across western north america. we tested hypotheses related to mode of dispersal and the influence of historic climate oscillations on population genetic structure. in order to generate a larger mitochondrial data set, we used  <dig> sequencing to reconstruct the complete mitochondrial genome in the early stages of the project.


RESULTS
our analysis revealed high levels of population structure with several deeply divergent clades present across the sample area. evidence from five mitochondrial genes and one nuclear locus identified a potentially cryptic lineage in the pacific northwest. gene flow estimates and geographic clade distributions suggest that overland flight during the winged adult stage is an important dispersal mechanism for this taxon. we found evidence of multiple glacial refugia across the species distribution and signs of secondary contact within and among major clades.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a basis for future studies of aquatic insect phylogeography at the inter-basin scale in western north america. our findings add to an understanding of the role of historical climate isolations in shaping assemblages of aquatic insects in this region. we identified several geographic areas that may have historical importance for other aquatic organisms with similar distributions and dispersal strategies as p. badia. this work adds to the ever-growing list of studies that highlight the potential of next-generation dna sequencing in a phylogenetic context to improve molecular data sets from understudied groups.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
stonefliesnext-generation sequencingphylogeographylast glacial maximumcryptic genetic diversityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

