BACKGROUND
live imaging provides an essential methodology for understanding complex and dynamic cell behaviors and their underlying molecular mechanisms. genetically-encoded reporter expressing mouse strains are an important tool for use in live imaging experiments. such reporter strains can be engineered by placing cis-regulatory elements of interest to direct the expression of desired reporter genes. if these cis-regulatory elements are downstream targets, and thus activated as a consequence of signaling pathway activation, such reporters can provide read-outs of the signaling status of a cell. the notch signaling pathway is an evolutionary conserved pathway operating in multiple developmental processes as well as being the basis for several congenital diseases. the transcription factor cbf <dig> is a central evolutionarily conserved component of the notch signaling pathway. it binds the active form of the notch receptor  and subsequently binds to cis-regulatory regions  in the promoters of notch responsive genes. in this way, cbf <dig> binding sites represent a good target for the design of a notch signaling reporter.


RESULTS
to generate a single-cell resolution notch signaling reporter, we used a cbf responsive element to direct the expression of a nuclear-localized fluorescent protein. to do this, we linked  <dig> copies of a consensus cbf <dig> binding site to the basal simian virus  <dig>  promoter, placed this cassette in front of a fluorescent protein fusion comprising human histone h2b linked to the yellow fluorescent protein  venus, one of the brightest available yfps. we used the cbf:h2b-venus construct to generate both transgenic embryonic mouse stem  cell lines and a strain of transgenic mice that would report notch signaling activity.


CONCLUSIONS
by using multiple cbf <dig> binding sites together with a subcellular-localized, genetically-encoded fluorescent protein, h2b-venus, we have generated a transgenic strain of mice that faithfully recapitulates notch signaling at single-cell resolution. this is the first mouse reporter strain in which individual cells transducing a notch signal can be visualized. the improved resolution of this reporter makes it ideal for live imaging developmental processes regulated by the notch signaling pathway as well as a short-term lineage tracer of notch expressing cells due to the perdurance of the fluorescent reporter. taken together, the cbf:h2b-venus mouse strain is a unique tool to study and understand the morphogenetic events regulated by the notch signaling pathway.

mouse embryolive imagingcell trackinggfpvenush2b-venusreporter straincbf/rbpjnotch signaling

