BACKGROUND
rhizobia are soil bacteria that establish symbiotic relationships with legumes and fix nitrogen in root nodules. we recently reported that several nitrogen-fixing rhizobial strains, belonging to rhizobium phaseoli, r. trifolii, r. grahamii and sinorhizobium americanum, were able to colonize phaseolus vulgaris  seeds. to gain further insight into the traits that support this ability, we analyzed the genomic sequences and proteomes of r. phaseoli  and s. americanum  strains from seeds and compared them with those of the closely related strains ciat <dig> and cfnei <dig>  respectively, isolated only from nodules.


RESULTS
in a fine structural study of the s. americanum genomes, the chromosomes, megaplasmids and symbiotic plasmids were highly conserved and syntenic, with the exception of the smaller plasmid, which appeared unrelated. the symbiotic tract of ccgm <dig> appeared more disperse, possibly due to the action of transposases. the chromosomes of seed strains had less transposases and strain-specific genes. the seed strains ccgm <dig> and ccgm <dig> shared about half of their genomes with their closest strains , but a large fraction of the rest also had homology with other rhizobia. they contained  <dig> and  <dig> strain-specific genes, respectively, particularly abundant in the functions of transcription, motility, energy generation and cofactor biosynthesis. the proteomes of seed and nodule strains were obtained and showed a particular profile for each of the strains. about  <dig> % of the proteins in the comparisons appeared similar. forty of the most abundant proteins in each strain were identified; these proteins in seed strains were involved in stress responses and coenzyme and cofactor biosynthesis and in the nodule strains mainly in central processes. only  <dig> % of the abundant proteins had hypothetical functions.


CONCLUSIONS
functions that were enriched in the genomes and proteomes of seed strains possibly participate in the successful occupancy of the new niche. the genome of the strains had features possibly related to their presence in the seeds. this study helps to understand traits of rhizobia involved in seed adaptation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nitrogen fixationcomparative genomicsproteomeconsejo nacional de ciencia y tecnología-mexico213606152776girard lourdes mora jaime dgapa-papiit-unamin206914in208216girard lourdes mora jaime issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

