BACKGROUND
widespread in the environment, staphylococcus spp. infect animals and humans as normal flora or pathogens. by extending our recent report of multi-drug resistant  s. aureus in dairy goats, this study investigated the staphylococcal infection and characterized the mdr-s. aureus and methicillin-resistant s. aureus  isolates collected from goats in  <dig> to elucidate the appearance of mrsa in goats and the mastitis associated staphylococcus enterotoxin  types. a total of  <dig> samples were collected from six goat parts and three environmental sources among four dairy goat farms in southern taiwan. coagulase-positive and negative staphylococcus spp.  were also identified. furthermore, predominant se genes of nine enterotoxin genes sea through sej along with antimicrobial resistance and genetic variations were determined.


RESULTS
in total,  <dig> staphylococcal strains were identified and found predominantly in milk, and in the vagina, anus, and nasal cavity. the most prevalent species was s. lentus, followed by s. aureus, s. epidermidis, and s. xylosus. enterotoxin genes were not identified in any cns isolates, however sec and see were identified only in s. aureus associated with mastitis in goat. in compared to the isolates from  <dig> to  <dig>   <dig> s. aureus isolates from  <dig> were found to be more resistant to ampicillin, cephalothin, oxacillin, oxytetracycline, penicillin g, and tetracycline. eleven mrsa isolates were identified and belonged to sccmec type iii  as the major type and sccmec type ii . these mrsa isolates revealed pulse-field gel electrophoresis  pattern a , c , and d  of human isolates. the other two isolates without pulsotypes belonged to st <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
the prevalence and infection sites of cns differed from those of cps. genetic analyses indicated that genetic divergence, possible zoonotic transfer of mrsa, and the involvement of sec as important virulence factors for of s. aureus that lead to mastitis in goats.

mrsastaphylococcus aureusmastitisdrug-resistancemdrstaphylococcal enterotoxingoats

