BACKGROUND
similar to gram-negative organisms, borrelia spirochetes are dual-membrane organisms with both an inner and outer membrane. although the outer membrane contains integral membrane proteins, few of the borrelial outer membrane proteins  have been identified and characterized to date. therefore, we utilized a consensus computational network analysis to identify novel borrelial omps.


RESULTS
using a series of computer-based algorithms, we selected all protein-encoding sequences predicted to be om-localized and/or to form β-barrels in the borrelial om. using this system, we identified  <dig> potential omps from b. burgdorferi and characterized three  to confirm that our computer-based methodology did, in fact, identify borrelial omps. triton x- <dig> phase partitioning revealed that bb <dig> is found in the detergent phase, which would be expected of a membrane protein. proteolysis assays indicate that bb <dig> is partially sensitive to both proteinase k and trypsin, further indicating that bb <dig> is surface-exposed. consistent with a prior study, we also confirmed that bb <dig> is surface-exposed and associates with the borrelial om. furthermore, we have shown that bb <dig>  the product of a co-transcribed downstream gene, also encodes a novel, previously uncharacterized borrelial omp. interestingly, while bb <dig> has several physicochemical properties consistent with it being an omp, it was found to be resistant to surface proteolysis. consistent with bb <dig> and bb <dig> being omps, both were found to be capable of incorporating into liposomes and exhibit pore-forming activity, suggesting that both proteins are porins. lastly, we expanded our computational analysis to identify omps from other borrelial organisms, including both lyme disease and relapsing fever spirochetes.


CONCLUSIONS
using a consensus computer algorithm, we generated a list of candidate omps for both lyme disease and relapsing fever spirochetes and determined that three of the predicted b. burgdorferi proteins identified were indeed novel borrelial omps. the combined studies have identified putative spirochetal omps that can now be examined for their roles in virulence, physiology, and disease pathogenesis. importantly, the studies described in this report provide a framework by which omps from any human pathogen with a diderm ultrastructure could be cataloged to identify novel virulence factors and vaccine candidates.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
borrelialyme diseaserelapsing feverouter membrane proteinshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000060national institute of allergy and infectious diseasesai059373ai-29735kenedy melisha r. radolf justin d. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

