BACKGROUND
pseudoviruses  that encapsidate a reporter plasmid dna have been used as surrogates for native human papillomavirus , whose continuous production is technically difficult. hpv psvs have been designed to form capsids made up of the major capsid protein l <dig> and the minor capsid proteins l <dig>  hpv psvs have been produced in 293tt cells transfected with plasmid expressing l <dig> and l <dig> protein and plasmid containing the reporter gene. several studies have suggested that naturally occurring hpv virions contain cellular histones, and histones have also been identified in mature hpv psvs. however, the effect of the histones on the properties of the psvs has not been investigated. using heparin chromatography, we separated mature hpv type  <dig> psvs into three fractions  according to their heparin-binding affinities.


RESULTS
the amounts of cellular histone and cellular nucleotides per psv were found to increase in the order fraction i, ii and iii. it appeared that psvs in fraction i contains just small amount of cellular histone in western blot analysis. the proportions of the three fractions in psv preparations were  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  % for fraction i, ii, and iii psvs, respectively. in the electron microscope psvs in fraction i appeared to have a more condensed structure than those in fractions ii and iii. under the electron microscope fraction ii and iii psvs appeared to be covered by substantial amounts of cellular histone while there was no visible histone covering psvs of fraction i. also the levels of reporter gene expression in infections of fraction ii and iii psvs to 293tt cells were significantly lower than those in infections of fraction i psv, and fraction ii and iii particles had significantly reduced immunogenicity.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings suggest that the involvement of large amounts of cellular histones during psv formation interferes with the structural integrity of the psvs and affects their immunogenicity. the fraction i particle therefore has the most suitable characteristics for use as an hpv psv.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
human papillomaviruspseudovirionheparin chromatographyhistonehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003725national research foundation of koreanrf-2015r1d1a1a01057370kim hong-jin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

