BACKGROUND
mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis , the causative bacterium of johne’s disease in dairy cattle, is widespread in the canadian dairy industry and has significant economic and animal welfare implications. an understanding of the population dynamics of map can be used to identify introduction events, improve control efforts and target transmission pathways, although this requires an adequate understanding of map diversity and distribution between herds and across the country. whole genome sequencing  offers a detailed assessment of the snp-level diversity and genetic relationship of isolates, whereas several molecular typing techniques used to investigate the molecular epidemiology of map, such as variable number of tandem repeat  typing, target relatively unstable repetitive elements in the genome that may be too unpredictable to draw accurate conclusions. the objective of this study was to evaluate the diversity of bovine map isolates in canadian dairy herds using wgs and then determine if vntr typing can distinguish truly related and unrelated isolates.


RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis based on  <dig>  snps identified through wgs of  <dig> map isolates identified eight genetically distinct subtypes in dairy herds from seven canadian provinces, with the dominant type including over 80% of map isolates. vntr typing of  <dig> map isolates identified  <dig> types, including “bison type” isolates, from seven different herds. at a national level, map isolates differed from each other by 1– <dig> to 239– <dig> snps, regardless of whether they belonged to the same or different vntr types. a herd-level analysis of map isolates demonstrated that vntr typing may both over-estimate and under-estimate the relatedness of map isolates found within a single herd.


CONCLUSIONS
the presence of multiple map subtypes in canada suggests multiple introductions into the country including what has now become one dominant type, an important finding for johne’s disease control. vntr typing often failed to identify closely and distantly related isolates, limiting the applicability of using this typing scheme to study the molecular epidemiology of map at a national and herd-level.

keywords
mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosisvariable number tandem repeat typingwhole genome sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

