BACKGROUND
disease resistance  genes from different rosaceae species have been identified by map-based cloning for resistance breeding. however, there are few reports describing the pattern of r-gene evolution in rosaceae species because several rosaceae genome sequences have only recently become available.


RESULTS
since most disease resistance genes encode nbs-lrr proteins, we performed a systematic genome-wide survey of nbs-lrr genes between five rosaceae species, namely fragaria vesca , malus × domestica , pyrus bretschneideri , prunus persica  and prunus mume  which contained  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> nbs-lrr genes, respectively. a high proportion of multi-genes and similar ks peaks  of gene families in the four woody genomes were detected. a total of  <dig> species-specific duplicate clades were observed in the phylogenetic tree constructed using all  <dig> nbs-lrr genes. high percentages of nbs-lrr genes derived from species-specific duplication were found among the five genomes . furthermore, the ks and ka/ks values of tir-nbs-lrr genes  were significantly greater than those of non-tir-nbs-lrr genes , and most of the nbs-lrrs had ka/ks ratios less than  <dig>  suggesting that they were evolving under a subfunctionalization model driven by purifying selection.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that recent duplications played an important role in the evolution of nbs-lrr genes in the four woody perennial rosaceae species. based on the phylogenetic tree produced, it could be inferred that species-specific duplication has mainly contributed to the expansion of nbs-lrr genes in the five rosaceae species. in addition, the ks and ka/ks ratios suggest that the rapidly evolved tnls have different evolutionary patterns to adapt to different pathogens compared with non-tnl resistant genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nbs-lrr genesrosaceae speciesdisease resistance genesspecies-specific duplicationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

