BACKGROUND
head trauma is one of the most important clinical issues that not only can be fatal and disabling, requiring long-term treatment and care, but also can cause heavy financial burden. formation or distribution of free oxygen radicals should be decreased to enable fixing of poor neurological outcomes and to prevent neuronal damage secondary to ischemia after trauma. coenzyme q <dig> , a component of the mitochondrial electron transport chain, is a strong antioxidant that plays a role in membrane stabilization. in this study, the role of coq <dig> in the treatment of head trauma is researched by analyzing the histopathological and biochemical effects of coq <dig> administered after experimental traumatic brain injury in rats. a traumatic brain-injury model was created in all rats. trauma was inflicted on rats by the free fall of an object of  <dig> g weight from a height of  <dig> cm on the frontoparietal midline onto a metal disc fixed between the coronal and the lambdoid sutures after a midline incision was carried out.


RESULTS
in the biochemical tests, tissue malondialdehyde  levels were significantly higher in the traumatic brain-injury group compared to the sham group . administration of coq <dig> after trauma was shown to be protective because it significantly lowered the increased mda levels . comparing the superoxide dismutase  levels of the four groups, trauma + coq <dig> group had sod levels ranging between those of sham group and traumatic brain-injury group, and no statistically significant increase was detected. histopathological results showed a statistically significant difference between the coq <dig> and the other trauma-subjected groups with reference to vascular congestion, neuronal loss, nuclear pyknosis, nuclear hyperchromasia, cytoplasmic eosinophilia, and axonal edema .


CONCLUSIONS
neuronal degenerative findings and the secondary brain damage and ischemia caused by oxidative stress are decreased by coq <dig> use in rats with traumatic brain injury.

