BACKGROUND
micrornas  are single-stranded non-coding rnas known to regulate a wide range of cellular processes by silencing the gene expression at the protein and/or mrna levels. computational prediction of mirna targets is essential for elucidating the detailed functions of mirna. however, the prediction specificity and sensitivity of the existing algorithms are still poor to generate meaningful, workable hypotheses for subsequent experimental testing. constructing a richer and more reliable training data set and developing an algorithm that properly exploits this data set would be the key to improve the performance current prediction algorithms.


RESULTS
a comprehensive training data set is constructed for mammalian mirnas with its positive targets obtained from the most up-to-date mirna target depository called mirecords and its negative targets derived from  <dig> microarray data. a new algorithm svmicro is developed, which assumes a 2-stage structure including a site support vector machine  followed by a utr-svm. svmicro makes prediction based on  <dig> optimal site features and  <dig> optimal utr features, selected by training from a comprehensive collection of  <dig> site and  <dig> utr features. comprehensive evaluation of svmicro performance has been carried out on the training data, proteomics data, and immunoprecipitation  pull-down data. comparisons with some popular algorithms demonstrate consistent improvements in prediction specificity, sensitivity and precision in all tested cases. all the related materials including source code and genome-wide prediction of human targets are available at http://compgenomics.utsa.edu/svmicro.html.


CONCLUSIONS
a 2-stage svm based new mirna target prediction algorithm called svmicro is developed. svmicro is shown to be able to achieve robust performance. it holds the promise to achieve continuing improvement whenever better training data that contain additional verified or high confidence positive targets and properly selected negative targets are available.

