BACKGROUND
platelets are instrumental to primary haemostasis; in addition, as they are central to endothelium vascular repair, they play a role in physiological inflammation. platelets have also been demonstrated to be key players in innate immunity and inflammation, expressing toll-like receptors  to sense microbial infection and initiate inflammatory responses. they are equipped to decipher distinct signals, to use alternate pathways of signalling through a complete signalosome, despite their lack of a nucleus, and to adjust the innate immune response appropriately for pathogens exhibiting different types of ‘danger’ signals. previous work has described the two main lps isoforms-tlr <dig> activation pathways in purified platelets. however, the precise mechanism of tlr <dig> signalling in platelets is not completely unravelled, especially how this signalling may occur since platelets do not express cd <dig>  the tlr <dig> pathophysiological companion for lps sensing. thus, we investigated from what source the cd <dig> molecules required for tlr <dig> signalling in platelets could come.


RESULTS
here we show that cd <dig>  required for optimal response to lps stimulation, is obtained from plasma, but used with restrictive regulation. these data add to the body of evidence that platelets are closer to regulatory cells than to first line defenders. the readout of our experiments is the canonical secreted cytokine-like protein, soluble cd40l, a molecule that is central in physiology and pathology and that is abundantly secreted by platelets from the alpha-granules upon stimulation.


CONCLUSIONS
we show that scd <dig> from plasma contributes to lps/tlr <dig> signalling in platelets to allow significant release of soluble cd40l, thereby elucidating the mechanism of lps-induced platelet responses and providing new insights for reducing lps toxicity in the circulation.

keywords
cytokineinflammationlipopolysaccharideplateletsoluble cd14tlr4issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

