BACKGROUND
species in the varied geographic topology of taiwan underwent obvious demographic changes during glacial periods. cinnamomum kanehirae has been exploited for timber and to obtain medicinal fungi for the past  <dig> years. understanding anthropogenic factors influencing the demography of this species after the last glacial maximum  is critically important for the conservation of this species.


RESULTS
populations of c. kanehirae were classified into four geographic regions: northwestern , west-central , southwestern , and southeastern . in total,  <dig> individuals from  <dig> localities were sampled, and variations in the chalcone synthase gene  intron and leafy  intron- <dig> sequences of nuclear dna were examined in order to assess phylogeographic patterns, the timescales of demographic and evolutionary events, and recent anthropogenic effects. in total,  <dig> chs and  <dig> lfy sequences, which respectively constituted  <dig> and  <dig> haplotypes, were used for the analyses. estimates of the migration rate  through time revealed a pattern of frequent gene flow during previous and the present interglacials. the isolation-by-distance test showed that there generally was no significant correlation between genetic and geographic distances. the level of among-region genetic differentiation was significant when comparing eastern to western populations. however, no significant among-region genetic differentiation was found in comparisons among the four geographic regions. moreover, essentially no genetic structuring was found for the three regions west of the cmr. a fit of spatial range expansion was found for pooled and regional samples according to the non-significant values of the sum of squared deviations. using the bayesian skyline plot  method, a recent bottleneck after the lgm expansion was detected in both regional and pooled samples.


CONCLUSIONS
common haplotype distributions among geographic regions and the relatively shallow genetic structuring displayed are the result of historical gene flows. southward dispersals in an earlier time frame from the nw region and in a later time frame from the se region were inferred. the bsp analysis suggested a postglacial expansion event. recent trends, however, refer to a bottleneck due to human interventions observed for both pooled and regional c. kanehirae samples.

