BACKGROUND
haemophilus parasuis  is the etiological agent of glässer's disease in pigs. currently, the molecular basis of this infection is largely unknown. the innate immune response is the first line of defense against the infectious disease. systematical analysis on host innate immune response to the infection is important for understanding the pathogenesis of the infectious microorganisms.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> differentially expressed  genes were identified in the porcine alveolar macrophages   <dig> days after h. parasuis infection. these genes were principally related to inflammatory response, immune response, microtubule polymerization, regulation of transcript and signal transduction. through the pathway analysis, the significant pathways mainly concerned with cell adhesion molecules, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, complement and coagulation cascades, toll-like receptor signaling pathway, mapk signaling pathway, suggesting that the host took different strategies to activate immune and inflammatory response upon h. parasuis infection. the global interactions network and two subnetworks of the proteins encoded by de genes were analyzed by using string. further immunostimulation analysis indicated that mrna levels of s <dig> calcium-binding protein a <dig>  and s <dig> calcium-binding protein a <dig>  in porcine pk- <dig> cells increased within  <dig> h and were sustained after administration of lipopolysaccharide  and poly  respectively. the s100a <dig> and s100a <dig> genes were found to be up-regulated significantly in lungs, spleen and lymph nodes in h. parasuis infected pigs. we firstly cloned and sequenced the porcine coronin1a gene. phylogenetic analysis showed that pocoronin 1a belonged to the group containing the bos taurus sequence. structural analysis indicated that the pocoronin 1a contained putative domains of trp-asp  repeats signature, trp-asp  repeats profile and trp-asp  repeats circular profile at the n-terminus.


CONCLUSIONS
our present study is the first one focusing on the response of porcine alveolar macrophages to h. parasuis. our data demonstrate a series of genes are activated upon h. parasuis infection. the observed gene expression profile could help screening the potential host agents for reducing the prevalence of h. parasuis and further understanding the molecular pathogenesis associated with h. parasuis infection in pigs.

