BACKGROUND
liver regeneration is inhibited by chronic ethanol consumption and this impaired repair response may contribute to the risk for alcoholic liver disease. we developed and applied a novel data analysis approach to assess the effect of chronic ethanol intake in the mechanisms responsible for liver regeneration. we performed a time series transcriptomic profiling study of the regeneration response after 2/3rd partial hepatectomy  in ethanol-fed and isocaloric control rats.


RESULTS
we developed a novel data analysis approach focusing on comparative pattern counts  to exhaustively identify the dominant and subtle differential expression patterns. approximately  <dig> genes were differentially regulated in ethanol or control groups within 24 h after phx. adaptation to chronic ethanol intake significantly altered the immediate early gene expression patterns and nearly completely abrogated the cell cycle induction in hepatocytes post phx. the patterns highlighted by compact analysis contained several non-parenchymal cell specific markers indicating their aberrant transcriptional response as a novel mechanism through which chronic ethanol intake deregulates the integrated liver tissue response.


CONCLUSIONS
our novel comparative pattern analysis revealed new insights into ethanol-mediated molecular changes in non-parenchymal liver cells as a possible contribution to the defective liver regeneration phenotype. the results revealed for the first time an ethanol-induced shift of hepatic stellate cells from a pro-regenerative phenotype to that of an anti-regenerative state after phx. our results can form the basis for novel interventions targeting the non-parenchymal cells in normalizing the dysfunctional repair response process in alcoholic liver disease. our approach is illustrated online at http://compact.jefferson.edu.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000027national institute on alcohol abuse and alcoholismaa018873aa022417aa016919aa007463hoek jan b. vadigepalli rajanikanth issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

