BACKGROUND
the tumor microenvironment contains a vast array of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines that alter myelopoiesis and lead to the maturation of immunosuppressive cells known as myeloid-derived suppressor cells . incubating bone marrow  precursors with a combination of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor  and interleukin- <dig>  generated a tumor-infiltrating mdsc-like population that impaired anti-tumor specific t-cell functions. this in vitro experimental approach was used to simulate mdsc maturation, and the cellular metabolic response was then monitored. a complementary experimental model that inhibited l-arginine  metabolizing enzymes in msc- <dig> cells, an immortalized cell line derived from primary mdscs, was used to study the metabolic events related to immunosuppression.


RESULTS
exposure of bm cells to gm-csf and il- <dig> activated, within 24 h, l-arg metabolizing enzymes which are responsible for the mdscs immunosuppressive potential. this was accompanied by an increased uptake of l-glutamine  and glucose, the latter being metabolized by anaerobic glycolysis. the up-regulation of nutrient uptake lead to the accumulation of tca cycle intermediates and lactate as well as the endogenous synthesis of l-arg and the production of energy-rich nucleotides. moreover, inhibition of l-arg metabolism in msc- <dig> cells down-regulated central carbon metabolism activity, including glycolysis, glutaminolysis and tca cycle activity, and led to a deterioration of cell bioenergetic status. the simultaneous increase of cell specific concentrations of atp and a decrease in atp-to-adp ratio in bm-derived mdscs suggested cells were metabolically active during maturation. moreover, amp-activated protein kinase  was activated during mdsc maturation in gm-csf and il-6–treated cultures, as revealed by the continuous increase of amp-to-atp ratios and the phosphorylation of ampk. likewise, ampk activity was decreased in msc- <dig> cells when l-arg metabolizing enzymes were inhibited. finally, inhibition of ampk activity by the specific inhibitor compound c  resulted in the inhibition of l-arg metabolizing enzyme activity and abolished mdscs immunosuppressive activity.


CONCLUSIONS
we anticipate that the inhibition of ampk and the control of metabolic fluxes may be considered as a novel therapeutic target for the recovery of the immunosurveillance process in cancer-bearing hosts.

myeloid-derived suppressor cellsgm-csfil-6msc- <dig> cellscentral carbon metabolismbioenergetics

