BACKGROUND
one theoretical explanation for the relatively poor performance of brassica rapa  × brassica napus  transgenic hybrids suggests that hybridization imparts a negative genetic load. consequently, in hybrids genetic load could overshadow any benefits of fitness enhancing transgenes and become the limiting factor in transgenic hybrid persistence. two types of genetic load were analyzed in this study: random/linkage-derived genetic load, and directly incorporated genetic load using a transgenic mitigation  strategy. in order to measure the effects of random genetic load, hybrid productivity  was correlated with crop- and weed-specific aflp genomic markers. this portion of the study was designed to answer whether or not weed × transgenic crop hybrids possessing more crop genes were less competitive than hybrids containing fewer crop genes. the effects of directly incorporated genetic load  were analyzed through transgene persistence data. tm strategies are proposed to decrease transgene persistence if gene flow and subsequent transgene introgression to a wild host were to occur.


RESULTS
in the absence of interspecific competition, transgenic weed × crop hybrids benefited from having more crop-specific alleles. there was a positive correlation between performance and number of b. napus crop-specific aflp markers . however under interspecific competition with wheat or more weed-like conditions , there was a positive correlation between the number of b. rapa weed-specific aflp markers and seed yield , although no such correlation was detected for vegetative biomass. when genetic load was directly incorporated into the hybrid genome, by inserting a fitness-mitigating dwarfing gene that that is beneficial for crops but deleterious for weeds , there was a dramatic decrease in the number of transgenic hybrid progeny persisting in the population.


CONCLUSIONS
the effects of genetic load of crop and in some situations, weed alleles might be beneficial under certain environmental conditions. however, when genetic load was directly incorporated into transgenic events, e.g., using a tm construct, the number of transgenic hybrids and persistence in weedy genomic backgrounds was significantly decreased.

