BACKGROUND
the visual system may process spatial frequency information in a low-to-high, coarse-to-fine sequence. in particular, low and high spatial frequency information may be processed via different pathways during object recognition, with lsf information projected rapidly to frontal areas and hsf processed later in visual ventral areas. in an electroencephalographic study, we examined the time course of information processing for images filtered to contain different ranges of spatial frequencies. participants viewed either high spatial frequency , low spatial frequency , or unfiltered, broadband  images of objects or non-object textures, classifying them as showing either man-made or natural objects, or non-objects. event-related potentials  and evoked and total gamma band activity  recorded using the electroencephalogram were compared for object and non-object images across the different spatial frequency ranges.


RESULTS
the visual p <dig> showed independent modulations by object and spatial frequency, while for the n <dig> these factors interacted. the p <dig> showed more positive amplitudes for objects than non-objects, and more positive amplitudes for bb than for hsf images, which in turn evoked more positive amplitudes than lsf images. the peak-to-peak n <dig> showed that the n <dig> was much reduced for bb non-objects relative to all other images, while hsf and lsf non-objects still elicited as negative an n <dig> as objects. in contrast, egba was influenced by spatial frequency and not objecthood, while tgba showed a stronger response to objects than non-objects.


CONCLUSIONS
different pathways are involved in the processing of low and high spatial frequencies during object recognition, as reflected in interactions between objecthood and spatial frequency in the visual n <dig> component. total gamma band seems to be related to a late, probably high-level representational process.

keywords
electroencephalography oscillationsgamma bandobject recognitionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

