BACKGROUND
large mammals are capable of thermoregulation shortly after birth due to the presence of brown adipose tissue . the majority of bat disappears after birth and is replaced by white adipose tissue .


RESULTS
we analyzed the postnatal transformation of adipose in sheep with a time course study of the perirenal adipose depot. we observed changes in tissue morphology, gene expression and metabolism within the first two weeks of postnatal life consistent with the expected transition from bat to wat. the transformation was characterized by massively decreased mitochondrial abundance and down-regulation of gene expression related to mitochondrial function and oxidative phosphorylation. global gene expression profiling demonstrated that the time points grouped into three phases: a brown adipose phase, a transition phase and a white adipose phase. between the brown adipose and the transition phase  <dig> genes were differentially expressed, and  <dig> genes were differentially expressed between the transition and the white adipose phase. thirty-eight genes were shared among the two sets of differentially expressed genes. we identified a number of regulated transcription factors, including nr1h <dig>  myc, klf <dig>  esr <dig>  rela and bcl <dig>  which were linked to the overall changes in gene expression during the adipose tissue remodeling. finally, the perirenal adipose tissue expressed both brown and brite/beige adipocyte marker genes at birth, the expression of which changed substantially over time.


CONCLUSIONS
using global gene expression profiling of the postnatal bat to wat transformation in sheep, we provide novel insight into adipose tissue plasticity in a large mammal, including identification of novel transcriptional components linked to adipose tissue remodeling. moreover, our data set provides a useful resource for further studies in adipose tissue plasticity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
batbrite/beige adipose tissueglobal gene expression profilingmitochondrial numbersheeptranscription factorsucp1watissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

