BACKGROUND
in the evaluation of stereo-electroencephalography  signals, the physicist’s workflow involves several operations, including determining the position of individual electrode contacts in terms of both relationship to grey or white matter and location in specific brain regions. these operations are  generally carried out manually by experts with limited computer support,  hugely time consuming, and  often inaccurate, incomplete, and prone to errors.


RESULTS
in this paper we present seeg assistant, a set of tools integrated in a single 3dslicer extension, which aims to assist neurosurgeons in the analysis of post-implant structural data and hence aid the neurophysiologist in the interpretation of seeg data. seeg assistant consists of  a module to localize the electrode contact positions using imaging data from a thresholded post-implant ct,  a module to determine the most probable cerebral location of the recorded activity, and  a module to compute the grey matter proximity index, i.e. the distance of each contact from the cerebral cortex, in order to discriminate between white and grey matter location of contacts. finally, exploiting 3dslicer capabilities, seeg assistant offers a graphical user interface that simplifies the interaction between the user and the tools. seeg assistant has been tested on  <dig> patients segmenting  <dig> electrodes, and it has been used to identify the neuroanatomical loci and to compute the distance to the nearest cerebral cortex for  <dig> contacts. we also performed manual segmentation and compared the results between the proposed tool and gold-standard clinical practice. as a result, the use of seeg assistant decreases the post implant processing time by more than  <dig> orders of magnitude, improves the quality of results and decreases, if not eliminates, errors in post implant processing.


CONCLUSIONS
the seeg assistant framework for the first time supports physicists by providing a set of open-source tools for post-implant processing of seeg data. furthermore, seeg assistant has been integrated into 3d slicer, a software platform for the analysis and visualization of medical images, overcoming limitations of command-line tools.

keywords
epilepsyseegautomatic segmentationepileptic zone detectionsgmpimedical imagingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

