BACKGROUND
chemical cross-linking combined with mass spectrometry  is a high-throughput approach to studying protein-protein interactions. the number of peptide-peptide combinations grows quadratically with respect to the number of proteins, resulting in a high computational complexity. widely used methods including xquest :315– <dig>  2008; walzthoeni et al., nat methods 9:901– <dig>  2012), plink :904– <dig>  2012), proteinprospector :420– <dig>  2014) and kojak :2190– <dig>  2015) avoid searching all peptide-peptide combinations by pre-selecting peptides with heuristic approaches. however, pre-selection procedures may cause missing findings. the most intuitive approach is searching all possible candidates. a tool that can exhaustively search a whole database without any heuristic pre-selection procedure is therefore desirable.


RESULTS
we have developed a cross-linked peptides identification tool named ecl. it can exhaustively search a whole database in a reasonable period of time without any heuristic pre-selection procedure. tests showed that searching a database containing  <dig> proteins took  <dig> h.

ecl identified more non-redundant cross-linked peptides than xquest, plink, and proteinprospector. experiments showed that about  <dig> % of these additional identified peptides were not pre-selected by kojak. we used protein crystal structures from the protein data bank to check the intra-protein cross-linked peptides. most of the distances between cross-linking sites were smaller than  <dig> Å.


CONCLUSIONS
to the best of our knowledge, ecl is the first tool that can exhaustively search all candidates in cross-linked peptides identification. the experiments showed that ecl could identify more peptides than xquest, plink, and proteinprospector. a further analysis indicated that some of the additional identified results were thanks to the exhaustive search.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cross-linkingpeptide identificationdatabase searchingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

