BACKGROUND

pseudoalteromonas is a genus of ubiquitous marine bacteria used as model organisms to study the biological mechanisms involved in the adaptation to cold conditions. a remarkable feature shared by these bacteria is their ability to produce secondary metabolites with a strong antimicrobial and antitumor activity. despite their biotechnological relevance, representatives of this genus are still lacking  an extensive genomic characterization, including features involved in the evolution of secondary metabolites production. indeed, biotechnological applications would greatly benefit from such analysis.


RESULTS
here, we analyzed the genomes of  <dig> strains belonging to different pseudoalteromonas species and isolated from diverse ecological niches, including extreme ones . these sequences were used to reconstruct the largest pseudoalteromonas pangenome computed so far, including also the two main groups of pseudoalteromonas strains . the downstream analyses were conducted to describe the genomic diversity, both at genus and group levels. this allowed highlighting a remarkable genomic heterogeneity, even for closely related strains. we drafted all the main evolutionary steps that led to the current structure and gene content of pseudoalteromonas representatives. these, most likely, included an extensive genome reduction and a strong contribution of horizontal gene transfer , which affected biotechnologically relevant gene sets and occurred in a strain-specific fashion. furthermore, this study also identified the genomic determinants related to some of the most interesting features of the pseudoalteromonas representatives, such as the production of secondary metabolites, the adaptation to cold temperatures and the resistance to abiotic compounds.


CONCLUSIONS
this study poses the bases for a comprehensive understanding of the evolutionary trajectories followed in time by this peculiar bacterial genus and for a focused exploitation of their biotechnological potential.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pseudoalteromonasmarine bacteriapangenomemicrobial evolutioncomparative genomicsantibioticsantarctic bacteriahorizontal gene transferpnrapnra 2013/b <dig> pnra  <dig> az <dig> fondi marco fani renato pharmasea312184de pascale donatella issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

