BACKGROUND
comfrey is consumed by humans as a vegetable and a tea, and has been used as an herbal medicine for more than  <dig> years. comfrey, however, is hepatotoxic in livestock and humans and carcinogenic in experimental animals. our previous study suggested that comfrey induces liver tumors by a genotoxic mechanism and that the pyrrolizidine alkaloids in the plant are responsible for mutation induction and tumor initiation in rat liver.


RESULTS
in this study, we identified comfrey-induced gene expression profile in the livers of rats. groups of  <dig> male transgenic big blue rats were fed a basal diet and a diet containing 8% comfrey roots, a dose that resulted in liver tumors in a previous carcinogenicity bioassay. the animals were treated for  <dig> weeks and sacrificed one day after the final treatment. we used a rat microarray containing  <dig>  genes to perform genome-wide gene expression studies. dietary comfrey resulted in marked changes in liver gene expression, as well as in significant decreases in the body weight and increases in liver mutant frequency. when a two-fold cutoff value and a p-value less than  <dig>  were selected,  <dig>  genes were identified as differentially expressed in comfrey-fed rats compared to control animals. among these genes, there were  <dig>  genes associated by ingenuity pathway analysis with particular functions, and the differentially expressed genes in comfrey-fed rat livers were involved in metabolism, injury of endothelial cells, and liver injury and abnormalities, including liver fibrosis and cancer development.


CONCLUSIONS
the gene expression profile provides us a better understanding of underlying mechanisms for comfrey-induced hepatic toxicity. integration of gene expression changes with known pathological changes can be used to formulate a mechanistic scheme for comfrey-induced liver toxicity and tumorigenesis.

2– <dig> march  <dig> third annual midsouth computational biology and bioinformatics society  conference. bioinformatics: a calculated discovery baton rouge, la, usa

