BACKGROUND
starch is biosynthesised by a complex of enzymes including various starch synthases and starch branching and debranching enzymes, amongst others. the role of all these enzymes has been investigated using gene silencing or genetic knockouts, but there are few examples of overexpression due to the problems of either cloning large genomic fragments or the toxicity of functional cdnas to bacteria during cloning. the aim of this study was to investigate the function of potato starch branching enzyme ii  using overexpression in potato tubers.


RESULTS
a hybrid sbeii intragene consisting of potato cdna containing a fragment of potato genomic dna that included a single intron was used in order to prevent bacterial translation during cloning. a population of  <dig> transgenic potato plants exhibiting sbeii overexpression was generated. compared with wild-type, starch from these tubers possessed an increased degree of amylopectin branching, with more short chains of degree of polymerisation  6– <dig> and particularly of dp <dig>  transgenic lines expressing a granule-bound starch synthase  rnai construct were also generated for comparison and exhibited post-transcriptional gene silencing of gbss and reduced amylose content in the starch. both transgenic modifications did not affect granule morphology but reduced starch peak viscosity. in starch from sbeii-overexpressing lines, the increased ratio of short to long amylopectin branches facilitated gelatinisation, which occurred at a reduced temperature  or lower urea concentration. in contrast, silencing of gbss increased the gelatinisation temperature by 4°c, and starch required a higher urea concentration for gelatinisation. in lines with a range of sbeii overexpression, the magnitude of the increase in sbeii activity, reduction in onset of gelatinisation temperature and increase in starch swollen pellet volume were highly correlated, consistent with reports that starch swelling is greatly dependent upon the amylopectin branching pattern.


CONCLUSIONS
this work reports the first time that overexpression of sbeii has been achieved in a non-cereal plant. the data show that overexpression of sbeii using a simple single-intron hybrid intragene is an effective way to modify potato starch physicochemical properties, and indicate that an increased ratio of short to long amylopectin branches produces commercially beneficial changes in starch properties such as reduced gelatinisation temperature, reduced viscosity and increased swelling volume.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
amylopectin branchinggbss silencingsbeii overexpressionstarch gelatinisationstarch propertiessolanum tuberosumissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

