BACKGROUND
hyperthyroidism is the most common endocrine disorder observed in domestic felines; however, its etiology is largely unknown. two classes of persistent organic pollutants, polybrominated diphenyl ethers  and polychlorinated biphenyls  are known to interfere with thyroid hormone  signaling and regulation; thus, it is postulated that they contribute to the etiopathogenesis of feline hyperthyroidism and pose a risk to humans and other species. in this case-control study, the concentrations of  <dig> pbde and  <dig> pcb congeners were measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry in serum or plasma samples from  <dig> hyperthyroid and  <dig> control cats in order to investigate the association between concentration of pbde and pcb congeners and feline hyperthyroidism. logistic regression analysis was used to determine whether elevated concentrations of individual congeners were associated with a higher risk of feline hyperthyroidism.


RESULTS
hyperthyroid cats had higher concentrations of four pbde congeners  and five pcb congeners , compared to control cats. in addition, the sum of both pbde and pcb congener concentrations were elevated in the hyperthyroid group compared to control cats; however, only the increased pcb concentrations were statistically significant. the sum total pbde concentrations in our feline samples were approximately  <dig> times greater than concentrations previously reported in human populations from a geographically similar area, whereas sum total pcb concentrations were comparable to those previously reported in humans.


CONCLUSIONS
these observational findings support the hypothesis that pbdes and pcbs may contribute to the etiopathogenesis of hyperthyroidism in felines. as domestic house cats are often exposed to higher concentrations of pbdes than humans, they may serve as sentinels for the risk of th disruption that these pollutants pose to humans and other species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pbdepcbhyperthyroidismfelinethyroidthyroidopathypersistent organic pollutantsendocrine disruptionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000066national institute of environmental health sciencesniehs p02es011269t <dig> es007059http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000139u.s. environmental protection agency83543201center for companion animal health, school of veterinary medicine, university of california, davisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

