BACKGROUND
when the parasitoid wasp leptopilina boulardi lays its eggs in drosophila larvae phagocytic cells called plasmatocytes and specialized cells known as lamellocytes encapsulate the egg. this requires these circulating immunosurveillance cells  to change from a non-adhesive to an adhesive state enabling them to bind to the invader. interestingly, attachment of leukocytes, platelets, and insect haemocytes requires the same adhesion complexes as epithelial and neuronal cells.


RESULTS
here evidence is presented showing that the drosophila l1-type cell adhesion molecule neuroglian  is required for haemocytes to encapsulate l. boulardi wasp eggs. the amino acid sequence figqy containing a conserved phosphorylated tyrosine is found in the intracellular domain of all l1-type cell adhesion molecules. this conserved tyrosine is phosphorylated at the cell periphery of plasmatocytes and lamellocytes prior to parasitisation, but dephosphorylated after immune activation. intriguingly, another pool of nrg located near the nucleus of plasmatocytes remains phosphorylated after parasitisation. in mammalian neuronal cells phosphorylated neurofascin, another l1-type cell adhesion molecule interacts with a nucleokinesis complex containing the microtubule binding protein lissencephaly- <dig>   <cit> . interestingly in plasmatocytes from nrg mutants the nucleokinesis regulating protein lissencephaly- <dig>  fails to localise properly around the nucleus and is instead found diffuse throughout the cytoplasm and at unidentified perinuclear structures. after attaching to the wasp egg control plasmatocytes extend filopodia laterally from their cell periphery; as well as extending lateral filopodia plasmatocytes from nrg mutants also extend many filopodia from their apical surface.


CONCLUSIONS
the drosophila cellular adhesion molecule neuroglian is expressed in haemocytes and its activity is required for the encapsulation of l. boularli eggs. at the cell periphery of haemocytes neuroglian may be involved in cell-cell interactions, while at the cell centre neuroglian regulates the localisation of the nucleokinesis complex protein lissencephaly- <dig> 

