BACKGROUND
within the last decade, salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar cerro  has become one of the most common serovars isolated from cattle and dairy farm environments in the northeastern us. the fact that this serovar is commonly isolated from subclinically infected cattle and is rarely associated with human disease, despite its frequent isolation from cattle, has led to the hypothesis that this emerging serovar may be characterized by reduced virulence. we applied comparative and population genomic approaches to  characterize the evolution of this recently emerged serovar and to  gain a better understanding of genomic features that could explain some of the unique epidemiological features associated with this serovar.


RESULTS
in addition to generating a de novo draft genome for one salmonella cerro strain, we also generated whole genome sequence data for  <dig> additional s. cerro isolates, including  <dig> from cattle operations in new york  state,  <dig> from human clinical cases from ny in  <dig>  and  <dig> from diverse animal sources . all isolates sequenced in this study represent sequence type st <dig>  population genomic analysis showed that isolates from the ny cattle operations form a well-supported clade within s. cerro st <dig> , distinct from isolates from washington state, florida and the human clinical cases. a molecular clock analysis indicates that the most recent common ancestor of the ny bovine clade dates back to  <dig>  supporting the recent emergence of this clone.

comparative genomic analyses revealed several relevant genomic features of s. cerro st <dig>  that may be responsible for reduced virulence of s. cerro, including an insertion creating a premature stop codon in sopa. in addition, patterns of gene deletion in s. cerro st <dig> further support adaptation of this clone to a unique ecological or host related niche.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the increase in prevalence of s. cerro st <dig> is caused by a highly clonal subpopulation and that s. cerro st <dig> is characterized by unique genomic deletions that may indicate adaptation to specific ecological niches and possibly reduced virulence in some hosts.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

