BACKGROUND
the challenges of accurate gene prediction and enumeration are further aggravated in large genomes that contain highly repetitive transposable elements . yet tes play a substantial role in genome evolution and are themselves an important subject of study. repeat annotation, based on counting occurrences of k-mers, has been previously used to distinguish tes from low-copy genic regions; but currently available software solutions are impractical due to high memory requirements or specialization for specific user-tasks.


RESULTS
here we introduce the tallymer software, a flexible and memory-efficient collection of programs for k-mer counting and indexing of large sequence sets. unlike previous methods, tallymer is based on enhanced suffix arrays. this gives a much larger flexibility concerning the choice of the k-mer size. tallymer can process large data sizes of several billion bases. we used it in a variety of applications to study the genomes of maize and other plant species. in particular, tallymer was used to index a set of whole genome shotgun sequences from maize  . we analyzed k-mer frequencies for a wide range of k. at this low genome coverage  highly repetitive 20-mers constituted 44% of the genome but represented only 1% of all possible k-mers. similar low-complexity was seen in the repeat fractions of sorghum and rice. when applying our method to other maize data sets, high-c0t derived sequences showed the greatest enrichment for low-copy sequences. among annotated tes, the most highly repetitive were of the ty3/gypsy class of retrotransposons, followed by the ty1/copia class, and dna transposons. among expressed sequence tags , a notable fraction contained high-copy k-mers, suggesting that transposons are still active in maize. retrotransposons in mo <dig> and mcc cultivars were readily detected using the b <dig> 20-mer frequency index, indicating their conservation despite extensive rearrangement across cultivars. among one hundred annotated bacterial artificial chromosomes , k-mer frequency could be used to detect transposon-encoded genes with 92% sensitivity, compared to 96% using alignment-based repeat masking, while both methods showed 92% specificity.


CONCLUSIONS
the tallymer software was effective in a variety of applications to aid genome annotation in maize, despite limitations imposed by the relatively low coverage of sequence available. for more information on the software, see .

