BACKGROUND
unraveling the genetic mechanisms associated with reduced gene flow between genetically differentiated populations is key to understand speciation. different types of structural variations  have been found as a source of genetic diversity in a wide range of species. previous studies provided detailed knowledge on the potential evolutionary role of svs, especially copy number variations , between well diverged species of e.g. primates. however, our understanding of their significance during ongoing speciation processes is limited due to the lack of cnv data from closely related species. the genus sus  which started to diverge ~ <dig> mya presents an excellent model for studying the role of cnvs during ongoing speciation.


RESULTS
in this study, we identified  <dig> cnv regions  across the genus sus. these cnvrs encompass  <dig> genes and were found to evolve ~ <dig>  times faster than single nucleotide polymorphisms . the majority of these copy number variable genes are olfactory receptors  known to play a prominent role in food foraging and mate recognition in sus. phylogenetic analyses, including novel bayesian analysis, based on cnvrs that overlap ors retain the well-accepted topology of the genus sus whereas cnvrs overlapping genes other than ors show evidence for random drift and/or admixture.


CONCLUSIONS
we hypothesize that inter-specific variation in copy number of ors provided the means for rapid adaptation to different environments during the diversification of the genus sus in the pliocene. furthermore, these regions might have acted as barriers preventing massive gene flow between these species during the multiple hybridization events that took place later in the pleistocene suggesting a possible prominent role of ors in the ongoing sus speciation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
speciationstructural variationcopy number variationnext generation sequencing dataread depth methodissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

