BACKGROUND
phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidases , the most abundant isoforms of gpx families, interfere directly with hydroperoxidation of lipids. biochemical properties of these proteins vary along with their donor organisms, which has complicated the phylogenetic classification of diverse phgpx-like proteins. despite efforts for comprehensive analyses, the evolutionary aspects of gpx genes in invertebrates remain largely unknown.


RESULTS
we isolated gpx homologs via in silico screening of genomic and/or expressed sequence tag databases of eukaryotic organisms including protostomian species. genes showing strong similarity to the mammalian phgpx genes were commonly found in all genomes examined. gpx3- and gpx7-like genes were additionally detected from nematodes and platyhelminths, respectively. the overall distribution of the phgpx-like proteins with different biochemical properties was biased across taxa; selenium- and glutathione -dependent proteins were exclusively detected in platyhelminth and deuterostomian species, whereas selenium-independent and thioredoxin -dependent enzymes were isolated in the other taxa. in comparison of genomic organization, the gsh-dependent phgpx genes showed a conserved architectural pattern, while their trx-dependent counterparts displayed complex exon-intron structures. a codon for the resolving cys engaged in reductant binding was found to be substituted in a series of genes. selection pressure to maintain the selenocysteine codon in gsh-dependent genes also appeared to be relaxed during their evolution. with the dichotomized fashion in genomic organizations, a highly polytomic topology of their phylogenetic trees implied that the gpx genes have multiple evolutionary intermediate forms.


CONCLUSIONS
comparative analysis of invertebrate gpx genes provides informative evidence to support the modular pathways of gpx evolution, which have been accompanied with sporadic expansion/deletion and exon-intron remodeling. the differentiated enzymatic properties might be acquired by the evolutionary relaxation of selection pressure and/or biochemical adaptation to the acting environments. our present study would be beneficial to get detailed insights into the complex gpx evolution, and to understand the molecular basis of the specialized physiological implications of this antioxidant system in their respective donor organisms.

