BACKGROUND
the chloroplast genome is important for plant development and plant evolution. nelumbo nucifera is one member of relict plants surviving from the late cretaceous. recently, a new sequencing platform pacbio rs ii, known as ‘smrt  sequencing’, has been developed. using the smrt sequencing to investigate the chloroplast genome of n. nucifera will help to elucidate the plastid evolution of basal eudicots.


RESULTS
the sizes of the de novo assembled complete chloroplast genome of n. nucifera were  <dig>  bp,  <dig>  bp and  <dig>  bp with average depths of coverage of 7×, 712× and 105× sequenced by sanger, illumina miseq and pacbio rs ii, respectively. the precise chloroplast genome of n. nucifera was obtained from pacbio rs ii data proofread by illumina miseq reads, with a quadripartite structure containing a large single copy region  and a small single copy region  separated by two inverted repeat regions . the genome contains  <dig> different genes, including four distinct rrnas,  <dig> distinct trnas and  <dig> distinct peptide-coding genes. a phylogenetic analysis of  <dig> taxa from  <dig> orders indicated that nelumbo with an age of  <dig> million years is a sister clade to platanus, which belongs to the basal eudicots. basal eudicots began to emerge during the early jurassic with estimated divergence times at  <dig> million years using mcmctree. ir expansions/contractions within the basal eudicots seem to have occurred independently.


CONCLUSIONS
because of long reads and lack of bias in coverage of at-rich regions, pacbio rs ii showed a great promise for highly accurate ‘finished’ genomes, especially for a de novo assembly of genomes. n. nucifera is one member of basal eudicots, however, evolutionary analyses of ir structural variations of n. nucifera and other basal eudicots suggested that ir expansions/contractions occurred independently in these basal eudicots or were caused by independent insertions and deletions. the precise chloroplast genome of n. nucifera will present new information for structural variation of chloroplast genomes and provide new insight into the evolution of basal eudicots at the primary sequence and structural level.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
n. nuciferachloroplast genome sequencingbasal eudicotssystematic positiondivergence timepacbio rs iiissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

