BACKGROUND
availability of molecular markers has proven to be an efficient tool in facilitating progress in plant breeding, which is particularly important in the case of less researched crops such as cotton. considering the obvious advantages of single nucleotide polymorphisms  and insertion-deletion polymorphisms , expressed sequence tags  were analyzed in silico to identify snps and indels in this study, aiming to develop more molecular markers in cotton.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  est-based snp and indel markers were developed by comparing ests between gossypium hirsutum and g. barbadense, mining g. hirsutum unigenes, and analyzing 3′ untranslated region  sequences. the marker polymorphisms were investigated using the two parents of the mapping population based on the single-strand conformation polymorphism  analysis. of all the markers,  <dig>  were polymorphic, and revealed  <dig> loci. linkage analysis using a bc <dig> population mapped  <dig> loci on the  <dig> chromosomes. statistical analysis of base variations in snps showed that base transitions accounted for  <dig> % of the total base variations and gene ontology indicated that cotton genes varied greatly in harboring snps ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  snps per gene. sanger sequencing of three randomly selected snp markers revealed discrepancy between the in silico predicted sequences and the actual sequencing results.


CONCLUSIONS
in silico analysis is a double-edged blade to develop est-snp/indel markers. on the one hand, the designed markers can be well used in tetraploid cotton genetic mapping. and it plays a certain role in revealing transition preference and snp frequency of cotton genes. on the other hand, the developmental efficiency of markers and polymorphism of designed primers are comparatively low.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cottonmolecular markerssnpindelgenetic mappingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

