BACKGROUND
a randomized, unmasked, multicenter study was conducted to evaluate the rate of pruritus reduction and improvement in clinical scoring by cyclosporine a  either alone  or with concurrent prednisolone  for the treatment of atopic dermatitis in dogs. dogs were included in the study after exclusion of other causes of pruritic dermatitis, and were assessed by dermatologists on days  <dig>  14 ±  <dig> and 28 ±  <dig>  assessments included: general physical examination, cadesi- <dig> lesion scoring, overall clinical response, evaluation of adverse events , body weight and clinical pathology . owner assessments, including pruritus  and overall assessment of response were conducted every 3–4 days, either during visits to the clinic or at home. owners reported aes to the investigator throughout the study.


RESULTS
by day 28 ±  <dig> both treatment groups resulted in a significant improvement of the atopic dermatitis. both investigators and owners agreed that concurrent therapy resulted in a quicker improvement of the dogs ‘overall’ skin condition and of pruritus , when compared to cyclosporine a alone . cadesi- <dig> scores significantly improved in both groups by day 14 ±  <dig> onwards, and there were no significant differences in the scores between treatment groups at any time points. a total of  <dig> aes  were reported in  <dig> dogs. no dogs died or stopped treatment due to an ae. the most commonly reported aes in the cyclosporine a group were associated with the digestive tract, whilst systemic disorders were reported more frequently observed following concurrent therapy. evaluation of body weight change and clinical pathology indices showed no overall clinically significant abnormalities.


CONCLUSIONS
in dogs with atopic dermatitis, a short initiating course of prednisolone expedited the efficacy of cyclosporine a in resolving pruritus and associated clinical signs. the observed adverse events were consistent with those expected for the individual veterinary medicinal products.

cyclosporineciclosporineatopic dermatitispruritusprednisoloneclinical safetyatopica

