BACKGROUND
the species-specificity of male genitalia has been well documented in many insect groups and sexual selection has been proposed as the evolutionary force driving the often rapid, morphological divergence. the internal female genitalia, in sharp contrast, remain poorly studied. here, we present the first comparative study of the internal reproductive system of sepsidae. we test the species-specificity of the female genitalia by comparing recently diverged sister taxa. we also compare the rate of change in female morphological characters with the rate of fast-evolving, molecular and behavioral characters.


RESULTS
we describe the ectodermal parts of the female reproductive tract for  <dig> species representing  <dig> of the  <dig> described genera and define  <dig> morphological characters with discontinuous variation found in eight structures that are part of the reproductive tract. using a well-resolved molecular phylogeny based on  <dig> genes, we reconstruct the evolution of these characters across the family . two structures, in particular, evolve faster than the rest. the first is the ventral receptacle, which is a secondary sperm storage organ. it accounts for more than half of all the evolutionary changes observed . it is morphologically diverse across genera, can be bi-lobed or multi-chambered , and is strongly sclerotized in one clade. the second structure is the dorsal sclerite, which is present in all sepsids except orygma luctuosum and ortalischema albitarse. it is associated with the opening of the spermathecal ducts and is often distinct even among sister species .


CONCLUSIONS
we find the internal female genitalia are diverse in sepsidae and diagnostic for all species. in particular, fast-evolving structures like the ventral receptacle and dorsal sclerite are likely involved in post-copulatory sexual selection. in comparison to behavioral and molecular data, the female structures are evolving 2/ <dig> as fast as the non-constant third positions of the coi barcoding gene. they display less convergent evolution in characters  than the third positions or sepsid mating behavior .

