BACKGROUND
the protein-protein interaction network  is an effective information tool for understanding the complex biological processes inside the cell and solving many biological problems such as signaling pathway identification and prediction of protein functions. eriocheir sinensis is a highly-commercial aquaculture species with an unclear proteome background which hinders the construction and development of pin for e. sinensis. however, in recent years, the development of next-generation deep-sequencing techniques makes it possible to get high throughput data of e. sinensis tanscriptome and subsequently obtain a systematic overview of the protein-protein interaction system.


RESULTS
in this work we sequenced the transcriptional rna of eyestalk, y-organ and hepatopancreas in e. sinensis and generated a pin of e. sinensis which included  <dig>  proteins and  <dig>  interactions. each protein-protein interaction in the network was scored according to the homology and genetic relationship. the signaling sub-network, representing the signal transduction pathways in e. sinensis, was extracted from the global network, which depicted a global view of the signaling systems in e. sinensis. seven basic signal transduction pathways were identified in e. sinensis. by investigating the evolution paths of the seven pathways, we found that these pathways got mature in different evolutionary stages. moreover, the functions of unclassified proteins and unigenes in the pin of e. sinensis were predicted. specifically, the functions of  <dig> unclassified proteins related to  <dig> unclassified unigenes were assigned, which respectively covered 76% and 73% of all the unclassified proteins and unigenes in the network.


CONCLUSIONS
the pin generated in this work is the first large-scale pin of aquatic crustacean, thereby providing a paradigmatic blueprint of the aquatic crustacean interactome. signaling sub-network extracted from the global pin depicts the interaction of different signaling proteins and the evolutionary paths of the identified signal transduction pathways. furthermore, the function assignment of unclassified proteins based on the pin offers a new reference in protein function exploration. more importantly, the construction of the e. sinensis pin provides necessary experience for the exploration of pins in other aquatic crustacean species.

eriocheir sinensischinese mitten crabnetwork integrationsignal transductionevolution path

