BACKGROUND
fruit maturation and ripening are genetically regulated processes that involve a complex interplay of plant hormones, growth regulators and multiple biological and environmental factors. tomato  has been used as a model of biological and genetic studies on the regulation of specific ripening pathways, including ethylene, carotenoid and cell wall metabolism. this model has also been used to investigate the functions of upstream signalling and transcriptional regulators. thus far, many ripening-associated transcription factors that influence fruit development and ripening have been reported. nac transcription factors are plant specific and play important roles in many stages of plant growth and development, such as lateral root formation, secondary cell wall synthesis, and embryo, floral organ, vegetative organ and fruit development.


RESULTS
tissue-specific analysis by quantitative real-time pcr showed that slnac <dig> was highly accumulated in immature green fruits; the expression of slnac <dig> increased with fruit ripening till to the highest level at  <dig> d after the breaker stage. the overexpression of slnac <dig> resulted in reduced carotenoids by altering carotenoid pathway flux and decreasing ethylene synthesis mediated mainly by the reduced expression of ethylene biosynthetic genes of system- <dig>  thus led to yellow or orange mature fruits. the results of yeast one-hybrid experiment demonstrated that slnac <dig> can interact with the regulatory regions of genes related lycopene and ethylene synthesis. these results also indicated that slnac <dig> inhibited fruit ripening by affecting ethylene synthesis and carotenoid accumulation in slnac <dig> overexpression lines. in addition, the overexpression of slnac <dig> reduced the firmness of the fruits and the thickness of the pericarp and produced more abscisic acid, resulting in the early softening of fruits. hence, in slnac <dig> overexpression lines, both ethylene-dependent and abscisic acid-dependent pathways are regulated by slnac <dig> in fruit ripening regulatory network.


CONCLUSIONS
slnac <dig> had a broad influence on tomato fruit ripening and regulated slnac <dig> overexpression tomato fruit ripening through both ethylene-dependent and abscisic acid-dependent pathways. thus, this study provided new insights into the current model of tomato fruit ripening regulatory network.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
abscisic acidethylenefruit ripeninggene expressionslnac1tomatoissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

