BACKGROUND
insects belong to a class that accounts for the majority of animals on earth. with over one million identified species, insects display a huge diversity and occupy extreme environments. at present, there are dozens of fully sequenced insect genomes that cover a range of habitats, social behavior and morphologies. in view of such diverse collection of genomes, revealing evolutionary trends and charting functional relationships of proteins remain challenging.


RESULTS
we analyzed the relatedness of  <dig> complete proteomes representative of proteomes from insects including louse, bee, beetle, ants, flies and mosquitoes, as well as an out-group from the crustaceans. the analyzed proteomes mostly represented the orders of hymenoptera and diptera. the  <dig>  protein sequences from the  <dig> proteomes were automatically clustered into  <dig>  families, including  <dig> singletons. a comprehensive analysis based on statistical considerations identified the families that were significantly expanded or reduced in any of the studied organisms. among all the tested species, ants are characterized by an exceptionally high rate of family gain and loss. by assigning annotations to hundreds of species-specific families, the functional diversity among species and between the major clades  is revealed. we found that many species-specific families are associated with receptor signaling, stress-related functions and proteases. the highest variability among insects associates with the function of transposition and nucleic acids processes . specifically, the wasp and ants have an order of magnitude more tnap families and proteins relative to species that belong to diptera .


CONCLUSIONS
an unsupervised clustering methodology combined with a comparative functional analysis unveiled proteomic signatures in the major clades of winged insects. we propose that the expansion of tnap families in hymenoptera potentially contributes to the accelerated genome dynamics that characterize the wasp and ants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
comparative proteomicsgenome annotationprotein classificationhierarchical clusteringprotein familiesarthropodsgene noveltyhomology searchsocial insectsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

