BACKGROUND
the current extensive use of the domestic goat  is the result of its medium size and high adaptability as multiple breeds. the extent to which its genetic variability was influenced by early domestication practices is largely unknown. a common standard by which to analyze maternally-inherited variability of livestock species is through complete sequencing of the entire mitogenome .


RESULTS
we present the first extensive survey of goat mitogenomic variability based on  <dig> complete sequences selected from an initial collection of  <dig> samples that represent  <dig> different breeds of c. hircus, as well as its wild sister species, bezoar  from iran. our phylogenetic analyses dated the most recent common ancestor of c. hircus to ~ <dig>  years  ago and identified five distinctive domestic haplogroups . more than 90 % of goats examined were in haplogroup a. these domestic lineages are predominantly nested within c. aegagrus branches, diverged concomitantly at the interface between the epipaleolithic and early neolithic periods, and underwent a dramatic expansion starting from ~12–10 ka ago.


CONCLUSIONS
domestic goat mitogenomes descended from a small number of founding haplotypes that underwent domestication after surviving the last glacial maximum in the near eastern refuges. all modern haplotypes a probably descended from a single  female c. aegagrus. zooarchaelogical data indicate that domestication first occurred in southeastern anatolia. goats accompanying the first neolithic migration waves into the mediterranean were already characterized by two ancestral a and c variants. the ancient separation of the c branch  suggests a genetically distinct population that could have been involved in a second event of domestication. the novel diagnostic mutational motifs defined here, which distinguish wild and domestic haplogroups, could be used to understand phylogenetic relationships among modern breeds and ancient remains and to evaluate whether selection differentially affected mitochondrial genome variants during the development of economically important breeds.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
goat mitochondrial genomemtdna haplogroupsdomesticationorigin of capra hircuscapra aegagrusmiur: progetti firb-futuro in ricerca 2008rbfr08u07machilli alessandro miur: progetti firb-futuro in ricerca 2012rbfr126b8iolivieri anna miur: prin-progetti ricerca di interesse nazionale 20122012ja4bty_002achilli alessandro miur: prin-progetti ricerca di interesse nazionale 20092009p2cnkk_005achilli alessandro miur: prin-progetti ricerca di interesse nazionale 20072007xrbaenajmone marsan paolo eu fp <dig> project nextgenkbbe-2009-1-1-03issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

