BACKGROUND
due to a relatively high level of codominant inheritance and transferability within and among taxonomic groups, simple sequence repeat  markers are important elements in comparative mapping and delineation of genomic regions associated with traits of economic importance. expressed sequence tags  are a source of ssrs that can be used to develop markers to facilitate plant breeding and for more basic research across genera and higher plant orders.

methods
leaf and meristem tissue from ‘heritage’ red raspberry  and ‘bristol’ black raspberry  were utilized for rna extraction. after conversion to cdna and library construction, ests were sequenced, quality verified, assembled and scanned for ssrs.  primers flanking the ssrs were designed and a subset tested for amplification, polymorphism and transferability across species. ests containing ssrs were functionally annotated using the genbank non-redundant  database and further classified using the gene ontology database.


RESULTS
to accelerate development of est-ssrs in the genus rubus ,  <dig> and  <dig> cdna sequences were generated from red raspberry and black raspberry, respectively. the cdna sequences were screened using rigorous filtering criteria which resulted in the identification of  <dig> and  <dig> ssr loci for red and black raspberry, respectively. primers were designed from the surrounding sequences resulting in  <dig> and  <dig> primer pairs, respectively, as some sequences contained more than one ssr locus. sequence analysis revealed that the ssr-containing genes span a diversity of functions and share more sequence identity with strawberry genes than with other rosaceous species.


CONCLUSIONS
this resource of rubus-specific, gene-derived markers will facilitate the construction of linkage maps composed of transferable markers for studying and manipulating important traits in this economically important genus.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
molecular markersest-ssrrubus idaeusrubus occidentalismicrosatellitesmarker-assisted breedingmarker transferabilityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

