BACKGROUND
in eukaryotic cells, there are two sub-pathways of nucleotide excision repair , the global genome  ner and the transcription-coupled repair . tcr can preferentially remove the bulky dna lesions located at the transcribed strand of a transcriptional active gene more rapidly than those at the untranscribed strand or overall genomic dna. this strand-specific repair in a suitable restriction fragment is usually determined by alkaline gel electrophoresis followed by southern blotting transfer and hybridization with an indirect end-labeled single-stranded probe. here we describe a new method of tcr assay based on strand-specific-pcr . using this method, we have investigated the role of dna-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit , a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinases  family, in the tcr pathway of uv-induced dna damage.


RESULTS
although depletion of dna-pkcs sensitized hela cells to uv radiation, it did not affect the ggner efficiency of uv-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers  damage. we postulated that dna-pkcs may involve in the tcr process. to test this hypothesis, we have firstly developed a novel method of tcr assay based on the strand-specific pcr technology with a set of smart primers, which allows the strand-specific amplification of a restricted gene fragment of uv radiation-damaged genomic dna in mammalian cells. using this new method, we confirmed that sirna-mediated downregulation of cockayne syndrome b resulted in a deficiency of tcr of the uv-damaged dihydrofolate reductase  gene. in addition, dmso-induced silencing of the c-myc gene led to a decreased tcr efficiency of uv radiation-damaged c-myc gene in hl <dig> cells. on the basis of the above methodology verification, we found that the depletion of dna-pkcs mediated by sirna significantly decreased the tcr capacity of repairing the uv-induced cpds damage in dhfr gene in hela cells, indicating that dna-pkcs may also be involved in the tcr pathway of dna damage repair. by means of immunoprecipitation and maldi-tof-mass spectrometric analysis, we have revealed the interaction of dna-pkcs and cyclin t <dig>  which is a subunit of the human transcription elongation factor . while the p-tefb complex can phosphorylate the serine  <dig> of the carboxyl-terminal domain  of rna polymerase ii and promote transcription elongation.


CONCLUSIONS
a new method of tcr assay was developed based the strand-specific-pcr . our data suggest that dna-pkcs plays a role in the tcr pathway of uv-damaged dna. one possible mechanistic hypothesis is that dna-pkcs may function through associating with cyclint2/cdk <dig>  to modulate the activity of rna pol ii, which has already been identified as a key molecule recognizing and initializing tcr.

