BACKGROUND
the plant hormone abscisic acid  is ubiquitous among land plants where it plays an important role in plant growth and development. in seeds, aba induces embryogenesis and seed maturation as well as seed dormancy and germination. in vegetative tissues, aba is a necessary mediator in the triggering of many of the physiological and molecular adaptive responses of the plant to adverse environmental conditions, such as desiccation, salt and cold.


RESULTS
in this study, we investigated the influence of abscisic acid  on physcomitrella patens at the level of the proteome using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis  and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry . sixty-five protein spots showed changes in response to aba treatment. among them, thirteen protein spots were down-regulated; fifty-two protein spots were up-regulated including four protein spots which were newly induced. these proteins were involved in various functions, including material and energy metabolism, defense, protein destination and storage, transcription, signal transduction, cell growth/division, transport, and cytoskeleton. specifically, most of the up-regulated proteins functioned as molecular chaperones, transcriptional regulators, and defense proteins. detailed analysis of these up-regulated proteins showed that aba could trigger stress and defense responses and protect plants from oxidative damage. otherwise, three protein kinases involved in signal pathways were up-regulated suggesting that p. patens is sensitive to exogenous aba. the down-regulated of the rubisco small subunit, photosystem ii oxygen-evolving complex proteins and photosystem assembly protein ycf <dig> indicated that photosynthesis of p. patens was inhibited by aba treatment.


CONCLUSIONS
proteome analysis techniques have been applied as a direct, effective, and reliable tool in differential protein expressions. sixty-five protein spots showed differences in accumulation levels as a result of treatment with aba. detailed analysis these protein functions showed that physiological and molecular responses to the plant hormone aba appear to be conserved among higher plant species and bryophytes.

