BACKGROUND
soybean is one of the most economically important crops in the world. the cotyledon is the nutrient storage area in seeds, and it is critical for seed quality and yield. cotyledon mutants are important for the genetic dissection of embryo patterning and seed development. however, the molecular mechanisms underlying soybean cotyledon development are largely unexplored.


RESULTS
in this study, we characterised a soybean curled-cotyledon  mutant. compared with wild-type , anatomical analysis revealed that the cco cotyledons at the torpedo stage became more slender and grew outward. the entire embryos of cco mutant resembled the “tail of swallow”. in addition, cco seeds displayed reduced germination rate and gibberellic acid  level, whereas the abscisic acid  and auxin  levels were increased. rna-seq identified  <dig>  differentially expressed genes  between wt and the cco mutant. the kegg pathway analysis showed many degs were mapped to the hormone biosynthesis and signal transduction pathways. consistent with assays of hormones in seeds, the results of rna-seq indicated auxin and aba biosynthesis and signal transduction in cco were more active than in wt, while an early step in ga biosynthesis was blocked, as well as conversion rate of inactive gas to bioactive gas in ga signaling. furthermore, genes participated in other hormone biosynthesis and signalling pathways such as cytokinin , ethylene , brassinosteroid , and jasmonate acid  were also affected in the cco mutant.


CONCLUSIONS
our data suggest that multiple phytohormone biosynthesis and signal transduction pathways are reprogrammed in cco, and changes in these pathways may partially contribute to the cco mutant phenotype, suggesting the involvement of multiple hormones in the coordination of soybean cotyledon development.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
soybeanrna-seqplant hormonecurled-cotyledonmutantissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

