BACKGROUND
the production of heather  in germany is highly dependent on cultivars with mutated flower morphology, the so-called diplocalyx bud bloomers. so far, this unique flower type of c. vulgaris has not been reported in any other plant species. the flowers are characterised by an extremely extended flower attractiveness, since the flower buds remain closed throughout the complete flowering season. the flowers of c. vulgaris bud bloomers are male sterile, because the stamens are absent. furthermore, petals are converted into sepals. therefore the diplocalyx bud bloomer flowers consist of two whorls of sepals directly followed by the gynoecium.


RESULTS
a broad comparison was undertaken to identify genes differentially expressed in the bud flowering phenotype and in the wild type of c. vulgaris. transcriptome sequence reads were generated using  <dig> sequencing of two flower type specific cdna libraries. in total,  <dig>  sequence reads were obtained, assembled to  <dig>  contigs, functionally mapped, and annotated. transcript abundances were compared and  <dig> differentially expressed genes detected. among these differentially expressed genes, calluna vulgaris pistillata  which is the orthologue of the arabidopsis b gene pistillata  was considered as the most promising candidate gene. quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  was performed to analyse the gene expression levels of two c. vulgaris b genes cvpi and calluna vulgaris apetala  <dig>  in both flower types. cvap <dig> which is the orthologue of the arabidopsis b gene apetala  <dig>  turned out to be ectopically expressed in sepals of wild type and bud bloomer flowers. cvpi expression was proven to be reduced in the bud blooming flowers.


CONCLUSIONS
differential expression patterns of the b-class genes cvap <dig> and cvpi were identified to cause the characteristic morphology of c. vulgaris flowers leading to the following hypotheses: ectopic expression of cvap <dig> is a convincing explanation for the formation of a completely petaloid perianth in both flower types. in c. vulgaris, cvpi is essential for determination of petal and stamen identity. the characteristic transition of petals into sepals potentially depends on the observed deficiency of cvpi and cvap <dig> expression in bud blooming flowers.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
 <dig> sequencingbud floweringfloral organ identityheatherhomeotic mutantreal-time pcrtranscriptometranscription factorissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

