BACKGROUND
traditionally, chinese indigenous sheep were classified geographically and morphologically into three groups: mongolian, kazakh and tibetan. herein, we aimed to evaluate the population structure and genome selection among  <dig> individuals from ten representative chinese indigenous sheep breeds: ujimqin, hu, tong, large-tailed han and lop breed ; duolang and kazakh ; and diqing, plateau-type tibetan, and valley-type tibetan breed .


RESULTS
we analyzed the population using principal component analysis , structure and a neighbor-joining -tree. in pca plot, the tibetan and mongolian groups were clustered as expected; however, duolang and kazakh  were segregated. structure analyses suggested two subpopulations: one from north china  and the other from the southwest . in the nj-tree, the tibetan group formed an independent branch and the kazakh and mongolian groups were mixed. we then used the di statistic approach to reveal selection in chinese indigenous sheep breeds. among the  <dig> genome sequence windows analyzed, sixteen  exhibited signatures of selection in four or more breeds. we detected three strong selection windows involving three functional genes: rxfp <dig>  ppp1cc and pdgfd. pdgfd, one of the four subfamilies of pdgf, which promotes proliferation and inhibits differentiation of preadipocytes, was significantly selected in fat type breeds by the rsb  approach. two consecutive selection regions in duolang sheep were obviously different to other breeds. one region was in oar <dig> including three genes  the influence growth traits. the other region was in oar  <dig> including four genes  associated with a milk production quantitative trait locus. we also identified known candidate genes such as bmpr1b, msrb <dig>  and three genes  that influence lambing percentage, ear size and coat phenotypes, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
based on the results presented here, we propose that chinese native sheep can be divided into two genetic groups: the thin type , and the fat type . we also identified important genes that drive valuable phenotypes in chinese indigenous sheep, especially pdgfd, which may influence fat deposition in fat type sheep.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genome-wide analysischina indigenous sheeppopulation analysisselection signal analysisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

