BACKGROUND
it has been reported that the composition of human gut microbiota changes with age; however, few studies have used molecular techniques to investigate the long-term, sequential changes in gut microbiota composition. in this study, we investigated the sequential changes in gut microbiota composition in newborn to centenarian japanese subjects.


RESULTS
fecal samples from  <dig> healthy japanese subjects between the ages of  <dig> and 104 years were analyzed by high-throughput sequencing of amplicons derived from the v3-v <dig> region of the 16s rrna gene. analysis based on bacterial co-abundance groups  defined by kendall correlations between genera revealed that certain transition types of microbiota were enriched in infants, adults, elderly individuals and both infant and elderly subjects. more positive correlations between the relative abundances of genera were observed in the elderly-associated cags compared with the infant- and adult-associated cags. hierarchical ward’s linkage clustering based on the abundance of genera indicated five clusters, with median  ages of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  years. subjects were predominantly clustered with their matched age; however, some of them fell into mismatched age clusters. furthermore, clustering based on the proportion of transporters predicted by phylogenetic investigation of communities by reconstruction of unobserved states  showed that subjects were divided into two age-related groups, the adult-enriched and infant/elderly-enriched clusters. notably, all the drug transporters based on kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  orthology groups were found in the infant/elderly-enriched cluster.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate some patterns and transition points in the compositional changes in gut microbiota with age. in addition, the transporter property prediction results suggest that nutrients in the gut might play an important role in changing the gut microbiota composition with age.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gut microbiotacommensal bacteriajapanese populationagingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

