BACKGROUND
high intracellular levels of unbound iron can contribute to the production of reactive oxygen species  via the fenton reaction, while depletion of iron limits the availability of iron-containing proteins, some of which have important functions in defence against oxidative stress. vice versa increased ros levels lead to the damage of proteins with iron sulphur centres. thus, organisms have to coordinate and balance their responses to oxidative stress and iron availability. our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms underlying the co-regulation of these responses remains limited. to discriminate between a direct cellular response to iron limitation and indirect responses, which are the consequence of increased levels of ros, we compared the response of the α-proteobacterium rhodobacter sphaeroides to iron limitation in the presence or absence of oxygen.


RESULTS
one third of all genes with altered expression under iron limitation showed a response that was independent of oxygen availability. the other iron-regulated genes showed different responses in oxic or anoxic conditions and were grouped into six clusters based on the different expression profiles. for two of these clusters, induction in response to iron limitation under oxic conditions was dependent on the oxyr regulatory protein. an oxyr mutant showed increased ros production and impaired growth under iron limitation.


CONCLUSIONS
some r. sphaeroides genes respond to iron limitation irrespective of oxygen availability. these genes therefore reflect a “core iron response” that is independent of potential ros production under oxic, iron-limiting conditions. however, the regulation of most of the iron-responsive genes was biased by oxygen availability. most strikingly, the oxyr-dependent activation of a subset of genes upon iron limitation under oxic conditions, including many genes with a role in iron metabolism, revealed that elevated ros levels were an important trigger for this response. oxyr thus provides a regulatory link between the responses to oxidative stress and to iron limitation in r. sphaeroides.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rhodobacter sphaeroidestranscriptomicsiron limitationoxyrrnaseqoxidative stressissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

