BACKGROUND
high-throughput omics technologies such as microarrays and next-generation sequencing  have become indispensable tools in biological research. computational analysis and biological interpretation of omics data can pose significant challenges due to a number of factors, in particular the systems integration required to fully exploit and compare data from different studies and/or technology platforms. in transcriptomics, the identification of differentially expressed genes when studying effect or contrast of interest constitutes the starting point for further downstream computational analysis  leading to mechanistic insights. therefore, it is important to systematically store the full list of genes with their associated statistical analysis results  corresponding to one or more effect or contrast of interest  in a comparable manner and extract gene sets in order to efficiently support downstream analyses and further leverage data on a long-term basis. filling this gap would open new research perspectives for biologists to discover disease-related biomarkers and to support the understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying specific biological perturbation effects .


RESULTS
to address these challenges, we developed confero, a contrast data and gene set platform for downstream analysis and biological interpretation of omics data. the confero software platform provides storage of contrast data in a simple and standard format, data transformation to enable cross-study and platform data comparison, and automatic extraction and storage of gene sets to build new a priori knowledge which is leveraged by integrated and extensible downstream computational analysis tools. gene set enrichment analysis  and over-representation analysis  are currently integrated as an analysis module as well as additional tools to support biological interpretation. confero is a standalone system that also integrates with galaxy, an open-source workflow management and data integration system. to illustrate confero platform functionality we walk through major aspects of the confero workflow and results using the bioconductor estrogen package dataset.


CONCLUSIONS
confero provides a unique and flexible platform to support downstream computational analysis facilitating biological interpretation. the system has been designed in order to provide the researcher with a simple, innovative, and extensible solution to store and exploit analyzed data in a sustainable and reproducible manner thereby accelerating knowledge-driven research. confero source code is freely available from http://sourceforge.net/projects/confero/.

gene expressioncontrast datagene setgene set enrichmentomicsmicroarraynext-generation sequencingreproducible research systemknowledge acquisition

