BACKGROUND
genome-wide association studies  aim to identify genetic variants  across the entire human genome that are associated with phenotypic traits such as disease status and drug response. highly accurate and reproducible genotype calling are paramount since errors introduced by calling algorithms can lead to inflation of false associations between genotype and phenotype. most genotype calling algorithms currently used for gwas are based on multiple arrays. because hundreds of gigabytes  of raw data are generated from a gwas, the samples are typically partitioned into batches containing subsets of the entire dataset for genotype calling. high call rates and accuracies have been achieved. however, the effects of batch size  and of batch composition  on call rate and accuracy as well as the propagation of the effects into significantly associated snps identified have not been investigated. in this paper, we analyzed both the batch size and batch composition for effects on the genotype calling algorithm brlmm using raw data of  <dig> hapmap samples analyzed with the affymetrix human mapping  <dig> k array set.


RESULTS
using data from  <dig> hapmap samples interrogated with the affymetrix human mapping  <dig> k array set, three different batch sizes and three different batch compositions were used for genotyping using the brlmm algorithm. comparative analysis of the calling results and the corresponding lists of significant snps identified through association analysis revealed that both batch size and composition affected genotype calling results and significantly associated snps. batch size and batch composition effects were more severe on samples and snps with lower call rates than ones with higher call rates, and on heterozygous genotype calls compared to homozygous genotype calls.


CONCLUSIONS
batch size and composition affect the genotype calling results in gwas using brlmm. the larger the differences in batch sizes, the larger the effect. the more homogenous the samples in the batches, the more consistent the genotype calls. the inconsistency propagates to the lists of significantly associated snps identified in downstream association analysis. thus, uniform and large batch sizes should be used to make genotype calls for gwas. in addition, samples of high homogeneity should be placed into the same batch.

23– <dig> february  <dig> fifth annual mcbios conference. systems biology: bridging the omics oklahoma city, ok, usa

