BACKGROUND
est  sequences and their annotation provide a highly valuable resource for gene discovery, genome sequence annotation, and other genomics studies that can be applied in genetics, breeding and conservation programs for non-model organisms. conifers are long-lived plants that are ecologically and economically important globally, and have a large genome size. black spruce , is a transcontinental species of the north american boreal and temperate forests. however, there are limited transcriptomic and genomic resources for this species. the primary objective of our study was to develop a black spruce transcriptomic resource to facilitate on-going functional genomics projects related to growth and adaptation to climate change.


RESULTS
we conducted bidirectional sequencing of cdna clones from a standard cdna library constructed from black spruce needle tissues. we obtained  <dig>  high quality  sequence reads, with an average read-length of 532 bp. clustering and assembly of ests resulted in  <dig>  unique sequences, consisting of  <dig>  singletons and  <dig> contigs. approximately two-thirds  of unique sequences were functionally annotated. genes involved in  <dig> molecular functions and  <dig> biological processes were discovered, including  <dig> putative transcription factors and  <dig> genes involved in photosynthesis. most abundantly expressed transcripts were associated with photosynthesis, growth factors, stress and disease response, and transcription factors. a total of  <dig> full-length genes were identified. about 18%  of the transcripts were novel, representing an important addition to the genbank est database . fifty-seven di-, tri-, tetra- and penta-nucleotide simple sequence repeats were identified.


CONCLUSIONS
we have developed the first high quality est resource for black spruce and identified  <dig> novel transcripts, which may be species-specific related to life history and ecological traits. we have also identified full-length genes and microsatellite-containing ests. based on est sequence similarities, black spruce showed close evolutionary relationships with congeneric picea glauca and picea sitchensis compared to other pinaceae members and angiosperms. the est sequences reported here provide an important resource for genome annotation, functional and comparative genomics, molecular breeding, conservation and management studies and applications in black spruce and related conifer species.

picea marianaexpressed sequence taggene discoverygene expressiongene ontologymicrosatellites

