BACKGROUND
improving feed efficiency  of pigs by genetic selection is of economic and environmental significance. an increasingly accepted measure of feed efficiency is residual feed intake . currently, the molecular mechanisms underlying rfi are largely unknown. additionally, to incorporate rfi into animal breeding programs, feed intake must be recorded on individual pigs, which is costly and time-consuming. thus, convenient and predictive biomarkers for rfi that can be measured at an early age are greatly desired. in this study, we aimed to explore whether differences exist in the global gene expression profiles of peripheral blood of  <dig> to 42 day-old pigs with extremely low  and high rfi  values from two lines that were divergently selected for rfi during the grow-finish phase, to use such information to explore the potential molecular basis of rfi differences, and to initiate development of predictive biomarkers for rfi.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> differentially expressed genes   between the low  and high  rfi groups of animals by using rna sequencing technology. we validated  <dig> of  <dig> selected degs by reverse transcription-quantitative pcr  in a joint analysis of  <dig>  of the  <dig> samples already used for rna-seq plus  <dig>  novel samples from the same contemporary group of pigs. using an analysis of the  <dig> novel samples alone, only nine of the  <dig> selected degs were validated. genes involved in small molecule biosynthetic process, antigen processing and presentation of peptide antigen via major histocompatibility complex  class i, and steroid biosynthetic process were overrepresented among degs that had higher expression in the low versus high rfi animals. genes known to function in the proteasome complex or mitochondrion were also significantly enriched among genes with higher expression in the low versus high rfi animals. alternatively, genes involved in signal transduction, bone mineralization and regulation of phosphorylation were overrepresented among degs with lower expression in the low versus high rfi animals. the degs significantly overlapped with genes associated with disease, including hyperphagia, eating disorders and mitochondrial diseases . a weighted gene co-expression network analysis  identified four co-expression modules that were differentially expressed between the low and high rfi groups. genes involved in lipid metabolism, regulation of bone mineralization, cellular immunity and response to stimulus were overrepresented within the two modules that were most significantly differentially expressed between the low and high rfi groups. we also found five of the degs and one of the co-expression modules were significantly associated with the rfi phenotype of individual animals .


CONCLUSIONS
the post-weaning blood transcriptome was clearly different between the low and high rfi groups. the identified degs suggested potential differences in mitochondrial and proteasomal activities, small molecule biosynthetic process, and signal transduction between the two rfi groups and provided potential new insights into the molecular basis of rfi in pigs, although the observed relationship between the post-weaning blood gene expression and rfi phenotype measured during the grow-finish phase was not strong. degs and representative genes in co-expression modules that were associated with rfi phenotype provide a preliminary list for developing predictive biomarkers for rfi in pigs.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
sus scrofafeed efficiencyresidual feed intakeblood transcriptomerna-sequsda national institute of food and agriculture agriculture and food research initiativenifa-afri-2011-68004-30336dekkers jack c. m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

