BACKGROUND
macrolide antibiotics are commonly administered for bacterial respiratory illnesses. azithromycin  is especially noted for extremely high intracellular concentrations achieved within macrophages which is far greater than the serum concentration. clinical strains of type b francisella  tularensis have been reported to be resistant to az, however our laboratory francisella strains were found to be sensitive. we hypothesized that different strains/species of francisella  may have different susceptibilities to az, a widely used and well-tolerated antibiotic.


RESULTS
in vitro susceptibility testing of az confirmed that f. tularensis subsp. holarctica live vaccine strain   was not sensitive while f. philomiragia, f. novicida, and type a f. tularensis  were susceptible. in j774a. <dig> mouse macrophage cells infected with f. philomiragia, f. novicida, and f. tularensis lvs,  <dig> μg/ml az applied extracellularly eliminated intracellular francisella infections. a concentration of  <dig> μg/ml az was required for francisella-infected a <dig> human lung epithelial cells, suggesting that macrophages are more effective at concentrating az than epithelial cells. mutants of rnd efflux components  in f. novicida demonstrated less sensitivity to az by mic than the parental strain, but the tolc disc-inhibition assay demonstrated increased sensitivity, indicating a complex role for the outer-membrane transporter. mutants of acra and acrb mutants were less sensitive to az than the parental strain, suggesting that acrab is not critical for the efflux of az in f. novicida. in contrast, f. tularensis schu s <dig> mutants Δacrb and Δacra were more sensitive than the parental strain, indicating that the acrab may be important for az efflux in f. tularensis schu s <dig>  f. novicida lps o-antigen mutants  were found to be less sensitive in vitro to az compared to the wild-type. az treatment prolonged the survival of galleria  mellonella infected with francisella.


CONCLUSIONS
these studies demonstrate that type a francisella strains, as well as f. novicida and f. philomiragia, are sensitive to az in vitro. francisella lps and the rnd efflux pump may play a role in az sensitivity. az also has antimicrobial activity against intracellular francisella, suggesting that the intracellular concentration of az is high enough to be effective against multiple strains/species of francisella, especially in macrophages. az treatment prolonged survival an in vivo model of francisella-infection.

