BACKGROUND
quantifying the amount of standing genetic variation in fitness represents an empirical challenge. unfortunately, the shortage of detailed studies of the genetic architecture of fitness has hampered progress in several domains of evolutionary biology. one such area is the study of sexual selection. in particular, the evolution of adaptive female choice by indirect genetic benefits relies on the presence of genetic variation for fitness. female choice by genetic benefits fall broadly into good genes  models and compatibility  models where the strength of selection is dictated by the genetic architecture of fitness. to characterize the genetic architecture of fitness, we employed a quantitative genetic design  in a population of the seed beetle callosobruchus maculatus, which is known to exhibit post-copulatory female choice. from reciprocal crosses of inbred lines, we assayed egg production, egg-to-adult survival, and lifetime offspring production of the outbred f <dig> daughters .


RESULTS
we used the bio model to estimate six components of genetic and environmental variance in fitness. we found sizeable additive and non-additive genetic variance in f <dig> productivity, but lower genetic variance in egg-to-adult survival, which was strongly influenced by maternal and paternal effects.


CONCLUSIONS
our results show that, in order to gain a relevant understanding of the genetic architecture of fitness, measures of offspring fitness should be inclusive and should include quantifications of offspring reproductive success. we note that our estimate of additive genetic variance in f <dig> productivity  is sufficient to generate indirect selection on female choice. however, our results also show that the major determinant of offspring fitness is the genetic interaction between parental genomes, as indicated by large amounts of non-additive genetic variance  for f <dig> productivity. we discuss the processes that may maintain additive and non-additive genetic variance for fitness and how these relate to indirect selection for female choice.

