BACKGROUND
the american lobster, homarus americanus, is an important species as an economically valuable fishery, a key member in marine ecosystems, and a well-studied model for central pattern generation, the neural networks that control rhythmic motor patterns. despite multi-faceted scientific interest in this species, currently our genetic resources for the lobster are limited. in this study, we de novo assemble a transcriptome for homarus americanus using central nervous system , muscle, and hybrid neurosecretory tissues and compare gene expression across these tissue types. in particular, we focus our analysis on genes relevant to central pattern generation and the identity of the neurons in a neural network, which is defined by combinations of genes distinguishing the neuronal behavior and phenotype, including ion channels, neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, receptors, transcription factors, and other gene products.


RESULTS
using samples from the central nervous system , abdominal muscle, and heart , we used rna-seq to characterize gene expression patterns across tissues types. we also compared control tissues with those challenged with the neuropeptide proctolin in vivo. our transcriptome generated  <dig>  transcripts with known protein annotations. of these,  <dig> - <dig>  of annotated transcripts were significantly differentially expressed  across tissue types. we found  <dig> transcripts for ion channels and identified receptors and/or proteins for over  <dig> different neurotransmitters and neuromodulators. results indicated tissue-specific expression of select neuromodulator  and neurotransmitter  pathways. we also identify differential expression of ion channel families, including kainite family glutamate receptors, inward-rectifying k+  channels, and transient receptor potential  a family channels, across central pattern generating tissues.


CONCLUSIONS
our transcriptome-wide profiles of the rhythmic pattern generating abdominal and cardiac nervous systems in homarus americanus reveal candidates for neuronal features that drive the production of motor output in these systems.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomerna-seqgene expressioncnsnervous systemcentral pattern generationlocomotionneuronal differentiationlobsterhomarus americanushttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundation0963010http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100002322schlumberger foundationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

