BACKGROUND
due to a high toxicity of nitrite and its metabolites, it is of high interest to study mechanisms underlying the low no <dig> level maintenance in the cell. during anaerobic growth of escherichia coli the main nitrite-reducing enzymes are nrfa and nirb nitrite reductases. nrfa reductase is localized in the cell periplasm and uses no <dig> as an electron acceptor to create a proton gradient; nirb reductase is restricted to the cytoplasm and metabolizes excessive nitrite inside the cell, the uptake of which is mediated by the transporter protein nirc. while it is known that these three systems, periplasmic, cytoplasmic and transport, determine nitrite uptake and assimilation in the cell as well as its excretion, little is known about their co-ordination.


RESULTS
using a mathematical model describing the nitrite utilization in e. coli cells cultured in a flow chemostat, the role of enzymes involved in nitrite metabolism and transport in controlling nitrite intracellular levels was investigated. it was demonstrated that the model adapted to the experimental data on expression of nrfa and nirb genes encoding nrfa and nirb nitrite reductases, can describe nitrite accumulation kinetics in the chemostat in the millimolar range of added substrate concentrations without any additional assumptions. according to the model, in this range, low intracellular nitrite level, weakly dependent on its concentration in the growth media, is maintained . it is not sufficient to consider molecular-genetic mechanisms of nrfa reductase activity regulation to describe the nitrite accumulation dynamics in the chemostat in the micromolar range  of added nitrite concentrations. analysis of different hypotheses has shown that the mechanism of local enzyme concentration change due to membrane potential-induced diffusion from the cytoplasm to the periplasm at low nitrite levels is sufficient to explain the nitrite accumulation dynamics in the chemostat.


CONCLUSIONS
at nitrite concentrations in the media more than 2 mm, the model adapted to the experimental data on nitrite utilization dynamics in e. coli cells cultured in the flow chemostat demonstrates the largest contribution of genetic mechanisms involved in nrf and nir operons activity regulation to the control of nitrite intracellular levels. the model predicts a significant contribution of the membrane potential to the periplasmic nrfa nitrite reductase activity regulation and nitrite utilization dynamics at substrate concentrations ≤1 mm.

keywords
escherichia colianaerobic respirationmathematical modelgene expression regulationnitrite reductasenitrite transportmembrane potentialthe 7th international young scientists school “systems biology and bioinformatics”  novosibirsk, russia 22- <dig> june  <dig> http://conf.nsc.ru/plantgen2015issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

