BACKGROUND
the genome of helicobacter pylori, an oncogenic bacterium in the human stomach, rapidly evolves and shows wide geographical divergence. the high incidence of stomach cancer in east asia might be related to bacterial genotype. we used newly developed comparative methods to follow the evolution of east asian h. pylori genomes using  <dig> complete genome sequences from japanese, korean, amerind, european, and west african strains.


RESULTS
a phylogenetic tree of concatenated well-defined core genes supported divergence of the east asian lineage  from the european lineage ancestor, and then from the amerind lineage ancestor. phylogenetic profiling revealed a large difference in the repertoire of outer membrane proteins  through gene loss, gain, and mutation. all known functions associated with molybdenum, a rare element essential to nearly all organisms that catalyzes two-electron-transfer oxidation-reduction reactions, appeared to be inactivated. two pathways linking acetyl~coa and acetate appeared intact in some japanese strains. phylogenetic analysis revealed greater divergence between the east asian  and the european  genomes in proteins in host interaction, specifically virulence factors , outer membrane proteins, and lipopolysaccharide synthesis  enzymes. divergence was also seen in proteins in electron transfer and translation fidelity , a dna recombinase/exonuclease that recognizes genome identity , and dna/rna hybrid nucleases . positively selected amino acid changes between hspeasia and hpeurope were mapped to products of caga, vaca, homc , sotb , and a translation fidelity factor . large divergence was seen in genes related to antibiotics: frxa , def , and ftsa .


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate dramatic genome evolution within a species, especially in likely host interaction genes. the east asian strains appear to differ greatly from the european strains in electron transfer and redox reactions. these findings also suggest a model of adaptive evolution through proteome diversification and selection through modulation of translational fidelity. the results define h. pylori east asian lineages and provide essential information for understanding their pathogenesis and designing drugs and therapies that target them.

