BACKGROUND
the co-chaperone hop  has been shown to act as an adaptor for protein folding and maturation, in concert with hsp <dig> and hsp <dig>  the hop gene is of eukaryotic origin. likewise, the chloroplast elongation factor g  catalyzes the translocation step in chloroplast protein synthesis. the chl-fus gene, which encodes the cef-g protein, is of plastid origin. both proteins, hop and cef-g, derived from domain duplications. it was demonstrated that the nuclear chl-fus gene locates in opposite orientation to a hop gene in glycine max. we explored  <dig> available plant genomes from chlorophyta to higher plants, to determine whether the chl-fus gene was transferred directly downstream of the primordial hop in the proto-eukaryote host cell. since both genes came from exon/module duplication events, we wanted to explore the involvement of introns in the early origin and the ensuing evolutionary changes in gene structure.


RESULTS
we reconstructed the evolutionary history of the two convergent plant genes, on the basis of their gene structure, microsynteny and microcolinearity, from  <dig> plant nuclear genomes. despite a high degree  of microcolinearity among vascular plants, our results demonstrate that their adjacency was a product of chromosomal rearrangements. based on predicted exon − intron structures, we inferred the molecular events giving rise to the current form of genes. therefore, we propose a simple model of exon/module shuffling by intronic recombinations in which phase- <dig> introns were essential for domain duplication, and a phase- <dig> intron for transit peptide recruiting. finally, we demonstrate a natural susceptibility of the intergenic region to recombine or delete, seriously threatening the integrity of the chl-fus gene for the future.


CONCLUSIONS
our results are consistent with the interpretation that the chl-fus gene was transferred from the chloroplast to a chromosome different from that of hop, in the primitive photosynthetic eukaryote, and much later before the appearance of angiosperms, it was recombined downstream of hop. exon/module shuffling mediated by symmetric intron phases  was essential for gene evolution. the intergenic region is prone to recombine, risking the integrity of both genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tpr proteinshop genecef-gchl-fus genemicrosyntenyexon shufflingintron phaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

