BACKGROUND
in recent years, highly frequent swine respiratory diseases have been caused by extraintestinal pathogenic escherichia coli  in china. due to this increase in expecs, this bacterial pathogen has become a threat to the development of the chinese swine industry. to investigate expec pathogenesis, we isolated a strain  from lesioned porcine lungs from changchun in china, reported the draft genome and performed comparative genomic analyses.


RESULTS

based on the gross post-mortem examination, bacterial isolation, animal regression test and 16s rrna gene sequence analysis, the pathogenic bacteria was identified as an expec. the slpe draft genome was  <dig>  mb with a g + c content of  <dig> %. the phylogenomic comparison indicated that the slpe strain belongs to the b <dig> monophyletic phylogroups and that its closest relative is avian pathogenic escherichia coli  o <dig>  however, the distribution diagram of the pan-genome virulence genes demonstrated significant differences between slpe and apec <dig>  we also identified a capsular polysaccharide synthesis gene cluster  in the slpe strain genomes using blastp.


CONCLUSIONS
we isolated the expec  from swine lungs in china, performed the whole genome sequencing and compared the sequence with other escherichia coli . the comparative genomic analysis revealed several genes including several virulence factors that are expec strain-specific, such as fimbrial adhesins , irea, pgtp, hlyf, the pix gene cluster and fecr for their further study. we found a cps in the slpe strain genomes for the first time, and this cps is closely related to the cps from klebsiella pneumoniae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
expecpneumoniapigsgenomenational key research and development plan2016yfd0501301the science and technology development plan of jilin province20170520074jhthe science and technology development plan of jilin province20150101109jcissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

