BACKGROUND
therapy with mesenchymal stem cells  has been reported to provide beneficial effects in the treatment of neurological and orthopaedic disorders in dogs. the exact mechanism of action is poorly understood. magnetic resonance imaging  gives the opportunity to observe mscs after clinical administration. to visualise mscs with the help of mri, labelling with an mri contrast agent is necessary. however, it must be clarified whether there is any negative influence on cell function and viability after labelling prior to clinical administration.


RESULTS
for the purpose of the study, seven samples with canine adipose-derived stem cells were incubated with superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles  for 24 h. the internalisation of the iron particles occurred via endocytosis. spio particles were localized as free clusters in the cytoplasm or within lysosomes depending on the time of investigation. the efficiency of the labelling was investigated using prussian blue staining and macs assay. after 3 weeks the percentage of spio labelled canine stem cells decreased. phalloidin staining showed no negative effect on the cytoskeleton. labelled cells underwent osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation. chondrogenic differentiation occurred to a lesser extent compared with a control sample. mtt-test and wound healing assay showed no influence of labelling on the proliferation. the duration of spio labelling was assessed using a  <dig> tesla clinical mri scanner and t <dig> weighted turbo spin echo and t <dig> weighted gradient echo mri sequences  <dig>   <dig> and 3 weeks after labelling. the hypointensity caused by spio lasted for 3 weeks in both sequences.


CONCLUSIONS
an endorem labelling concentration of  <dig>  μg/ml fe  had no adverse effects on the viability of canine ascs. therefore, this contrast agent could be used as a model for iron oxide labelling agents. however, the tracking ability in vivo has to be evaluated in further studies.

keywords
canine adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cellssuperparamagnetic iron oxide particlesendoremmagnetic resonanceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

