BACKGROUND
despite evidence of an association between variants at the apolipoprotein l <dig> gene  locus and a spectrum of related kidney diseases, underlying biological mechanisms remain unknown. an earlier preliminary study published by our group showed that an apol <dig> variant  modified the association between high-density lipoprotein cholesterol  and estimated glomerular filtration rate  in african americans. to further understand this relationship, we evaluated the interaction in two additional large cohorts of african americans for a total of  <dig>  unrelated individuals from the howard university family study , the natural history of apol1-associated nephropathy study , and the atherosclerosis risk in communities study . the association between hdlc and egfr was determined using linear mixed models, and the interaction between rs <dig> genotype and hdlc was evaluated using a multiplicative term.


RESULTS
among individuals homozygous for the risk genotype, a strong inverse hdlc-egfr association was observed, with a positive association in others . the interaction was similar in hufs and nhaan, and attenuated in aric. given that aric participants were older, we investigated an age effect; age was a significant modifier of the observed interaction. when older individuals were excluded, the interaction in aric was similar to that in the other studies.


CONCLUSIONS
based on these findings, it is clear that the relationship between hdlc and egfr is strongly influenced by the apol <dig> rs <dig> kidney risk genotype. moreover, the degree to which this variant modifies the association may depend on the age of the individual. more detailed physiological studies are warranted to understand how rs <dig> may affect the relationship between hdlc and egfr in individuals with and without disease and across the lifespan.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
apolipoprotein l1high-density lipoprotein cholesterolafrican ancestryglomerular filtration rateissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

