BACKGROUND
many diurnal animals exhibit a mid-day ‘siesta’, generally thought to be an adaptive response aimed at minimizing exposure to heat on warm days, suggesting that in regions with cooler climates mid-day siestas might be a less prominent feature of animal behavior. drosophila melanogaster exhibits thermal plasticity in its mid-day siesta that is partly governed by the thermosensitive splicing of the 3’-terminal intron  from the key circadian clock gene period . for example, decreases in temperature lead to progressively more efficient splicing, which increasingly favors activity over sleep during the mid-day. in this study we sought to determine if the adaptation of d. melanogaster from its ancestral range in the lowlands of tropical africa to the cooler temperatures found at high altitudes involved changes in mid-day sleep behavior and/or dmpi <dig> splicing efficiency.


RESULTS
using natural populations of drosophila melanogaster from different altitudes in tropical africa we show that flies from high elevations have a reduced mid-day siesta and less consolidated sleep. we identified a single nucleotide polymorphism  in the per 3’ untranslated region that has strong effects on dmpi <dig> splicing and mid-day sleep levels in both low and high altitude flies. intriguingly, high altitude flies with a particular variant of this snp exhibit increased dmpi <dig> splicing efficiency compared to their low altitude counterparts, consistent with reduced mid-day siesta. thus, a boost in dmpi <dig> splicing efficiency appears to have played a prominent but not universal role in how african flies adapted to the cooler temperatures at high altitude.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings point towards mid-day sleep behavior as a key evolutionary target in the thermal adaptation of animals, and provide a genetic framework for investigating daytime sleep in diurnal animals which appears to be driven by mechanisms distinct from those underlying nighttime sleep.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
drosophilasleepcircadiantemperaturemid-day siestasplicingaltitudethermal adaptationdmpi <dig> intronperiod genehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000065national institute of neurological disorders and strokens042088edery isaac issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

