BACKGROUND
soil bacteria collectively known as rhizobium, characterized by their ability to establish beneficial symbiosis with legumes, share several common characteristics with pathogenic bacteria when infecting the host plant. recently, it was demonstrated that a fadd mutant of sinorhizobium meliloti is altered in the control of swarming, a type of co-ordinated movement previously associated with pathogenicity, and is also impaired in nodulation efficiency on alfalfa roots. in the phytopathogen xanthomonas campestris, a fadd homolog  forms part of a cluster of genes involved in the regulation of pathogenicity factors. in this work, we have investigated the role in swarming and symbiosis of smc <dig>  a s. meliloti fadd-linked gene.


RESULTS
the smc <dig> locus in s. meliloti shows similarities with members of the major facilitator superfamily  of transporters. a s. meliloti null-mutant shows increased sensitivity to chloramphenicol. this indication led us to rename the locus tep <dig> for transmembrane efflux protein. the lack of tep <dig> does not affect the appearance of swarming motility. interestingly, nodule formation efficiency on alfalfa plants is improved in the tep <dig> mutant during the first days of the interaction though nod gene expression is lower than in the wild type strain. curiously, a nodc mutation or the addition of n-acetyl glucosamine to the wild type strain lead to similar reductions in nod gene expression as in the tep <dig> mutant. moreover, aminosugar precursors of nod factors inhibit nodulation.


CONCLUSIONS
tep <dig> putatively encodes a transmembrane protein which can confer chloramphenicol resistance in s. meliloti by expelling the antibiotic outside the bacteria. the improved nodulation of alfalfa but reduced nod gene expression observed in the tep <dig> mutant suggests that tep <dig> transports compounds which influence nodulation. in contrast to bradyrhizobium japonicum, we show that in s. meliloti there is no feedback regulation of nodulation genes. moreover, the nod factor precursor, n-acetyl glucosamine reduces nod gene expression and nodulation efficiency when present at millimolar concentrations. a role for tep <dig> in the efflux of nod factor precursors could explain the phenotypes associated with tep <dig> inactivation.

