BACKGROUND
heme binding proteins  are metalloproteins that contain a heme ligand  as the prosthetic group. several computational methods have been proposed to predict heme binding residues and thereby to understand the interactions between heme and its host proteins. however, few in silico methods for identifying hbps have been proposed.


RESULTS
this work proposes a scoring card method  based method  for predicting and analyzing hbps from sequences. a balanced dataset of  <dig> hbps  and  <dig> non-hbps  with an identity of 25% was firstly established. consequently, a set of scores that quantified the propensity of amino acids and dipeptides to be hbps is estimated using scm to maximize the predictive accuracy of scmhbp. finally, the informative physicochemical properties of  <dig> amino acids are identified by utilizing the estimated propensity scores to be used to categorize hbps. the training and mean test accuracies of scmhbp applied to three independent test datasets are  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively. scmhbp performs well relative to comparison with such methods as support vector machine , decision tree j <dig>  and bayes classifiers. the putative non-hbps with high sequence propensity scores are potential hbps, which can be further validated by experimental confirmation. the propensity scores of individual amino acids and dipeptides are examined to elucidate the interactions between heme and its host proteins. the following characteristics of hbps are derived from the propensity scores: 1) aromatic side chains are important to the effectiveness of specific hbp functions; 2) a hydrophobic environment is important in the interaction between heme and binding sites; and 3) the whole hbp has low flexibility whereas the heme binding residues are relatively flexible.


CONCLUSIONS
scmhbp yields knowledge that improves our understanding of hbps rather than merely improves the prediction accuracy in predicting hbps.

 <dig> july- <dig> august  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  thirteenth international conference on bioinformatics  sydney, australia

