BACKGROUND
the classical perspective that interspecific hybridization in animals is rare has been changing due to a growing list of empirical examples showing the occurrence of gene flow between closely related species. using sequence data from cyt b mitochondrial gene and three intron nuclear genes  we investigated patterns of nucleotide polymorphism and divergence between two closely related toad species r. marina and r. schneideri. by comparing levels of differentiation at nuclear and mtdna levels we were able to describe patterns of introgression and infer the history of hybridization between these species.


RESULTS
all nuclear loci are essentially concordant in revealing two well differentiated groups of haplotypes, corresponding to the morphologically-defined species r. marina and r. schneideri. mitochondrial dna analysis also revealed two well-differentiated groups of haplotypes but, in stark contrast with the nuclear genealogies, all r. schneideri sequences are clustered with sequences of r. marina from the right amazon bank , while r. marina sequences from the left amazon bank  are monophyletic. an isolation-with-migration  analysis using nuclear data showed that r. marina and r. schneideri diverged at ≈  <dig>  myr , while r. marina populations from lab and rab diverged at ≈  <dig>  myr . this time of divergence is not consistent with the split between lab and rab populations obtained with mtdna data , which is notably similar to the estimate obtained with nuclear genes between r. marina and r. schneideri. coalescent simulations of mtdna phylogeny under the speciation history inferred from nuclear genes rejected the hypothesis of incomplete lineage sorting to explain the conflicting signal between mtdna and nuclear-based phylogenies.


CONCLUSIONS
the cytonuclear discordance seems to reflect the occurrence of interspecific hybridization between these two closely related toad species. overall, our results suggest a phenomenon of extensive mtdna unidirectional introgression from the previously occurring r. schneideri into the invading r. marina. we hypothesize that climatic-induced range shifts during the pleistocene/holocene may have played an important role in the observed patterns of introgression.

