BACKGROUND
epithelial-mesenchymal cross talk is centerpiece in the development of many branched organs, including the lungs. the embryonic lung mesoderm provides instructional information not only for lung architectural development, but also for patterning, commitment and differentiation of its many highly specialized cell types. the mesoderm also serves as a reservoir of progenitors for generation of differentiated mesenchymal cell types that include αsma-expressing fibroblasts, lipofibroblasts, endothelial cells and others. transforming growth factor β  is a key signaling pathway in epithelial-mesenchymal cross talk. using a cre-loxp approach we have elucidated the role of the tgfβ type i receptor tyrosine kinase, alk <dig>  in epithelial-mesenchymal cross talk during lung morphogenesis.


RESULTS
targeted early inactivation of alk <dig> in mesodermal progenitors caused abnormal development and maturation of the lung that included reduced physical size of the sub-mesothelial mesoderm, an established source of specific mesodermal progenitors. abrogation of mesodermal alk5-mediated signaling also inhibited differentiation of cell populations in the epithelial and endothelial lineages. importantly, alk <dig> mutant lungs contained a reduced number of αsmapos cells and correspondingly increased lipofibroblasts. elucidation of the underlying mechanisms revealed that through direct and indirect modulation of target signaling pathways and transcription factors, including pdgfrα, pparγ, prrx <dig>  and zfp <dig>  alk5-mediated tgfβ controls a process that regulates the commitment and differentiation of αsmapos versus lipofibroblast cell populations during lung development.


CONCLUSIONS
alk5-mediated tgfβ signaling controls an early pathway that regulates the commitment and differentiation of αsmapos versus lif cell lineages during lung development.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lipofibroblastlung developmentmesodermmyofibroblastpdgfrαpparβzfp423http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000050national heart, lung, and blood institutehl-107307minoo parviz hastings foundationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

