BACKGROUND
harmful algal blooms deteriorate the services of aquatic ecosystems. they are often formed by cyanobacteria composed of genotypes able to produce a certain toxin, for example, the hepatotoxin microcystin , but also of nontoxic genotypes that either carry mutations in the genes encoding toxin synthesis or that lost those genes during evolution. in general, cyanobacterial blooms are favored by eutrophication. very little is known about the stability of the toxic/nontoxic genotype composition during trophic change.


RESULTS
archived samples of preserved phytoplankton on filters from aquatic ecosystems that underwent changes in the trophic state provide a so far unrealized possibility to analyze the response of toxic/nontoxic genotype composition to the environment. during a period of  <dig> years of re-oligotrophication of the deep, physically stratified lake zürich , the population of the stratifying cyanobacterium planktothrix was at a minimum during the most eutrophic years , but increased and dominated the phytoplankton during the past two decades. quantitative polymerase chain reaction revealed that during the whole observation period the proportion of the toxic genotype was strikingly stable, that is, close to 100%. inactive mc genotypes carrying mutations within the mc synthesis genes never became abundant. unexpectedly, a nontoxic genotype, which lost its mc genes during evolution, and which could be shown to be dominant under eutrophic conditions in shallow polymictic lakes, also co-occurred in lake zürich but was never abundant. as it is most likely that this nontoxic genotype contains relatively weak gas vesicles unable to withstand the high water pressure in deep lakes, it is concluded that regular deep mixing selectively reduced its abundance through the destruction of gas vesicles.


CONCLUSIONS
the stability in toxic genotype dominance gives evidence for the adaptation to deep mixing of a genotype that retained the mc gene cluster during evolution. such a long-term dominance of a toxic genotype draws attention to the need to integrate phylogenetics into ecological research as well as ecosystem management.

allelic discrimination assayeutrophicationgenetic population structureharmful algal bloomshistoric sampleslong-term monitoringmicrocystin

