BACKGROUND
long-term potentiation  of synapses is thought to be due in part to a change in ampa receptor trafficking leading to an increase in the number of ampa receptors at the synapse. ltp onset occurs within seconds after the induction signal. a particle-based stochastic simulation software is used to investigate the effect of brownian diffusion of glutamate receptors on receptor incorporation into the synaptic specialisation and the time-course of ltp expression. the model of the dendritic spine includes receptors diffusing within the membrane, scaffold molecules within the synaptic specialisation capable of binding receptors and a molecular picket-fence surrounding the synaptic membrane area, all features found within the biological system.


RESULTS
during simulations, receptors accumulate rapidly at the post-synaptic density  from the extra-synaptic membrane under a number of biologically observed conditions. the time of half-saturation, t1/ <dig>  defined as the time-point at which half the available scaffold proteins are occupied with receptors, is found to be  <dig> ms. different scaffold distributions are shown to have little effect on this time-course. decreasing the probability of escape of receptors from the psd domain, thus localising receptors closer to the scaffold proteins, substantially decreases t1/ <dig>  a decrease of escape probability from  <dig> to  <dig> brings about a non-linear decrease in t1/ <dig> from  <dig> ms to  <dig> ms. release-location of receptors within the spine is found to affect the initial rate of receptor incorporation. we simulate three possible sources of receptors:  receptors distributed within the spine extra-synaptic membrane;  receptors from exocytotic vesicles released to the synaptic spine; and  receptors entering the spine from the dendritic shaft through the spine neck. receptors released from exocytotic vesicles initially accumulate faster than receptors released from the other two sources. a model of glutamate release and glutamate-receptor interaction shows that newly inserted receptors make a substantial contribution to a glutamate evoked response within the observed time-frame.


CONCLUSIONS
fast accumulation of ampa receptors is consistent with experimentally observed fast onset of ltp expression.

