BACKGROUND
transglutaminases  form a group of enzymes that have many different substrates and among the most well known are fibrin for factor xiiia and the clotting protein in crustaceans. we also found that tgase is an abundant protein in the hematopoietic tissue  cells of crayfish and hence we have studied the possible function of this enzyme in hematopoiesis.


RESULTS
tgase is one of the most abundant proteins in the hpt and its mrna expression as well as enzyme activity is very high in the hpt cells, lesser in the semi-granular hemocytes and very low in the granular cells. in cultured hematopoietic tissues, high activity was present in cells in the centre of the tissue, whereas cells migrating out of the tissue had very low tgase activity. rnai experiments using dsrna for tgase completely knocked down the transcript and as a result the cell morphology was changed and the cells started to spread intensely. if astakine, a cytokine directly involved in hematopoiesis, was added the cells started to spread and adopt a morphology similar to that observed after rnai of tgase. astakine had no effect on tgase expression, but after a prolonged incubation for one week with this invertebrate cytokine, tgase activity inside and outside the cells was completely lost. thus it seems as if astakine addition to the hpt cells and rnai of tgase in the cell culture will lead to the same results, i.e. loss of tgase activity in the cells and they start to differentiate and spread.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study suggest that tgase is important for keeping the hpt cells in an undifferentiated stage inside the hematopoietic tissue and if expression of tgase mrna is blocked the cells start to differentiate and spread.

this shows a new function for transglutaminase in preventing hematopoietic stem cells from starting to differentiate and migrate into the hemolymph, whereas their proliferation is unaffected. astakine is also important for the hematopoiesis, since it induces hemocyte synthesis in the hpt but now we also show that it in some unknown way participates in the differentiation of the hpt cells.

