BACKGROUND
drug-drug interactions  are one of the major concerns in drug discovery. accurate prediction of potential ddis can help to reduce unexpected interactions in the entire lifecycle of drugs, and are important for the drug safety surveillance.


RESULTS
since many ddis are not detected or observed in clinical trials, this work is aimed to predict unobserved or undetected ddis. in this paper, we collect a variety of drug data that may influence drug-drug interactions, i.e., drug substructure data, drug target data, drug enzyme data, drug transporter data, drug pathway data, drug indication data, drug side effect data, drug off side effect data and known drug-drug interactions. we adopt three representative methods: the neighbor recommender method, the random walk method and the matrix perturbation method to build prediction models based on different data. thus, we evaluate the usefulness of different information sources for the ddi prediction. further, we present flexible frames of integrating different models with suitable ensemble rules, including weighted average ensemble rule and classifier ensemble rule, and develop ensemble models to achieve better performances.


CONCLUSIONS
the experiments demonstrate that different data sources provide diverse information, and the ddi network based on known ddis is one of most important information for ddi prediction. the ensemble methods can produce better performances than individual methods, and outperform existing state-of-the-art methods. the datasets and source codes are available at https://github.com/zw9977129/drug-drug-interaction/.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
drug-drug interactionensemble learningmissing link predictionrandom walkhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china6110312661572368zhang wen liu feng national natural science foundation of china 61402340luo fei natural science foundation of hubei province of chinazry2014000901tian gang issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

