BACKGROUND
synthesis and uptake of pyoverdine, the primary siderophore of the opportunistic pathogen pseudomonas aeruginosa, is dependent on two extra-cytoplasmic function  sigma factors, fpvi and pvds. fpvi and pvds are required for expression of the ferri-pyoverdine receptor gene fpva and of pyoverdine synthesis genes respectively. in the absence of pyoverdine the anti-sigma factor fpvr that spans the cytoplasmic membrane inhibits the activities of both fpvi and pvds, despite the two sigma factors having low sequence identity.


RESULTS
to investigate the interactions of fpvr with fpvi and pvds, we first used a tandem affinity purification system to demonstrate binding of pvds by the cytoplasmic region of fpvr in p. aeruginosa at physiological levels. the cytoplasmic region of fpvr bound to and inhibited both fpvi and pvds when the proteins were co-expressed in escherichia coli. each sigma factor was then subjected to error prone pcr and site-directed mutagenesis to identify mutations that increased sigma factor activity in the presence of fpvr. in fpvi, the amino acid changes clustered around conserved region four of the protein and are likely to disrupt interactions with fpvr. deletion of five amino acids from the c-terminal end of fpvi also disrupted interactions with fpvr. mutations in pvds were present in conserved regions two and four. most of these mutations as well as deletion of thirteen amino acids from the c-terminal end of pvds increased sigma factor activity independent of whether fpvr was present, suggesting that they increase either the stability of pvds or its affinity for core rna polymerase.


CONCLUSIONS
these data show that fpvr binds to pvds in both p. aeruginosa and e. coli, inhibiting its activity. fpvr also binds to and inhibits fpvi and binding of fpvi is likely to involve conserved region four of the sigma factor protein.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
siderophoregene expressionecf sigma factoranti-sigma factorpyoverdinepseudomonascell surface signalingtonb-dependent signalingtandem affinity purificationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

