BACKGROUND
bacteroides fragilis is a gram-negative anaerobe that is normally a human gut commensal; it comprises a small percentage of the gut bacteroides but is the most frequently isolated bacteroides from human infections. identification of the essential genes necessary for the survival of b. fragilis provides novel information which can be exploited for the treatment of bacterial infections.


RESULTS
massive parallel sequencing of saturated transposon mutant libraries  was used to determine the essential genes for the growth of b. fragilis 638r on nutrient rich medium. among the  <dig> protein coding genes,  <dig> genes  were found to be essential for the survival of b. fragilis 638r. of the  <dig> essential genes, only  <dig> genes were assigned to a cluster of orthologous genes, and about  <dig> genes had kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes orthologous members. interestingly, genes with hypothetical functions accounted for  <dig> % of essential genes , indicating that the functions of a significant percentage of the genes used by b. fragilis 638r are still unknown. global transcriptome analysis using rna-seq indicated that most of the essential genes  are, in fact, transcribed in b. fragilis 638r including most of those coding for hypothetical proteins. three hundred fifty of the  <dig> essential genes of b. fragilis 638r are present in database of essential genes.  <dig>  and 31% of those are genes included as essential genes for nine species .


CONCLUSIONS
the essential gene data described in this investigation provides a valuable resource to study gene function and pathways involved in b. fragilis survival. thorough examination of the b. fragilis-specific essential genes and genes that are shared between divergent organisms opens new research avenues that will lead to enhanced understanding of survival strategies used by bacteria in different microniches and under different stress situations.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacteroides fragilistransposon mutantsessential genesmassively parallel sequencingcogdegissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

