BACKGROUND
copy number variations  are usually inferred from single nucleotide polymorphism  arrays by use of some software packages based on given algorithms. however, there is no clear understanding of the performance of these software packages; it is therefore difficult to select one or several software packages for cnv detection based on the snp array platform.

we selected four publicly available software packages designed for cnv calling from an affymetrix snp array, including birdsuite, dchip, genotyping console  and penncnv. the publicly available dataset generated by array-based comparative genomic hybridization , with a resolution of  <dig> million probes per sample, was considered to be the “gold standard”. compared with the cgh-based dataset, the success rate, average stability rate, sensitivity, consistence and reproducibility of these four software packages were assessed compared with the “gold standard”. specially, we also compared the efficiency of detecting cnvs simultaneously by two, three and all of the software packages with that by a single software package.


RESULTS
simply from the quantity of the detected cnvs, birdsuite detected the most while gtc detected the least. we found that birdsuite and dchip had obvious detecting bias. and gtc seemed to be inferior because of the least amount of cnvs it detected. thereafter we investigated the detection consistency produced by one certain software package and the rest three software suits. we found that the consistency of dchip was the lowest while gtc was the highest. compared with the cnvs detecting result of cgh, in the matching group, gtc called the most matching cnvs, penncnv-affy ranked second. in the non-overlapping group, gtc called the least cnvs. with regards to the reproducibility of cnv calling, larger cnvs were usually replicated better. penncnv-affy shows the best consistency while birdsuite shows the poorest.


CONCLUSIONS
we found that penncnv outperformed the other three packages in the sensitivity and specificity of cnv calling. obviously, each calling method had its own limitations and advantages for different data analysis. therefore, the optimized calling methods might be identified using multiple algorithms to evaluate the concordance and discordance of snp array-based cnv calling.

cnvcghevaluationcomparisonperformance testreproducibility testsuccess ratebirdsuitedchipgtcpenncnv

