BACKGROUND
a variety of conditions  are employed in antifouling tests with marine bacteria. shewanella algae was selected as model organism to evaluate the effect of these parameters on: bacterial growth, biofilm formation, the activity of model antifoulants, and the development and nanomechanical properties of the biofilms.

the main objectives were:

1) to highlight and quantify the effect of these conditions on relevant parameters for antifouling studies: biofilm morphology, thickness, roughness, surface coverage, elasticity and adhesion forces.

2) to establish and characterise in detail a biofilm model with a relevant marine strain.


RESULTS
both the medium and the temperature significantly influenced the total cell densities and biofilm biomasses in 24-hour cultures. likewise, the ic <dig> of three antifouling standards  was significantly affected by the medium and the initial cell density. four media  were selected to explore their effect on the morphological and nanomechanical properties of 24-h biofilms. two biofilm growth patterns were observed: a clear trend to vertical development, with varying thickness and surface coverage in mb, lmb and sasw, and a horizontal, relatively thin film in mh <dig>  the atomic force microscopy analysis showed the lowest young modulii for mb , followed by sasw , lmb  and mh <dig> . adhesion forces followed an inverted trend, being higher in mb  and lower in mh <dig> .


CONCLUSIONS
all the parameters significantly affected the ability of s. algae to grow and form biofilms, as well as the activity of antifouling molecules. a detailed study has been carried out in order to establish a biofilm model for further assays. the morphology and nanomechanics of s. algae biofilms were markedly influenced by the nutritional environments in which they were developed. as strategies for biofilm formation inhibition and biofilm detachment are of particular interest in antifouling research, the present findings also highlight the need for a careful selection of the assay conditions.

biofilmbiofoulingantifoulingshewanella algaeclsm analysisatomic force microscopyyoung modulusadhesion forces

