BACKGROUND
cytochrome c  is an apoptosis-initiating protein when released into the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells and therefore a possible cancer drug candidate. although proteins have been increasingly important as pharmaceutical agents, their chemical and physical instability during production, storage, and delivery remains a problem. chemical glycosylation has been devised as a method to increase protein stability and thus enhance their long-lasting bioavailability.


RESULTS
three different molecular weight glycans  were chemically coupled to surface exposed cyt c lysine  residues using succinimidyl chemistry via amide bonds. five neo-glycoconjugates were synthesized, lac4-cyt-c, lac9-cyt-c, dex5-cyt-c, dex8-cyt-c, and dex3-cyt-c. subsequently, we investigated glycoconjugate structure, activity, and stability. circular dichroism  spectra demonstrated that cyt c glycosylation did not cause significant changes to the secondary structure, while high glycosylation levels caused some minor tertiary structure perturbations. functionality of the cyt c glycoconjugates was determined by performing cell-free caspase  <dig> and caspase  <dig> induction assays and by measuring the peroxidase-like pseudo enzyme activity. the glycoconjugates showed ≥94% residual enzyme activity and 86 ±  <dig> to 95 ± 1% relative caspase  <dig> activation compared to non-modified cyt c. caspase  <dig> activation by the glycoconjugates was with 92 ± 7% to 96 ± 4% within the error the same as the caspase  <dig> activation. there were no major changes in cyt c activity upon glycosylation. incubation of dex3-cyt c with mercaptoethanol caused significant loss in the tertiary structure and a drop in caspase  <dig> and  <dig> activation to only 24 ± 8% and 26 ± 6%, respectively. this demonstrates that tertiary structure intactness of cyt c was essential for apoptosis induction. furthermore, glycosylation protected cyt c from detrimental effects by some stresses  and from proteolytic degradation. in addition, non-modified cyt c was more susceptible to denaturation by a water-organic solvent interface than its glycoconjugates, important for the formulation in polymers.


CONCLUSIONS
the results demonstrate that chemical glycosylation is a potentially valuable method to increase cyt c stability during formulation and storage and potentially during its application after administration.

apoptosischemical glycosylationdrug deliverypharmaceutical proteinprotein formulationprotein stability

