BACKGROUND
liver is an important metabolic organ that plays a critical role in lipid synthesis, degradation, and transport; however, the molecular regulatory mechanisms of lipid metabolism remain unclear in chicken. in this study, rna-seq technology was used to investigate differences in expression profiles of hepatic lipid metabolism-related genes and associated pathways between juvenile and laying hens. the study aimed to broaden the understanding of liver lipid metabolism in chicken, and thereby to help improve laying performance in the poultry industry.


RESULTS
rna-seq analysis was carried out on total rna harvested from the liver of juvenile  and laying  hens. compared with juvenile hens,  <dig> differentially expressed genes  with p ≤  <dig>  were obtained in laying hens, and  <dig> of these genes were significantly differentially expressed  at a false discovery rate  of ≤ <dig>  and fold-change ≥ <dig> or ≤ <dig> . in addition, most of the  <dig> sde novel genes  were discovered highly expressed, and  <dig> sde isoforms were identified. gene ontology  enrichment and kegg  pathway analysis showed that the sde genes were most enrichment in steroid biosynthesis, ppar signaling pathway, biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, glycerophospholipid metabolism, three amino acid pathways, and pyruvate metabolism . the top significantly enriched go terms among the sde genes included lipid biosynthesis, cholesterol and sterol metabolic, and oxidation reduction, indicating that principal lipogenesis occurred in the liver of laying hens.


CONCLUSIONS
this study suggests that the majority of changes at the transcriptome level in laying hen liver were closely related to fat metabolism. some of the sde uncharacterized novel genes and alternative splicing isoforms that were detected might also take part in lipid metabolism, although this needs further investigation. this study provides valuable information about the expression profiles of mrnas from chicken liver, and in-depth functional investigations of these mrnas could provide new insights into the molecular networks of lipid metabolism in chicken liver.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqlaying hensliverfat metabolismfunction analysisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

