BACKGROUND
dna methylation plays an important role in regulating gene expression during many biological processes. however, the mechanism of dna-methylation-dependent gene regulation is not fully understood. here, we explore two possible dna methylation regulatory mechanisms with opposite modes of gene expression regulation.


RESULTS
by comparing the genome-wide methylation and expression patterns in different tissues, we find that majority of tissue-specific differentially methylated regions  are negatively correlated with expression of their associated genes , consistent with the classical dogma that dna methylation suppresses gene expression; however, a significant portion of t-dmrs are positively correlated with gene expression . we observe that the positive t-dmrs have similar genomic location as negative t-dmrs, except that the positive t-dmrs are more enriched in the promoter regions. both positive and negative t-dmrs are enriched in dnase i hypersensitivity sites , suggesting that both are likely to be functional. the cpg sites of both positive and negative t-dmrs are also more evolutionarily conserved than the genomic background. interestingly, the putative target genes of the positive t-dmr are enriched for negative regulators such as transcriptional repressors, suggesting a novel mode of indirect dna methylation inhibition of expression through transcriptional repressors. likewise, two distinct sets of dna sequence motifs exist for positive and negative t-dmrs, suggesting that two distinct sets of transcription factors  are involved in positive and negative regulation mediated by dna methylation.


CONCLUSIONS
we find both negative and positive association between t-dmrs and gene expression, which implies the existence of two different mechanisms of dna methylation-dependent gene regulation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dna methylationtissue-specificdifferentially methylated regiongene regulationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

