BACKGROUND
the commerson’s leaf-nosed bat, hipposideros commersoni sensu stricto, is endemic to madagascar and is relatively common in the western portion of the island, where it is found in areas, including forested zones, from sea level to 1325 m. a previous study on morphological patterns of geographic variation within the species highlighted the presence of two distinct morphotypes; larger individuals in the north portion of the island and smaller individuals in the south. the main aim of this study was to use a combination of craniodental morphology and molecular data  to test previous hypotheses based on morphology and clarify the evolutionary history of the species group.

methods
we sequenced mitochondrial and nuclear genes from hipposideros commersoni obtained from the western portion of madagascar, and compared them with other african species as outgroups. we analyzed the sequence data using maximum likelihood and bayesian phylogenetic inference. divergence dates were estimated using bayesian molecular clock approach. variation in craniodental variables was also assessed from sequenced individuals.


RESULTS
the molecular analyses suggest that h. commersoni is not monophyletic, with strong support for the presence of several independently evolving lineages. two individuals amongst those sequenced from isalo  and itampolo  form a separate clade , distinct from other h. commersoni, and sister to continental african h. vittatus and h. gigas. within the h. commersoni clade, the molecular data support two geographically distributed clades; one from the south  and the other from the north , which diverged approximately  <dig>  million years ago. morphometric data were consistent with the molecular analyses, suggesting a north–south break within h. commersoni. however, at some localities, animals from both clades occurred in sympatry and these individuals could not be differentiated based on external and craniodental measurements.


CONCLUSIONS
using a combination of molecular and morphological characters, this study presents evidence of cryptic diversity in h. commersoni on madagascar. further fine-scale phylogeographic studies are needed to fully resolve the systematics of h. commersoni. this study highlights the utility of the combined approach in employing both morphological and molecular data to provide insights into the evolutionary history of malagasy population currently assigned to h. commersoni.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dry forestphylogenyparaphylyevolutionary historysystematicsmorphologyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

