BACKGROUND
the avian eggshell membranes surround the egg white and provide a structural foundation for calcification of the eggshell which is essential for avian reproduction; moreover, it is also a natural biomaterial with many potential industrial and biomedical applications. due to the insoluble and stable nature of the eggshell membrane fibres, their formation and protein constituents remain poorly characterized. the purpose of this study was to identify genes encoding eggshell membrane proteins, particularly those responsible for its structural features, by analyzing the transcriptome of the white isthmus segment of the oviduct, which is the specialized region responsible for the fabrication of the membrane fibres.


RESULTS
the del-mar 14 k chicken microarray was used to investigate up-regulated expression of transcripts in the white isthmus  compared with the adjacent magnum  and uterine  segments of the hen oviduct. analysis revealed  <dig> clones hybridizing to over-expressed transcripts , and corresponding to  <dig> ncbi annotated non-redundant gallus gallus gene ids. this combined analysis revealed that the structural proteins highly over-expressed in the white isthmus include collagen x , fibrillin- <dig>  and cysteine rich eggshell membrane protein . these results validate previous proteomics studies which have identified collagen x  and cremp in soluble eggshell extracts. genes encoding collagen-processing enzymes such as lysyl oxidase homologs  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> , prolyl  <dig> hydroxylase subunit α- <dig> and beta polypeptide  as well as peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase c  were also over-expressed. additionally, genes encoding proteins known to regulate disulfide cross-linking, including sulfhydryl oxidase  and thioredoxin , were identified which suggests that coordinated up-regulation of genes in the white isthmus is associated with eggshell membrane fibre formation.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study has identified genes associated with the processing of collagen, other structural proteins, and disulfide-mediated cross-linking during eggshell membrane formation in the white isthmus. identification of these genes will provide new insight into eggshell membrane structure and mechanisms of formation that will assist in the development of selection strategies to improve eggshell quality and food safety of the table egg.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chicken eggshell membranewhite isthmuscollagensbioinformaticstranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

