BACKGROUND
tunicates represent a key metazoan group as the sister-group of vertebrates within chordates. the six complete mitochondrial genomes available so far for tunicates have revealed distinctive features. extensive gene rearrangements and particularly high evolutionary rates have been evidenced with regard to other chordates. this peculiar evolutionary dynamics has hampered the reconstruction of tunicate phylogenetic relationships within chordates based on mitogenomic data.


RESULTS
in order to further understand the atypical evolutionary dynamics of the mitochondrial genome of tunicates, we determined the complete sequence of the solitary ascidian herdmania momus. this genome from a stolidobranch ascidian presents the typical tunicate gene content with  <dig> protein-coding genes,  <dig> rrnas and  <dig> trnas which are all encoded on the same strand. however, it also presents a novel gene arrangement, highlighting the extreme plasticity of gene order observed in tunicate mitochondrial genomes. probabilistic phylogenetic inferences were conducted on the concatenation of the  <dig> mitochondrial protein-coding genes from representatives of major metazoan phyla. we show that whereas standard homogeneous amino acid models support an artefactual sister position of tunicates relative to all other bilaterians, the cat and cat+bp site- and time-heterogeneous mixture models place tunicates as the sister-group of vertebrates within monophyletic chordates. moreover, the reference phylogeny indicates that tunicate mitochondrial genomes have experienced a drastic acceleration in their evolutionary rate that equally affects protein-coding and ribosomal-rna genes.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first mitogenomic study supporting the new chordate phylogeny revealed by recent phylogenomic analyses. it illustrates the beneficial effects of an increased taxon sampling coupled with the use of more realistic amino acid substitution models for the reconstruction of animal phylogeny.

