BACKGROUND
dysregulations in alternative splicing  patterns have been associated with many human diseases including cancer. in the present study, alterations to the global rna splicing landscape of cellular genes were investigated in a large-scale screen from  <dig> liver tissue samples using high-throughput rna sequencing data.


RESULTS
our study identifies modifications in the as patterns of transcripts encoded by more than  <dig> genes such as tumor suppressor genes, transcription factors, and kinases. these findings provide insights into the molecular differences between various types of hepatocellular carcinoma . our analysis allowed the identification of  <dig> unique transcripts for which as is misregulated in hbv-associated hcc, while  <dig> are unique to hcv-associated hcc,  <dig> to hbv&hcv-associated hcc, and  <dig> to virus-free hcc. moreover, we demonstrate that the expression pattern of the rna splicing factor hnrnpc in hcc tissues significantly correlates with patient survival. we also show that the expression of the hbx protein from hbv leads to modifications in the as profiles of cellular genes. finally, using rna interference and a reverse transcription-pcr screening platform, we examined the implications of cellular proteins involved in the splicing of transcripts involved in apoptosis and demonstrate the potential contribution of these proteins in as control.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the first comprehensive portrait of global changes in the rna splicing signatures that occur in hepatocellular carcinoma. moreover, these data allowed us to identify unique signatures of genes for which as is misregulated in the different types of hcc.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
liver cancerhepatitis b virushepatitis c virusrna splicinggene dysregulationcentre de recherche du centre hospitalier universitaire de sherbrookefaculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé de luniversité de sherbrookeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

