BACKGROUND
verticillium dahliae is a soil-borne fungus that causes vascular wilt diseases in a wide range of plant hosts. v. dahliae produces multicelled, melanized resting bodies, also known as microsclerotia  that can survive for years in the soil. the ms are the primary source of infection of the verticillium disease cycle. thus, ms formation marks an important event in the disease cycle of v. dahliae.


RESULTS
in this study, next generation sequencing technology of rna-seq was employed to investigate the global transcriptomic dynamics of ms development to identify differential gene expression at several stages of ms formation in strain xs <dig> of v. dahliae, isolated from smoke tree. we observed large-scale changes in gene expression during ms formation, such as increased expression of genes involved in protein metabolism and carbohydrate metabolism. genes involved in glycolytic pathway and melanin biosynthesis were dramatically up-regulated in ms. cluster analyses revealed increased expression of genes encoding products involved in primary metabolism and stress responses throughout ms development. differential expression of ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolism and cell death-associated genes during ms development were revealed. homologs of genes located in the lineage-specific  regions of v. dahliae strain vdls. <dig>  were either not expressed or showed low expression. furthermore, alternative splicing  events were analyzed, revealing that over  <dig> % as events involve retention of introns .


CONCLUSIONS
these data reveal the dynamics of transcriptional regulation during ms formation and were used to construct a comprehensive high-resolution gene expression map. this map provides a key resource for understanding the biology and molecular basis of ms development of v. dahliae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
verticillium dahliaemicrosclerotia developmentrna-seqtranscriptomegene expressionalternative splicingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

