BACKGROUND
arabinogalactan-proteins  are ubiquitous components of cell walls throughout the plant kingdom and are extensively post translationally modified by conversion of proline to hydroxyproline  and by addition of arabinogalactan polysaccharides  to hyp residues. agps are implicated to function in various aspects of plant growth and development, but the functional contributions of agp glycans remain to be elucidated. hyp glycosylation is initiated by the action of a set of hyp-o-galactosyltransferase  enzymes that remain to be fully characterized.


RESULTS
three members of the gt <dig> family  were identified as hyp-o-galt genes by heterologous expression in tobacco leaf epidermal cells and examined along with two previously characterized hyp-o-galt genes, galt <dig> and galt <dig>  transcript profiling by real-time pcr of these five hyp-o-galts revealed overlapping but distinct expression patterns. transiently expressed galt <dig>  galt <dig> and galt <dig> fluorescent protein fusions were localized within golgi vesicles. biochemical analysis of knock-out mutants for the five hyp-o-galt genes revealed significant reductions in both agp-specific hyp-o-galt activity and β-gal-yariv precipitable agps. further phenotypic analysis of these mutants demonstrated reduced root hair growth, reduced seed coat mucilage, reduced seed set, and accelerated leaf senescence. the mutants also displayed several conditional phenotypes, including impaired root growth, and defective anisotropic growth of root tips under salt stress, as well as less sensitivity to the growth inhibitory effects of β-gal-yariv reagent in roots and pollen tubes.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides evidence that all five hyp-o-galt genes encode enzymes that catalyze the initial steps of agp galactosylation and that agp glycans play essential roles in both vegetative and reproductive plant growth.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
arabidopsisarabinogalactan-proteinsagp biosynthesisgalactosyltransferaseo-glycosylationplant cell wallhydroxyprolinegalactosehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundation 0918661showalter allan m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

