BACKGROUND
genomic instability plays an important role in human cancers. we previously characterized genomic instability in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas  in terms of loss of heterozygosity  and copy number  changes in tumors. in the current study we focus on biallelic loss and its relation to expression of mrna and mirna in escc using results from 500k snp, mrna, and mirna arrays in  <dig> cases from a high-risk region of china.


RESULTS
 biallelic loss was uncommon but when it occurred it exhibited a consistent pattern: only  <dig> genes  showed biallelic loss in at least  <dig> % of escc samples, but nearly all of these genes were concentrated on just four chromosomal arms .  biallelic loss was associated with lower mrna expression:  <dig> of the  <dig> genes also had rna expression data, and  <dig>  showed lower expression levels in cases with biallelic loss compared to those without.  the relation of biallelic loss to mirna expression was less clear but appeared to favor higher mirna levels: of  <dig> mirna-target gene pairs,  <dig> pairs  had higher mirna expression with biallelic loss than without, while  <dig> pairs  had lower mirna expression.  finally, the effect of biallelic loss on the relation between mirna and mrna expression was complex. biallelic loss was most commonly associated with a pattern of elevated mirna and reduced mrna , but a pattern of both reduced mirna and mrna was also common .


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that biallelic loss in escc is uncommon, but when it occurs it is localized to a few specific chromosome regions and is associated with reduced mrna expression of affected genes. the effect of biallelic loss on mirna expression and on the relation between mirna and mrna expressions was complex.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
esophageal squamous cell carcinomabiallelic lossgene expressionmicrornaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

