BACKGROUND
variation of gene expression can lead to phenotypic variation and have therefore been assumed to contribute the diversity of wine yeast  properties. however, the molecular bases of this variation of gene expression are unknown. we addressed these questions by carrying out an integrated genetical-genomic study in fermentation conditions. we report here quantitative trait loci  mapping based on expression profiling in a segregating population generated by a cross between a derivative of the popular wine strain ec <dig> and the laboratory strain s288c.


RESULTS
most of the fermentation traits studied appeared to be under multi-allelic control. we mapped five phenotypic qtls and  <dig> expression qtls. several expression qtls overlapped in hotspots. among the linkages unraveled here, several were associated with metabolic processes essential for wine fermentation such as glucose sensing or nitrogen and vitamin metabolism. variations affecting the regulation of drug detoxification and export  were linked to variation in four genes encoding transcription factors . we demonstrated that the allelic variation of war <dig> and tpo <dig> affected sorbic and octanoic acid resistance, respectively. moreover, analysis of the transcription factors phylogeny suggests they evolved with a specific adaptation of the strains to wine fermentation conditions. unexpectedly, we found that the variation of fermentation rates was associated with a partial disomy of chromosome  <dig>  this disomy resulted from the well known 8– <dig> translocation.


CONCLUSIONS
this large data set made it possible to decipher the effects of genetic variation on gene expression during fermentation and certain wine fermentation properties. our findings shed a new light on the adaptation mechanisms required by yeast to cope with the multiple stresses generated by wine fermentation. in this context, the detoxification and export systems appear to be of particular importance, probably due to nitrogen starvation. furthermore, we show that the well characterized 8– <dig> translocation located in ssu <dig>  which is associated with sulfite resistance, can lead to a partial chromosomic amplification in the progeny of strains that carry it, greatly improving fermentation kinetics. this amplification has been detected among other wine yeasts.

wine yeastfermentationqtltranscriptomepartial disomydetoxification

