BACKGROUND
very little is known about the effects of manganese -excess on citrus photosynthesis and antioxidant systems. seedlings of sour pummelo  were irrigated for  <dig> weeks with nutrient solution containing  <dig> μm  or  <dig> μm  mnso <dig>  the objective of this study were to understand the mechanisms by which mn-excess leads to a decrease in co <dig> assimilation and to test the hypothesis that mn-induced changes in antioxidant systems differ between roots and leaves.


RESULTS
mn-excess decreased co <dig> assimilation and stomatal conductance, increased intercellular co <dig> concentration, but did not affect chlorophyll  level. both initial and total ribulose- <dig> -bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase  activity in mn-excess leaves decreased to a lesser extent than co <dig> assimilation. contents of glucose, fructose, starch and total nonstructural carbohydrates did not differ between mn-excess leaves and controls, while sucrose content was higher in the former. chl a fluorescence  transients from mn-excess leaves showed increased o-step and decreased p-step, accompanied by positive l- and k-bands. mn-excess decreased maximum quantum yield of primary photochemistry  and total performance index , but increased relative variable fluorescence at i-steps  and energy dissipation. on a protein basis, mn-excess leaves displayed higher activities of monodehydroascorbate reductase , glutathione reductase , superoxide dismutase , catalase  and guaiacol peroxidase  and contents of antioxidants, similar ascorbate peroxidase  activities and lower dehydroascorbate reductase  activities; while mn-excess roots had similar or lower activities of antioxidant enzymes and contents of antioxidants. mn-excess did not affect malondialdehyde  content of roots and leaves.


CONCLUSIONS
mn-excess impaired the whole photosynthetic electron transport chain from the donor side of photosystem ii  up to the reduction of end acceptors of photosystem i , thus limiting the production of reducing equivalents, and hence the rate of co <dig> assimilation. both the energy dissipation and the antioxidant systems were enhanced in mn-excess leaves, while the antioxidant systems in mn-excess roots were not up-regulated, but still remained high activity. the antioxidant systems in mn-excess roots and leaves provided sufficient protection to them against oxidative damage.

