BACKGROUND
defining cell type-specific transcriptomes in mammals can be challenging, especially for unannotated regions of the genome. we have developed an analytical pipeline called grohmm for annotating primary transcripts using global nuclear run-on sequencing  data. herein, we use this pipeline to characterize the transcriptome of an immortalized adult human ventricular cardiomyocyte cell line  in response to signaling by tumor necrosis factor alpha , which is controlled in part by nf-κb, a key transcriptional regulator of inflammation. a unique aspect of this work is the use of the rna polymerase ii  inhibitor α-amanitin, which we used to define a set of rna polymerase i and iii  transcripts.


RESULTS
using grohmm, we identified ~ <dig>  coding and non-coding transcribed regions in ac <dig> cells, which includes a set of unique pol i and pol iii primary transcripts. many of these transcripts have not been annotated previously, including enhancer rnas originating from nf-κb binding sites. in addition, we observed that ac <dig> cells rapidly and dynamically reorganize their transcriptomes in response to tnfα stimulation in an nf-κb-dependent manner, switching from a basal state to a proinflammatory state affecting a spectrum of cardiac-associated protein-coding and non-coding genes. moreover, we observed distinct pol ii dynamics for up- and downregulated genes, with a rapid release of pol ii into productive elongation for tnfα-stimulated genes. as expected, the tnfα-induced changes in the ac <dig> transcriptome resulted in corresponding changes in cognate mrna and protein levels in a similar manner, but with delayed kinetics.


CONCLUSIONS
our studies illustrate how computational genomics can be used to characterize the signal-regulated transcriptome in biologically relevant cell types, providing new information about how the human genome is organized, transcribed and regulated. in addition, they show how α-amanitin can be used to reveal the pol i and pol iii transcriptome. furthermore, they shed new light on the regulation of the cardiomyocyte transcriptome in response to a proinflammatory signal and help to clarify the link between inflammation and cardiomyocyte function at the transcriptional level.

