BACKGROUND
in human carcinomas, overexpression of cortactin correlates with poor prognosis. cortactin is an f-actin-binding protein involved in cytoskeletal rearrangements and cell migration by promoting actin-related protein 2/ <dig> mediated actin polymerization. it shares a high amino acid sequence and structural similarity to hematopoietic lineage cell-specific protein  <dig>  although their functions differ considerable. in this manuscript we describe the genomic organization of these two genes in a variety of species by a combination of cloning and database searches. based on our analysis, we predict the genesis of the actin-binding repeat domain during evolution.


RESULTS
cortactin homologues exist in sponges, worms, shrimps, insects, urochordates, fishes, amphibians, birds and mammalians, whereas hs <dig> exists in vertebrates only, suggesting that both genes have been derived from an ancestor cortactin gene by duplication. in agreement with this, comparative genome analysis revealed very similar exon-intron structures and sequence homologies, especially over the regions that encode the characteristic highly conserved f-actin-binding repeat domain. cortactin splice variants affecting this f-actin-binding domain were identified not only in mammalians, but also in amphibians, fishes and birds. in mammalians, cortactin is ubiquitously expressed except in hematopoietic cells, whereas hs <dig> is mainly expressed in hematopoietic cells. in accordance with their distinct tissue specificity, the putative promoter region of cortactin is different from hs <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
comparative analysis of the genomic organization and amino acid sequences of cortactin and hs <dig> provides inside into their origin and evolution. our analysis shows that both genes originated from a gene duplication event and subsequently hs <dig> lost two repeats, whereas cortactin gained one repeat. our analysis genetically underscores the significance of the f-actin binding domain in cytoskeletal remodeling, which is of importance for the major role of hs <dig> in apoptosis and for cortactin in cell migration.

