BACKGROUND
sexual ornamentation may be related to the degree of paternal care and the ‘good-parent’ model predicts that male secondary characters honestly advertise paternal investment. in most birds, males are involved in bringing up the young and successful reproduction highly depends on male contribution during breeding. in passerines, male song is indicative of male attributes and for few species it has been shown that song features also signal paternal investment to females. males of nightingales luscinia megarhynchos are famous for their elaborate singing but so far there is only little knowledge on the role of male song in intersexual communication, and it is unknown whether male song predicts male parenting abilities.


RESULTS
using rfid technology to record male feeding visits to the nest, we found that nightingale males substantially contribute to chick feeding. also, we analyzed male nocturnal song with focus on song features that have been shown to signal male quality before. we found that several song features, namely measures of song complexity and song sequencing, were correlated with male feeding rates. moreover, the combination of these song features had strong predictive power for male contribution to nestling feeding.


CONCLUSIONS
since male nightingales are involved in chick rearing, paternal investment might be a crucial variable for female mate choice in this species. females may assess future paternal care on the basis of song features identified in our study and thus these features may have evolved to signal direct benefits to females. additionally we underline the importance of multiple acoustic cues for female mating decisions especially in species with complex song such as the nightingale.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
male qualitypaternal effortsong complexitysong sequencenetwork analysissong categoryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

