BACKGROUND
in recent years, new neonatal porcine diarrhoea  of unknown aetiology has emerged in denmark. nnpd affects piglets during the first week of life and results in impaired welfare, decreased weight gain, and in the worst-case scenario death. commonly used preventative interventions such as vaccination or treatment with antibiotics, have a limited effect on nnpd. previous studies have investigated the clinical manifestations, histopathology, and to some extent, microbiological findings; however, these studies were either inconclusive or suggested that enterococci, possibly in interaction with escherichia coli, contribute to the aetiology of nnpd. this study examined ileal and colonic luminal contents of  <dig> control piglets and  <dig> nnpd piglets by means of the qpcr-based gut microbiotassay and  <dig> samples by  <dig> sequencing to study the composition of the bacterial gut microbiota in relation to nnpd.


RESULTS
nnpd was associated with a diminished quantity of bacteria from the phyla actinobacteria and firmicutes while genus enterococcus was more than  <dig> times more abundant in diarrhoeic piglets. the number of bacteria from the phylum fusobacteria was also doubled in piglets suffering from diarrhoea. with increasing age, the gut microbiota of nnpd affected piglet and control piglets became more diverse. independent of diarrhoeic status, piglets from first parity sows  possessed significantly more bacteria from family enterobacteriaceae and species e. coli, and fewer bacteria from phylum firmicutes. piglets born to gilts had  <dig> times higher odds of having nnpd compared with piglets born to multiparous sows. finally, the co-occurrence of genus enterococcus and species e. coli contributed to the risk of having nnpd.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study support previous findings that points towards genus enterococcus and species e. coli to be involved in the pathogenesis of nnpd. moreover, the results indicate that nnpd is associated with a disturbed bacterial composition and larger variation between the diarrhoeic piglets.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nnpdneonatalpigletdiarrhoeaqpcrmicrobiotagut microbiotassay <dig> sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

