BACKGROUND
due to its extraordinary chemical properties, the cysteine amino acid residue is often involved in protein folding, electron driving, sensing stress, and binding metals such as iron or zinc. lactococcus lactis, a gram-positive bacterium, houses around one hundred cysteine-rich proteins  in the cytoplasm, but only a few in the membrane.


RESULTS
in order to understand the role played by this motif we focused our work on two membrane proteins of unknown function: llmg_ <dig> and llmg_ <dig>  each of these proteins has two cx2c motifs separated by ten amino-acid residues . together with a short intervening gene , the genes of these two proteins form an operon, which is induced only during the early log growth phase. in both proteins, we found that the cx2cx10cx2c motif chelated a zinc ion via its cysteine residues, but the sphere of coordination was remarkably different in each case. in the case of llmg_ <dig>  two of the four cysteines were ligands of a zinc ion whereas in llmg_ <dig>  all four residues were involved in binding zinc. in both proteins, the cysteine-zinc complex was very stable at 37 °c or in the presence of oxidative agents, suggesting a probable role in protein stability. we found that the complete deletion of llmg_ <dig> increased the sensitivity of the mutant to cumene hydroperoxide whereas the deletion of the cysteine motif in llmg_ <dig> resulted in a growth defect. the latter mutant was much more resistant to lysozyme than other strains.


CONCLUSIONS
our data suggest that the cx2cx10cx2c motif is used to chelate a zinc ion but we cannot predict the number of cysteine residue involved as ligand of metal. although no other motif is present in sequence to identify roles played by these proteins, our results indicate that llmg_ <dig> contributes to the cell wall integrity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cysteinezincmembrane proteinsgrowthcumene hydroperoxidelysozymeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

