BACKGROUND
the meninges  and associated vasculature  and choroid plexus are important in maintaining cerebrospinal fluid  generation and flow. mav vasculature was previously observed to be adversely affected by environmentally-induced hyperthermia  and more so by a neurotoxic amphetamine  exposure. herein, microarray and rt-pcr analysis was used to compare the gene expression profiles between choroid plexus and mav under control conditions and at 3 hours and 1 day after eih or amph exposure. since amph and eih are so disruptive to vasculature, genes related to vasculature integrity and function were of interest.


RESULTS
our data shows that, under control conditions, many of the genes with relatively high expression in both the mav and choroid plexus are also abundant in many epithelial tissues. these genes function in transport of water, ions, and solutes, and likely play a role in csf regulation. most genes that help form the blood–brain barrier  and tight junctions were also highly expressed in mav but not in choroid plexus. in mav, exposure to eih and more so to amph decreased the expression of bbb-related genes such as sox <dig>  ocln, and cldn <dig>  but they were much less affected in the choroid plexus. there was a correlation between the genes related to reactive oxidative stress and damage that were significantly altered in the mav and choroid plexus after either eih or amph. however, amph  significantly affected about  <dig> times as many genes as eih in the mav, while in the choroid plexus eih affected more genes than amph. several unique genes that are not specifically related to vascular damage increased to a much greater extent after amph compared to eih in the mav  and choroid plexus .


CONCLUSIONS
our study indicates that the disruption of choroid plexus function and damage produced by amph and eih is significant, but the changes may not be as pronounced as they are in the mav, particularly for amph. expression profiles in the mav and choroid plexus differed to some extent and differences were not restricted to vascular related genes.

gene expressionmeningescerebral vasculaturechoroid plexuscerebrospinal fluidamphetamineshyperthermia

