BACKGROUND
affinity-purification mass-spectrometry  provides a powerful means of identifying protein complexes and interactions. several important challenges exist in interpreting the results of ap-ms experiments. first, the reproducibility of ap-ms experimental replicates can be low, due both to technical variability and the dynamic nature of protein interactions in the cell. second, the identification of true protein-protein interactions in ap-ms experiments is subject to inaccuracy due to high false negative and false positive rates. several experimental approaches can be used to mitigate these drawbacks, including the use of replicated and control experiments and relative quantification to sensitively distinguish true interacting proteins from false ones.

methods
to address the issues of reproducibility and accuracy of protein-protein interactions, we introduce a two-step method, called rocs, which makes use of indicator prey proteins to select reproducible ap-ms experiments, and of confidence scores to select specific protein-protein interactions. the indicator prey proteins account for measures of protein identifiability as well as protein reproducibility, effectively allowing removal of outlier experiments that contribute noise and affect downstream inferences. the filtered set of experiments is then used in the protein-protein interaction  scoring step. prey protein scoring is done by computing a confidence score, which accounts for the probability of occurrence of prey proteins in the bait experiments relative to the control experiment, where the significance cutoff parameter is estimated by simultaneously controlling false positives and false negatives against metrics of false discovery rate and biological coherence respectively. in summary, the rocs method relies on automatic objective criterions for parameter estimation and error-controlled procedures.


RESULTS
we illustrate the performance of our method by applying it to five previously published ap-ms experiments, each containing well characterized protein interactions, allowing for systematic benchmarking of rocs. we show that our method may be used on its own to make accurate identification of specific, biologically relevant protein-protein interactions, or in combination with other ap-ms scoring methods to significantly improve inferences.


CONCLUSIONS
our method addresses important issues encountered in ap-ms datasets, making rocs a very promising tool for this purpose, either on its own or in conjunction with other methods. we anticipate that our methodology may be used more generally in proteomics studies and databases, where experimental reproducibility issues arise. the method is implemented in the r language, and is available as an r package called “rocs”, freely available from the cran repository http://cran.r-project.org/.

experimental reproducibilityindicator prey proteinsconfidence scoreprotein-protein interactionaffinity-purification mass-spectrometry

