BACKGROUND
microalgal triglyceride  synthesis has attracted considerable attention. particular emphasis has been put towards characterizing the algal homologs of the canonical rate-limiting enzymes, diacylglycerol acyltransferase  and phospholipid:diacylglycerol acyltransferase . less work has been done to analyze homologs from a phylogenetic perspective. in this work, we used hmmer iterative profiling and phylogenetic and functional analyses to determine the number and sequence characteristics of algal dgat and pdat, as well as related sequences that constitute their corresponding superfamilies. we included most algae with available genomes, as well as representative eukaryotic and prokaryotic species.


RESULTS
amongst our main findings, we identified a novel clade of dgat1-like proteins exclusive to red algae and glaucophyta and a previously uncharacterized subclade of dgat <dig> proteins with an unusual number of transmembrane segments. our analysis also revealed the existence of a novel dgat exclusive to green algae with moderate similarity to plant soluble dgat <dig>  the dgat <dig> clade shares a most recent ancestor with a group of uncharacterized proteins from cyanobacteria. subcellular targeting prediction suggests that most green algal dgat <dig> proteins are imported to the chloroplast, evidencing that the green algal chloroplast might have a soluble pathway for the de novo synthesis of tags. heterologous expression of c. reinhardtii dgat <dig> produces an increase in the accumulation of tag, as evidenced by thin layer chromatography.


CONCLUSIONS
our analysis contributes to advance in the knowledge of complex superfamilies involved in lipid metabolism and provides clues to possible enzymatic players of chloroplast tag synthesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
algaebiodiesel productionchloroplasthmmer profilingneutral lipidssoluble acyltransferaseprotein phylogenytriglyceride metabolismhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006668fondo para la investigación científica y tecnológicapict-2013-2122beligni maría v. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002923consejo nacional de investigaciones científicas y técnicasconicet-pip 1142011010009beligni maría v. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

