BACKGROUND
mycobacteria, along with exospore forming streptomyces, belong to the phylum actinobacteria. mycobacteria are generally believed to be non-differentiating. recently however, we showed that the mycobacterial model organism m. smegmatis is capable of forming different types of morphologically distinct resting cells. when subjected to starvation conditions, cells of m. smegmatis exit from the canonical cell division cycle, segregate and compact their chromosomes, and become septated and multi-nucleoided. under zero nutrient conditions the differentiation process terminates at this stage with the formation of large resting cells . in the presence of traces of carbon sources this multi-nucleoided cell stage completes cell division and separates into small resting cells . here, we carried out rna-seq profiling of smrc and larc development to characterize the transcriptional program underlying these starvation-induced differentiation processes.


RESULTS
changes among the top modulated genes demonstrated that smrcs and larcs undergo similar transcriptional changes. the formation of multi-nucleoided cells  was accompanied by upregulation of septum formation functions ftsz, ftsw, and pbpb, as well as the dna translocase ftsk. the observed compaction of chromosomes was accompanied by an increase of the transcript level of the dna binding protein hlp, an orthologue of the streptomyces spore-specific chromosome condensation protein hups. both smrc and larc development were accompanied by similar temporal expression patterns of candidate regulators, including the transcription factors whib <dig>  whib <dig>  and whib <dig>  which are orthologues of the streptomyces sporulation regulators whib, whid and wbla, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
transcriptional analyses of the development of mycobacterial resting cell types suggest that these bacteria harbor a novel differentiation program and identify a series of potential regulators. this provides the basis for the genetic dissection of this actinobacterial differentiation process.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
smrclarcactinobacteriasporulationevolutionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001349national medical research councilnmrc/tcr/011-nuhs/2014dick thomas http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001381national research foundation singaporenrf-rf2010-10chen swaine lin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

