BACKGROUND
the r2r3-myb genes regulate pigmentation and morphogenesis of flowers, including flower and cell shape, and therefore have importance in the development of new varieties of orchids. however, new variety development is limited by the long breeding time required in orchids. in this study, we identified a cdna, dhmyb <dig>  that is expressed during flower development in a hybrid orchid, dendrobium hybrida  then used the direct application of dsrna to observe the effect of gene silencing on flower phenotype and floral epidermal cell shape.


RESULTS
flower bud development in the dendrobium hybrid was characterised into seven stages and the time of meiosis was determined as between stages  <dig> to  <dig> when the bud is approximately half of the mature size. scanning electron microscopy characterisation of adaxial epidermal cells of the flower perianth, showed that the petals and sepals each are divided into two distinct domains based on cell shape and size, while the labellum comprises seven domains. thirty-two partial cdna fragments representing r2r3-myb gene sequences were isolated from d. hybrida. phylogenetic analysis revealed that nine of the translated sequences were clustered with myb sequences that are known to be involved in cell shape development and from these, dhmyb <dig> was selected for full length cdna cloning and functional study. direct application of a 430 bp dsrna from the 3’ region of dhmyb <dig> to emerging orchid flower buds reduced expression of dhmyb <dig> rna compared with untreated control. scanning electron microscopy of adaxial epidermal cells within domain one of the labellum of flowers treated with dhmyb <dig> dsrna showed flattened epidermal cells whilst those of control flowers were conical.


CONCLUSIONS
dhmyb <dig> is expressed throughout flower bud development and is involved in the development of the conical cell shape of the epidermal cells of the dendrobium hybrida flower labellum. the direct application of dsrna changed the phenotype of floral cells, thus, this technique may have application in floriculture biotechnology.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cell morphogenesisrna interferencerna silencingbiotechnologygene silencingepidermal cellissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

