BACKGROUND
many popular dengue forecasting techniques have been used by several researchers to extrapolate dengue incidence rates, including the k-h model, support vector machines , and artificial neural networks . the time series analysis methodology, particularly arima and sarima, has been increasingly applied to the field of epidemiological research for dengue fever, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and other infectious diseases. the main drawback of these methods is that they do not consider other variables that are associated with the dependent variable. additionally, new factors correlated to the disease are needed to enhance the prediction accuracy of the model when it is applied to areas of similar climates, where weather factors such as temperature, total rainfall, and humidity are not substantially different. such drawbacks may consequently lower the predictive power for the outbreak.


RESULTS
the predictive power of the forecasting model-assessed by akaike’s information criterion , bayesian information criterion , and the mean absolute percentage error -is improved by including the new parameters for dengue outbreak prediction. this study’s selected model outperforms all three other competing models with the lowest aic, the lowest bic, and a small mape value. the exclusive use of climate factors from similar locations decreases a model’s prediction power. the multivariate poisson regression, however, effectively forecasts even when climate variables are slightly different. female mosquitoes and seasons were strongly correlated with dengue cases. therefore, the dengue incidence trends provided by this model will assist the optimization of dengue prevention.


CONCLUSIONS
the present work demonstrates the important roles of female mosquito infection rates from the previous season and climate factors  in dengue outbreaks. incorporating these two factors in the model significantly improves the predictive power of dengue hemorrhagic fever forecasting models, as confirmed by aic, bic, and mape.

keywords
dengue hemorrhagic feverforecasting modelprediction modelmultivariate poisson regressionclimate factor analysisthe national research council thailandphor khor/2555-125kesorn kraisak the national science and technology development agency , for a research chair grantissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

