BACKGROUND
cotton, one of the world’s leading crops, is important to the world’s textile and energy industries, and is a model species for studies of plant polyploidization, cellulose biosynthesis and cell wall biogenesis. here, we report the construction of a plant-transformation-competent binary bacterial artificial chromosome  library and comparative genome sequence analysis of polyploid upland cotton  with one of its diploid putative progenitor species, g. raimondii ulbr.


RESULTS
we constructed the cotton bibac library in a vector competent for high-molecular-weight dna transformation in different plant species through either agrobacterium or particle bombardment. the library contains  <dig>  clones with an average insert size of 135 kb, providing an approximate 99% probability of obtaining at least one positive clone from the library using a single-copy probe. the quality and utility of the library were verified by identifying bibacs containing genes important for fiber development, fiber cellulose biosynthesis, seed fatty acid metabolism, cotton-nematode interaction, and bacterial blight resistance. in order to gain an insight into the upland cotton genome and its relationship with g. raimondii, we sequenced nearly  <dig>  bibac ends  randomly selected from the library, generating approximately one bes for every 250 kb along the upland cotton genome. the retroelement gypsy/dirs <dig> family predominates in the upland cotton genome, accounting for over 77% of all transposable elements. from the bess, we identified  <dig>  simple sequence repeats , of which  <dig>  were new, thus providing additional markers for cotton genome research. surprisingly, comparative sequence analysis showed that upland cotton is much more diverged from g. raimondii at the genomic sequence level than expected. there seems to be no significant difference between the relationships of the upland cotton d- and a-subgenomes with the g. raimondii genome, even though g. raimondii contains a d genome .


CONCLUSIONS
the library represents the first bibac library in cotton and related species, thus providing tools useful for integrative physical mapping, large-scale genome sequencing and large-scale functional analysis of the upland cotton genome. comparative sequence analysis provides insights into the upland cotton genome, and a possible mechanism underlying the divergence and evolution of polyploid upland cotton from its diploid putative progenitor species, g. raimondii.

bibac librarygossypium hirsutumgossypium raimondiibibac end sequence genome evolutionssrpolyploidization and evolution

