BACKGROUND
solanum torvum sw is worldwide employed as rootstock for eggplant cultivation because of its vigour and resistance/tolerance to the most serious soil-borne diseases as bacterial, fungal wilts and root-knot nematodes. the little information on solanum torvum  resistance mechanisms, is mostly attributable to the lack of genomic tools  as well as to the paucity of database information limiting high-throughput expression studies in torvum.


RESULTS
as a first step towards transcriptome profiling of torvum inoculated with the nematode m. incognita, we built a torvum 3’ transcript catalogue. one-quarter of a  <dig> full run resulted in  <dig>  quality-filtered reads. de novo assembly yielded  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons. similarity searches of the s. torvum transcript tags catalogue produced  <dig>  annotations. a  <dig>  features custom combimatrix chip was then designed and microarray hybridizations were conducted for both control and  <dig> dpi  with meloidogyne incognita-infected roots samples resulting in  <dig> differentially expressed genes . we also tested the chip with samples from the phylogenetically-related nematode-susceptible eggplant species solanum melongena. an in-silico validation strategy was developed based on assessment of sequence similarity among torvum probes and eggplant expressed sequences available in public repositories. go term enrichment analyses with the  <dig> torvum deg revealed enhancement of several processes as chitin catabolism and sesquiterpenoids biosynthesis, while no go term enrichment was found with eggplant deg.

the genes identified from s. torvum catalogue, bearing high similarity to known nematode resistance genes, were further investigated in view of their potential role in the nematode resistance mechanism.


CONCLUSIONS
by combining  <dig> pyrosequencing and microarray technology we were able to conduct a cost-effective global transcriptome profiling in a non-model species. in addition, the development of an in silico validation strategy allowed to further extend the use of the custom chip to a related species and to assess by comparison the expression of selected genes without major concerns of artifacts. the expression profiling of s. torvum responses to nematode infection points to sesquiterpenoids and chitinases as major effectors of nematode resistance. the availability of the long sequence tags in s. torvum catalogue will allow precise identification of active nematocide/nematostatic compounds and associated enzymes posing the basis for exploitation of these resistance mechanisms in other species.

torvumnematode resistance <dig> pyrosequencingmicroarrayheterologous hybridizations

