BACKGROUND
a critical aspect of plant infection by the majority of pathogens is penetration of the plant cell wall. this process requires the production and secretion of a broad spectrum of pathogen enzymes that target and degrade the many complex polysaccharides in the plant cell wall. as a necessary framework for a study of the expression of cell wall degrading enzymes  produced by the broad host range phytopathogen, phytophthora parasitica, we have conducted an in-depth bioinformatics analysis of the entire complement of genes encoding cwdes in this pathogen’s genome.


RESULTS
our bioinformatic analysis indicates that  <dig>  of the  <dig>  predicted proteins encoded by the p. parasitica genome, are carbohydrate-active enzymes  involved in the degradation of cell wall polysaccharides. of the  <dig> proteins,  <dig> contain classical n-terminal secretion signals and  <dig> are predicted to be targeted to the non-classical secretion pathway. identification of cazyme catalytic activity based on primary protein sequence is difficult, nevertheless, detailed comparisons with previously characterized enzymes has allowed us to determine likely enzyme activities and targeted substrates for many of the p. parasitica cwdes. some proteins  contain more than one cazyme module but, in most cases, multiple modules are from the same cazyme family. only  <dig> p. parasitica cwdes contain both catalytically-active  and non-catalytic  modules, a situation that contrasts with that in fungal phytopathogens. other striking differences between the complements of cwdes in p. parasitica and fungal phytopathogens are seen in the cazyme families that target cellulose, pectins or β- <dig> -glucans . about 25% of p. parasitica cazymes are solely directed towards pectin degradation, with the majority coming from pectin lyase or carbohydrate esterase families. fungal phytopathogens typically contain less than half the numbers of these cazymes. the p. parasitica genome, like that of other oomycetes, is rich in cazymes that target β- <dig> -glucans.


CONCLUSIONS
this detailed analysis of the full complement of p. parasitica cell wall degrading enzymes provides a framework for an in-depth study of patterns of expression of these pathogen genes during plant infection and the induction or repression of expression by selected substrates.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cazymescarbohydrate binding modulecarbohydrate esterasecell wall degrading enzymesglycoside hydrolasepolysaccharide lyasephytophthora parasitica genomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

