BACKGROUND
cytokine flow cytometry  or intracellular cytokine staining  can quantitate antigen-specific t cell responses in settings such as experimental vaccination. standardization of ics among laboratories performing vaccine studies would provide a common platform by which to compare the immunogenicity of different vaccine candidates across multiple international organizations conducting clinical trials. as such, a study was carried out among several laboratories involved in hiv clinical trials, to define the inter-lab precision of ics using various sample types, and using a common protocol for each experiment .


RESULTS
three sample types  were shipped to various sites, where ics assays using cytomegalovirus  pp <dig> peptide mix or control antigens were performed in parallel in 96-well plates. for one experiment, antigens and antibody cocktails were lyophilised into 96-well plates to simplify and standardize the assay setup. results  were determined by each site. raw data were also sent to a central site for batch analysis with a dynamic gating template.

mean inter-laboratory coefficient of variation  ranged from 17–44% depending upon the sample type and analysis method. cryopreserved peripheral blood mononuclear cells  yielded lower inter-lab c.v.'s than whole blood. centralized analysis  reduced the inter-lab c.v. by 5–20%, depending upon the experiment. the inter-lab c.v. was lowest  for samples with a mean of > <dig> % ifnγ + t cells, and highest  for samples with a mean of < <dig> % ifnγ + cells.


CONCLUSIONS
ics assays can be performed by multiple laboratories using a common protocol with good inter-laboratory precision, which improves as the frequency of responding cells increases. cryopreserved pbmc may yield slightly more consistent results than shipped whole blood. analysis, particularly gating, is a significant source of variability, and can be reduced by centralized analysis and/or use of a standardized dynamic gating template. use of pre-aliquoted lyophilized reagents for stimulation and staining can provide further standardization to these assays.

