BACKGROUND
anaerobic digestion is a biological process in which a consortium of microorganisms transforms a complex substrate into methane and carbon dioxide. a good understanding of the interactions between the populations that form this consortium can contribute to a successful anaerobic digestion of the substrate.

in this study we combine the analysis of the biogas production in a laboratory anaerobic digester fed with the microalgae spirulina, a protein rich substrate, with the analysis of the metagenome of the consortium responsible for digestion, obtained by high-throughput dna sequencing. the obtained metagenome was also compared with a metagenome from a full scale biogas plant fed with cellulose rich material.


RESULTS
the optimal organic loading rate for the anaerobic digestion of spirulina was determined to be  <dig>  g spirulina l− <dig> day− <dig> with a specific biogas production of 350 ml biogas g spirulina− <dig> with a methane content of 68 %.

firmicutes dominated the microbial consortium at 38 % abundance followed by bacteroidetes, chloroflexi and thermotogae. euryarchaeota represented  <dig>  % of the total abundance. the most abundant organism  was related to tissierella, a bacterium known to use proteinaceous substrates for growth. methanomicrobiales and methanosarcinales dominated the archaeal community. compared to the full scale cellulose-fed digesters, pfam domains related to protein degradation were more frequently detected and pfam domains related to cellulose degradation were less frequent in our sample.


CONCLUSIONS
the results presented in this study suggest that spirulina is a suitable substrate for the production of biogas. the proteinaceous substrate appeared to have a selective impact on the bacterial community that performed anaerobic digestion. a direct influence of the substrate on the selection of specific methanogenic populations was not observed.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
metagenomemetagenome comparisonspirulinabiogasbinningmicrobial communityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

