BACKGROUND
bone morphogenetic protein  signalling has emerged as a fundamental pathway in endothelial cell biology and deregulation of this pathway is implicated in several vascular disorders. bmp signalling output in endothelial cells is highly context- and dose-dependent. phosphorylation of the bmp intracellular effectors, smad1/5/ <dig>  is routinely used to monitor bmp signalling activity. to better understand the in vivo context-dependency of bmp-smad signalling, we investigated differences in bmp-smad transcriptional activity in different vascular beds during mouse embryonic and postnatal stages. for this, we used the bre::gfp bmp signalling reporter mouse in which the bmp response element  from the id1-promotor, a smad1/5/ <dig> target gene, drives the expression of gfp.


RESULTS
a mosaic pattern of gfp was present in various angiogenic sprouting plexuses and in endocardium of cardiac cushions and trabeculae in the heart. high calibre veins seemed to be more bre::gfp transcriptionally active than arteries, and ubiquitous activity was present in embryonic lymphatic vasculature. postnatal lymphatic vessels showed however only discrete micro-domains of transcriptional activity. dynamic shifts in transcriptional activity were also observed in the endocardium of the developing heart, with a general decrease in activity over time. surprisingly, proliferative endothelial cells were almost never gfp-positive. patches of transcriptional activity seemed to correlate with vasculature undergoing hemodynamic alterations.


CONCLUSIONS
the bre::gfp mouse allows to investigate selective context-dependent aspects of bmp-smad signalling. our data reveals the highly dynamic nature of bmp-smad mediated transcriptional regulation in time and space throughout the vascular tree, supporting that bmp-smad signalling can be a source of phenotypic diversity in some, but not all, healthy endothelium. this knowledge can provide insight in vascular bed or organ-specific diseases and phenotypic heterogeneity within an endothelial cell population.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bmp-smad signallingsprouting angiogenesisvalve developmentlymphangiogenesisendocardiumphenotype switchingheterogeneityretinastochastic expressionmorphogeniwtsb 111224beets karen fwo26334g0542n13criem nathan zwijsen an interuniversity attraction poles program vii/07zwijsen an onderzoeksraad, ku leuven goa11/012zwijsen an hercules foundationinframouse zw09-03zwijsen an http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004040ku leuvenvib issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

