BACKGROUND
visceral white adipose tissue  hypertrophy, adipokine production, inflammation and fibrosis are strongly associated with obesity, but the time-course of these changes in-vivo are not fully understood. therefore, the aim of this study was to establish the time-course of changes in adipocyte morphology, adipokines and the global transcriptional landscape in visceral wat during the development of diet-induced obesity.


RESULTS
c57bl/6 j mice were fed a high-fat diet  or normal diet  and sacrificed at  <dig> time-points over 24 weeks. excessive fat accumulation was evident in visceral wat depots  after 2–4 weeks. fibrillar collagen accumulation was evident in epidydimal adipocytes at 24 weeks. plasma adipokines, leptin, resistin and adipsin, increased early and time-dependently, while adiponectin decreased late after 20 weeks. only plasma leptin and adiponectin levels were associated with their respective mrna levels in visceral wat. time-course microarrays revealed early and sustained activation of the immune transcriptome in epididymal and mesenteric depots. up-regulated inflammatory genes included pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines  and their upstream signalling pathway genes . early changes also occurred in fibrosis, extracellular matrix, collagen and cathepsin related-genes, but histological fibrosis was only visible in the later stages.


CONCLUSIONS
in diet-induced obesity, early activation of tlr-mediated inflammatory signalling cascades by cd antigen genes, leads to increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, resulting in chronic low-grade inflammation. early changes in collagen genes may trigger the accumulation of ecm components, promoting fibrosis in the later stages of diet-induced obesity. new therapeutic approaches targeting visceral adipose tissue genes altered early by hfd feeding may help ameliorate the deleterious effects of diet-induced obesity.

adipocytokine dysregulationtranscriptional responseadipose tissueextracellular matrixcathepsinfibrosis

