BACKGROUND
the identification of inversions of dna segments shorter than read length , defined as micro-inversions , remains challenging for next-generation sequencing reads. it is acknowledged that mis are important genomic variation and may play roles in causing genetic disease. however, current alignment methods are generally insensitive to detect mis. here we develop a novel tool, mid , to identify mis in human genomes using next-generation sequencing reads.


RESULTS
the algorithm of mid is designed based on a dynamic programming path-finding approach. what makes mid different from other variant detection tools is that mid can handle small mis and multiple breakpoints within an unmapped read. moreover, mid improves reliability in low coverage data by integrating multiple samples. our evaluation demonstrated that mid outperforms gustaf, which can currently detect inversions from 30 bp to 500 bp.


CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, mid is the first method that can efficiently and reliably identify mis from unmapped short next-generation sequencing reads. mid is reliable on low coverage data, which is suitable for large-scale projects such as the  <dig> genomes project . mid identified previously unknown mis from the 1kgp that overlap with genes and regulatory elements in the human genome. we also identified mis in cancer cell lines from cancer cell line encyclopedia . therefore our tool is expected to be useful to improve the study of mis as a type of genetic variant in the human genome. the source code can be downloaded from: http://cqb.pku.edu.cn/zhulab/mid.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keyword
micro-inversionnext-generation sequencingstructural variationthe fourteenth asia pacific bioinformatics conference  apbc 2016san francisco, ca, usa  <dig> -  <dig> january  <dig> http://www.sfasa.org/apbc2016/apbc <dig> htmlissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

