BACKGROUND
medetomidine-ketamine  and dexmedetomidine-ketamine  are widely used to provide general anaesthesia in laboratory animals, but have not been compared directly in many of these species, including rodents. this study aimed to compare the onset and depth of anaesthesia, and changes in vital signs, after intraperitoneal  or subcutaneous  administration of ketamine  combined with medetomidine  or dexmedetomidine  using a randomised semi-crossover design with ≥  <dig> hours between treatments in  <dig> male and  <dig> female mice. each mouse was anaesthetised twice using the same administration route : once with each drug-ketamine combination. anaesthetised mice were monitored on a heating pad without supplemental oxygen for  <dig> minutes; atipamezole was administered for reversal. the times that the righting reflex was lost post-injection and returned post-reversal were analysed using general linear models. tail-pinch and pedal reflexes were examined using binomial generalized linear models. pulse rate , respiratory rate , and arterial haemoglobin saturation  were compared using generalized additive mixed models.


RESULTS
there were no significant differences among treatments for the times taken for loss and return of the righting reflex, or response of the tail-pinch reflex. the pedal withdrawal reflex was abolished more frequently with mk than dk over time . the response of pr and spo <dig> were similar among treatments, but fr was significantly higher with mk than dk . markedly low spo <dig> concentrations occurred within  <dig> minutes post-injection  in all treatment groups and were most severe after  <dig> minutes lapsed . no statistical differences were detected in regards to administration route .


CONCLUSIONS
this study failed to demonstrate clinical advantages of the enantiomer dexmedetomidine over medetomidine when combined with ketamine to produce general anaesthesia in mice. at the doses administered, deep surgical anaesthesia was not consistently produced with either combination; therefore, anaesthetic depth must be assessed before performing surgical procedures. supplemental oxygen should always be provided during anaesthesia to prevent hypoxaemia.

alpha- <dig> agonistsdexmedetomidinedrug administration routegeneral anaesthesiahypoxaemiaketaminemousemedetomidinesubcutaneous injectionsupplemental oxygen

