BACKGROUND
as a complex system, the brain is a self-organizing entity that depends on local interactions among cells. its regions  can be conceptualized as cellular ecosystems, but the similarity of their functional profiles is poorly understood. the study used the allen human brain atlas to classify  <dig> brain regions into hierarchically-organized environments based on their expression of  <dig> g protein-coupled neurotransmitter receptors, with no a priori reference to the regions’ positions in the brain’s anatomy or function. the analysis was based on hierarchical clustering, and multiscale bootstrap resampling was used to estimate the reliability of detected clusters.


RESULTS
the study presents the first unbiased, hierarchical tree of functional environments in the human brain. the similarity of brain regions was strongly influenced by their anatomical proximity, even when they belonged to different functional systems. generally, spatial vicinity trumped long-range projections or network connectivity. the main cluster of brain regions excluded the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. the nuclei of the amygdala formed a cluster irrespective of their striatal or pallial origin. in its receptor profile, the hypothalamus was more closely associated with the midbrain than with the thalamus. the cerebellar cortical areas formed a tight and exclusive cluster. most of the neocortical areas  clustered in a large, statistically well supported group that included no other brain regions.


CONCLUSIONS
this study adds a new dimension to the established classifications of brain divisions. in a single framework, they are reconsidered at multiple scales—from individual nuclei and areas to their groups to the entire brain. the analysis provides support for predictive models of brain self-organization and adaptation.

keywords
neural networksecosystemsneurotransmitter receptorsforebrainmidbrainhindbrainpalliumcerebral cortexhierarchical clusteringmultiscale bootstrap resamplingucsb academic senate research grantsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

