BACKGROUND
capping protein , also known as capz in muscle cells and cap32/ <dig> in dictyostelium discoideum, plays a major role in regulating actin filament dynamics. cp is a ubiquitously expressed heterodimer comprising an α- and β-subunit. it tightly binds to the fast growing end of actin filaments, thereby functioning as a “cap” by blocking the addition and loss of actin subunits. vertebrates contain two somatic variants of cp, one being primarily found at the cell periphery of non-muscle tissues while the other is mainly localized at the z-discs of skeletal muscles.


RESULTS
to elucidate structural and functional differences between cytoplasmic and sarcomercic cp variants, we have solved the atomic structure of cap32/ <dig>  from the cellular slime mold dictyostelium at  <dig>  Å resolution and compared it to that of chicken muscle capz. the two homologs display a similar overall arrangement including the attached α-subunit c-terminus  and the flexible β-tentacle. nevertheless, the structures exhibit marked differences suggesting considerable structural flexibility within the α-subunit. in the α-subunit we observed a bending motion of the β-sheet region located opposite to the position of the c-terminal β-tentacle towards the antiparallel helices that interconnect the heterodimer. recently, a two domain twisting attributed mainly to the β-subunit has been reported. at the hinge of these two domains cap32/ <dig> contains an elongated and highly flexible loop, which has been reported to be important for the interaction of cytoplasmic cp with actin and might contribute to the more dynamic actin-binding of cytoplasmic compared to sarcomeric cp .


CONCLUSIONS
the structure of cap32/ <dig> from dictyostelium discoideum allowed a detailed analysis and comparison between the cytoplasmic and sarcomeric variants of cp. significant structural flexibility could particularly be found within the α-subunit, a loop region in the β-subunit, and the surface of the α-globule where the amino acid differences between the cytoplasmic and sarcomeric mammalian cp are located. hence, the crystal structure of cap32/ <dig> raises the possibility of different binding behaviours of the cp variants toward the barbed end of actin filaments, a feature, which might have arisen from adaptation to different environments.

capping proteinactin-bindingdictyostelium discoideumstructural flexibilitycap32/34capz

