BACKGROUND
the insulin signalling pathway  is an important biochemical pathway, which regulates some fundamental biological functions such as glucose and lipid metabolism, protein synthesis, cell proliferation, cell differentiation and apoptosis. in the last years, different mathematical models based on ordinary differential equations have been proposed in the literature to describe specific features of the isp, thus providing a description of the behaviour of the system and its emerging properties. however, protein-protein interactions potentially generate a multiplicity of distinct chemical species, an issue referred to as “combinatorial complexity”, which results in defining a high number of state variables equal to the number of possible protein modifications. this often leads to complex, error prone and difficult to handle model definitions.


RESULTS
in this work, we present a comprehensive model of the isp, which integrates three models previously available in the literature by using the rule-based modelling  approach. rbm allows for a simple description of a number of signalling pathway characteristics, such as the phosphorylation of signalling proteins at multiple sites with different effects, the simultaneous interaction of many molecules of the signalling pathways with several binding partners, and the information about subcellular localization where reactions take place. thanks to its modularity, it also allows an easy integration of different pathways.

after rbm specification, we simulated the dynamic behaviour of the isp model and validated it using experimental data. we the examined the predicted profiles of all the active species and clustered them in four clusters according to their dynamic behaviour. finally, we used parametric sensitivity analysis to show the role of negative feedback loops in controlling the robustness of the system.


CONCLUSIONS
the presented isp model is a powerful tool for data simulation and can be used in combination with experimental approaches to guide the experimental design. the model is available at http://sysbiobig.dei.unipd.it/ was submitted to biomodels database .

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
insulin signalling pathwayrule-based modellingparametric sensitivity analysissystem robustnesscariparo 2008– <dig> “systems biology approaches to infer gene regulation from gene and protein time series data”issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

