BACKGROUND
tomato  self-compatibility  is defined as self-pollen tubes that can penetrate their own stigma, elongate in the style and fertilize their own ovules. self-incompatibility  is defined as self-pollen tubes that are prevented from developing in the style. to determine the influence of gene expression on style self-pollination, a transcriptome-wide comparative analysis of sc and si tomato unpollinated/pollinated styles was performed using rna-sequencing  data.


RESULTS
transcriptome profiles of 24-h unpollination  and self-pollination  styles from sc and si tomato species were generated using high-throughput next generation sequencing. from the comparison of sc self-pollinated and unpollinated styles,  <dig> differentially expressed genes  were identified, of which  <dig> were downregulated and  <dig> were upregulated. from the comparison of si self-pollinated and unpollinated styles,  <dig> degs were identified, of which  <dig> were downregulated and  <dig> were upregulated. nine gene ontology  terms were enriched significantly in sc and  <dig> go terms were enriched significantly in si. a total of  <dig> enriched kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways were identified in sc and  <dig> enriched kegg pathways were identified in si, among which “cysteine and methionine metabolism pathway” and “plant hormone signal transduction pathway” were significantly enriched in si.


CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first global transcriptome-wide comparative analysis of sc and si tomato unpollinated/pollinated styles. advanced bioinformatic analysis of degs uncovered the pathways of “cysteine and methionine metabolism” and “plant hormone signal transduction”, which are likely to play important roles in the control of pollen tubes growth in si species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tomatoself-incompatibilityself-compatibilitystyletranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

