BACKGROUND
hepatitis c virus  is a rapidly evolving rna virus that has been classified into seven genotypes. all hcv genotypes cause chronic hepatitis, which ultimately leads to liver diseases such as cirrhosis. the genotypes are unevenly distributed across the globe, with genotypes  <dig> and  <dig> being the most prevalent. until recently, molecular epidemiological studies of hcv evolution within the host and at the population level have been limited to the analyses of partial viral genome segments, as it has been technically challenging to amplify and sequence the full-length of the  <dig>  kb hcv genome. although recent improvements have been made in full genome sequencing methodologies, these protocols are still either limited to a specific genotype or cost-inefficient.


RESULTS
in this study we describe a genotype-specific protocol for the amplification and sequencing of the near-full length genome of all six major hcv genotypes. we applied this protocol to  <dig> hcv positive clinical samples, and had a successful genome amplification rate of 90 %, when the viral load was greater than  <dig>  iu/ml. the assay was shown to have a detection limit of 1– <dig> cdna copies per reaction. the method was tested with both illumina and pacbio single molecule, real-time  sequencing technologies. illumina sequencing resulted in deep coverage and allowed detection of rare variants as well as hcv co-infection with multiple genotypes. the application of the method with pacbio rs resulted in sequence reads greater than 9 kb that covered the near full-length hcv amplicon in a single read and enabled analysis of the near full-length quasispecies.


CONCLUSIONS
the protocol described herein can be utilised for rapid amplification and sequencing of the near-full length hcv genome in a cost efficient manner suitable for a wide range of applications.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000925national health and medical research council1042090rg1084706rg121994bull rowena a. lloyd andrew r. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

