BACKGROUND
activation of naïve b lymphocytes by extracellular ligands, e.g. antigen, lipopolysaccharide  and cd <dig> ligand, induces a combination of common and ligand-specific phenotypic changes through complex signal transduction pathways. for example, although all three of these ligands induce proliferation, only stimulation through the b cell antigen receptor  induces apoptosis in resting splenic b cells. in order to define the common and unique biological responses to ligand stimulation, we compared the gene expression changes induced in normal primary b cells by a panel of ligands using cdna microarrays and a statistical approach, classifi , which identifies significant co-clustering of genes with similar gene ontology™ annotation.


RESULTS
classifi analysis revealed an overrepresentation of genes involved in ion and vesicle transport, including multiple components of the proton pump, in the bcr-specific gene cluster, suggesting that activation of antigen processing and presentation pathways is a major biological response to antigen receptor stimulation. proton pump components that were not included in the initial microarray data set were also upregulated in response to bcr stimulation in follow up experiments. mhc class ii expression was found to be maintained specifically in response to bcr stimulation. furthermore, ligand-specific internalization of the bcr, a first step in b cell antigen processing and presentation, was demonstrated.


CONCLUSIONS
these observations provide experimental validation of the computational approach implemented in classifi, demonstrating that classifi-based gene expression cluster analysis is an effective data mining tool to identify biological processes that correlate with the experimental conditional variables. furthermore, this analysis has identified at least thirty-eight candidate components of the b cell antigen processing and presentation pathway and sets the stage for future studies focused on a better understanding of the components involved in and unique to b cell antigen processing and presentation.

