BACKGROUND
freshwater harbors approximately  <dig>  fish species accounting for 43% of the diversity of all modern fish. a single ancestral lineage evolved into about two-thirds of this enormous biodiversity  and is currently distributed throughout the world's continents except antarctica. despite such remarkable species diversity and ubiquity, the evolutionary history of this major freshwater fish clade, otophysi, remains largely unexplored. to gain insight into the history of otophysan diversification, we constructed a timetree based on whole mitogenome sequences across  <dig> species representing  <dig> of the  <dig> families.


RESULTS
partitioned maximum likelihood analysis based on unambiguously aligned sequences  confidently recovered the monophyly of otophysi and the two constituent subgroups . the latter clade comprised three orders , and gymnotiformes was sister to the latter two groups. one of the two suborders in characiformes  was more closely related to siluriformes than to its own suborder , rendering the characiforms paraphyletic. although this novel relationship did not receive strong statistical support, it was supported by analyzing independent nuclear markers. a relaxed molecular clock bayesian analysis of the divergence times and reconstruction of ancestral habitats on the timetree suggest a pangaean origin and mesozoic radiation of otophysans.


CONCLUSIONS
the present timetree demonstrates that survival of the ancestral lineages through the two consecutive mass extinctions on pangaea, and subsequent radiations during the jurassic through early cretaceous shaped the modern familial diversity of otophysans. this evolutionary scenario is consistent with recent arguments based on biogeographic inferences and molecular divergence time estimates. no fossil otophysan, however, has been recorded before the albian, the early cretaceous 100- <dig> ma, creating an over  <dig> million year time span without fossil evidence. this formidable ghost range partially reflects a genuine difference between the estimated ages of stem group origin  and crown group morphological diversification ; the ghost range, however, would be filled with discoveries of older fossils that can be used as more reasonable time constraints as well as with developments of more realistic models that capture the rates of molecular sequences accurately.

