BACKGROUND
the skin commensal and opportunistic pathogen staphylococcus epidermidis is a leading cause of hospital-acquired and biomaterial-associated infections. the polysaccharide intercellular adhesin , a homoglycan composed of β- <dig> -linked n-acetylglucosamine residues, synthesized by enzymes encoded in icaadbc is a major functional factor in biofilm accumulation, promoting virulence in experimental biomaterial-associated s. epidermidis infection. extracellular mucous layer extracts of s. epidermidis contain another major polysaccharide, referred to as 20-kda polysaccharide , composed mainly out of glucose, n-acetylglucosamine, and being partially sulfated. 20-kdaps antiserum prevents adhesion of s. epidermidis on endothelial cells and development of experimental keratitis in rabbits. here we provide experimental evidence that 20-kdaps and pia represent distinct molecules and that 20-kdaps is implicated in endocytosis of s. epidermidis bacterial cells by human monocyte-derived macrophages.


RESULTS
analysis of  <dig> clinical coagulase-negative staphylococci from blood-cultures and central venous catheter tips indicated that 20-kdaps is expressed exclusively in s. epidermidis but not in other coagulase-negative staphylococcal species. tn917-insertion in various locations in icaadbc in mutants m <dig>  m <dig>  m <dig>  and m <dig> of s. epidermidis  <dig> are abolished for pia synthesis, while 20-kdaps expression appears unaltered as compared to wild-type strains using specific anti-pia and anti-20-kdaps antisera. while periodate oxidation and dispersin b treatments abolish immuno-reactivity and intercellular adhesive properties of pia, no abrogative activity is exerted towards 20-kdaps immunochemical reactivity following these treatments. pia polysaccharide i-containing fractions eluting from q-sepharose were devoid of detectable 20-kdaps using specific elisa. preincubation of non-20-kdaps-producing clinical strain with increasing amounts of 20-kdaps inhibits endocytosis by human macrophages, whereas, preincubation of 20-kdaps-producing strain atcc <dig> with 20-kdaps antiserum enhances bacterial endocytosis by human macrophages.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, icaadbc is not involved in 20-kdaps synthesis, while the chemical and chromatographic properties of pia and 20-kdaps are distinct. 20-kdaps exhibits anti-phagocytic properties, whereas, 20-kdaps antiserum may have a beneficial effect on combating infection by 20-kdaps-producing s. epidermidis.

