BACKGROUND
over the course of its intraerythrocytic developmental cycle , the malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum tightly orchestrates the rise and fall of transcript levels for hundreds of genes. considerable debate has focused on the relative importance of transcriptional versus post-transcriptional processes in the regulation of transcript levels. enzymatically active forms of rnapii in other organisms have been associated with phosphorylation on the serines at positions  <dig> and  <dig> of the heptad repeats within the c-terminal domain  of rnapii. we reasoned that insight into the contribution of transcriptional mechanisms to gene expression in p. falciparum could be obtained by comparing the presence of enzymatically active forms of rnapii at multiple genes with the abundance of their associated transcripts.


RESULTS
we exploited the phosphorylation state of the ctd to detect enzymatically active forms of rnapii at most p. falciparum genes across the idc. we raised highly specific monoclonal antibodies against three forms of the parasite ctd, namely unphosphorylated, ser5-p and ser2/5-p, and used these in chip-on-chip type experiments to map the genome-wide occupancy of rnapii. our data reveal that the idc is divided into early and late phases of rnapii occupancy evident from simple bi-phasic rnapii binding profiles. by comparison to mrna abundance, we identified sub-sets of genes with high occupancy by enzymatically active forms of rnapii and relatively low transcript levels and vice versa. we further show that the presence of active and repressive histone modifications correlates with rnapii occupancy over the idc.


CONCLUSIONS
the simple early/late occupancy by rnapii cannot account for the complex dynamics of mrna accumulation over the idc, suggesting a major role for mechanisms acting downstream of rnapii occupancy in the control of gene expression in this parasite.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

