BACKGROUND
protein-protein interactions  play crucial roles in the execution of various cellular processes and form the basis of biological mechanisms. although large amount of ppis data for different species has been generated by high-throughput experimental techniques, current ppi pairs obtained with experimental methods cover only a fraction of the complete ppi networks, and further, the experimental methods for identifying ppis are both time-consuming and expensive. hence, it is urgent and challenging to develop automated computational methods to efficiently and accurately predict ppis.


RESULTS
we present here a novel hierarchical pca-eelm  model to predict protein-protein interactions only using the information of protein sequences. in the proposed method,  <dig> protein pairs retrieved from the dip database were encoded into feature vectors by using four kinds of protein sequences information. focusing on dimension reduction, an effective feature extraction method pca was then employed to construct the most discriminative new feature set. finally, multiple extreme learning machines were trained and then aggregated into a consensus classifier by majority voting. the ensembling of extreme learning machine removes the dependence of results on initial random weights and improves the prediction performance.


CONCLUSIONS
when performed on the ppi data of saccharomyces cerevisiae, the proposed method achieved  <dig> % prediction accuracy with  <dig> % sensitivity at the precision of  <dig> %. extensive experiments are performed to compare our method with state-of-the-art techniques support vector machine . experimental results demonstrate that proposed pca-eelm outperforms the svm method by 5-fold cross-validation. besides, pca-eelm performs faster than pca-svm based method. consequently, the proposed approach can be considered as a new promising and powerful tools for predicting ppi with excellent performance and less time.

25- <dig> july  <dig> the  <dig> international conference on intelligent computing  huangshan, china

