BACKGROUND
visfatin is an adipokine associated with glucose and lipid metabolism. we previously reported two visfatin upstream single nucleotide polymorphisms , c.-3187g > a  and c.-1537c > t , which were in perfect linkage disequilibrium, in a singaporean cohort of severely obese children and are associated with visfatin level and adverse cardiometabolic parameters. we aim to functionally characterize the effect of c.-3187g > a and c.-1537c > t snps on basal transcriptional activity.

methods
a  <dig>  kb and  <dig>  kb upstream promoter region of the visfatin gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and separately cloned into luciferase reporter vectors. successful clones were transfected into human embryonic kidney  and human breast carcinoma  cells and in-vitro dual-luciferase assay was performed. ﻿electrophoretic mobility shift assay  was also conducted to examine the binding affinity between transcription factors and visfatin promoter sequences.


RESULTS
variant promoter with only c.-1537c > t snp did not show a change in transcriptional activity as compared to the wild type. however, variant promoter with both c.-3187g > a and c.-1537c > t snps showed a statistically significant increase of  <dig>  fold  in transcriptional activity. the longer  <dig> kbp visfatin promoter sequence was also shown to have significantly higher transcriptional activity  as compared to the shorter  <dig> kbp visfatin promoter. both c.-3187g > a and c.-1537c > t variants showed an increased binding with nuclear protein.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated for the first time that visfatin variant promoter with both c.-3187g > a and c.-1537c > t snps result in an increase in transcriptional activity. this supports our previous finding and postulation that these snps contribute to elevated visfatin levels which may mediate higher triglyceride levels, severe systolic blood pressure and severe hypertension in obese children. these snps may co-operatively affect enhancer or silencer function to regulate transcriptional activity. in conclusion, this study shows that upstream visfatin snps could potentially affect phenotypic outcome in obese children through alteration of circulating visfatin level.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
childhood obesityvisfatin promoterluciferase assaypolymorphismsvariantssingapore paediatric society research grant 2013http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001355singapore institute for clinical sciencesc8019lee yung seng issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

