BACKGROUND
variations in floral display represent one of the core features associated with the transition from allogamy to autogamy in angiosperms. the promotion of autogamy under stress conditions suggests the potential involvement of a signaling pathway with a dual role in both flower development and stress response. the jasmonic acid  pathway is a plausible candidate to play such a role because of its involvement in many plant responses to environmental and developmental cues. in the present study, we used peach  varieties with showy and non-showy flowers to investigate the role of ja  in floral display.


RESULTS
our results show that ppjaz <dig>  a component of the ja signaling pathway in peach, regulates petal expansion during anthesis and promotes self-pollination. ppjaz <dig> transcript levels were higher in petals of the non-showy flowers than those of showy flowers at anthesis. moreover, the ectopic expression of ppjaz <dig> in tobacco  converted the showy, chasmogamous tobacco flowers into non-showy, cleistogamous flowers. stability of ppjaz <dig> was confirmed in vivo using ppjaz1-gfp chimeric protein. ppjaz <dig> inhibited ja-dependent processes in roots and leaves of transgenic plants, including induction of ja-response genes to mechanical wounding. however, the inhibitory effect of ppjaz <dig> on ja-dependent fertility functions was weaker, indicating that ppjaz <dig> regulates the spatial localization of ja signaling in different plant organs. indeed, ja-related genes showed differential expression patterns in leaves and flowers of transgenic plants.


CONCLUSIONS
our results reveal that under stress conditions – for example, herbivore attacks -- stable jaz proteins such as ppjaz <dig> may alter ja signaling in different plant organs, resulting in autogamy as a reproductive assurance mechanism. this represents an additional mechanism by which plant hormone signaling can modulate a vital developmental process in response to stress.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
jaz proteinsjasmonic acidautogamycleistogamypeachfloral displayissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

