BACKGROUND
alpha satellite is the major repeated dna element of primate centromeres. evolution of these tandemly repeated sequences has led to the existence of numerous families of monomers exhibiting specific organizational patterns. the limited amount of information available in non-human primates is a restriction to the understanding of the evolutionary dynamics of alpha satellite dna.


RESULTS
we carried out the targeted high-throughput sequencing of alpha satellite monomers and dimers from the cercopithecus solatus genome, an old world monkey from the cercopithecini tribe. computational approaches were used to infer the existence of sequence families and to study how these families are organized with respect to each other. while previous studies had suggested that alpha satellites in old world monkeys were poorly diversified, our analysis provides evidence for the existence of at least four distinct families of sequences within the studied species and of higher order organizational patterns. fluorescence in situ hybridization using oligonucleotide probes that are able to target each family in a specific way showed that the different families had distinct distributions on chromosomes and were not homogeneously distributed between chromosomes.


CONCLUSIONS
our new approach provides an unprecedented and comprehensive view of the diversity and organization of alpha satellites in a species outside the hominoid group. we consider these data with respect to previously known alpha satellite families and to potential mechanisms for satellite dna evolution. applying this approach to other species will open new perspectives regarding the integration of satellite dna into comparative genomic and cytogenetic studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
alpha satellite dnahigh-throughput sequencingcercopithecus solatuscentromere genomicsactions thématiques muséum "génomique et collections"actions thématiques muséum "emergence"issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

