BACKGROUND
rna transcripts from genomic sequences showing dyad symmetry typically adopt hairpin-like, cloverleaf, or similar structures that act as recognition sites for proteins. such structures often are the precursors of non-coding rna  sequences like microrna  and small-interfering rna  that have recently garnered more functional significance than in the past. genomic dna contains hundreds of thousands of such inverted repeats  with varying degrees of symmetry. but by collecting statistically significant information from a known set of ncrna, we can sort these irs into those that are likely to be functional.


RESULTS
a novel method was developed to scan genomic dna for partially symmetric inverted repeats and the resulting set was further refined to match mirna precursors  with respect to their density of symmetry, statistical probability of the symmetry, length of stems in the predicted hairpin secondary structure, and the gc content of the stems. this method was applied on the arabidopsis thaliana genome and validated against the set of  <dig> known arabidopsis pre-mirna in the mirbase database. a preliminary scan for irs identified  <dig> of the known pre-mirna but with  <dig> pre-mirna candidates. this large number of irs was further refined to  <dig> candidates with  <dig> pre-mirna identified and further still to  <dig> candidates with  <dig> pre-mirna identified .


CONCLUSIONS
 <dig> candidates for potentially functional mirna is still too large a set to warrant wet lab analyses, such as northern blotting, on all of them. hence additional filters are needed to further refine the number of candidates while still retaining most of the known mirna. these include detection of promoters and terminators, homology analyses, location of candidate relative to coding regions, and better secondary structure prediction algorithms. the software developed is designed to easily accommodate such additional filters with a minimal experience in perl.

19– <dig> february  <dig> seventh annual mcbios conference.  bioinformatics: systems, biology, informatics and computation jonesboro, ar, usa

