BACKGROUND
the cle  gene family encodes small signaling peptides that are primarily involved in coordinating stem cell fate in different types of plant meristems. their roles in vascular cambium have highlighted their potential function in wood formation. apart from recent advances on identification and characterization of cle genes, little is known about this gene family in a tree species.


RESULTS
fifty ptcle genes were identified from the populus trichocarpa genome and were classified into four major groups based on sequence similarity. analysis of the genomic organization of ptcle genes indicates that genome duplication, as well as the diversity in the cle motif, have contributed to the expansion of cle gene family in poplar. a comparison with functionally characterized arabidopsis cle protein sequences showed that many ptcle proteins are closely related to their predicted arabidopsis counterparts. particularly, ptcle <dig>  ptcle <dig>  ptcle <dig> and ptcle <dig> comprised an identical cle motif to atcle41/tdif, which is known as a regulator of vascular cambium homeostasis, strongly supporting the idea that similar signaling pathways exist in both species to regulate wood formation and secondary growth. transcriptome profiling revealed that ptcle genes generally were differentially expressed while some ptcle genes exhibited tissue-specific expression patterns. moreover, compared to their arabidopsis counterparts, ptcle genes showed either similar or distinct expression patterns, implying functional conservation in some cases and functional divergence in others.


CONCLUSIONS
our study provides a genome-wide analysis of the cle gene family in poplar, and highlights the potential roles of key ptcle genes in the regulation of secondary growth and wood formation. the comparative analysis revealed that functional conservation may exist between ptcles and their atcle orthologues, which was further supported by transcriptomic analysis. transcriptional profiling provided further insights into possible functional divergence, evidenced by differential expression patterns of various ptcle genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cle peptidepopulus trichocarpaarabidopsis thalianaphylogenetic analysistranscriptional profilingnational natural science foundation of china3127157531200902wang guodong fundamental research funds for the central universitiesgk201103005wang guodong specialized research fund for the doctoral program of higher education from the ministry of education of china20120202120009wang guodong natural science basic research plan in shaanxi province of china2014jm3064wang guodong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

