BACKGROUND
development of cells with minimal metabolic functionality is gaining importance due to their efficiency in producing chemicals and fuels. existing computational methods to identify minimal reaction sets in metabolic networks are computationally expensive. further, they identify only one of the several possible minimal reaction sets.


RESULTS
in this paper, we propose an efficient graph theory based recursive optimization approach to identify all minimal reaction sets. graph theoretical insights offer systematic methods to not only reduce the number of variables in math programming and increase its computational efficiency, but also provide efficient ways to find multiple optimal solutions. the efficacy of the proposed approach is demonstrated using case studies from escherichia coli and saccharomyces cerevisiae. in case study  <dig>  the proposed method identified three minimal reaction sets each containing  <dig> reactions in escherichia coli central metabolic network with  <dig> reactions. analysis of these three minimal reaction sets revealed that one of them is more suitable for developing minimal metabolism cell compared to other two due to practically achievable internal flux distribution. in case study  <dig>  the proposed method identified  <dig> minimal reaction sets from the saccharomyces cerevisiae genome scale metabolic network with  <dig> reactions. the proposed method required only  <dig>  hours to identify all the  <dig> minimal reaction sets and has shown a significant reduction  in the solution time when compared to the existing methods for finding minimal reaction set.


CONCLUSIONS
identification of all minimal reactions sets in metabolic networks is essential since different minimal reaction sets have different properties that effect the bioprocess development. the proposed method correctly identified all minimal reaction sets in a both the case studies. the proposed method is computationally efficient compared to other methods for finding minimal reaction sets and useful to employ with genome-scale metabolic networks.

systems biotechnologystrain developmentminimal cellmixed-integer linear program multiple solutions

