BACKGROUND
the fungal species complex colletotrichum gloeosporioides sensu lato contains over  <dig> plant-interacting species. these species exhibit different life styles  and show considerable variation in host and tissue adaptation strategies. accurate species delimitation in c. gloeosporioides s.l. is very challenging due to nascent lineage boundaries and phenotypic plasticity, which strongly impedes studies of the complex’s host-interaction biology. in this study, we first sequenced and compared nine mitogenomes belonging to four c. gloeosporioides s.l. species lineages , and evaluated the usefulness of mitogenome sequence in complementing prevailing nuclear markers for species delimitation.


RESULTS
the c. gloeosporioides s.l. mitogenomes ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  bp in size, and each contained an identical set of genes transcribed in the same direction. compared with previously reported colletotrichum mitogenomes, these mitogenomes were uniquely featured by:  significantly larger genome size due to richer intron content and longer intergenic region;  striking gc content elevation at the intergenic region; and  considerable intron content variation among different species lineages. compared with nuclear dna markers commonly used in phylogeny, the mitogenome nucleotide diversity was extremely low, yet the mitogenome alignment contained the highest number of parsimony informative sites, which allowed the generation of a high-resolution phylogeny recognizing all taxonomic lineages, including ones belonging to the very nascent c. siamense s.l. complex. the tree topology was highly congruent with the phylogeny based on nuclear marker concatenation except for lineages within c. siamense s.l. further comparative phylogenetic analysis indicated that lineage-specific rapid divergence of gs and sod <dig> markers confounded concatenation-based species relationship inference.


CONCLUSIONS
this study sheds light on the evolution of c. gloeosporioides s.l. mitogenomes and demonstrates that mitogenome sequence can complement prevailing nuclear markers in improving species delimitation accuracy. the mitogenome sequences reported will be valuable resources for further genetic studies with c. gloeosporioides s.l. and other colletotrichum species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
evolutionspecies complexmitochondrial genomeconcatenationphylogenythe national science foundation of china 31601595liang xiaofei the general financial grant from the china postdoctoral science foundation2016m592844liang xiaofei the china agriculture research systemcars-28sun guangyu fundamental research funds of northwest a and f universityz109021610liang xiaofei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

