BACKGROUND
in most species of mammals, the trb locus has the common feature of a library of trbv genes positioned at the 5'- end of two in tandem aligned d-j-c gene clusters, each composed of a single trbd gene, 6- <dig> trbj genes and one trbc gene. an enhancer located at the 3'end of the last trbc and a well-defined promoter situated at the 5'end of the trbd gene and/or a undefined promoter situated at the 5'end of the trbd <dig> are sufficient to generate the full recombinase accessibility at the locus. in ruminant species, the 3'end of the trb locus is characterized by the presence of three d-j-c clusters, each constituted by a single trbd, 5- <dig> trbj and one trbc genes with the center cluster showing a structure combined with the clusters upstream and downstream, suggesting that a unequal crossover occurred in the duplication. an enhancer downstream the last trbc, and a promoter at the 5'-end of each trbd gene are also present.


RESULTS
in this paper we focused our attention on the analysis of a large number of sheep tr β-chain transcripts derived from four different lymphoid tissues of three diverse sheep breed animals to certify the use and frequency of the three gene clusters in the β-chain repertoire. as the sheep trb locus genomic organization is known, the exact interpretation of the v-d-j rearrangements was fully determined. our results clearly demonstrate that sheep β-chain constitutes a level of variability that is substantially larger than that described in other mammalian species. this is due not only to the increase of the number of d and j genes available to the somatic recombination, but also to the presence of the trans-rearrangement process. moreover, the functional complexity of β-chain repertoire is resolved by other mechanisms such as alternative cis- and trans-splicing and recombinational diversification that seems to affect the variety of the constant region.


CONCLUSIONS
all together our data demonstrate that a disparate set of molecular mechanisms operate to perform a diversified repertoire in the sheep β-chain and this could confer some special biological properties to the corresponding αβ t cells in the ruminant lineage.

