BACKGROUND
activin a is a pleiotrophic regulatory cytokine, the ablation of which is neonatal lethal. healthy human alveolar macrophages  constitutively express activin a, but ams of patients with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis  are deficient in activin a. pap is an autoimmune lung disease characterized by neutralizing autoantibodies to granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor . activin a can be stimulated, however, by gm-csf treatment of ams in vitro. to further explore pulmonary activin a regulation, we examined ams in bronchoalveolar lavage  from wild-type c57bl/ <dig> compared to gm-csf knockout mice which exhibit a pap-like histopathology. both human pap and mouse gm-csf knockout ams are deficient in the transcription factor, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma .


RESULTS
in sharp contrast to human pap, activin a mrna was elevated in mouse gm-csf knockout ams, and activin a protein was increased in bal fluid. investigation of potential causative factors for activin a upregulation revealed intrinsic overexpression of ifnγ, a potent inducer of the m <dig> macrophage phenotype, in gm-csf knockout bal cells. ifnγ mrna was not elevated in pap bal cells. in vitro studies confirmed that ifnγ stimulated activin a in wild-type ams while antibody to ifnγ reduced activin a in gm-csf knockout ams. both ifnγ and activin a were also reduced in gm-csf knockout mice in vivo after intratracheal instillation of lentivirus-pparγ compared to control lentivirus vector. examination of other m <dig> markers in gm-csf knockout mice indicated intrinsic elevation of the ifnγ-regulated gene, inducible nitrogen oxide synthetase , ccl <dig>  and interleukin - <dig> compared to wild-type. the m <dig> markers, il- <dig> and ccl <dig> were also intrinsically elevated.


CONCLUSIONS
data point to ifnγ as the primary upregulator of activin a in gm-csf knockout mice which in addition, exhibit a unique mix of m1-m <dig> macrophage phenotypes.

interferon gammaactivin aalveolar macrophages

