BACKGROUND
studies with the nematode model caenorhabditis elegans have identified conserved biochemical pathways that act to modulate life span. life span can also be influenced by the composition of the intestinal microbiome, and c. elegans life span can be dramatically influenced by its diet of escherichia coli. although c. elegans is typically fed the standard op <dig> strain of e. coli, nematodes fed e. coli strains rendered respiratory deficient, either due to a lack coenzyme q or the absence of atp synthase, show significant life span extension. here we explore the mechanisms accounting for the enhanced nematode life span in response to these diets.


RESULTS
the intestinal load of e. coli was monitored by determination of worm-associated colony forming units  as a function of age. the presence of gfp-expressing e. coli in the worm intestine was also monitored by fluorescence microscopy. worms fed the standard op <dig> e. coli strain have high cfu and gfp-labeled bacteria in their guts at the l <dig> larval stage, and show saturated coliform counts by day five of adulthood. in contrast, nematodes fed diets of respiratory deficient e. coli lacking coenzyme q lived significantly longer and failed to accumulate bacteria within the lumen at early ages. animals fed bacteria deficient in complex v showed intermediate coliform numbers and were not quite as long-lived. the results indicate that respiratory deficient q-less e. coli are effectively degraded in the early adult worm, either at the pharynx or within the intestine, and do not accumulate in the intestinal tract until day ten of adulthood.


CONCLUSIONS
the findings of this study suggest that the nematodes fed the respiratory deficient e. coli diet live longer because the delay in bacterial colonization of the gut subjects the worms to less stress compared to worms fed the op <dig> e. coli diet. this work suggests that bacterial respiration can act as a virulence factor, influencing the ability of bacteria to colonize and subsequently harm the animal host. respiratory deficient bacteria may pose a useful model for probing probiotic relationships within the gut microbiome in higher organisms.

agingbacterial colonizationcoenzyme qgut microbiomeintestinelife spanpharynxprobioticrespiration

