BACKGROUND
pancreatic beta-cells are the target of an autoimmune attack in type  <dig> diabetes mellitus . this is mediated in part by cytokines, such as interleukin -1β and interferon -γ. these cytokines modify the expression of hundreds of genes, leading to beta-cell dysfunction and death by apoptosis. several of these cytokine-induced genes are potentially regulated by the il-1β-activated transcription factor  nuclear factor -κb, and previous studies by our group have shown that cytokine-induced nf-κb activation is pro-apoptotic in beta-cells. to identify nf-κb-regulated gene networks in beta-cells we presently used a discriminant analysis-based approach to predict nf-κb responding genes on the basis of putative regulatory elements.


RESULTS
the performance of linear and quadratic discriminant analysis  in identifying nf-κb-responding genes was examined on a dataset of  <dig> positive and negative examples of nf-κb regulation, using stratified cross-validation with an internal leave-one-out cross-validation  loop for automated feature selection and noise reduction. lda performed slightly better than qda, achieving 61% sensitivity, 91% specificity and 87% positive predictive value, and allowing the identification of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> nf-κb putative target genes in insulin-producing ins-1e cells, primary rat beta-cells and human pancreatic islets, respectively. predicted nf-κb targets had a significant enrichment in genes regulated by cytokines  and double stranded rna , as compared to genes not regulated by these nf-κb-dependent stimuli. we increased the confidence of the predictions by selecting only evolutionary stable genes, i.e. genes with homologs predicted as nf-κb targets in rat, mouse, human and chimpanzee.


CONCLUSIONS
the present in silico analysis allowed us to identify novel regulatory targets of nf-κb using a supervised classification method based on putative binding motifs. this provides new insights into the gene networks regulating cytokine-induced beta-cell dysfunction and death.

