BACKGROUND
the genus populus includes poplars, aspens and cottonwoods, which will be collectively referred to as poplars hereafter unless otherwise specified. poplars are the dominant tree species in many forest ecosystems in the northern hemisphere and are of substantial economic value in plantation forestry. poplar has been established as a model system for genomics studies of growth, development, and adaptation of woody perennial plants including secondary xylem formation, dormancy, adaptation to local environments, and biotic interactions.


RESULTS
as part of the poplar genome sequencing project and the development of genomic resources for poplar, we have generated a full-length -cdna collection using the biotinylated cap trapper method. we constructed four flcdna libraries using rna from xylem, phloem and cambium, and green shoot tips and leaves from the p. trichocarpa nisqually- <dig> genotype, as well as insect-attacked leaves of the p. trichocarpa × p. deltoides hybrid. following careful selection of candidate cdna clones, we used a combined strategy of paired end reads and primer walking to generate a set of  <dig>  high-accuracy, sequence-verified flcdnas, which clustered into  <dig>  putative unique genes. mapping flcdnas to the poplar genome sequence combined with blast comparisons to previously predicted protein coding sequences in the poplar genome identified  <dig> flcdnas that likely localize to gaps in the current genome sequence assembly. another  <dig> flcdnas mapped to the genome sequence but were not included among the previously predicted genes in the poplar genome. comparative sequence analysis against arabidopsis thaliana and other species in the non-redundant database of genbank revealed that  <dig> % of the poplar flcdnas display no significant sequence similarity to other plant proteins. by mapping the poplar flcdnas against transcriptome data previously obtained with a  <dig>  k cdna microarray, we identified  <dig> flcdna clones for genes that were differentially expressed in poplar leaves attacked by forest tent caterpillars.


CONCLUSIONS
this study has generated a high-quality flcdna resource for poplar and the third largest flcdna collection published to date for any plant species. we successfully used the flcdna sequences to reassess gene prediction in the poplar genome sequence, perform comparative sequence annotation, and identify differentially expressed transcripts associated with defense against insects. the flcdna sequences will be essential to the ongoing curation and annotation of the poplar genome, in particular for targeting gaps in the current genome assembly and further improvement of gene predictions. the physical flcdna clones will serve as useful reagents for functional genomics research in areas such as analysis of gene functions in defense against insects and perennial growth. sequences from this study have been deposited in ncbi genbank under the accession numbers ef <dig> to ef <dig> 

