BACKGROUND
the tibetan pig is one of domestic animals indigenous to the qinghai-tibet plateau. several geographically isolated pig populations are distributed throughout the plateau. it remained an open question if these populations have experienced different demographic histories and have evolved independent adaptive loci for the harsh environment of the plateau. to address these questions, we herein investigated ~  <dig>  genetic variants across the pig genome in a broad panel of  <dig> individuals from  <dig> tibetan geographic populations and  <dig> lowland breeds.


RESULTS
using a series of population genetic analyses, we show that tibetan pig populations have marked genetic differentiations. tibetan pigs appear to be  <dig> independent populations corresponding to the tibetan, gansu and sichuan & yunnan locations. each population is more genetically similar to its geographic neighbors than to any of the other tibetan populations. by applying a locus-specific branch length test, we identified both population-specific and -shared candidate genes under selection in tibetan pigs. these genes, such as pla2g12a, rgcc, c9orf <dig>  grin2b, grid <dig> and epas <dig>  are involved in high-altitude physiology including angiogenesis, pulmonary hypertension, oxygen intake, defense response and erythropoiesis. a majority of these genes have not been implicated in previous studies of highlanders and high-altitude animals.


CONCLUSIONS
tibetan pig populations have experienced substantial genetic differentiation. historically, tibetan pigs likely had admixture with neighboring lowland breeds. during the long history of colonization in the plateau, tibetan pigs have developed a complex biological adaptation mechanism that could be different from that of tibetans and other animals. different tibetan pig populations appear to have both distinct and convergent adaptive loci for the harsh environment of the plateau.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
high-altitude adaptationgenetic basispopulation historytibetan pigsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

