BACKGROUND
parkinson’s disease  is complex and heterogeneous. the numerous susceptibility loci that have been identified reaffirm the complexity of pd but do not fully explain it; e.g., it is not known if any given pd susceptibility gene is associated with all pd or a disease subtype. we also suspect that important disease genes may have escaped detection because of this heterogeneity. we used presence/absence of family history to subdivide the cases and performed genome-wide association studies  in sporadic-pd and familial-pd separately. the aim was to uncover new genes and gain insight into the genetic architecture of pd.


RESULTS
employing gwas on the neurogenetics research consortium  dataset stratified by family history , we identified a novel locus on chromosome 1p <dig> in sporadic-pd  and replicated the finding  in  <dig> sporadic-pd and  <dig> controls from the national institutes of neurologic disease and stroke  repository. this is the fifth pd locus to be mapped to the short arm of chromosome  <dig>  it is flanked by s1pr <dig> and olfm <dig> genes, and is 200 kb from a multiple sclerosis susceptibility gene. the second aim of the study was to extend the stratified gwas to the well-established pd genes. snca_ rs <dig> was associated with both sporadic-pd  and familial-pd . hla_rs <dig> was more strongly associated with sporadic-pd  than familial-pd . in the mapt region, virtually every single nucleotide polymorphism  had a stronger effect-size and lower p-value in familial-pd  than in sporadic-pd .


CONCLUSIONS
we discovered and replicated a new locus for sporadic-pd which had escaped detection in un-stratified gwas. this demonstrates that by stratifying on a key variable the power gained due to diminished heterogeneity can sometimes outweigh the power lost to reduced sample size. we also detected distinct patterns of disease associations for previously established pd susceptibility genes, which gives an insight to the genetic architecture of the disease and could aid in the selection of appropriate study population for future studies.

gwasparkinson’s diseasesncamapthlagenetic heterogeneitysecondary gwasstratified gwaschromosome 1p

