BACKGROUND
recent microbiologic studies have shown that quorum sensing mechanisms, which serve as one of the fundamental requirements for bacterial survival, exist widely in bacterial intra- and inter-species cell-cell communication. many simulation models, inspired by the social behavior of natural organisms, are presented to provide new approaches for solving realistic optimization problems. most of these simulation models follow population-based modelling approaches, where all the individuals are updated according to the same rules. therefore, it is difficult to maintain the diversity of the population.


RESULTS
in this paper, we present a computational model termed lcm-qs, which simulates the bacterial quorum-sensing  mechanism using an individual-based modelling approach under the framework of agent-environment-rule  scheme, i.e. bacterial lifecycle model . lcm-qs model can be classified into three main sub-models: chemotaxis with qs sub-model, reproduction and elimination sub-model and migration sub-model. the proposed model is used to not only imitate the bacterial evolution process at the single-cell level, but also concentrate on the study of bacterial macroscopic behaviour. comparative experiments under four different scenarios have been conducted in an artificial 3-d environment with nutrients and noxious distribution. detailed study on bacterial chemotatic processes with quorum sensing and without quorum sensing are compared. by using quorum sensing mechanisms, artificial bacteria working together can find the nutrient concentration  quickly in the artificial environment.


CONCLUSIONS
biomimicry of quorum sensing mechanisms using the lifecycle model allows the artificial bacteria endowed with the communication abilities, which are essential to obtain more valuable information to guide their search cooperatively towards the preferred nutrient concentrations. it can also provide an inspiration for designing new swarm intelligence optimization algorithms, which can be used for solving the real-world problems.

25- <dig> july  <dig> the  <dig> international conference on intelligent computing  huangshan, china

