BACKGROUND
exiguobacterium antarcticum strain b7
is a gram-positive psychrotrophic bacterial species isolated in
antarctica. although this bacteria has been poorly studied, its genome
has already been sequenced. therefore, it is an appropriate model for the
study of thermal adaptation. in the present study, we analyzed the
transcriptomes and proteomes of e.
antarcticum b <dig> grown at 0°c and 37°c by solid rna-seq, ion
torrent rna-seq and two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis tandem
mass spectrometry .


RESULTS
we found expression of  <dig>  transcripts in all replicates from both
platforms and differential expression of  <dig> genes  comparing the two temperatures by rna-seq. a total of
 <dig> spots were differentially expressed between the two temperatures on
2d-dige,  <dig> of which were identified by ms/ms. some proteins exhibited
patterns of dispersion in the gel that are characteristic of
post-translational modifications.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings suggest that the two sequencing platforms yielded similar
results and that different omic approaches may be used to improve the
understanding of gene expression. to adapt to low temperatures, e. antarcticum b <dig> expresses four of the six
cold-shock proteins present in its genome. the cold-shock proteins were
the most abundant in the bacterial proteome at 0°c. some of the
differentially expressed genes are required to preserve transcription and
translation, while others encode proteins that contribute to the
maintenance of the intracellular environment and appropriate protein
folding. the results denote the complexity intrinsic to the adaptation of
psychrotrophic organisms to cold environments and are based on two omic
approaches. they also unveil the lifestyle of a bacterial species
isolated in antarctica.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.

keywords
exiguobacterium antarcticumpsychrotrophicproteomicrna-seqgene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

