BACKGROUND
xylogen, a chimeric arabinogalactan protein containing a non-specific lipid transfer protein domain, can promote xylem cell differentiation. no comprehensive study has been carried out on the xylp gene family in rice. as a first step in research on this gene family and as a useful strategy in general, a genome-wide analysis of the osxylp gene family is thus needed.


RESULTS
in this study, we identified  <dig> xylp genes from the rice genome and comprehensively analyzed their protein structures, phylogenetic relationships, chromosomal locations, and gene duplication status. our results indicate that gene duplication has played major roles in the expansion of the osxylp gene family. we used expressed sequence tag, microarray, massively parallel signature sequencing, and quantitative real-time pcr data to analyze osxylp gene expression during various developmental stages and under abiotic stress conditions. we found that many osxylp genes are abundantly expressed in vascular tissues and seeds, with some genes regulated under hormonal or abiotic stresses. in addition, we identified knockout mutants of osxylp <dig> and osxylp <dig> and discovered that the mutant xylp <dig> has a defect in stem height.


CONCLUSIONS
we analyzed expression profiles of  <dig> xylp genes and characterized the structures and evolutionary relationships of their proteins. our results demonstrate that the rice xylp gene family may play roles in plant vascular system development and hormone signaling. among the  <dig> detected osxylps,  <dig> are newly identified genes encoding arabinogalactan proteins. our results provide comprehensive insights that will assist future research on the biological functions of the rice xylp gene family.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ricexylpsarabinogalactan proteinexpression analysisnon-specific lipid transfer proteinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

