BACKGROUND
ischemic preconditioning has been proposed to involve changes in mitochondrial h+ and k+ fluxes, in particular through activation of uncoupling proteins and atp-sensitive k+ channels . the objectives of the present study were to explore how increased h+ and k+ fluxes influence heart mitochondrial physiology with regard to production and scavenging of reactive oxygen species , volume changes and resistance to calcium-induced mitochondrial permeability transition .


RESULTS
isolated rat heart mitochondria were exposed to a wide concentration range of the protonophore cccp or the potassium ionophore valinomycin to induce increased h+ and k+ conductance, respectively. simultaneous monitoring of mitochondrial respiration and calcium retention capacity  demonstrated that the relative increase in respiration caused by valinomycin or cccp correlated with a decrease in crc, and that no level of respiratory uncoupling was associated with enhanced resistance to mpt. mitochondria suspended in hyperosmolar buffer demonstrated a dose-dependent reduction in crc with increasing osmolarity. however, mitochondria in hypoosmolar buffer to increase matrix volume did not display increased crc. ros generation was reduced by both k+- and h+-mediated respiratory uncoupling. the ability of heart mitochondria to detoxify h2o <dig> was substantially greater than the production rate. the h2o <dig> detoxification was dependent on respiratory substrates and was dramatically decreased following calcium-induced mpt, but was unaffected by uncoupling via increased k+ and h+ conductance.


CONCLUSIONS
it is concluded that respiratory uncoupling is not directly beneficial to rat heart mitochondrial resistance to calcium overload irrespective of whether h+ or k+ conductance is increased. the negative effects of respiratory uncoupling thus probably outweigh the reduction in ros generation and a potential positive effect by increased matrix volume, resulting in a net sensitization of heart mitochondria to mpt activation.

ischemic preconditioningmitochondrial permeability transitionpotassium channelsrespiratory uncouplingreactive oxygen species

