BACKGROUND
rna interference  becomes an increasingly important and effective genetic tool to study the function of target genes by suppressing specific genes of interest. this system approach helps identify signaling pathways and cellular phase types by tracking intensity and/or morphological changes of cells. the traditional rnai screening scheme, in which one sirna is designed to knockdown one specific mrna target, needs a large library of sirnas and turns out to be time-consuming and expensive.


RESULTS
in this paper, we propose a conceptual model, called compressed sensing rnai , which employs a unique combination of group of small interfering rnas  to knockdown a much larger size of genes. this strategy is based on the fact that one gene can be partially bound with several small interfering rnas  and conversely, one sirna can bind to a few genes with distinct binding affinity. this model constructs a multi-to-multi correspondence between sirnas and their targets, with sirnas much fewer than mrna targets, compared with the conventional scheme. mathematically this problem involves an underdetermined system of equations , which is ill-posed in general. however, the recently developed compressed sensing  theory can solve this problem. we present a mathematical model to describe the csrnai system based on both cs theory and biological concerns. to build this model, we first search nucleotide motifs in a target gene set. then we propose a machine learning based method to find the effective sirnas with novel features, such as image features and speech features to describe an sirna sequence. numerical simulations show that we can reduce the sirna library to one third of that in the conventional scheme. in addition, the features to describe sirnas outperform the existing ones substantially.


CONCLUSIONS
this csrnai system is very promising in saving both time and cost for large-scale rnai screening experiments which may benefit the biological research with respect to cellular processes and pathways.

