BACKGROUND
pineapple  is a tropical fruit crop of significant commercial importance. although the physiological changes that occur during pineapple fruit development have been well characterized, little is known about the molecular events that occur during the fruit ripening process. understanding the molecular basis of pineapple fruit ripening will aid the development of new varieties via molecular breeding or genetic modification. in this study we developed a  <dig> element pineapple microarray and used it to profile gene expression changes that occur during pineapple fruit ripening.


RESULTS
microarray analyses identified  <dig> unique cdnas differentially expressed at least  <dig> -fold between the mature green and mature yellow stages of pineapple fruit ripening. among these  <dig> sequences,  <dig> share significant homology with genes encoding proteins of known function,  <dig> share homology with genes encoding proteins of unknown function and  <dig> share no significant homology with any database accession. of the  <dig> pineapple sequences with homologs,  <dig> were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated during pineapple fruit ripening. david functional annotation cluster  analysis of all  <dig> sequences with homologs revealed confident enrichment scores for redox activity, organic acid metabolism, metalloenzyme activity, glycolysis, vitamin c biosynthesis, antioxidant activity and cysteine peptidase activity, indicating the functional significance and importance of these processes and pathways during pineapple fruit development. quantitative real-time pcr analysis validated the microarray expression results for nine out of ten genes tested.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first report of a microarray based gene expression study undertaken in pineapple. our bioinformatic analyses of the transcript profiles have identified a number of genes, processes and pathways with putative involvement in the pineapple fruit ripening process. this study extends our knowledge of the molecular basis of pineapple fruit ripening and non-climacteric fruit ripening in general.

pineapplenon-climactericfruit ripeningmicroarray

