BACKGROUND
among the dietary essential amino acids, the most severely limiting in the cereals is lysine. since cereals make up half of the human diet, lysine limitation has quality/nutritional consequences. the breakdown of lysine is controlled mainly by the catabolic bifunctional enzyme lysine ketoglutarate reductase - saccharopine dehydrogenase . the lkr/sdh gene has been reported to produce transcripts for the bifunctional enzyme and separate monofunctional transcripts. in addition to lysine metabolism, this gene has been implicated in a number of metabolic and developmental pathways, which along with its production of multiple transcript types and complex exon/intron structure suggest an important node in plant metabolism. understanding more about the lkr/sdh gene is thus interesting both from applied standpoint and for basic plant metabolism.


RESULTS
the current report describes a wheat genomic fragment containing an lkr/sdh gene and adjacent genes. the wheat lkr/sdh genomic segment was found to originate from the a-genome of wheat, and est analysis indicates all three lkr/sdh genes in hexaploid wheat are transcriptionally active. a comparison of a set of plant lkr/sdh genes suggests regions of greater sequence conservation likely related to critical enzymatic functions and metabolic controls. although most plants contain only a single lkr/sdh gene per genome, poplar contains at least two functional bifunctional genes in addition to a monofunctional lkr gene. analysis of ests finds evidence for monofunctional lkr transcripts in switchgrass, and monofunctional sdh transcripts in wheat, brachypodium, and poplar.


CONCLUSIONS
the analysis of a wheat lkr/sdh gene and comparative structural and functional analyses among available plant genes provides new information on this important gene. both the structure of the lkr/sdh gene and the immediately adjacent genes show lineage-specific differences between monocots and dicots, and findings suggest variation in activity of lkr/sdh genes among plants. although most plant genomes seem to contain a single conserved lkr/sdh gene per genome, poplar possesses multiple contiguous genes. a preponderance of sdh transcripts suggests the lkr region may be more rate-limiting. only switchgrass has est evidence for lkr monofunctional transcripts. evidence for monofunctional sdh transcripts shows a novel intron in wheat, brachypodium, and poplar.

