BACKGROUND
cytoplasmic male sterility  is an inability to produce functional pollen that is caused by mutation of the mitochondrial genome. comparative analyses of mitochondrial genomes of lines with and without cms in several species have revealed structural differences between genomes, including extensive rearrangements caused by recombination. however, the mitochondrial genome structure and the dna rearrangements that may be related to cms have not been characterized in capsicum spp.


RESULTS
we obtained the complete mitochondrial genome sequences of the pepper cms line fs <dig>  and the fertile line jeju . comparative analysis between mitochondrial genomes of peppers and tobacco that are included in solanaceae revealed extensive dna rearrangements and poor conservation in non-coding dna. in comparison between pepper lines, fs <dig> and jeju mitochondrial dnas contained the same complement of protein coding genes except for one additional copy of an atp <dig> gene  in fs <dig>  in terms of genome structure, we found eighteen syntenic blocks in the two mitochondrial genomes, which have been rearranged in each genome. by contrast, sequences between syntenic blocks, which were specific to each line, accounted for  <dig>  and  <dig>  bp in fs <dig> and jeju, respectively. the previously-reported cms candidate genes, orf <dig> and ψatp6- <dig>  were located on the edges of the largest sequence segments that were specific to fs <dig>  in this region, large number of small sequence segments which were absent or found on different locations in jeju mitochondrial genome were combined together. the incorporation of repeats and overlapping of connected sequence segments by a few nucleotides implied that extensive rearrangements by homologous recombination might be involved in evolution of this region. further analysis using mtdna pairs from other plant species revealed common features of dna regions around cms-associated genes.


CONCLUSIONS
although large portion of sequence context was shared by mitochondrial genomes of cms and male-fertile pepper lines, extensive genome rearrangements were detected. cms candidate genes located on the edges of highly-rearranged cms-specific dna regions and near to repeat sequences. these characteristics were detected among cms-associated genes in other species, implying a common mechanism might be involved in the evolution of cms-associated genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

