BACKGROUND
plant aldh <dig> enzymes are aminoaldehyde dehydrogenases  that oxidize different ω-amino or trimethylammonium aldehydes, but only some of them have betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase  activity and produce the osmoprotectant glycine betaine . the latter enzymes possess alanine or cysteine at position  <dig> , while those aldh10s that cannot oxidize betaine aldehyde  have isoleucine at this position. only the plants that contain a441- or c441-type aldh <dig> isoenzymes accumulate gb in response to osmotic stress. in this work we explored the evolutionary history of the acquisition of bal specificity by plant aldh10s.


RESULTS
we performed extensive phylogenetic analyses and constructed and characterized, kinetically and structurally, four sobadh variants that simulate the parsimonious intermediates in the evolutionary pathway from i441-type to a441- or c441-type enzymes. all mutants had a correct folding, average thermal stabilities and similar activity with aminopropionaldehyde, but whereas a441s and a441t exhibited significant activity with bal, a441v and a441f did not. the kinetics of the mutants were consistent with their predicted structural features obtained by modeling, and confirmed the importance of position  <dig> for bal specificity. the acquisition of badh activity could have happened through any of these intermediates without detriment of the original function or protein stability. phylogenetic studies showed that this event occurred independently several times during angiosperms evolution when an aldh <dig> gene duplicate changed the critical ile residue for ala or cys in two consecutive single mutations. aldh <dig> isoenzymes frequently group in two clades within a plant family: one includes peroxisomal i441-type, the other peroxisomal and non-peroxisomal i441-, a441- or c441-type. interestingly, high gb-accumulators plants have non-peroxisomal a441- or c441-type isoenzymes, while low-gb accumulators have the peroxisomal c441-type, suggesting some limitations in the peroxisomal gb synthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings shed light on the evolution of the synthesis of gb in plants, a metabolic trait of most ecological and physiological relevance for their tolerance to drought, hypersaline soils and cold. together, our results are consistent with smooth evolutionary pathways for the acquisition of the badh function from ancestral i441-type amadhs, thus explaining the relatively high occurrence of this event.

osmoprotectionosmotic stressaminoaldehyde dehydrogenaseenzyme kineticssubstrate specificityenzyme subcellular locationprotein stabilityprotein structureprotein evolution

