BACKGROUND
fish species often exhibit significant sexual dimorphism for commercially important traits. accordingly, the control of phenotypic sex, and in particular the production of monosex cultures, is of particular interest to the aquaculture industry. sex determination in the widely farmed nile tilapia  is complex, involving genomic regions on at least three chromosomes  and interacting in certain cases with elevated early rearing temperature as well. thus, sex ratios may vary substantially from 50%.


RESULTS
this study focused on mapping sex-determining quantitative trait loci  in families with skewed sex ratios. these included four families that showed an excess of males  when reared at standard temperature  and a fifth family in which an excess of males  was observed when fry were reared at 36°c for ten days from first feeding. all the samples used in the current study were genotyped for two single-nucleotide polymorphisms  located in the expected major sex-determining region in linkage group  <dig> . the only misassigned individuals were phenotypic males with the expected female genotype, suggesting that those offspring had undergone sex-reversal with respect to the major sex-determining locus. we mapped snps identified from double digest restriction-site associated dna  sequencing in these five families. three genetic maps were constructed consisting of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  snps from the three largest families. qtl analyses provided evidence for a novel genome-wide significant qtl in lg  <dig>  evidence was also found for another sex-determining qtl in the fifth family, in the proximal region of lg  <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
overall, the results from this study suggest that these previously undetected qtls are involved in sex determination in the nile tilapia, causing sex reversal  with respect to the xx genotype at the major sex-determining locus in lg  <dig> 

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
oreochromis niloticussex reversalqtl mappingddrad-seqaquacultureissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

