BACKGROUND
magnesium -deficiency is frequently observed in citrus plantations and is responsible for the loss of productivity and poor fruit quality. knowledge on the effects of mg-deficiency on upstream targets is scarce. seedlings of ‘xuegan’  were irrigated with mg-deficient  or mg-sufficient  nutrient solution for 16 weeks. thereafter, we first investigated the proteomic responses of c. sinensis roots and leaves to mg-deficiency using two-dimensional electrophoresis  in order to  enrich our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of plants to deal with mg-deficiency and  understand the molecular mechanisms by which mg-deficiency lead to a decrease in photosynthesis.


RESULTS
fifty-nine upregulated and  <dig> downregulated protein spots were isolated in mg-deficient leaves, while only  <dig> upregulated and  <dig> downregulated protein spots in mg-deficient roots. many mg-deficiency-responsive proteins were involved in carbohydrate and energy metabolism, followed by protein metabolism, stress responses, nucleic acid metabolism, cell wall and cytoskeleton metabolism, lipid metabolism and cell transport. the larger changes in leaf proteome versus root one in response to mg-deficiency was further supported by our observation that total soluble protein concentration was decreased by mg-deficiency in leaves, but unaffected in roots. mg-deficiency had decreased levels of proteins  involved in photosynthesis, thus decreasing leaf photosynthesis. to cope with mg-deficiency, c. sinensis leaves and roots might respond adaptively to mg-deficiency through: improving leaf respiration and lowering root respiration, but increasing  the levels of proteins related to atp synthase in roots ; enhancing the levels of proteins involved in reactive oxygen species  scavenging and other stress-responsive proteins; accelerating proteolytic cleavage of proteins by proteases, protein transport and amino acid metabolism; and upregulating the levels of proteins involved in cell wall and cytoskeleton metabolism.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrated that proteomics were more affected by long-term mg-deficiency in leaves than in roots, and that the adaptive responses differed between roots and leaves when exposed to long-term mg-deficiency. mg-deficiency decreased the levels of many proteins involved in photosynthesis, thus decreasing leaf photosynthesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
citrus sinensismagnesium -deficiencyphotosynthesisproteomicsrespirationreactive oxygen speciesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

