BACKGROUND
the cell wall of pathogenic mycobacteria is known to possess poly-l-glutamine  layer. plg synthesis has been directly linked to glutamine synthetase  enzyme. glna <dig> gene encodes for gs enzyme in mycobacteria. plg layer is absent in cell wall of avirulent mycobacterium smegmatis, although m. smegmatis strain expressing gs enzyme of pathogenic mycobacteria can synthesize plg layer in the cell wall. the role of gs enzyme has been extensively studied in mycobacterium tuberculosis, however, little is known about gs enzyme in other mycobacterial species. mycobacterium bovis, as an intracellular pathogen encounters nitrogen stress inside macrophages, thus it has developed nitrogen assimilatory pathways to survive in adverse conditions. we have investigated the expression and activity of m. bovis gs in response to nitrogen availability and effect on synthesis of plg layer in the cell wall. m. smegmatis was used as a model to study the behaviour of glna <dig> locus of m. bovis.


RESULTS
we observed that gs expression and activity decreased significantly in high nitrogen grown conditions. in high nitrogen conditions, the amount of plg in cell wall was drastically reduced  as compared to low nitrogen condition in m. bovis and in m. smegmatis strain complemented with m. bovis glna <dig>  additionally, biofilm formation by m. smegmatis strain complemented with m. bovis glna <dig> was increased than the wild type m. smegmatis strain.


CONCLUSIONS
the physiological regulation of gs in m. bovis was found to be similar to that reported in other mycobacteria but this data revealed that plg synthesis in the cell wall of pathogenic mycobacteria occurs only in nitrogen limiting conditions and on the contrary high nitrogen conditions inhibit plg synthesis. this indicates that plg synthesis may be a form of nitrogen assimilatory pathway during ammonium starvation in virulent mycobacteria. also, we have found that m. smegmatis complemented with m. bovis glna <dig> was more efficient in biofilm formation than the wild type strain. this indicates that plg layer favors biofilm formation. this study demonstrate that the nitrogen availability not only regulates gs expression and activity in m. bovis but also affects cell surface properties by modulating synthesis of plg.

mycobacterium bovismycobacterium smegmatisglutamine synthetasepoly-l-glutamine/glutamatebiofilm

