BACKGROUND
elucidating the histological characteristics of normal vascular smooth muscle cells  is important for understanding mechanisms of development, disease etiology and the remodeling and/or regeneration process of the vessel. however, knowledge regarding vsmcs is focused primarily on the artery. although the characteristics of each great vessel are documented, few studies have examined vsmcs in parallel within each great vessel. the present study focused on comparing characteristics of canine vsmcs within the aorta , branch pulmonary artery , main pulmonary artery  and inferior vena cava , simultaneously.


RESULTS
western blot and immunohistochemistry were used to determine vsmc protein content for alpha smooth muscle actin , calponin, myosin heavy chain  and its isozyme sm <dig>  and non-muscle myosin heavy chain b . thickness and ratio of the vsmc layer were also measured. expression levels of asma, calponin and sm <dig> significantly differed between vessels, except between mpa and either bpa, ao and ivc vessels. expression levels of mhc were significantly different in all vessels, whilst expression of smemb was significantly different in the ao compared with either bpa and mpa vessels. all vessels were significantly different with respect to total wall and vsmc layer thickness. the ratio between vsmc layer and total wall thickness was significantly different for each vessel, except between bpa and mpa vessels. histological analysis of the ivc revealed that the vsmc layer does not line evenly and continuously through the long axis or transverse sections. with respect to the pulmonary artery, calponin was expressed to a greater extent in the mpa compared with the bpa . in contrast, mhc and sm <dig> were expressed to a greater extent in the bpa compared with the mpa . differences in vsmc distribution indicate structural differences in the proximal and distal pulmonary artery bifurcation.


CONCLUSIONS
our results show that the vsmc expression pattern in each great vessel is unique and suggestive of the developmental differences between great vessels. we believe this study provides basic data for the pathology, etiology and regenerative capability of the vessels.

caninesmooth muscle cellsvesselhistology

