BACKGROUND
how floral traits and community composition influence plant specialization is poorly understood and the existing evidence is restricted to regions where plant diversity is low. here, we assessed whether plant specialization varied among four species-rich subalpine/alpine communities on the yulong mountain, sw china . we analyzed two factors  to determine the degree of plant specialization across  <dig> plant species in all four communities. floral visitors were collected and pollen load analyses were conducted to identify and define pollen vectors. plant specialization of each species was described by using both pollen vector diversity  and plant selectiveness , which reflected how selective a given species was relative to available pollen vectors.


RESULTS
pollen vector diversity tended to be higher in communities at lower elevations, while plant selectiveness was significantly lower in a community with the highest proportion of unspecialized flowers . in particular, we found that plant species with large and unspecialized flowers attracted a greater diversity of pollen vectors and showed higher selectiveness in their use of pollen vectors. plant species with large floral displays and high flower abundance were more selective in their exploitation of pollen vectors. moreover, there was a negative relationship between plant selectiveness and pollen vector density.


CONCLUSIONS
these findings suggest that flower shape and flower size can increase pollen vector diversity but they also increased plant selectiveness. this indicated that those floral traits that were more attractive to insects increased the diversity of pollen vectors to plants while decreasing overlap among co-blooming plant species for the same pollen vectors. furthermore, floral traits had a more important impact on the diversity of pollen vectors than the composition of anthophilous insect communities. plant selectiveness of pollen vectors was strongly influenced by both floral traits and insect community composition. these findings provide a basis for a better understanding of how floral traits and community context shape interactions between flowers and their pollen vectors in species-rich communities.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
diversity of pollen vectorsfloral displayflower abundanceflower shapeflower sizeflowering durationplant-pollen vector interactionspollen vector densityplant selectivenessspecializationnational key basic research program of china2014cb954100li de-zhu joint fund of national natural science foundation of china -yunnan provinceu1502261wang hong major international joint research project of national natural science foundation of china31320103919wang hong http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31470323wang hong key research program of the chinese academy of scienceskjzd-ew-l07wang hong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

