BACKGROUND
dna-binding proteins are vital for the study of cellular processes. in recent genome engineering studies, the identification of proteins with certain functions has become increasingly important and needs to be performed rapidly and efficiently. in previous years, several approaches have been developed to improve the identification of dna-binding proteins. however, the currently available resources are insufficient to accurately identify these proteins. because of this, the previous research has been limited by the relatively unbalanced accuracy rate and the low identification success of the current methods.


RESULTS
in this paper, we explored the practicality of modelling dna binding identification and simultaneously employed an ensemble classifier, and a new predictor  was designed. the presented framework is comprised of two stages: a 188-dimension feature extraction method to obtain the protein structure and an ensemble classifier designated as imdc. experiments using different datasets showed that our method is more successful than the traditional methods in identifying dna-binding proteins. the identification was conducted using a feature that selected the minimum redundancy and maximum relevance . an accuracy rate of  <dig> % and an area under the curve  value of  <dig>  were obtained in a cross validation. a test dataset was tested in our method and resulted in an 86% accuracy, versus a 76% using idna-prot and a 68% accuracy using dna-prot.


CONCLUSIONS
our method can help to accurately identify dna-binding proteins, and the web server is accessible at http://datamining.xmu.edu.cn/~songli/ndna. in addition, we also predicted possible dna-binding protein sequences in all of the sequences from the uniprotkb/swiss-prot database.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dna-binding proteinensemble classifierunbalanced datasetbioinformaticsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

