BACKGROUND
common bean is an important legume crop with only a moderate number of short expressed sequence tags  made with traditional methods. the goal of this research was to use full-length cdna technology to develop ests that would overlap with the beginning of open reading frames and therefore be useful for gene annotation of genomic sequences. the library was also constructed to represent genes expressed under drought, low soil phosphorus and high soil aluminum toxicity. we also undertook comparisons of the full-length cdna library to two previous non-full clone est sets for common bean.


RESULTS
two full-length cdna libraries were constructed: one for the drought tolerant mesoamerican genotype bat <dig> and the other one for the acid-soil tolerant andean genotype g <dig> which has been selected for genome sequencing. plants were grown in three soil types using deep rooting cylinders subjected to drought and non-drought stress and tissues were collected from both roots and above ground parts. a total of  <dig>  clones were selected robotically, half from each library. then, nearly  <dig>  clones from the g <dig> library were sequenced with an average read length of  <dig> nucleotides. a total of  <dig>  unigenes were identified consisting of  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons. these were functionally annotated with gene ontology terms and placed into kegg pathways. compared to other est sequencing efforts in common bean, about half of the sequences were novel or represented the 5' ends of known genes.


CONCLUSIONS
the present full-length cdna libraries add to the technological toolbox available for common bean and our sequencing of these clones substantially increases the number of unique est sequences available for the common bean genome. all of this should be useful for both functional gene annotation, analysis of splice site variants and intron/exon boundary determination by comparison to soybean genes or with common bean whole-genome sequences. in addition the library has a large number of transcription factors and will be interesting for discovery and validation of drought or abiotic stress related genes in common bean.

