BACKGROUND
prioritization methods have become an useful tool for mining large amounts of data to suggest promising hypotheses in early research stages. particularly, network-based prioritization tools use a network representation for the interactions between different biological entities to identify novel indirect relationships. however, current network-based prioritization tools are strongly tailored to specific domains of interest  and they do not allow to consider networks with more than two types of entities . therefore, the direct application of these methods to accomplish new prioritization tasks is limited.


RESULTS
this work presents prophnet, a generic network-based prioritization tool that allows to integrate an arbitrary number of interrelated biological entities to accomplish any prioritization task. we tested the performance of prophnet in comparison with leading network-based prioritization methods, namely rcnet and domainrbf, for gene-disease and domain-disease prioritization, respectively. the results obtained by prophnet show a significant improvement in terms of sensitivity and specificity for both tasks. we also applied prophnet to disease-gene prioritization on alzheimer, diabetes mellitus type  <dig> and breast cancer to validate the results and identify putative candidate genes involved in these diseases.


CONCLUSIONS
prophnet works on top of any heterogeneous network by integrating information of different types of biological entities to rank entities of a specific type according to their degree of relationship with a query set of entities of another type. our method works by propagating information across data networks and measuring the correlation between the propagated values for a query and a target sets of entities. prophnet is available at: http://genome <dig> ugr.es/prophnet. a matlab implementation of the algorithm is also available at the website.

14- <dig> november  <dig> integrated bio-search: 12th international workshop on network tools and applications in biology  como, italy

