BACKGROUND
the adventitious roots  of plants share the same function as primary and lateral roots , although their development is mainly an adaptive reaction to stress conditions. regeneration of grafted plants is often accompanied by ar formation thus making the grafting technique a good model for studying ar initiation and development and their means of emergence. pectins and arabinogalactan proteins  are helpful markers of particular cellular events, such as programmed cell death , elongation, proliferation or other differentiation events that accompany ar development. however, little is known about the distribution of pectins and agps during ar ontogeny, either in the primordium or stem tissues from which ar arise or their correspondence with these events during lr formation.


RESULTS
ar were developed from different stem tissues such as parenchyma, xylem rays and the cambium, depending on the stem age and treatment  of the parental tissue. immunochemical analysis of the presence of pectic  and agp  epitopes in ar and ar-associated tissues showed differential, tissue-specific distributions of these epitopes. two pectic epitopes  were developmentally regulated and the occurrence of the lm <dig> xylogalacturonan epitope in the root cap of the ar differed from other species described so far. agp epitopes were abundantly present in the cytoplasmic compartments  and were correlated with the degree of cell vacuolisation. jim <dig> and jim <dig> epitopes were detected in the more advanced stages of primordium development, whereas the jim <dig> epitope was present from the earliest division events of the initial ar cells. the comparison between ar and lr showed quantitative  and qualitative  differences.


CONCLUSIONS
the chemical compositions of adventitious and lateral root cells show differences that correlate with the different origins of these cells. in ar, developmental changes in the distribution of pectins and agp suggest the turnover of wall compounds. our data extend the knowledge about the distribution of pectin and agp during non-embryogenic root development in a species that is important from an agronomic point of view.

keywords
arabinogalactan proteinsautograftingcell differentiationcell wallimmunohistochemistrylateral rootspectinstomatoesfaculty of biology and environmental protection, university of silesiagrant for young scientists 1m-0113-001- <dig>  zfin00000040sala katarzyna issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

