BACKGROUND
small synthetic molecules provide valuable tools to agricultural biotechnology to circumvent the need for genetic engineering and provide unique benefits to modulate plant growth and development.


RESULTS
we developed a method to explore molecular mechanisms of plant growth by high-throughput phenotypic screening of haploid populations of pollen cells. these cells rapidly germinate to develop pollen tubes. compounds acting as growth inhibitors or stimulators of pollen tube growth are identified in a screen lasting not longer than 8 h high-lighting the potential broad applicability of this assay to prioritize chemicals for future mechanism focused investigations in plants. we identified  <dig> chemical compounds that influenced pollen development. we demonstrated the usefulness of the identified compounds as promotors or inhibitors of tobacco and arabidopsis thaliana seed growth. when 7 days old seedlings were grown in the presence of these chemicals twenty two of these compounds caused a reduction in arabidopsis root length in the range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  % when compared to controls grown in the absence of the chemicals. two of the chemicals sharing structural homology with thiazolidines stimulated root growth and increased root length by  <dig>  and  <dig>  %, respectively. the pollen tube growth stimulating compound  belongs to benzazepin-type chemicals and increased arabidopsis root length by  <dig>  %.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study we demonstrate the usefulness of plant pollen tube based assay for screening small chemical compound libraries for new biologically active compounds. the pollen tubes represent an ultra-rapid screening tool with which even large compound libraries can be analyzed in very short time intervals. the broadly applicable high-throughput protocol is suitable for automated phenotypic screening of germinating pollen resulting in combination with seed germination assays in identification of plant growth inhibitors and stimulators.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chemical librarypollenpollen tubegrowthgrowth regulatorministry of education and science of the russian federation and russian fund for fundamental researchagreement no.  <dig> a <dig> . <dig> from  <dig> .2013leonov sergey bundesministerium für bildung und forschung microsystems fkz 0316185palme klaus issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

