BACKGROUND
psbo, the manganese-stabilising protein, is an indispensable extrinsic subunit of photosystem ii. it plays a crucial role in the stabilisation of the water-splitting mn4cao <dig> cluster, which catalyses the oxidation of water to molecular oxygen by using light energy. psbo was also demonstrated to have a weak gtpase activity that could be involved in regulation of d <dig> protein turnover. our analysis of psbo sequences showed that many angiosperm species express two psbo paralogs, but the pairs of isoforms in one species were not orthologous to pairs of isoforms in distant species.


RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis of  <dig> psbo sequences from  <dig> land plant species revealed that psbo duplication occurred many times independently, generally at the roots of modern angiosperm families. in spite of this, the level of isoform divergence was similar in different species. moreover, mapping of the differences on the protein tertiary structure showed that the isoforms in individual species differ from each other on similar positions, mostly on the luminally exposed end of the β-barrel structure. comparison of these differences with the location of differences between psbos from diverse angiosperm families indicated various selection pressures in psbo evolution and potential interaction surfaces on the psbo structure.


CONCLUSIONS
the analyses suggest that similar subfunctionalisation of psbo isoforms occurred parallelly in various lineages. we speculate that the presence of two psbo isoforms helps the plants to finely adjust the photosynthetic apparatus in response to variable conditions. this might be mediated by diverse gtpase activity, since the isoform differences predominate near the predicted gtp-binding site.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gene duplicationgtpasehomology modellingmanganese-stabilizing protein oxygen evolving complexparallel evolutionprotein structurepsboissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

