BACKGROUND
campylobacter jejuni, the most leading cause for bacterial gastroenteritis worldwide, shows a high genetic diversity among its isolates. recently, we demonstrated the existence of six c. jejuni-groups by combining mlst with six genetic markers. these groups were further characterized by the detection of cj1321-cj <dig>  fucp, cj <dig>  cj0755/cfra, ceue, plda, cstii, and cstiii in order  to show further associations between these different genetic markers and mlst ccs. moreover, different studies were able to associate several of these markers: a sialylated lipoologosaccharide , the gamma-glytamyl-transpeptidase , and the absence of a certain allele of the enterochelin-uptake-binding-protein  with severe campylobacteriosis, bloody diarrhea and unpleasant outcome. additionally more than half of human campylobacter-isolates were assigned to a non-livestock clade associated with the absence of cj1321-cj <dig>  these isolates were considered as mere colonizers.

from the combination of marker genes, the ratio of human isolates in a specific group, and clinical data  it should be demonstrated to which of the previous defined groups these campylobacter-subpopulations, associated with higher virulence, correspond.


RESULTS
besides the marker gene plda, all new estimated genetic markers show significant differences in their distribution among the various mlst-based groups. especially the genes for cj1321-cj <dig>  fucp, cj <dig>  cj0755/cfra are widely associated with each other and split the study population into two major and seven intermediate groups substantiating the previous group-definition, whereas cstii and cstiii indicate at least three groups following an independent distribution pattern.


CONCLUSIONS
based on these data a group of c. jejuni-isolates characterized by the presence of ansb, dmsa, ggt, and the absence of cj1365c, cj1585c, cj1321-cj <dig>  fucp, cj <dig>  cj0755/cfra, and cstii/iii was associated with a higher prevalence in human campylobacteriosis, bloody diarrhea as well as hospitalization and bears obviously a higher virulence for humans. in contrast to that better livestock-adapted groups characterized by the ability to utilize l-fucose and the presence of all of the five identified putative c. jejuni iron-uptake systems as well as cj1321-cj <dig>  cj1365c, cj1585c, and cstii and/or cstiii  is more prevalent in animal hosts and was secondary associated with less severe campylobacteriosis.

campylobacter jejunisubgroupsfucpcj0178cj0755/cfralos classflagellin glycosylationvirulence

