BACKGROUND
a major goal of molecular biology is determining the mechanisms that control the transcription of genes. motif enrichment analysis  seeks to determine which dna-binding transcription factors control the transcription of a set of genes by detecting enrichment of known binding motifs in the genes' regulatory regions. typically, the biologist specifies a set of genes believed to be co-regulated and a library of known dna-binding models for transcription factors, and mea determines which  of the factors may be direct regulators of the genes. since the number of factors with known dna-binding models is rapidly increasing as a result of high-throughput technologies, mea is becoming increasingly useful. in this paper, we explore ways to make mea applicable in more settings, and evaluate the efficacy of a number of mea approaches.


RESULTS
we first define a mathematical framework for motif enrichment analysis that relaxes the requirement that the biologist input a selected set of genes. instead, the input consists of all regulatory regions, each labeled with the level of a biological signal. we then define and implement a number of motif enrichment analysis methods. some of these methods require a user-specified signal threshold, some identify an optimum threshold in a data-driven way and two of our methods are threshold-free. we evaluate these methods, along with two existing methods , using yeast chip-chip data. our novel threshold-free method based on linear regression performs best in our evaluation, followed by the data-driven pastaa algorithm. the clover algorithm performs as well as pastaa if the user-specified threshold is chosen optimally. data-driven methods based on three statistical tests–fisher exact test, rank-sum test, and multi-hypergeometric test—perform poorly, even when the threshold is chosen optimally. these methods  perform even worse when unrestricted data-driven threshold determination is used.


CONCLUSIONS
our novel, threshold-free linear regression method works well on chip-chip data. methods using data-driven threshold determination can perform poorly unless the range of thresholds is limited a priori. the limits implemented in pastaa, however, appear to be well-chosen. our novel algorithms—ame —are available at http://bioinformatics.org.au/ame/.

