BACKGROUND
one aim of the in silico characterization of proteins is to identify all residue-positions, which are crucial for function or structure. several sequence-based algorithms exist, which predict functionally important sites. however, with respect to sequence information, many functionally and structurally important sites are hard to distinguish and consequently a large number of incorrectly predicted functional sites have to be expected. this is why we were interested to design a new classifier that differentiates between functionally and structurally important sites and to assess its performance on representative datasets.


RESULTS
we have implemented clips-1d, which predicts a role in catalysis, ligand-binding, or protein structure for residue-positions in a mutually exclusive manner. by analyzing a multiple sequence alignment, the algorithm scores conservation as well as abundance of residues at individual sites and their local neighborhood and categorizes by means of a multiclass support vector machine. a cross-validation confirmed that residue-positions involved in catalysis were identified with state-of-the-art quality; the mean mcc-value was  <dig> . for structurally important sites, prediction quality was considerably higher . for ligand-binding sites, prediction quality was lower , because binding sites and structurally important residue-positions share conservation and abundance values, which makes their separation difficult. we show that classification success varies for residues in a class-specific manner. this is why our algorithm computes residue-specific p-values, which allow for the statistical assessment of each individual prediction. clips-1d is available as a web service at http://www-bioinf.uni-regensburg.de/.


CONCLUSIONS
clips-1d is a classifier, whose prediction quality has been determined separately for catalytic sites, ligand-binding sites, and structurally important sites. it generates hypotheses about residue-positions important for a set of homologous proteins and focuses on conservation and abundance signals. thus, the algorithm can be applied in cases where function cannot be transferred from well-characterized proteins by means of sequence comparison.

