BACKGROUND
phosphorus  is an essential macronutrient for plant growth and development. to modulate their p homeostasis, plants must balance p uptake, mobilisation, and partitioning to various organs. despite the worldwide importance of wheat as a cultivated food crop, molecular mechanisms associated with phosphate  starvation in wheat remain unclear. to elucidate these mechanisms, we used rna-seq methods to generate transcriptome profiles of the wheat variety ‘chinese spring’ responding to  <dig> days of pi starvation.


RESULTS
we carried out de novo assembly on  <dig>  million high-quality reads generated from rna-seq libraries. we then constructed a transcript dataset containing  <dig>  non-redundant wheat transcripts, comprising  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  non-redundant full-length cdnas from the trifldb database. when compared with barley full-length cdnas,  <dig>  of the  <dig>  contigs were unalignable, suggesting that many might be distinct from barley transcripts. the average expression level of the contigs was lower than that of the known cdnas, implying that these contigs included transcripts that were rarely represented in the full-length cdna library. within the non-redundant transcript set, we identified 892– <dig>  responsive transcripts in roots and shoots, corresponding on average to  <dig> % of the contigs not covered by cdnas in trifldb under pi starvation. the relative expression level of the wheat ips <dig>  homologue, taips <dig>  was 341-fold higher in roots and 13-fold higher in shoots; this finding was further confirmed by qrt-pcr analysis. a comparative analysis of the wheat- and rice-responsive transcripts for orthologous genes under pi-starvation revealed commonly upregulated transcripts, most of which appeared to be involved in a general response to pi starvation, namely, an ips1-mediated signalling cascade and its downstream functions such as pi remobilisation, pi uptake, and changes in pi metabolism.


CONCLUSIONS
our transcriptome profiles demonstrated the impact of pi starvation on global gene expression in wheat. this study revealed that enhancement of the pi-mediated signalling cascade using ips <dig> is a potent adaptation mechanism to pi starvation that is conserved in both wheat and rice and validated the effectiveness of using short-read next-generation sequencing data for wheat transcriptome analysis in the absence of reference genome information.

de novo assemblyrna-seqtranscriptomewheatphosphorusphosphate starvation

