BACKGROUND
drought and soil salinity are major abiotic stresses. the mechanisms of stress tolerance have been studied extensively in model plants. caragana korshinskii is characterized by high drought and salt tolerance in northwestern china; unique patterns of gene expression allow it to tolerate the stress imposed by dehydration and semi-desert saline soil. there have, however, been no reports on the differences between c. korshinskii and model plants in the mechanisms underlying their drought and salt tolerance and regulation of gene expression.


RESULTS
three sequencing libraries from drought and salt-treated whole-seedling- plants and the control were sequenced to investigate changes in the c. korshinskii transcriptome in response to drought and salt stresses. of the  <dig>  contigs,  <dig>   were annotated with gene descriptions, gene ontology  terms, and metabolic pathways, with a cut-off e-value of 10− <dig>  these annotations included  <dig> go terms,  <dig> kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways, and  <dig> clusters of orthologous groups . on comparison of the transcriptomes of the control, drought- and salt-treated plants,  <dig> and  <dig> contigs showed significant differences in transcript abundance under drought and salt stresses. compared to the differentially expressed genes  in drought- or salt-treated arabidopsis in the database,  <dig> degs in drought-treated c. korshinskii and  <dig> degs in salt-treated samples were presumably unique to c. korshinskii. the transcription profiles revealed that genes related to transcription factors, protein kinases, and antioxidant enzymes are relevant to the tolerance of drought and salt stress in this species. the expression patterns of  <dig> randomly selected degs were confirmed by quantitative real-time pcr and were essentially consistent with the changes in transcript abundance identified by rna-seq.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study identified potential genes involved in drought and salt tolerance in c. korshinskii, as well as many degs uniquely expressed in drought- or salt-treated c. korshinskii samples compared to arabidopsis. to our knowledge, this study is the first exploration of the c. korshinskii transcriptome under drought and salt conditions, and these results will facilitate the discovery of specific stress-resistance-related genes in c. korshinskii, possibly leading to the development of novel plant cultivars through genetic engineering.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
caragana korshinskiitranscriptomeillumina sequencingdrought-stress tolerancesalt-stress tolerancea project  at the ministry of science and technology of china2011aa100201hu zanmin http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31400570li shaofeng issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

