BACKGROUND
the obligate parasitic plant witchweed  infects major cereal crops such as sorghum, maize, and millet, and is the most devastating weed pest in africa. an understanding of the nature of its parasitism would contribute to the development of more sophisticated management methods. however, the molecular and genomic resources currently available for the study of s. hermonthica are limited.


RESULTS
we constructed a full-length enriched cdna library of s. hermonthica, sequenced  <dig>  clones from the library, and obtained  <dig>  expressed sequence tag  sequences. the ests were assembled into  <dig>  unigenes that included  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons. the s. hermonthica unigene dataset was subjected to a comparative analysis with other plant genomes or ests. approximately 80% of the unigenes have homologs in other dicotyledonous plants including arabidopsis, poplar, and grape. we found that  <dig> unigenes are conserved in the hemiparasitic triphysaria species but not in other plant species. these are good candidates for genes specifically involved in plant parasitism. furthermore, we found  <dig>  putative simple sequence repeats  in the s. hermonthica unigene dataset. we tested  <dig> pairs of pcr primers flanking the ssrs to develop genetic markers for the detection of polymorphisms. most primer sets amplified polymorphicbands from individual plants collected at a single location, indicating high genetic diversity in s. hermonthica. we selected  <dig> primer pairs to analyze s. hermonthica harvested in the field from different host species and geographic locations. a clustering analysis suggests that genetic distances are not correlated with host specificity.


CONCLUSIONS
our data provide the first extensive set of molecular resources for studying s. hermonthica, and include est sequences, a comparative analysis with other plant genomes, and useful genetic markers. all the data are stored in a web-based database and freely available. these resources will be useful for genome annotation, gene discovery, functional analysis, molecular breeding, epidemiological studies, and studies of plant evolution.

