BACKGROUND
aggressive behaviors are an integral part of competitive interactions. there is considerable variation in aggressiveness among individuals both within and among species. aggressiveness is a quantitative trait that is highly heritable. in modern humans and macaques , variation in aggressiveness among individuals is associated with polymorphisms in the serotonergic  neurotransmitter system. to further investigate the genetics underlying interspecific variation in aggressiveness,  <dig> wild individuals from five baboon species  were screened for two polymorphisms in promoter regions of genes relevant for the 5-ht system .


RESULTS
surprisingly, despite considerable interspecific variation in aggressiveness, baboons are monomorphic in 5-httlpr, except for p. hamadryas, which carries one additional allele. accordingly, this locus cannot be linked to behavioral variation among species. a comparison among  <dig> papionin species, including nine species of macaques, shows that the most common baboon allele is similar to the one described for barbary macaques , probably representing the ancestral allele in this tribe. it should be noted that  all baboons live in africa, but within macaca only m. sylvanus lives on this continent. baboons are, however, highly polymorphic in the so-called ’warrior gene’ maoalpr, carrying three alleles. due to considerable variation in allele frequencies among populations of the same species, this genotype cannot be invoked to explain variation in aggressiveness at the species level.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides another indication that 5-httlpr is not related to aggressiveness in primates per se, but may have been under differential selective pressures among taxa and potentially among populations in different geographic regions. the results on maoalpr alleles in papio indicate that variation in the metabolism of monoamine neurotransmitters and associated behaviors is more important among populations than among species. we, therefore, propose to compile behavioral data from additional populations of papio to obtain further insight into the genetics underlying behavioral differences among primate species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
5-htbehavioral geneticscandidate geneprimatemaoa-uvntrneurotransmitterbaboonmacaquemacacaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

