BACKGROUND
kinesins, a superfamily of molecular motors, use microtubules as tracks and transport diverse cellular cargoes. all kinesins contain a highly conserved ~ <dig> amino acid motor domain. previous analysis of the completed genome sequence of one flowering plant  has resulted in identification of  <dig> kinesins. the recent completion of genome sequencing of several photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic eukaryotes that belong to divergent lineages offers a unique opportunity to conduct a comprehensive comparative analysis of kinesins in plant and non-plant systems and infer their evolutionary relationships.


RESULTS
we used the kinesin motor domain to identify kinesins in the completed genome sequences of  <dig> species, including  <dig> newly sequenced genomes. among the newly analyzed genomes, six represent photosynthetic eukaryotes. a total of  <dig> kinesins was used to perform comprehensive analysis of kinesins and to construct gene trees using the bayesian and parsimony approaches. the previously recognized  <dig> families of kinesins are resolved as distinct lineages in our inferred gene tree. at least three of the  <dig> kinesin families are not represented in flowering plants. chlamydomonas, a green alga that is part of the lineage that includes land plants, has at least nine of the  <dig> known kinesin families. seven of ten families present in flowering plants are represented in chlamydomonas, indicating that these families were retained in both the flowering-plant and green algae lineages.


CONCLUSIONS
the increase in the number of kinesins in flowering plants is due to vast expansion of the kinesin- <dig> and kinesin- <dig> families. the kinesin- <dig> family, which typically contains a c-terminal motor, has many plant kinesins that have the motor domain at the n terminus, in the middle, or the c terminus. several domains in kinesins are present exclusively either in plant or animal lineages. addition of novel domains to kinesins in lineage-specific groups contributed to the functional diversification of kinesins. results from our gene-tree analyses indicate that there was tremendous lineage-specific duplication and diversification of kinesins in eukaryotes. since the functions of only a few plant kinesins are reported in the literature, this comprehensive comparative analysis will be useful in designing functional studies with photosynthetic eukaryotes.

