BACKGROUND
to help understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the remarkable phenotypic diversity displayed by cichlids, the genome sequences of o. niloticus, p. nyererei, h. burtoni, n. brichardi and m. zebra were recently determined. here, we present the contents of the olfactory receptor  repertoires in the genomes of these five fishes.


RESULTS
we performed an exhaustive tblastn search of the five cichlid genomes to identify their or repertoires as completely as possible. we used as bait a set of ors described in the literature. the cichlid repertoires thereby extracted contained large numbers of complete genes , a small numbers of pseudogenes and many “edge genes” corresponding to incomplete genes located at the ends of contigs. a phylogenetic tree was constructed and showed these repertoires include a large number of families and subfamilies. it also allowed the identification of a large number of or analogues between cichlids with very high amino-acid identity . nearly 9% of the full-length cichlid or genes are composed of several coding exons. this is very unusual for vertebrate or genes. nevertheless, the evidence is strong, and includes the donor and acceptor splice junction sequences; also, the positions of these genes in the phylogenetic tree indicate that they constitute subfamilies well apart from non-or g protein-coupled receptor families.


CONCLUSIONS
cichlid or repertoires are made up of a larger number of genes and fewer pseudogenes than those in other teleosts except zebrafish. these ors share all identified properties common to all fish ors; however, the large number of families and subfamilies, each containing few ors implies that they have evolved more rapidly. this high level of or diversity is consistent with the substantial phenotypic diversity that characterizes cichlids.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
zebrafishmedakasticklebackfugutetraodoncichlidsolfactory receptorscoding exonsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

