BACKGROUND
neurotrophic factors influence survival, differentiation, proliferation and death of neuronal cells within the central nervous system. human ciliary neurotrophic factor  has neuroprotective properties and is also known to influence energy balance. consequently, hcntf has potential therapeutic applications in neurodegenerative, obesity and diabetes related disorders. clinical and biological applications of hcntf necessitate a recombinant expression system to produce large amounts of functional protein in soluble form. earlier attempts to express hcntf in escherichia coli  were limited by low amounts and the need to refold from inclusion bodies.


RESULTS
in this report, we describe a strategy to effectively identify constructs and conditions for soluble expression of hcntf in e. coli. small-scale expression screening with soluble fusion tags identified many conditions that yielded soluble expression. codon optimized 6-his-hcntf construct showed soluble expression in all the conditions tested. large-scale culture of the 6-his-hcntf construct yielded high  soluble expression  as compared to earlier published reports. functional activity of recombinant 6-his-hcntf produced was confirmed by its binding to hcntf receptor  with an ec50 =  <dig> nm.


CONCLUSIONS
our results highlight the combination of codon optimization and screening soluble fusion tags as a successful strategy for high yielding soluble expression of hcntf in e. coli. codon optimization of the hcntf sequence seems to be sufficient for soluble expression of hcntf. the combined approach of codon optimization and soluble fusion tag screen can be an effective strategy for soluble expression of pharmaceutical proteins in e. coli.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
neurotrophic factorshuman cntfcodon optimizationrecombinant soluble expressione. coliissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

