BACKGROUND
vascular wilt caused by fusarium oxysporum f. sp. ciceri race  <dig>  is a serious disease of chickpea  accounting for approximately 10-15% annual crop loss. the fungus invades the plant via roots, colonizes the xylem vessels and prevents the upward translocation of water and nutrients, finally resulting in wilting of the entire plant. although comparative transcriptomic profiling have highlighted some important signaling molecules, but proteomic studies involving chickpea-foc <dig> are limited. the present study focuses on comparative root proteomics of susceptible  and resistant  chickpea genotypes infected with foc <dig>  to understand the mechanistic basis of susceptibility and/or resistance.


RESULTS
the differential and unique proteins of both genotypes were identified at  <dig> h,  <dig> h, and  <dig> h post foc <dig> inoculation. 2d page analyses followed by maldi-tof ms and ms/ms identified  <dig> differentially  or uniquely expressed proteins. these proteins were further categorized into  <dig> functional classes and grouped into go  categories. network analyses of identified proteins revealed intra and inter relationship of these proteins with their neighbors as well as their association with different defense signaling pathways. qrt-pcr analyses were performed to correlate the mrna and protein levels of some proteins of representative classes.


CONCLUSIONS
the differential and unique proteins identified indicate their involvement in early defense signaling of the host. comparative analyses of expression profiles of obtained proteins suggest that albeit some common components participate in early defense signaling in both susceptible and resistant genotypes, but their roles and regulation differ in case of compatible and/or incompatible interactions. thus, functional characterization of identified pr proteins , trypsin protease inhibitor, aba responsive protein, cysteine protease, protein disulphide isomerase, ripening related protein and albumins are expected to serve as important molecular components for biotechnological application and development of sustainable resistance against foc <dig> 

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chickpea fusarium oxysporum f. sp. ciceri race 1defense responseroot proteomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

