BACKGROUND
insertion sequences  are approximately  <dig> kbp long “jumping” genes found in prokaryotes. iss encode the protein transposase, which facilitates the excision and reinsertion of iss in genomes, making these sequences a type of class i  mobile genetic elements. iss are proposed to be involved in the reductive evolution of symbiotic prokaryotes. our previous sequencing of the genome of the cyanobacterium ‘nostoc azollae’  <dig>  living in a tight perpetual symbiotic association with a plant , revealed the presence of an eroding genome, with a high number of insertion sequences  together with an unprecedented large proportion of pseudogenes. to investigate the role of iss in the reductive evolution of ‘nostoc azollae’  <dig>  and potentially in the formation of pseudogenes, a bioinformatic investigation of the is identities and positions in  <dig> cyanobacterial genomes was conducted. to widen the scope, the is contents were analysed qualitatively and quantitatively in  <dig> other genomes representing both free-living and symbiotic bacteria.


RESULTS
insertion sequences were not randomly distributed in the bacterial genomes and were found to transpose short distances from their original location  and pseudogenes were enriched in the vicinity of is elements. in general, symbiotic organisms showed higher densities of is elements and pseudogenes than non-symbiotic bacteria. a total of  <dig> distinct repeated sequences over 500 bp were identified in the  <dig> genomes investigated. in the genome of ‘nostoc azollae’  <dig>  is elements were apparent at  <dig> locations , with  <dig> being full-length. morphologically complex cyanobacteria with large genomes showed higher frequencies of is elements, irrespective of life style.


CONCLUSIONS
the apparent co-location of is elements and pseudogenes found in prokaryotic genomes implies earlier is transpositions into genes. as transpositions tend to be local rather than genome wide this likely explains the proximity between is elements and pseudogenes. these findings suggest that iss facilitate the reductive evolution in for instance in the symbiotic cyanobacterium ‘nostoc azollae’  <dig> and in other obligate prokaryotic symbionts.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cyanobacteriagenomic streamlininginsertion sequenceslocal hoppingnitrogen fixationpseudogenessymbiosisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

