BACKGROUND
nanoparticles appear to be promising devices for application in the agriculture and food industries, but information regarding the response of plants to contact with nano-devices is scarce. toxic effects may be imposed depending on the type and concentration of nanoparticle as well as time of exposure. a number of mechanisms may underlie the ability of nanoparticles to cause genotoxicity, besides the activation of ros scavenging mechanisms. in a previous study, we showed that plant cells accumulate 3-mercaptopropanoic acid-cdse/zns quantum dots  in their cytosol and nucleus and increased production of ros in a dose dependent manner when exposed to qd and that a concentration of  <dig> nm should be cyto-compatible.


RESULTS
when medicago sativa cells were exposed to  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> nm mpa-cdse/zns qd a correspondent increase in the activity of superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione reductase was registered. different versions of the comet assay were used to assess the genotoxicity of mpa-cdse/zns qd. the number of dna single and double strand breaks increased with increasing concentrations of mpa-cdse/zns qd. at the highest concentrations, tested purine bases were more oxidized than the pyrimidine ones. the transcription of the dna repair enzymes formamidopyrimidine dna glycosylase, tyrosyl-dna phosphodiesterase i and dna topoisomerase i was up-regulated in the presence of increasing concentrations of mpa-cdse/zns qd.


CONCLUSIONS
concentrations as low as  <dig> nm mpa-cdse/zns quantum dots are cytotoxic and genotoxic to plant cells, although not lethal. this sets a limit for the concentrations to be used when practical applications using nanodevices of this type on plants are being considered. this work describes for the first time the genotoxic effect of quantum dots in plant cells and demonstrates that both the dna repair genes  and the ros scavenging mechanisms are activated when mpa-cdse/zns qd contact m. sativa cells.

cdse/zns quantum dots3-mercaptopropanoic acidplant cellsmedicago sativacytotoxicitygenotoxicity

