BACKGROUND
micrornas  are a class of small non-coding rnas that play important roles in biotic and abiotic stresses by regulating their target genes. for common wheat, spring frost damage frequently occurs, especially when low temperature coincides with plants at early floral organ differentiation, which may result in significant yield loss. up to date, the role of mirnas in wheat response to frost stress is not well understood.


RESULTS
we report here the sequencing of small rna transcriptomes from the young spikes that were treated with cold stress and the comparative analysis with those of the control. a total of  <dig> conserved mirnas from  <dig> families and nine novel mirnas were identified. among them,  <dig> conserved and five novel mirnas were differentially expressed between the cold-stressed samples and the controls. the expression patterns of  <dig> mirnas were further validated by quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction . moreover, nearly half of the mirnas were cross inducible by biotic and abiotic stresses when compared with previously published work. target genes were predicted and validated by degradome sequencing. gene ontology  enrichment analysis showed that the target genes of differentially expressed mirnas were enriched for response to the stimulus, regulation of transcription, and ion transport functions. since many targets of differentially expressed mirnas were transcription factors that are associated with floral development such as arf, spb , mads-box , myb, spx , tcp , and ppr  genes, cold-altered mirna expression may cause abnormal reproductive organ development.


CONCLUSIONS
analysis of small rna transcriptomes and their target genes provide new insight into mirna regulation in developing wheat inflorescences under cold stress. mirnas provide another layer of gene regulation in cold stress response that can be genetically manipulated to reduce yield loss in wheat.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cold stressdegradomeinflorescence developmentmicrornawheatissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

