BACKGROUND
the northwest region of ethiopia is affected by both tsetse and non-tsetse transmitted trypanosomosis with a huge impact on livestock productivity. the objective of this experimental study was to determine clinical and pathological findings in young zebu cattle experimentally infected with trypanosoma vivax isolates from tsetse infested and non-tsetse infested areas of northwest ethiopia. a total of  <dig> cattle  aged between  <dig> and  <dig> months, purchased from a trypanosome-free and confirmed to be trypanosome negative divided into three groups of six animals were used. animals in the first two groups  received  <dig> ml of infected blood from donor animals at  <dig> trypanosomes/ml, and the remaining group was non-infected control . each group was observed for a period of eight consecutive weeks, daily for clinical signs and once per week for parasitaemia. postmortem examinations were done on euthanized animals, and tissue samples were taken for histopathological analysis.


RESULTS
the prepatent period of the disease was earlier in the nt group  <dig> days post infection  than tt group  <dig> dpi. the infection was characterized by reduced feed intake, intermittent pyrexia and parasitaemia, enlarged lymph nodes, lacrimation, reduced feed intake and emaciation. less frequently diarrhea, oedema and nervous signs were observed in both groups of infected animals. at necropsy, infected animals showed enlarged spleen, enlarged lymph nodes, pneumonic and emphysematous lung, enlarged liver, and haemorrhages on the brain and intestine. histopathological analysis revealed lymphoid hyperplasia of the spleen, necrosis of the liver, encephalitis and hyperplasia of lymph nodes.


CONCLUSIONS
trpanosoma vivax isolates from both tsetse infested and non-tsetse areas showed a variety of virulence factors leading to the development of acute clinical signs, gross and histopathological lesions. however, the parasitaemia and clinical signs appeared earlier in the nt compared to tt infected groups.

keywords
cattleclinical findingsgross lesionshistopathological lesionstrypanosoma vivaxnorthwest ethiopiaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

