BACKGROUND
testicular tumors are the most common genital neoplasms in male dogs, with leydig cell tumors , seminomas , and sertoli cell tumors  the most common forms. human sem are classified as classical  or spermatocytic . intratubular germ cell neoplasia of undifferentiated origin  is another form of human testicular tumor. the aim of this study was to verify that csem/ssem classification is valid in dogs and confirm the existence of canine igcnu.


RESULTS
testicular tumors were found in 46% of dogs at necropsy and accounted for 7% of tumors biopsied. the median age of dogs with tumors at necropsy was  <dig>  years; median age at positive biopsy was  <dig>  years. the most common tumors, in decreasing order, were lct, mixed tumors, sem and sct at necropsy, and sem, sct, mixed tumors, lct, peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and teratoma in the biopsy group. igcnu was found in 3% of testicles at necropsy and in 3% of biopsy samples. two dogs had testicular tumor metastasis. expression of c-kit was most common in sem and seminomatous components of mixed tumors. plap was mostly expressed in igcnu, sem, teratoma, and some mixed tumors. cytokeratin was mainly expressed in sct. cd <dig> expression was low in both groups.


CONCLUSIONS
the high tumor incidence at necropsy can be attributed to older age. tumor incidence in biopsy samples, dog age, and histological classification were consistent with previous studies. the higher incidence of sem and sct in the biopsy group probably resulted from the obvious clinical expression of these tumor types. the low incidence of metastasis confirmed the predominance of benign tumors. low cd <dig> expression confirmed the low incidence of testicular embryonal carcinoma. cytokeratin helps differentiate stromal tumors, especially sct, from germ cell tumors. histology and c-kit and plap expression indicate that igcnu exists in dogs. expression of c-kit and plap confirmed that csem and ssem classification is valid in dogs.

dogtestistumorsseminomaimmunohistochemistryincidenceigcnu

