BACKGROUND
trypanosomiasis is a disease caused by trypanosoma  vivax, a hemoprotozoa that can affect bovines. in south america, the sanguineous form is mechanically transmitted from one mammalian host  to another by the bite of a blood-sucking insect or by needles contaminated with infected blood. the negative impact of the parasitosis caused by t. vivax infection on the reproductive activity of male and female ruminants is known to reduce fertility. in males, alterations such as degeneration, diffuse or interlobular inflammatory infiltrate found in ovine and bovine testicles, can affect fertility through decreased sperm quality. this study evaluated the impact of natural infection with t. vivax on zebu bulls from the central station of artificial insemination  with regard to libido and the negative effects caused by this protozoan on semen quality.

methods
blood samples of  <dig> animals were collected to evaluate the presence of the trypomastigote form of t. vivax in blood smears obtained from hematocrit and buffy coat, and antibody titer igg anti t. vivax in indirect immunoflorescence . furthermore, data related to libido, ejaculate volume, spermatic concentration, and seminal vigor were recorded for these animals employing the criteria of the csai.


RESULTS
nine animals  showed t. vivax trypomastigotes and parasitemia between  <dig>  and  <dig> , and antibody titers from 1: <dig> to 1: <dig> in ifi. twenty nine negative animals in parasitological tests were not reactive in ifi, and six animals presented the antibodies igg anti t. vivax in ifi. data on reproductive activity showed that animals infected with t. vivax have a decreased libido and an increased spermatic volume, whereas other factors related to the reproductive process such as spermatic concentration, motility and spermatic force, were unchanged in infected bulls.


CONCLUSIONS
the t. vivax infection in zebu bulls from csai caused patent parasitemia, induced a febrile state, promoted reduction in the libido and increased the ejaculate volume. these conditions together may account to decrease the performance of these animals.

keywords
trypanosoma vivaxlibidoreproductionbullsemenissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

