BACKGROUND
low molecular weight haptens  cannot be recognized by the immune system unless conjugated to larger carrier molecules. antibodies to these exceptionally small antigens can still be generated with exquisite sensitivity. a detailed understanding at the molecular level of this incredible ability of antibodies to recognize haptens, is still limited compared to other antigen classes.

methods
different hapten targets with a broad range of structural flexibility and polarity were conjugated to carrier proteins, and utilized in sheep immunization. three antibody libraries were constructed and used as potential pools to isolate specific antibodies to each target. the isolated antibodies were analysed in term of cdr length, canonical structure, and binding site shape and electrostatic potential.


RESULTS
the simple, chemically naïve structure of squalane  was recognized with micromolar sensitivity. an increase in structural rigidity of the hydrophobic and cyclic coprostane  did not improve this binding sensitivity beyond the micromolar range, whilst the polar etioporphyrin  was detected with nanomolar sensitivity. homoserine lactone  molecules, which combine molecular flexibility and polarity, generated super-sensitive  interactions. to better understand this range of antibody-hapten interactions, analyses were extended to examine the binding loop canonical structures and cdr lengths of a series of anti-hapten clones. analyses of the pre and post- selection  sequences revealed more conserved sites  within the post-selection sequences, when compared to their pre-selection counterparts . the strong selection pressure, generated by panning against these haptens resulted in the isolation of antibodies with significant sequence conservation in the fw regions, and suitable binding site cavities, representing only a relatively small subset of the available full repertoire sequence and structural diversity. as part of this process, the important influence of cdr h <dig> on antigen binding was observed through its direct interaction with individual antigens and indirect impact on the orientation and the pocket shape, when combined with cdrs h <dig> and l <dig>  the binding pockets also displayed electrostatic surfaces that were complementary to the hydrophobic nature of cop, sqa, and por, and the negatively charged hsl.


CONCLUSIONS
the best binding antibodies have shown improved capacity to recognize these haptens by establishing complementary binding pockets in terms of size, shape, and electrostatic potential.

keywords
haptenphage displayantibody modelinghapten dockingcanonical structurecdr lengthelectrostatic potentialissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

