BACKGROUND
avoidance of palindromic recognition sites of type ii restriction-modification  systems was shown for many r-m systems in dozens of prokaryotic genomes. however the phenomenon has not been investigated systematically for all presently available genomes and annotated r-m systems. we have studied all known recognition sites in thousands of prokaryotic genomes and found factors that influence their avoidance.


RESULTS
only type ii r-m systems consisting of independently acting endonuclease and methyltransferase  cause avoidance of their sites, both palindromic and asymmetric, in corresponding prokaryotic genomes; the avoidance takes place for ~ 50 % of  <dig> studied cases. it is known that prokaryotes can acquire and lose r-m systems. thus it is possible to talk about the lifespan of an r-m system in a genome. we have shown that the recognition site avoidance correlates with the lifespan of r-m systems. the sites of orthodox r-m systems that are encoded in host genomes for a long time are avoided more often  than the sites of recently acquired ones. we also found cases of site avoidance in absence of the corresponding r-m systems in the genome. an analysis of closely related bacteria shows that such avoidance can be a trace of lost r-m systems. sites of type i, iiС/g, iim, iii, and iv r-m systems are not avoided in vast majority of cases.


CONCLUSIONS
the avoidance of orthodox type ii r-m system recognition sites in prokaryotic genomes is a widespread phenomenon. presence of an r-m system without an underrepresentation of its site may indicate that the r-m system was acquired recently. at the same time, a significant underrepresentation of a site may be a sign of presence of the corresponding r-m system in this organism or in its ancestors for a long time. the drastic difference between site avoidance for orthodox type ii r-m systems and r-m systems of other types can be explained by a higher rate of specificity changes or a less self-toxicity of the latter.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
restriction-modification systemssite avoidancemethylationrestriction endonucleaseprokaryotic genomehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002261russian foundation for basic research14-04-9135014-04-01693ershova anna karyagina anna russian scientific foundation14-50-0002914-50-00029spirin sergey alexeevski andrei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

