BACKGROUND
this work tests the hypothesis that bladder instillation with vascular endothelial growth factor  modulates sensory and motor nerve plasticity, and, consequently, bladder function and visceral sensitivity.

in addition to c57bl/6j, chat-cre mice were used for visualization of bladder cholinergic nerves. the direct effect of vegf on the density of sensory nerves expressing the transient receptor potential vanilloid subfamily  <dig>  and cholinergic nerves  was studied one week after one or two intravesical instillations of the growth factor.

to study the effects of vegf on bladder function, mice were intravesically instilled with vegf and urodynamic evaluation was assessed. vegf-induced alteration in bladder dorsal root ganglion  neurons was performed on retrogradly labeled urinary bladder afferents by patch-clamp recording of voltage gated na+ currents. determination of vegf-induced changes in sensitivity to abdominal mechanostimulation was performed by application of von frey filaments.


RESULTS
in addition to an overwhelming increase in trpv <dig> immunoreactivity, vegf instillation resulted in an increase in chat-directed expression of a fluorescent protein in several layers of the urinary bladder. intravesical vegf caused a profound change in the function of the urinary bladder: acute vegf  reduced micturition pressure and longer treatment  caused a substantial reduction in inter-micturition interval. in addition, intravesical vegf resulted in an up-regulation of voltage gated na+ channels  in bladder drg neurons and enhanced abdominal sensitivity to mechanical stimulation.


CONCLUSIONS
for the first time, evidence is presented indicating that vegf instillation into the mouse bladder promotes a significant increase in peripheral nerve density together with alterations in bladder function and visceral sensitivity. the vegf pathway is being proposed as a key modulator of neural plasticity in the pelvis and enhanced vegf content may be associated with visceral hyperalgesia, abdominal discomfort, and/or pelvic pain.

