BACKGROUND
sswap  is an architecture, protocol, and platform for using reasoning to semantically integrate heterogeneous disparate data and services on the web. sswap was developed as a hybrid semantic web services technology to overcome limitations found in both pure web service technologies and pure semantic web technologies.


RESULTS
there are currently over  <dig> resources published in sswap. approximately two dozen are custom-written services for qtl  and mapping data for legumes and grasses . the remaining are wrappers to nucleic acids research database and web server entries. as an architecture, sswap establishes how clients , providers , and discovery servers  interact to allow for the description, querying, discovery, invocation, and response of semantic web services. as a protocol, sswap provides the vocabulary and semantics to allow clients, providers, and discovery servers to engage in semantic web services. the protocol is based on the w3c-sanctioned first-order description logic language owl dl. as an open source platform, a discovery server running at   uses the description logic reasoner pellet to integrate semantic resources. the platform hosts an interactive guide to the protocol at , developer tools at , and a portal to third-party ontologies at  .


CONCLUSIONS
sswap addresses the three basic requirements of a semantic web services architecture  while addressing three technology limitations common in distributed service systems: i.e., i) the fatal mutability of traditional interfaces, ii) the rigidity and fragility of static subsumption hierarchies, and iii) the confounding of content, structure, and presentation. sswap is novel by establishing the concept of a canonical yet mutable owl dl graph that allows data and service providers to describe their resources, to allow discovery servers to offer semantically rich search engines, to allow clients to discover and invoke those resources, and to allow providers to respond with semantically tagged data. sswap allows for a mix-and-match of terms from both new and legacy third-party ontologies in these graphs.

