BACKGROUND
sequencing analysis of mitochondrial genomes is important for understanding the evolution and genome structures of various plant species. barley is a self-pollinated diploid plant with seven chromosomes comprising a large haploid genome of  <dig>  gbp. wild barley  and cultivated barley  have cross compatibility and closely related genomes, although a significant number of nucleotide polymorphisms have been reported between their genomes.


RESULTS
we determined the complete nucleotide sequences of the mitochondrial genomes of wild and cultivated barley. two independent circular maps of the  <dig>  bp barley mitochondrial genome were constructed by de novo assembly of high-throughput sequencing reads of barley lines h <dig> and haruna nijo, with only three snps detected between haplotypes. these mitochondrial genomes contained  <dig> protein-coding genes, three ribosomal rnas,  <dig> transfer rnas,  <dig> new orfs, six major repeat sequences and several types of transposable elements. of the barley mitochondrial genome-encoded proteins, nad <dig>  nad <dig> and rps <dig> had unique structures among grass species.


CONCLUSIONS
the mitochondrial genome of barley was similar to those of other grass species in terms of gene content, but the configuration of the genes was highly differentiated from that of other grass species. mitochondrial genome sequencing is essential for annotating the barley nuclear genome; our mitochondrial sequencing identified a significant number of fragmented mitochondrial sequences in the reported nuclear genome sequences. little polymorphism was detected in the barley mitochondrial genome sequences, which should be explored further to elucidate the evolution of barley.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hordeum vulgaremitochondrial genomede novo assemblycomparative genomicskakehhijp15k07257sato kazuhiro the scientific technique research promotion program for agriculture, forestry fisheries and food industry of japan25013asato kazuhiro kakenhijp26292007terachi toru issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

