BACKGROUND

podarcis tiliguerta is a wall lizard endemic to the mediterranean islands of corsica and sardinia. previous findings of high mtdna and morphological diversity have led to the suggestion that it may represent a species complex. here, we analysed mitochondrial and nuclear markers  in p. tiliguerta sampled from thirty-two localities across corsica and sardinia.


RESULTS
we find much greater intraspecific genetic divergence than between sister species of other mediterranean island podarcis, i.e., between p. lilfordi and p. pityusensis. we detected three mtdna clusters in corsica  and either two or three in sardinia  depending on the clustering method. only one or two ndna groups were identified within each main island . a bayesian time-calibrated multispecies coalescent tree was obtained from mtdna and provided statistical support for a miocene origin of the species . the posterior mean divergence time for the corsican and sardinian lineages was  <dig>  ma ago .


CONCLUSIONS
the results support the evolutionary distinctiveness of corsican and sardinian populations and also indicate a lack of post-divergence migration despite periods of contact being possible. further to this, species delimitation analyses of corsican and sardinian lineages provided statistical support for their recognition as distinct  taxa. our results provide new insights into the biogeography of the mediterranean biodiversity hotspot, and contribute important findings relevant to the systematics and evolution of this speciose lizard genus.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
podarcis tiliguertalacertidaecorsica and sardinia islandsmitochondrial dnanuclear dnaspecies treesecretaría de estado de investigación, desarrollo e innovación. erdfcgl2015-68139-c2-1-pconselleria d'educació, cultura i universitats . esffpi/2009conselleria d'educacio, cultura i universitats . esffpi/1488/2012issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

