BACKGROUND
irinotecan  and oxaliplatin are chemotherapeutic agents used in the treatment of colorectal cancer. however, the frequent development of resistance to these drugs represents a considerable challenge in the clinic. alus as retrotransposons comprise 11% of the human genome. genomic toxicity induced by carcinogens or drugs can reactivate alus by altering dna methylation. whether or not reactivation of alus occurs in sn <dig> and oxaliplatin resistance remains unknown.


RESULTS
we applied reduced representation bisulfite sequencing  to investigate the dna methylome in sn <dig> or oxaliplatin resistant colorectal cancer cell line models. moreover, we extended the rrbs analysis to tumor tissue from  <dig> patients with colorectal cancer who either did or did not benefit from capecitabine + oxaliplatin treatment. for the clinical samples, we applied a concept of ‘dna methylation entropy’ to estimate the diversity of dna methylation states of the identified resistance phenotype-associated methylation loci observed in the cell line models. we identified different loci being characteristic for the different resistant cell lines. interestingly, 53% of the identified loci were alu sequences- especially the alu y subfamily. furthermore, we identified an enrichment of alu y sequences that likely results from increased integration of new copies of alu y sequence in the drug-resistant cell lines. in the clinical samples, sox <dig> and other sox gene family members were shown to display variable dna methylation states in their gene regions. the alu y sequences showed remarkable variation in dna methylation states across the clinical samples.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings imply a crucial role of alu y in colorectal cancer drug resistance. our study underscores the complexity of colorectal cancer aggravated by mobility of alu elements and stresses the importance of personalized strategies, using a systematic and dynamic view, for effective cancer therapy.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aludna methylationcolorectal cancersn <dig> and oxaliplatin resistancediversitycell fate dynamicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

