BACKGROUND
drought is one of the main environmental factors limiting tree growth and productivity of plantation forests worldwide. populus hopeiensis hu et chow is one of the most important commercial plantation tree species in china. however, the genes controlling drought tolerance in this species have not been identified or characterized. here, we conducted differential expression analyses and identified a number of genes that were up- or downregulated in p. hopeiensis during water stress. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive study of differentially expressed genes in water-stressed p. hopeiensis.


RESULTS
using the cdna-aflp detection technique, we used  <dig> primer combinations to identify differentially expressed genes in p. hopeiensis during water stress. in total,  <dig> transcript derived-fragments  were obtained from 10× deep sequencing of  <dig> selected tdfs. of the  <dig> tdfs,  <dig> were annotated by blast searches against various databases. the majority of these genes encoded products involved in ion transport and compartmentalization, cell division, metabolism, and protein synthesis. the tdfs were clustered into  <dig> groups on the basis of their expression patterns. of the  <dig> reliable tdfs, the sequences of  <dig> were homologous to genes that play roles in short or long-term resistance to drought stress. some genes were further selected for validation of cdna-aflp expression patterns using real-time pcr analyses. the results confirmed the expression patterns that were detected using the cdna-aflp technique.


CONCLUSIONS
the cdna-aflp technique is an effective and powerful tool for identifying candidate genes that are differentially expressed under water stress. we demonstrated that  <dig> tdfs were differentially expressed in water-stressed poplar. the products of these genes are involved in various biological processes in the drought response of poplar. the results of this study will aid in the identification of candidate genes of future experiments aimed at understanding this response of poplar.

