BACKGROUND
a class of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus  shows resistance to vancomycin only in the presence of ß-lactam antibiotics . this type of vancomycin resistance is mainly attributable to the rapid depletion of free vancomycin in the presence of ß-lactam antibiotics. this means that ß-lactam antibiotics remain active or intact in bivr culture, although most mrsa cells are assumed to produce ß-lactamase. we hypothesised that the bivr cells either did not harbour the ß-lactamase gene, blaz, or the gene was quiescent. we tested this hypothesis by determining ß-lactamase activity and conducting pcr amplification of blaz.


RESULTS
five randomly selected laboratory stock bivr strains showed an undetectable level of ß-lactamase activity and were blaz-negative. five non-bivr stock strains showed an average ß-lactamase activity of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  u. to test freshly isolated mrsa,  <dig> clinical isolates were collected from  <dig> regionally distant hospitals. among  <dig> bivr strains, only 16% and 8% were blaz positive and ß-lactamase-positive, respectively. in contrast, 95% and 61% of  <dig> non-bivr strains had the blaz gene and produced active ß-lactamase, respectively. to know the mechanism of low ß-lactamase activity in the bivr cells, they were transformed with the plasmid carrying the blaz gene. the transformants still showed a low level of ß-lactamase activity that was several orders of magnitude lower than that of blaz-positive non-bivr cells. presence of the ß-lactamase gene in the transformants was tested by pcr amplification of blaz using  <dig> pairs of primers covering the entire blaz sequence. yield of the pcr products was consistently low compared with that using blaz-positive non-bivr cells. nucleotide sequencing of blaz in one of the bivr transformants revealed  <dig> amino acid substitutions. thus, it is likely that the ß-lactamase gene was modified in the bivr cells to downregulate active ß-lactamase production.


CONCLUSIONS
we concluded that bivr cells gain vancomycin resistance by the elimination or inactivation of ß-lactamase production, thereby preserving ß-lactam antibiotics in milieu, stimulating peptidoglycan metabolism, and depleting free vancomycin to a level below the minimum inhibitory concentration of vancomycin.

antibiotic resistanceß-lactamvancomycinstaphylococcus aureusß-lactamasemrsa

