BACKGROUND
the dispensable maize  b chromosome is highly heterochromatic and widely believed to be devoid of functional genes. although low-copy b chromosome causes no obvious phenotype variation, its existence might influence a genome gene expression. previous studies suggested that b chromosomes are evolved from standard chromosomes; therefore, they might contain genic regions showing homology with a chromosome sequences.


RESULTS
our data suggested that maize b chromosome influences the a-genome transcription with stronger effect associated with an increase in copy number of b chromosome. in total  <dig> differently expressed genes were detected in comparison between with and without b chromosome lines. these differentially expressed genes are mainly involved in cell metabolism and nucleotide binding. using starter + b, we amplified ten b chromosome loci with high sequence similarity to a-genome genes. fluorescence in situ hybridization  confirmed that at least four ~5 kb-sized genes are located on the b chromosome. in addition, through de novo assembly of the reads not unmapped to maize b <dig> reference genome together with pcr validation, we found three b-located ltr; in particular, one of them, the  <dig>  kb comp <dig>  is expressed in a b-dosage dependent manner.


CONCLUSIONS
we found that in the presence of maize b chromosome, the transcription of a genome genes was altered, with more impact by the increase of the b chromosome number. the b-located transcriptionally active genes showed high similarity to their a-genome homologues, and retrotransposons on b chromosome also have partial homologous to a genome sequences. our data shed more lights on the genome structure and evolution of the maize b chromosome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
maizeb chromosomerna-seqtranscriptionevolutionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31171563jin weiwei http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 31421005jin weiwei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

