BACKGROUND
the study of epigenetic processes and mechanisms present a dynamic approach to assess complex individual variation in obesity susceptibility. however, few studies have examined epigenetic patterns in preschool-age children at-risk for obesity despite the relevance of this developmental stage to trajectories of weight gain. we hypothesized that salivary dna methylation patterns of key obesogenic genes in hispanic children would 1) correlate with maternal bmi and 2) allow for identification of pathways associated with children at-risk for obesity.


RESULTS
genome-wide dna methylation was conducted on  <dig> saliva samples collected from hispanic preschool children using the infinium illumina humanmethylation 450 k beadchip , which interrogates > <dig>  cpg sites associated with ~ <dig>  genes. the analysis was limited to  <dig> genes that have been associated with obesity in a prior gwas study.

child dna methylation at  <dig> cpg sites was found to be significantly associated with maternal bmi, with increased methylation at  <dig> cpg sites and decreased methylation at  <dig> cpg sites. pathway analysis revealed methylation at these sites related to homocysteine and methionine degradation as well as cysteine biosynthesis and circadian rhythm. furthermore, eight of the  <dig> cpg sites reside in genes  that have prior known associations with obesity, diabetes, and the insulin pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
our study confirms that saliva is a practical human tissue to obtain in community settings and in pediatric populations. these salivary findings indicate potential epigenetic differences in hispanic preschool children at risk for pediatric obesity. identifying early biomarkers and understanding pathways that are epigenetically regulated during this critical stage of child development may present an opportunity for prevention or early intervention for addressing childhood obesity.

trial registration
the clinical trial protocol is available at clinicaltrials.gov . registered  <dig> march 2011

keywords
obesityhispanic childrenepigeneticsmethylationmethioninecysteine biosynthesishomocysteinenational heart, lung, and blood institute 5u01hl103620national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases 5p30dk092986-03vanderbilt institute for clinical and translational research 5ul1tr0045issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

