BACKGROUND
tularemia is a zoonotic disease caused by francisella tularensis that has been found in many different vertebrates. in germany most human infections are caused by contact with infected european brown hares . the aim of this study was to elucidate the epidemiology of tularemia in hares using phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of f. tularensis.


RESULTS
cultivation of f. tularensis subsp. holarctica bacteria from organ material was successful in  <dig> of  <dig> hares that had a positive pcr result targeting the ft-m <dig> locus.  <dig> isolates were sensitive to erythromycin and  <dig> were resistant. analysis of vntr loci , indels  and snps  was shown to be useful to investigate the genetic relatedness of francisella strains in this set of strains. the  <dig> erythromycin resistant isolates were assigned to clade b.i, and  <dig> erythromycin sensitive isolates to clade b.iv and one isolate was found to belong to clade b.ii. maldi-tof mass spectrometry  was useful to discriminate strains to the subspecies level.


CONCLUSIONS
f. tularensis seems to be a re-emerging pathogen in germany. the pathogen can easily be identified using pcr assays. isolates can also be identified within one hour using maldi-tof ms in laboratories where specific pcr assays are not established. further analysis of strains requires genotyping tools. the results from this study indicate a geographical segregation of the phylogenetic clade b.i and b.iv, where b.i strains localize primarily within eastern germany and b.iv strains within western germany. this phylogeographical pattern coincides with the distribution of biovar i  and biovar ii  strains. when time and costs are limiting parameters small numbers of isolates can be analysed using pcr assays combined with dna sequencing with a focus on genetic loci that are most likely discriminatory among strains found in a specific area. in perspective, whole genome data will have to be investigated especially when terrorist attack strains need to be tracked to their genetic and geographical sources.

