BACKGROUND
starch is a major part of cereal grain. it comprises two glucose polymer fractions, amylose  and amylopectin , that make up about  <dig> and 75 % of total starch, respectively. the ratio of the two affects processing quality and digestibility of starch-based food products. digestibility determines nutritional quality, as high amylose starch is considered a resistant or healthy starch  and is highly preferred for preventive measures against obesity and related health conditions. the topic of nutrition security is currently receiving much attention and consumer demand for food products with improved nutritional qualities has increased. in bread wheat , variation in amylose content is narrow, hence its limited improvement. therefore, it is necessary to produce wheat lines or populations showing wide variation in amylose/resistant starch content. in this study, a set of ems-induced m <dig> mutant lines showing dynamic variation in amylose/resistant starch content were produced. furthermore, two diverse mutant lines for amylose content were used to study quantitative expression patterns of  <dig> starch metabolic pathway genes and to identify candidate genes for amylose biosynthesis.


RESULTS
a population comprising  <dig> ems-induced mutation lines  was produced in a bread wheat  variety. two methods of amylose measurement in grain starch showed variation in amylose content ranging from ~ <dig> to 76 % in the population. the method of in vitro digestion showed variation in resistant starch content from  <dig> to 41 %. one-way anova analysis showed significant variation  in amylose and resistant starch content within the population. a multiple comparison test  showed that significant variation in amylose and resistant starch content, with respect to the parent, was observed in about  <dig> and 38 % of the mutant lines, respectively. expression pattern analysis of  <dig> starch metabolic pathway genes in two diverse mutant lines  showed higher expression of key genes of amylose biosynthesis  in the high amylose mutant line, in comparison to the parent. higher expression of amylopectin biosynthesis  was observed in the low amylose mutant lines. an additional six candidate genes showed over-expression  and reduced-expression  in the high amylose mutant line, indicating that other starch metabolic genes may also contribute to amylose biosynthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study a set of  <dig> ems-induced mutant lines  showing variation in amylose and resistant starch content in seed were produced. this population serves as useful germplasm or pre-breeding material for genome-wide study and improvement of starch-based processing and nutrition quality in wheat. it is also useful for the study of the genetic and molecular basis of amylose/resistant starch variation in wheat. furthermore, gene expression analysis of  <dig> starch metabolic genes in the two diverse mutant lines  indicates that in addition to key genes, several other genes  may also be involved in contributing to amylose/amylopectin biosynthesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
triticum aestivumethyl methanesulfonateamyloseresistant starchstarch metabolic pathway genesqrt-pcrissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

