BACKGROUND
one of the most significant issues surrounding next generation sequencing is the cost and the difficulty assembling short read lengths. targeted capture enrichment of longer fragments using single molecule sequencing  is expected to improve both sequence assembly and base-call accuracy but, at present, there are very few examples of successful application of these technologic advances in translational research and clinical testing. we developed a targeted single molecule sequencing  panel for genes implicated in ovarian response to controlled ovarian hyperstimulation  for infertility.


RESULTS
target enrichment was carried out using droplet-base multiplex polymerase chain reaction  technology  designed to yield amplicons averaging 1 kb fragment size from candidate  <dig> loci . the total targeted sequence was  <dig>  mb per sample. sms was carried out using single molecule, real-time dna sequencing , average raw read length =  <dig> nucleotides, 5% of the amplicons > <dig> nucleotides). after filtering with circular consensus  reads, the mean read length was  <dig> nucleotides . primary data analyses, alignment and filtering utilized the pacific biosciences® smrt portal. secondary analysis was conducted using the genome analysis toolkit for snp discovery l and wannovar for functional analysis of variants. filtered functional variants  <dig> of  <dig>  were further confirmed using conventional sanger sequencing. ccs reads were able to accurately detect zygosity. coverage within gc rich regions  was achieved by capturing long genomic dna  fragments and reading into regions that flank the capture regions. as proof of concept, a non-synonymous lhcgr variant captured in two severe ohss cases, and verified by conventional sequencing.


CONCLUSIONS
combining emulsion pcr-generated 1 kb amplicons and smrt dna sequencing permitted greater depth of coverage for t-sms and facilitated easier sequence assembly. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report combining emulsion pcr and t-sms for long reads using human dna samples, and ngs panel designed for biomarker discovery in ohss.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
single-molecule sequencingdroplet-based pcremulsion pcrnext generation dna sequencingovarian hyperstimulation syndromeohssissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

