BACKGROUND
plant glandular trichomes are chemical factories with specialized metabolic capabilities to produce diverse compounds. aromatic mint plants produce valuable essential oil in specialised glandular trichomes known as peltate glandular trichomes . here, we performed next generation transcriptome sequencing of different tissues of mentha spicata  to identify differentially expressed transcripts specific to pgt. our results provide a comprehensive overview of pgt’s dynamic metabolic activities which will help towards pathway engineering.


RESULTS
spearmint rnas from  <dig> different tissues: pgt, leaf and leaf stripped of pgts  were sequenced by illumina paired end sequencing. the sequences were assembled de novo into  <dig>  non-redundant unigenes; spanning a total of 101 mb. functions could be assigned to  <dig>   unigenes and among these  <dig>  unigenes were differentially expressed in pgt relative to leaf - pgt. lack of photosynthetic transcripts in pgt transcriptome indicated the high levels of purity of isolated pgt, as mint pgt are non-photosynthetic. a significant number of these unigenes remained unannotated or encoded hypothetical proteins. we found  <dig> terpene synthases ,  <dig> cytochrome p450s,  <dig> lipid transfer proteins and several transcription factors that were preferentially expressed in pgt. among the  <dig> tpss, two were characterized biochemically and found to be sesquiterpene synthases.


CONCLUSIONS
the extensive transcriptome data set renders a complete description of genes differentially expressed in spearmint pgt. this will facilitate the metabolic engineering of mint terpene pathway to increase yield and also enable the development of strategies for sustainable production of novel or altered valuable compounds in mint.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
spearmintnext generation sequencingtranscriptomeglandular trichomesterpenescarvoneterpene synthasesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

