BACKGROUND
dense consensus genetic maps based on high-throughput genotyping platforms are valuable for making genetic gains in brassica napus through quantitative trait locus identification, efficient predictive molecular breeding, and map-based gene cloning. this report describes the construction of the first b. napus consensus map consisting of a  <dig>  anchored array based genotyping platform; diversity arrays technology , and non-dart markers from six populations originating from australia, canada, china and europe. we aligned the b. napus dart sequences with genomic scaffolds from brassica rapa and brassica oleracea, and identified dart loci that showed linkage with qualitative and quantitative loci associated with agronomic traits.


RESULTS
the integrated consensus map covered a total of  <dig> .2 cm and represented all  <dig> chromosomes of the a and c genomes, with an average map density of one marker per  <dig>  cm, corresponding to approximately  <dig>  mbp of the haploid genome. through in silico physical mapping  <dig>  out of  <dig>   dart clones were assigned to the genomic scaffolds of b. rapa  and b. oleracea . these were used to orientate the genetic consensus map with the chromosomal sequences. the dart markers showed linkage with previously identified non-dart markers associated with qualitative and quantitative trait loci for plant architecture, phenological components, seed and oil quality attributes, boron efficiency, sucrose transport, male sterility, and race-specific resistance to blackleg disease.


CONCLUSIONS
the dart markers provide increased marker density across the b. napus genome. most of the dart markers represented on the current array were sequenced and aligned with the b. rapa and b. oleracea genomes, providing insight into the brassica a and c genomes. this information can be utilised for comparative genomics and genomic evolution studies. in summary, this consensus map can be used to  integrate new generation markers such as snp arrays and next generation sequencing data;  anchor physical maps to facilitate assembly of b. napus genome sequences; and  identify candidate genes underlying natural genetic variation for traits of interest.

