BACKGROUND
the purpose of this study was to prove the hypothesis that c-reactive protein  and nerve growth factor  may be potential biomarkers for lower urinary tract disorders and may be able to distinguish between micturition dysfunctions of different origin in dogs with spinal cord diseases. ngf- and crp- concentrations were measured in serum and urine samples using specific elisa-kits. results in urine were standardized by urine-creatinine levels.


RESULTS
crp in serum was detectable in 32/ <dig> and in urine samples in 40/ <dig> patients. ngf could be measured in all serum and in 70/ <dig> urine samples. urinary crp concentrations were significantly higher in dogs with micturition dysfunction  and in dogs with different neurological diseases  compared to the control group. however, comparing dogs with spinal cord disorders with and without associated micturition dysfunction no significant difference could be detected for ngf and crp values in urine or serum samples. additionally, levels did not decrease significantly, when measured at the time when the dogs regained the ability to urinate properly . urine samples with bacteria and/or leukocytes had no significant increase in urinary ngf  or crp  concentrations, but higher crp-levels in urine from dogs with cystitis were found compared to dogs without signs of cystitis.


CONCLUSIONS
from these data we conclude that neither crp nor ngf in urine or serum can be considered as reliable biomarkers for micturition disorders in dogs with spinal cord disorders in a clinical setting, but their production might be part of the pathogenesis of such disorders. significantly higher levels of crp could be found in the urine of dogs with micturition dysfunctions compared to control dogs. this phenomenon could potentially be explained by unspecific extrahepatic crp production by smooth muscle cells in the dilated bladder.

keywords
dognerve growth factorc-reactive proteinmicturition disordersspinal cord diseasecystitisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

