BACKGROUND
human interactome is predicted to contain  <dig>  to  <dig>  protein-protein interactions, . protein-fragment complementation assay  is one of the most widely used methods to detect ppi, as well as förster resonance energy transfer . to date, successful applications of firefly luciferase -based pca have been reported in vivo, in cultured cells and in cell-free lysate, owing to its high sensitivity, high signal-to-background  ratio, and reversible response. here we show the assay also works with purified proteins with unexpectedly rapid kinetics.


RESULTS
split fluc fragments both fused with a rapamycin-dependently interacting protein pair were made and expressed in e. coli system, and purified to homogeneity. when the proteins were used for pca to detect rapamycin-dependent ppi, they enabled a rapid detection  of ppi with high s/b ratio. when fn7- <dig> domains  that was shown to abrogate gfp mutant-based fret was inserted between split fluc and fkbp <dig> as a rigid linker, it still showed some response, suggesting less limitation in interacting partner’s size. finally, the stability of the probe was investigated. preincubation of the probes at  <dig> degreec up to 1 h showed marked decrease of the luminescent signal to  <dig> %, showing the limited stability of this system.


CONCLUSIONS
fluc pca using purified components will enable a rapid and handy detection of ppis with high s/b ratio, avoiding the effects of concomitant components. although the system might not be suitable for large-scale screening due to its limited stability, it can detect an interaction over larger distance than by fret. this would be the first demonstration of fluc pca in vitro, which has a distinct advantage over other ppi assays. our system enables detection of direct ppis without risk of perturbation by ppi mediators in the complex cellular milieu.

protein-protein interactionfirefly luciferasebioluminescenceprotein fragment complementation assaythermostabilityin vitro diagnostics

