BACKGROUND
drought stress in juvenile stages of crop development and premature leaf senescence induced by drought stress have an impact on biomass production and yield formation of barley . therefore, in order to get information of regulatory processes involved in the adaptation to drought stress and leaf senescence expression analyses of candidate genes were conducted on a set of  <dig> barley genotypes in early developmental stages, and expression quantitative trait loci  were identified by a genome wide association study.


RESULTS
significant effects of genotype and treatment were detected for leaf colour measured at bbch  <dig> as an indicator of leaf senescence and for the expression level of the genes analysed. furthermore, significant correlations were detected within the group of genes involved in drought stress  and those acting in leaf senescence , as well as between leaf senescence genes and the leaf colour . based on these expression data and  <dig>  polymorphic single nucleotide polymorphisms  with a minor allele frequency >5 % derived from the illumina 9 k iselect snp chip, eight cis eqtl and seven trans eqtl were found. out of these an eqtl located on chromosome 3h at  <dig>  cm is of special interest harbouring two drought stress genes  and one leaf senescence gene , as well as an eqtl on chromosome 5h at  <dig>  cm in which two genes  were identified to be associated to drought stress tolerance in a previous study.


CONCLUSIONS
with respect to the expression of genes involved in drought stress and early leaf senescence, genotypic differences exist in barley. major eqtl for the expression of these genes are located on barley chromosome 3h and 5h. respective markers may be used in future barley breeding programmes for improving tolerance to drought stress and leaf senescence.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
barleyleaf senescencedrought stresshigh-throughput qpcrgene expressioneqtlinterdisciplinary center for crop plant research issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

