BACKGROUND
huanglongbing  is a worldwide devastating disease of citrus. there are no effective control measures for this newly emerging but century-old disease. previously, we reported a combination of penicillin g and streptomycin was effective in eliminating or suppressing the associated bacterium, ‘candidatus liberibacter asiaticus’ .


RESULTS
here we report the bacterial composition and community structure in hlb-affected citrus plants during a growing season and while being treated with antibiotic combinations ps  and ko  using the phylochip™ g <dig> array. both antibiotic treatments resulted in significantly lower las bacterial titers  and hybridization scores. of the  <dig> + available operational taxonomic units  on phylochip™ g <dig>   <dig>  known otus were present in citrus leaf midribs. these otus were from  <dig> phyla, of which five contained  <dig> or more otus, proteobacteria , firmicutes , actinobacteria , bacteroidetes  and cyanobacteria . in the antibiotic treated samples, the number of otus decreased to a total of  <dig> . the over-all bacterial diversity decreased with the antibiotic treatments, as did the abundance of  <dig> otus within proteobacteria, firmicutes, bacteroidetes and planctomycetes. within the proteobacteria, ten otus representing the class γ-proteobacteria increased in abundance after four months of treatment, when the las bacterium was at its lowest level in the hlb-affected citrus field plants.


CONCLUSIONS
our data revealed that proteobacteria was constantly the dominant bacterial phylum recovered from citrus leaf midribs, with the α-proteobacterial and the γ-proteobacterial classes vying for prevalence. in addition, the level of bacterial diversity found in the leaf midribs of field citrus was greater than previously described. bacterial cells in close proximity may be able to modify their microenvironment, making the composition of the microbial community an important factor in the ability of las to cause hlb progression. a low las level was seen as an annual fluctuation, part of the bacterial population dynamics, and as a response to the antibiotic treatments.

