BACKGROUND
production of carp dominates world aquaculture. more than  <dig>  million tonnes of rohu carp, labeo rohita , were produced in  <dig>  aeromonas hydrophila is a bacterial pathogen causing aeromoniasis in rohu, and is a major problem for carp production worldwide. there is a need to better understand the genetic mechanisms affecting resistance to this disease, and to develop tools that can be used with selective breeding to improve resistance. here we use a 6 k snp array to genotype  <dig> full-sibling families of l. rohita that were experimentally challenged intra-peritoneally with a virulent strain of a. hydrophila to scan the genome for quantitative trait loci associated with disease resistance.


RESULTS
in all,  <dig> snps were found to be informative and were used to create a linkage map and to scan for qtl affecting resistance to a. hydrophila. the linkage map consisted of  <dig> linkage groups, corresponding to the number of haploid chromosomes in l. rohita. male and female linkage maps were similar in terms of order, coverage  and average interval distances . forty-one percent of the snps were annotated with gene identity using blast . twenty-one snps mapping to ten linkage groups showed significant associations with the traits hours of survival and dead or alive . of the snps showing significant or suggestive associations with the traits, several were homologous to genes of known immune function or were in close linkage to such genes. genes of interest included heat shock proteins , mucin , lectin , tributyltin-binding protein, major histocompatibility loci , complement protein component c7- <dig>  perforin  <dig>  ubiquitin , proteasome subunit, t-cell antigen receptor and lymphocyte specific protein tyrosine kinase.


CONCLUSIONS
a panel of markers has been identified that will be validated for use with both genomic and marker-assisted selection to improve resistance of l. rohita to a. hydrophila.

labeo rohitasingle nucleotide polymorphismtranscribed sequenceslinkage mapquantitative trait lociaeromonas hydrophila resistance

