BACKGROUND
sorghum is a versatile cereal crop, with excellent heat and drought tolerance. however, it is susceptible to early-season cold stress  which limits stand-establishment and seedling growth. to gain further insights on the molecular mechanism of cold tolerance in sorghum we performed transcriptome profiling between known cold sensitive and tolerant sorghum lines using rna sequencing technology under control and cold stress treatments.


RESULTS
here we report on the identification of differentially expressed genes  between contrasting sorghum genotypes, hongkezi  and btx <dig>  under cool and control temperatures using rnaseq approach to elucidate the molecular basis of sorghum response to cold stress. furthermore, we validated bi-allelic variants in the form of single nucleotide polymorphism  between the cold susceptible and tolerant lines of sorghum. an analysis of transcriptome profile showed that in response to cold, a total of  <dig> degs were detected under cold and control temperatures in both genotypes. we identified a subset of genes under cold stress for downstream analysis, including transcription factors that exhibit differential abundance between the sensitive and tolerant genotypes. we identified transcription factors including dehydration-responsive element-binding factors, c-repeat binding factors, and ethylene responsive transcription factors as significantly upregulated during cold stress in cold tolerant hkz. additionally, specific genes such as plant cytochromes, glutathione s-transferases, and heat shock proteins were found differentially regulated under cold stress between cold tolerant and susceptible genotype of sorghum. a total of  <dig>  snp were identified between the cold sensitive and tolerant genotypes with minimum read of four. approximately 89 % of the  <dig> snp sites selected for evaluation were validated using endpoint genotyping technology.


CONCLUSIONS
a new strategy which involved an integrated analysis of differential gene expression and identification of bi-allelic single nucleotide polymorphism  was conducted to determine and analyze differentially expressed genes and variation involved in cold stress response of sorghum. the results gathered provide an insight into the complex mechanisms associated with cold response in sorghum, which involve an array of transcription factors and genes which were previously related to abiotic stress response. this study also offers resource for gene based snp that can be applied towards targeted genomic studies of cold tolerance in sorghum and other cereal crops.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cold stresssorghumtranscriptome profilingrnaseqsingle nucleotide polymorphismgene based variantsus sorghum checkoff programus sorghum checkoff programissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

