BACKGROUND
virus-like particles  can be efficiently produced by heterologous expression of viral structural proteins in yeast. due to their repetitive structure, vlps are extensively used for protein engineering and generation of chimeric vlps with inserted foreign epitopes. hamster polyomavirus vp <dig> represents a promising epitope carrier. however, insertion of large sized protein sequences may interfere with its self-assembly competence. the co-expression of polyomavirus capsid protein vp <dig> with minor capsid protein vp <dig> or its fusion protein may result in pseudotype vlps where an intact vp <dig> protein mediates vlp formation. in the current study, the capacity of vp <dig> protein to self-assemble to vlps and interact with the modified vp <dig> protein has been exploited to generate pseudotype vlps displaying large-sized antibody molecules.


RESULTS
polyomavirus-derived pseudotype vlps harbouring a surface-exposed functionally active neutralizing antibody specific to hepatitis b virus  surface antigen  have been generated. the pseudotype vlps consisting of an intact hamster polyomavirus  major capsid protein vp <dig> and minor capsid protein vp <dig> fused with the anti-hbsag molecule were efficiently produced in yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae and purified by density-gradient centrifugation. formation of vlps was confirmed by electron microscopy. two types of pseudotype vlps were generated harbouring either the single-chain fragment variable  or fc-engineered scfv on the vlp surface. the antigen-binding activity of the purified pseudotype vlps was evaluated by elisa and virus-neutralization assay on hbv-susceptible primary hepatocytes from tupaia belangeri. both types of the pseudotype vlps were functionally active and showed a potent hbv-neutralizing activity comparable to that of the parental monoclonal antibody. the vp2-fused scfv molecules were incorporated into the vlps with higher efficiency as compared to the vp2-fused fc-scfv. however, the pseudotype vlps with displayed vp2-fused fc-scfv molecule showed higher antigen-binding activity and hbv-neutralizing capacity that might be explained by a better accessibility of the fc-engineered scfv of the vlp surface.


CONCLUSIONS
polyomavirus-derived pseudotype vlps harbouring multiple functionally active antibody molecules with virus-neutralizing capability may represent a novel platform for developing therapeutic tools with a potential application for post-exposure or therapeutic treatment of viral infections.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

