BACKGROUND
perchlorate contamination has been detected in both ground water and drinking water. an attractive treatment option is the use of ion-exchange to remove and concentrate perchlorate in brine. biological treatment can subsequently remove the perchlorate from the brine. when nitrate is present, it will also be concentrated in the brine and must also be removed by biological treatment. the primary objective was to obtain an in-depth characterization of the microbial populations of two salt-tolerant cultures each of which is capable of metabolizing perchlorate. the cultures were derived from a single ancestral culture and have been maintained in the laboratory for more than  <dig> years. one culture was fed perchlorate only, while the other was fed both perchlorate and nitrate.


RESULTS
a metagenomic characterization was performed using illumina dna sequencing technology, and the 16s rdna of several pure strains isolated from the mixed cultures were sequenced. in the absence of nitrate, members of the rhodobacteraceae constituted the prevailing taxonomic group. second in abundance were the rhodocyclaceae. in the nitrate fed culture, the rhodobacteraceae are essentially absent. they are replaced by a major expansion of the rhodocyclaceae and the emergence of the alteromonadaceae as a significant community member. gene sequences exhibiting significant homology to known perchlorate and nitrate reduction enzymes were found in both cultures.


CONCLUSIONS
the structure of the two microbial ecosystems of interest has been established and some representative strains obtained in pure culture. the results illustrate that under favorable conditions a group of organisms can readily dominate an ecosystem and yet be effectively eliminated when their advantage is lost. almost all known perchlorate-reducing organisms can also effectively reduce nitrate. this is certainly not the case for the rhodobacteraceae that were found to dominate in the absence of nitrate, but effectively disappeared in its presence. this study is significant in that it reveals the existence of a novel group of organisms that play a role in the reduction of perchlorate under saline conditions. these rhodobacteraceae especially, as well as other organisms present in these communities may be a promising source of unique salt-tolerant enzymes for perchlorate reduction.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
perchlorate contaminationnitratemetagenomic sequencingcommunity analysissalt-toleranceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

