BACKGROUND
cellular senescence irreversibly arrests growth of human diploid cells. in addition, recent studies have indicated that senescence is a multi-step evolving process related to important complex biological processes. most studies analyzed only the genes and their functions representing each senescence phase without considering gene-level interactions and continuously perturbed genes. it is necessary to reveal the genotypic mechanism inferred by affected genes and their interaction underlying the senescence process.


RESULTS
we suggested a novel computational approach to identify an integrative network which profiles an underlying genotypic signature from time-series gene expression data. the relatively perturbed genes were selected for each time point based on the proposed scoring measure denominated as perturbation scores. then, the selected genes were integrated with protein-protein interactions to construct time point specific network. from these constructed networks, the conserved edges across time point were extracted for the common network and statistical test was performed to demonstrate that the network could explain the phenotypic alteration. as a result, it was confirmed that the difference of average perturbation scores of common networks at both two time points could explain the phenotypic alteration. we also performed functional enrichment on the common network and identified high association with phenotypic alteration. remarkably, we observed that the identified cell cycle specific common network played an important role in replicative senescence as a key regulator.


CONCLUSIONS
heretofore, the network analysis from time series gene expression data has been focused on what topological structure was changed over time point. conversely, we focused on the conserved structure but its context was changed in course of time and showed it was available to explain the phenotypic changes. we expect that the proposed method will help to elucidate the biological mechanism unrevealed by the existing approaches.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
senescencetime-series gene expressiondata integrationnetwork analysissamsung advanced institute of technology-park sang chul dgist r&d program of the ministry of science, ict and technology of korea <dig> and 20160172park sang chul basic science research program through the national research foundation of korea  funded by the ministry of science, ict and future planningnrf-2015r1a2a2a03004088yoon youngmi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

