BACKGROUND
the colonial ascidian didemnum vexillum, sea carpet squirt, is not only a key marine organism to study morphological ancestral patterns of chordates evolution but it is also of great ecological importance due to its status as a major invasive species. non-coding rnas, in particular micrornas , are important regulatory genes that impact development and environmental adaptation. beyond mirnas, not much in known about tunicate ncrnas.


RESULTS
we provide here a comprehensive homology-based annotation of non-coding rnas in the recently sequenced genome of d. vexillum. to this end we employed a combination of several computational approaches, including blast searches with a wide range of parameters, and secondary structured centered survey with infernal. the resulting candidate set was curated extensively to produce a high-quality ncrna annotation of the first draft of the d. vexillum genome. it comprises  <dig> mirna families,  <dig> families of ribosomal rnas,  <dig> isoacceptor classes of trnas ,  <dig> snrnas,  <dig> snornas, and  <dig> other rna family. additionally,  <dig> families of mitochondrial trnas and  <dig> of mitochondrial ribosomal rnas and  <dig> long non-coding rna.


CONCLUSIONS
the comprehensive annotation of the d. vexillum non-coding rnas provides a starting point towards a better understanding of the restructuring of the small rna system in ascidians. furthermore it provides a valuable research for efforts to establish detailed non-coding rna annotations for other recently published and recently sequences in tunicate genomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tunicatadidemnum vexillummicrornasgenome annotationfundacion para la promocion de la investigacion y la tecnologa3256bermúdez-santana clara i. german academic exchange service-daadn/abermúdez-santana clara i. colciencias110165843196bermúdez-santana clara i. fapesp15/50164-5)brown federico d. german academic exchange service-daadn/astadler peter f. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

