BACKGROUND
the establishment of the mid-hindbrain region in vertebrates is mediated by the
isthmic organizer, an embryonic secondary organizer characterized by a
well-defined pattern of locally restricted gene expression domains with sharply
delimited boundaries. while the function of the isthmic organizer at the
mid-hindbrain boundary has been subject to extensive experimental studies, it
remains unclear how this well-defined spatial gene expression pattern, which is
essential for proper isthmic organizer function, is established during vertebrate
development. because the secreted wnt <dig> protein plays a prominent role in isthmic
organizer function, we focused in particular on the refinement of wnt1
gene expression in this context.


RESULTS
we analyzed the dynamics of the corresponding murine gene regulatory network and
the related, diffusive signaling proteins using a macroscopic model for the
biological two-scale signaling process. despite the discontinuity arising
from the sharp gene expression domain boundaries, we proved the existence of
unique, positive solutions for the partial differential equation system. this
enabled the numerically and analytically analysis of the formation and stability
of the expression pattern. notably, the calculated expression domain of
wnt <dig> has no sharp boundary in contrast to experimental evidence. we
subsequently propose a post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism for wnt1
mirnas which yields the observed sharp expression domain boundaries. we
established a list of candidate mirnas and confirmed their expression pattern by
radioactive in situ hybridization. the mirna mir- <dig> was identified as a
potential regulator of wnt <dig> mrna, which was validated by luciferase
sensor assays.


CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our theoretical analysis of the gene expression pattern induction at
the mid-hindbrain boundary revealed the need to extend the model by an additional
wnt <dig> regulation. the developed macroscopic model of a two-scale
process facilitate the stringent analysis of other morphogen-based patterning
processes.

mid-hindbrain boundarymirna modelingspatio-temporal modeldevelopemental biology

