BACKGROUND
most friesian horses reach their anaerobic threshold during a standardized exercise test  which requires lower intensity exercise than daily routine training. aim: to study strengths and weaknesses of an alternative set-protocol. two different sets  were applied during a 2 month training period of  <dig> young friesian dressage horses. setb alternated short episodes of canter with trot and walk, lacking long episodes of cantering, as applied in seta. following parameters were monitored: blood lactic acid  after cantering, average heart rate  in trot and maximum hr in canter. hr and bla of seta and setb were analyzed using a paired two-sided t-test and spearman correlation-coefficient .


RESULTS
bla after cantering was significantly higher in seta compared to setb and maximum hr in canter was significantly higher in seta compared to setb.

the majority of horses showed a significant training response based upon longitudinal follow-up of bla. horses with the lowest fitness at start, displayed the largest training response. bla was significantly lower in week  <dig> compared to week  <dig>  in both seta and setb. a significantly decreased bla level after cantering was noticeable in week  <dig> in seta, whereas in setb only as of week  <dig>  in seta a very strong correlation for bla and average hr at trot was found throughout the entire training period, not for canter.


CONCLUSIONS
young friesian horses do reach their anaerobic threshold during a set which requires lower intensity than daily routine training. therefore close monitoring throughout training is warranted. longitudinal follow up of bla and not of hr is suitable to assess training response. in the current study, horses that started with the lowest fitness level, showed the largest training response. during training monitoring hr in trot rather than in canter is advised. setb is best suited as a template for daily training in the aerobic window.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
friesianstandardized exercise testlactic acidheart ratetrotlongitudinalfenway foundationroyal dutch friesian studbookissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

