BACKGROUND
mycoplasmas-contamination of orientia tsutsugamushi, one of the obligated intracellular bacteria, is a very serious problem in in vitro studies using cell cultures because mycoplasmas have significant influence on the results of scientific studies. only a recommended decontamination method is to passage the contaminated o. tsutsugamushi strains through mice to eliminate only mycoplasmas under influence of their immunity. however, this method sometimes does not work especially for low virulent strains of o. tsutsugamushi which are difficult to propagate in mice. in this study, we tried to eliminate mycoplasmas contaminants from both high virulent and low virulent strains of the contaminated o. tsutsugamushi by repeating passage through cell cultures with antibiotics in vitro.


RESULTS
we cultured a contaminated, high virulent strain of o. tsutsugamushi using a mouse lung fibroblasts cell line, l- <dig> cell in the culture medium containing lincomycin at various concentrations and repeated passages about every seven days. at the passage  <dig> only with  <dig> μg/ml of lincomycin, we did not detect mycoplasmas by two pcr based methods whereas o. tsutsugamushi continued good growth. during following four passages without lincomycin, mycoplasmas did not recover. these results suggested that mycoplasmas were completely eliminated from the high virulent strain of o. tsutsugamushi. furthermore, by the same procedures with  <dig> μg/ml of lincomycin, we also eliminated mycoplasmas from a contaminated, low virulent strain of o. tsutsugamushi. our additional assay showed that  <dig> μg/ml of lyncomycin did not inhibit the growth of o. tsutsugamushi, although mics of many mycoplasmas contaminants were less than  <dig> μg/ml as shown previously.


CONCLUSIONS
our results showed an alternative method to eliminate mycoplasmas from the contaminated o. tsutsugamushi strains in place of in vivo passage through mice. especially this notable method works for the decontamination not only from the high virulent strain also from the low virulent strain of o. tsutsugamushi. for further elimination, lincomycin at the limit concentration, which does not inhibit the growth of o. tsutsugamushi, can possibly eliminate most mycoplasmas from contaminated o. tsutsugamushi strains.

orientia tsutsugamushiintracellular bacteriamycoplasmacontaminationeliminationcell cultureantibiotics

