BACKGROUND
rna visualization software tools have traditionally presented a static visualization of rna molecules with limited ability for users to interact with the resulting image once it is complete. only a few tools allowed for dynamic structures. one such tool is jviz.rna. currently, jviz.rna employs a unique method for the creation of the rna molecule layout by mapping the rna nucleotides into vertexes in a graph, which we call the detailed graph, and then utilizes a newtonian mechanics inspired system of forces to calculate a layout for the rna molecule. the work presented here focuses on improvements to jviz.rna that allow the drawing of rna secondary structures according to common drawing conventions, as well as dramatic run-time performance improvements. this is done first by presenting an alternative method for mapping the rna molecule into a graph, which we call the compressed graph, and then employing advanced numerical integration methods for the compressed graph representation.


RESULTS
comparing the compressed graph and detailed graph implementations, we find that the compressed graph produces results more consistent with rna drawing conventions. however, we also find that employing the compressed graph method requires a more sophisticated initial layout to produce visualizations that would require minimal user interference. comparing the two numerical integration methods demonstrates the higher stability of the backward euler method, and its resulting ability to handle much larger time steps, a high priority feature for any software which entails user interaction.


CONCLUSIONS
the work in this manuscript presents the preferred use of compressed graphs to detailed ones, as well as the advantages of employing the backward euler method over the forward euler method. these improvements produce more stable as well as visually aesthetic representations of the rna secondary structures. the results presented demonstrate that both the compressed graph representation, as well as the backward euler integrator, greatly enhance the run-time performance and usability. the newest iteration of jviz.rna is available at https://jviz.cs.sfu.ca/download/download.html.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rnavisualizationgraph layoutnumerical integrationnatural sciences and engineering research council of canada611362shabash boris natural sciences and engineering research council of canadacgs-dwiese kay c. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

