BACKGROUND
the origin and modification of novel traits are important aspects of biological diversification. studies combining concepts and approaches of developmental genetics and evolutionary biology have uncovered many examples of the recruitment, or co-option, of genes conserved across lineages for the formation of novel, lineage-restricted traits. however, little is known about the evolutionary history of the recruitment of those genes, and of the relationship between them -for example, whether the co-option involves whole or parts of existing networks, or whether it occurs by redeployment of individual genes with de novo rewiring. we use a model novel trait, color pattern elements on butterfly wings called eyespots, to explore these questions. eyespots have greatly diversified under natural and sexual selection, and their formation involves genetic circuitries shared across insects.


RESULTS
we investigated the evolutionary history of the recruitment and co-recruitment of four conserved transcription regulators to the larval wing disc region where circular pattern elements develop. the co-localization of antennapedia, notch, distal-less, and spalt with presumptive spot organizers was examined in  <dig> butterfly species, providing the largest comparative dataset available for the system. we found variation between families, between subfamilies, and between tribes. phylogenetic reconstructions by parsimony and maximum likelihood methods revealed an unambiguous evolutionary history only for antennapedia, with a resolved single origin of eyespot-associated expression, and many homoplastic events for notch, distal-less, and spalt. the flexibility in the recruitment of the targeted genes includes cases where different gene combinations are associated with morphologically similar eyespots, as well as cases where identical protein combinations are associated with very different phenotypes.


CONCLUSIONS
the evolutionary history of gene recruitment is consistent with both divergence from a recruited putative ancestral network, and with independent co-option of individual genes. the diversity in the combinations of genes expressed in association with eyespot formation does not parallel diversity in characteristics of the adult phenotype. we discuss these results in the context of inferring homology. our study underscores the importance of widening the representation of phylogenetic, morphological, and genetic diversity in order to establish general principles about the mechanisms behind the evolution of novel traits.

