BACKGROUND
gene copy number divergence between species is a form of genetic polymorphism that contributes significantly to both genome size and phenotypic variation. in plants, copy number expansions of single genes were implicated in cultivar- or species-specific tolerance of high levels of soil boron, aluminium or calamine-type heavy metals, respectively. arabidopsis halleri is a zinc- and cadmium-hyperaccumulating extremophile species capable of growing on heavy-metal contaminated, toxic soils. in contrast, its non-accumulating sister species a. lyrata and the closely related reference model species a. thaliana exhibit merely basal metal tolerance.


RESULTS
for a genome-wide assessment of the role of copy number divergence  in lineage-specific environmental adaptation, we conducted cross-species array comparative genome hybridizations of three plant species and developed a global signal scaling procedure to adjust for sequence divergence. in a. halleri, transition metal homeostasis functions are enriched twofold among the genes detected as copy number expanded. moreover, biotic stress functions including mostly disease resistance  gene-related genes are enriched twofold among genes detected as copy number reduced, when compared to the abundance of these functions among all genes.


CONCLUSIONS
our results provide genome-wide support for a link between evolutionary adaptation and cnd in a. halleri as shown previously for heavy metal atpase <dig>  moreover our results support the hypothesis that elemental defences, which result from the hyperaccumulation of toxic metals, allow the reduction of classical defences against biotic stress as a trade-off.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cross-speciesarray-cghmetal hyperaccumulationcnvarabidopsis halleritoll-interleukin receptor-nucleotide binding site-leucine rich repeat  protein familyresistance genes 15th international conference on bioinformatics  incob 2016queenstown, singapore 21- <dig> september  <dig> http://incob <dig> apbionet.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

