BACKGROUND
berry size is considered as one of the main selection criteria in table grape breeding programs. however, this is a quantitative and polygenic trait, and its genetic determination is still poorly understood. considering its economic importance, it is relevant to determine its genetic architecture and elucidate the mechanisms involved in its expression. to approach this issue, an rna-seq experiment based on illumina platform was performed , including seedless segregants with contrasting phenotypes for berry weight at fruit setting  and 6–8 mm berries  phenological stages.


RESULTS
a group of  <dig> differentially expressed  genes were identified, by comparing seedless segregants with contrasting phenotypes for berry weight:  <dig> genes from the fst stage and  <dig> from the b <dig> stage. also, we integrated differential expression, principal components analysis , correlations and network co-expression analyses to characterize the transcriptome profiling observed in segregants with contrasting phenotypes for berry weight. after this,  <dig> de genes were selected as candidate genes, and seven candidate genes were validated by real time-pcr, confirming their expression profiles.


CONCLUSIONS
we have carried out the first transcriptome analysis focused on table grape seedless segregants with contrasting phenotypes for berry weight. our findings contributed to the understanding of the mechanisms involved in berry weight determination. also, this comparative transcriptome profiling revealed candidate genes for berry weight which could be evaluated as selection tools in table grape breeding programs.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqtable grapesberry weightfunctional genomicscandidate genesconicytg07i1002hinrichsen patricio fondecyt11208883150519muñoz-espinoza claudia hinrichsen patricio fondap15090007orellana ariel basal programpb-16orellana ariel issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

