BACKGROUND
the solanaceae family contains a number of important crop species including potato  which is grown for its underground storage organ known as a tuber. albeit the 4th most important food crop in the world, other than a collection of ~ <dig>  expressed sequence tags, limited genomic sequence information is currently available for potato and advances in potato yield and nutrition content would be greatly assisted through access to a complete genome sequence. while morphologically diverse, solanaceae species such as potato, tomato, pepper, and eggplant share not only genes but also gene order thereby permitting highly informative comparative genomic analyses.


RESULTS
in this study, we report on analysis  <dig>  mb of potato genomic sequence representing  <dig> % of the genome generated through end sequencing of a potato bacterial artificial chromosome  clone library  and sequencing of  <dig> potato bac clones . the gc content of potato is very similar to solanum lycopersicon  and other dicotyledonous species yet distinct from the monocotyledonous grass species, oryza sativa. parallel analyses of repetitive sequences in potato and tomato revealed substantial differences in their abundance,  <dig> % in potato versus  <dig> % in tomato, which is consistent with the increased genome size per haploid genome of these two solanum species. specific classes and types of repetitive sequences were also differentially represented between these two species including a telomeric-related repetitive sequence, ribosomal dna, and a number of unclassified repetitive sequences. comparative analyses between tomato and potato at the gene level revealed a high level of conservation of gene content, genic feature, and gene order although discordances in synteny were observed.


CONCLUSIONS
genomic level analyses of potato and tomato confirm that gene sequence and gene order are conserved between these solanaceous species and that this conservation can be leveraged in genomic applications including cross-species annotation and genome sequencing initiatives. while tomato and potato share genic features, they differ in their repetitive sequence content and composition suggesting that repetitive sequences may have a more significant role in shaping speciation than previously reported.

