BACKGROUND
the popularity of microsatellites has greatly increased in the last decade on account of their many applications. however, little is currently understood about the factors that influence their genesis and distribution among and within species genomes. in this work, we analyzed carnivore microsatellite clones from genbank to study their association with interspersed repeats and elucidate the role of the latter in microsatellite genesis and distribution.


RESULTS
we constructed a comprehensive carnivore microsatellite database comprising  <dig> clones from genbank. thirty-three species of  <dig> out of  <dig> carnivore families were represented, although two distantly related species, the domestic dog and cat, were clearly overrepresented. of these clones,  <dig> contained trnalys-derived sines and  <dig> contained other interspersed repeats. our rough estimates of trna sine copies per haploid genome were much higher than published ones. our results also revealed a distinct juxtaposition of ag and a-rich repeats and trnalys-derived sines suggesting their coevolution. both microsatellites arose repeatedly in two regions of the insterspersed repeat. moreover, microsatellites associated with trnalys-derived sines showed the highest complexity and less potential instability.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that trnalys-derived sines are a significant source for microsatellite generation in carnivores, especially for ag and a-rich repeat motifs. these observations indicate two modes of microsatellite generation: the expansion and variation of pre-existing tandem repeats and the conversion of sequences with high cryptic simplicity into a repeat array; mechanisms which are not specific to trnalys-derived sines. microsatellite and interspersed repeat coevolution could also explain different distribution of repeat types among and within species genomes.

finally, due to their higher complexity and lower potential informative content of microsatellites associated with trnalys-derived sines, we recommend avoiding their use as genetic markers.

