BACKGROUND
the organization of the different tissues of an animal requires mechanisms that regulate cell-cell adhesion to promote and maintain the physical separation of adjacent cell populations. in the drosophila imaginal wing disc the iroquois homeobox genes are expressed in the notum anlage and contribute to the specification of notum identity. these genes are not expressed in the adjacent wing hinge territory. these territories are separated by an approximately straight boundary that in the mature disc is associated with an epithelial fold. the mechanism by which these two cell populations are kept separate is unclear.


RESULTS
here we show that the iro-c genes participate in keeping the notum and wing cell populations separate. indeed, within the notum anlage, cells not expressing iro-c tend to join together and sort out from their iro-c expressing neighbours. we also show that apposition of iro-c expressing and non-expressing cells induces invagination and apico-basal shortening of the iro-c- cells. this effect probably underlies formation of the fold that separates the notum and wing hinge territories. in addition, cells overexpressing a member of the iro-c contact one another and become organized in a network of thin strings that surrounds and isolates large groups of non-overexpressing cells. the strings appear to exert a pulling force along their longitudinal axis.


CONCLUSIONS
apposition of cells expressing and non-expressing the iro-c, as it occurs in the notum-wing hinge border of the drosophila wing disc, influences cell behaviour. it leads to cell sorting, and cellular invagination and apical-basal shortening. these effects probably account for keeping the prospective notum and wing hinge cell populations separate and underlie epithelial fold formation. cells that overexpress a member of the iro-c and that confront non-expressing cells establish contacts between themselves and become organized in a network of thin strings. this is a complex and unique phenotype that might be important for the generation of a straight notum-wing hinge border.

