BACKGROUND
destabilase-lysozyme  is a multifunctional i-type enzyme that has been found in the secretions from the salivary glands of medicinal leeches. mldl has been shown to exhibit isopeptidase, muramidase and antibacterial activity. this enzyme attracts interest because it expresses thrombolytic activity through isopeptidolysis of the ε--lys bonds that cross-link polypeptide chains in stabilised fibrin. to date, three isoforms of mldl have been identified.

the enzymatic properties of pure mldl isoforms have not yet been described because only destabilase complexes containing other proteins could be isolated from the salivary gland secretion and because low product yield from the generation of recombinant proteins has made comprehensive testing difficult.


RESULTS
in the present study, we optimised the procedures related to the expression, isolation and purification of active mldl isoforms  using an escherichia coli expression system, and we detected and compared their muramidase, lytic, isopeptidase and antimicrobial activities. after optimisation, the product yield was 30 mg per litre of culture. the data obtained in our study led to the suggestion that the recombinant mldl isoforms isolated from inclusion bodies form stable oligomeric complexes. analyses of the tested activities revealed that all isoforms exhibited almost identical patterns of ph and ionic strength effects on the activities. we determined that mldl-ds <dig>   <dig>   <dig> possessed non-enzymatic antibacterial activity independent of their muramidase activity. for the first time, we demonstrated the fibrinolytic activity of the recombinant mldl and showed that only intact proteins possessed this activity, suggesting their enzymatic nature.


CONCLUSIONS
the recombinant destabilase-lysozyme isoforms obtained in our study may be considered potential thrombolytic agents that act through a mechanism different from that of common thrombolytics.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
destabilase-lysozymerecombinant proteinthrombolysisisopeptidaseantimicrobial activityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

