BACKGROUND
among abiotic stresses, drought is the most common reducer of crop yields. the slow-wilting soybean genotype pi  <dig> is somewhat robust to water deficit and has been used previously to map the trait in a bi-parental population. since drought stress response is a complex biological process, whole genome transcriptome analysis was performed to obtain a deeper understanding of the drought response in soybean.


RESULTS
contrasting data from pi  <dig> and the cultivar ‘benning’, we developed a classification system to identify genes that were either responding to water-deficit in both genotypes or that had a genotype x environment  response. in spite of very different wilting phenotypes, 90% of classifiable genes had either constant expression in both genotypes  or very similar response profiles . by further classifying e genes based on expression profiles, we were able to discern the functional specificity of transcriptional responses at particular stages of water-deficit, noting both the well-known reduction in photosynthesis genes as well as the less understood up-regulation of the protein transport pathway. two percent of classifiable genes had a well-defined gxe response, many of which are located within slow-wilting qtls. we consider these strong candidates for possible causal genes underlying pi 416937’s unique drought avoidance strategy.


CONCLUSIONS
there is a general and functionally significant transcriptional response to water deficit that involves not only known pathways, such as down-regulation of photosynthesis, but also up-regulation of protein transport and chromatin remodeling. genes that show a genotypic difference are more likely to show an environmental response than genes that are constant between genotypes. in this study, at least five genes that clearly exhibited a genotype x environment response fell within known qtl and are very good candidates for further research into slow-wilting.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
drought stresscanopy-wiltingglycine maxrna-sequencingquantitative trait loci genotype x environmentissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

