BACKGROUND
one very important functional domain of proteins is the protein-protein interacting region , which forms the binding interface between interacting polypeptide chains. post-translational modifications  that occur in the ppir can either interfere with or facilitate the interaction between proteins. the ability to predict whether sites of protein modifications are inside or outside of ppirs would be useful in further elucidating the regulatory mechanisms by which modifications of specific proteins regulate their cellular functions.


RESULTS
using two of the comprehensive databases for protein-protein interaction and protein modification site data , we created new databases that map ptms to their locations inside or outside of ppirs. the mapped ptms represented only 5 % of all known ptms. thus, in order to predict localization within or outside of ppirs for the vast majority of ptms, a machine learning strategy was used to generate predictive models from these mapped databases. for the three mapped ptm databases which had sufficient numbers of modification sites for generating models , the resulting models yielded high overall predictive performance as judged by a combined performance score . among the multiple properties of amino acids that were used in the classification tasks, hydrophobicity was found to contribute substantially to the performance of the final predictive models. compared to the other classifiers we also evaluated, the svm provided the best performance overall.


CONCLUSIONS
these models are the first to predict whether ptms are located inside or outside of ppirs, as demonstrated by their high predictive performance. the models and data presented here should be useful in prioritizing both known and newly identified ptms for further studies to determine the functional relationship between specific ptms and protein-protein interactions. the implemented r package is available online .

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
post-translational modificationprotein-protein interacting regionmachine learningaaindexhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002873chulalongkorn universitycuaascratchadaphiseksomphot endowment fundpost-doctoral scholarship, ratchadaphiseksomphot fundsaethang thammakorn pisitkun trairak issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

