BACKGROUND
rubber dandelion  is being developed as a domestic source of natural rubber to meet increasing global demand. however, the domestication of tk is complicated by its colocation with two weedy dandelion species, taraxacum brevicorniculatum  and the common dandelion . tb is often present as a seed contaminant within tk accessions, while to is a pandemic weed, which may have the potential to hybridize with tk. to discriminate these species at the molecular level, and facilitate gene flow studies between the potential rubber crop, tk, and its weedy relatives, we generated genomic and marker resources for these three dandelion species.


RESULTS
complete chloroplast genome sequences of tk , to , and tb  were obtained using the illumina gaii and miseq platforms. chloroplast sequences were analyzed and annotated for all the three species. phylogenetic analysis within asteraceae showed that tk has a closer genetic distance to tb than to to and taraxacum species were most closely related to lettuce . by sequencing multiple genotypes for each species and testing variants using gel-based methods, four chloroplast single nucleotide polymorphism  variants were found to be fixed between tk and to in large populations, and between tb and to. additionally, expressed sequence tag  resources developed for to and tk permitted the identification of five nuclear species-specific snp markers.


CONCLUSIONS
the availability of chloroplast genomes of these three dandelion species, as well as chloroplast and nuclear molecular markers, will provide a powerful genetic resource for germplasm differentiation and purification, and the study of potential gene flow among taraxacum species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chloroplast genomerubberspecies-specific single nucleotide polymorphism markerstaraxacum brevicorniculatumtaraxacum kok-saghyztaraxacum officinaleusda national institute of food and agriculturehatch project 230837cornish katrina oardc seeds2011-004cornish katrina issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

