BACKGROUND
individual body growth is controlled in large part by the spatial and temporal heterogeneity of, and competition for, resources. grizzly bears  are an excellent species for studying the effects of resource heterogeneity and maternal effects  on life history traits such as body size because their habitats are highly variable in space and time. here, we evaluated influences on body size of grizzly bears in alberta, canada by testing six factors that accounted for spatial and temporal heterogeneity in environments during maternal, natal and ‘capture’  environments. after accounting for intrinsic biological factors , we examined how body size, measured in mass, length and body condition, was influenced by:  population density;  regional habitat productivity;  inter-annual variability in productivity ;  local habitat quality;  human footprint ; and  landscape change.


RESULTS
we found sex and age explained the most variance in body mass, condition and length . inter-annual variability in climate the year before and of birth  had detectable effects on the three-body size metrics ; both maternal  and natal  effects of precipitation and temperature were related with body size. local heterogeneity in habitat quality also explained variance in body mass and condition , while annual rate of landscape change explained additional variance in body length . human footprint and population density had no observed effect on body size.


CONCLUSIONS
these results illustrated that body size patterns of grizzly bears, while largely affected by basic biological characteristics , were also influenced by regional environmental gradients the year before, and of, the individual’s birth thus illustrating silver spoon effects. the magnitude of the silver spoon effects was on par with the influence of contemporary regional habitat productivity, which showed that both temporal and spatial influences explain in part body size patterns in grizzly bears. because smaller bears were found in colder and less-productive environments, we hypothesize that warming global temperatures may positively affect body mass of interior bears.

bearsilver spoonenvironmental effectsgps radiocollartemporal and spatial heterogeneity

