BACKGROUND
solanum commersonii is a wild potato species that exhibits high tolerance to both biotic and abiotic stresses and has been used as a source of genes for introgression into cultivated potato. among the interesting features of s. commersonii is resistance to the bacterial wilt caused by ralstonia solanacearum, one of the most devastating bacterial diseases of crops.


RESULTS
in this study, we used deep sequencing of s. commersonii rna  to analyze the below-ground plant transcriptional responses to r. solanacearum. while a majority of s. commersonii rna-seq reads could be aligned to the solanum tuberosum group phureja dm reference genome sequence, we identified  <dig>  s. commersonii novel transcripts through assembly of unaligned s. commersonii rna-seq reads. we also used rna-seq to study gene expression in pathogen-challenged roots of s. commersonii accessions resistant  and susceptible  to the pathogen. expression profiles obtained from read mapping to the s. tuberosum reference genome and the s. commersonii novel transcripts revealed a differential response to the pathogen in the two accessions, with  <dig>  and  <dig>  differentially expressed genes including s. commersonii novel transcripts in the resistant and susceptible genotypes. interestingly,  <dig> % of the f <dig> and  <dig> % of the f <dig> differentially expressed genes had been previously identified as responsive to biotic stresses and half of those up-regulated in both accessions had been involved in plant pathogen responses. finally, we compared two different methods to eliminate ribosomal rna from the plant rna samples in order to allow dual mapping of rnaseq reads to the host and pathogen genomes and provide insights on the advantages and limitations of each technique.


CONCLUSIONS
our work catalogues the s. commersonii transcriptome and strengthens the notion that this species encodes specific genes that are differentially expressed to respond to bacterial wilt. in addition, a high proportion of s. commersonii-specific transcripts were altered by r. solanacearum only in f <dig> accession, while phythormone-related genes were highly induced in f <dig>  suggesting a markedly different response to the pathogen in the two plant accessions studied.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
solanum commersoniibacterial wiltbrown rotralstonia solanacearumrna sequencingtranscriptomedisease resistanceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

