BACKGROUND
macaca fascicularis  is the most commonly used non-human  primate in biomedical research. little is known about the genomic variation in cynomolgus macaques or how the sequence variants compare to those of the well-studied related species, macaca mulatta . previously we identified single nucleotide polymorphisms  in portions of  <dig> rhesus macaque genes and reported that indian and chinese rhesus had largely different snps. here we identify snps from some of the same genomic regions of cynomolgus macaques  and compare them to the snps found in rhesus.


RESULTS
we sequenced a portion of  <dig> genes in  <dig> cynomolgus macaques. we identified  <dig> snps in these regions, compared with  <dig> snps found in the same genomic regions of  <dig> indian and chinese rhesus macaques. thirty six  of the m. fascicularis snps were overlapping in both species. the majority  of the snps found in both chinese and indian rhesus macaque populations were also present in m. fascicularis. of the snps previously found in a single rhesus population, 38%  and 44%  were also identified in cynomolgus macaques. in an alternative approach, we genotyped  <dig> cynomolgus dnas using a rhesus macaque snp array representing  <dig> genes and found that 51%  of the rhesus snps were present in m. fascicularis. comparisons of snp profiles from cynomolgus macaques imported from breeding centers in china  showed they were similar to those from indochina.


CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates a surprisingly high conservation of snps between m. fascicularis and m. mulatta, suggesting that the relationship of these two species is closer than that suggested by morphological and mitochondrial dna analysis alone. these findings indicate that snp discovery efforts in either species will generate useful resources for both macaque species. identification of snps that are unique to regional populations of cynomolgus macaques indicates that location-specific snps could be used to distinguish monkeys of uncertain origin. as an example, cynomolgus macaques obtained from  <dig> different breeding centers in china were shown to have indochinese ancestry.

