BACKGROUND
the most toxic aromatic hydrocarbon pollutants are categorized as dioxin-like compounds  to which extreme tolerance has evolved independently and contemporaneously in  four populations of atlantic killifish . surprisingly, the magnitude and phenotype of dlc tolerance is similar among these killifish populations that have adapted to varied, but highly aromatic hydrocarbon-contaminated urban/industrialized estuaries of the us atlantic coast. multiple tolerant and neighboring sensitive killifish populations were compared with the expectation that genetic loci associated with dlc tolerance would be revealed.


RESULTS
since the aryl hydrocarbon receptor  pathway partly or fully mediates dlc toxicity in vertebrates, single nucleotide polymorphisms  from  <dig> genes associated with the ahr pathway were identified to serve as targeted markers. wild fish  from four highly tolerant killifish populations and four nearby sensitive populations were genotyped using  <dig> snp markers. similar to other killifish population genetic analyses, strong genetic differentiation among populations was detected, consistent with isolation by distance models. when dlc-sensitive populations were pooled and compared to pooled dlc-tolerant populations, multi-locus analyses did not distinguish the two groups. however, pairwise comparisons of nearby tolerant and sensitive populations revealed high differentiation among sensitive and tolerant populations at these specific loci: ahr  <dig> and  <dig>  cathepsin z, the cytochrome p450s , and the nadh dehydrogenase subunits. in addition, significant shifts in minor allele frequency were observed at ahr <dig> and cyp1a loci across most sensitive/tolerant pairs, but only ahr <dig> exhibited shifts in the same direction across all pairs.


CONCLUSIONS
the observed differences in allelic composition at the ahr <dig> and cyp1a snp loci were identified as significant among paired sensitive/tolerant populations of atlantic killifish with multiple statistical tests. the genetic patterns reported here lend support to the argument that ahr <dig> and cyp1a play a role in the adaptive response to extreme dlc contamination. additional functional assays are required to isolate the exact mechanism of dlc tolerance.

adaptationecotoxicologycandidate gene scankillifish

