BACKGROUND
marine diatoms constitute a major component of eukaryotic phytoplankton and stand at the crossroads of several evolutionary lineages. these microalgae possess peculiar genomic features and novel combinations of genes acquired from bacterial, animal and plant ancestors. furthermore, they display both dna methylation and gene silencing activities. yet, the biogenesis and regulatory function of small rnas  remain ill defined in diatoms.


RESULTS
here we report the first comprehensive characterization of the srna landscape and its correlation with genomic and epigenomic information in phaeodactylum tricornutum. the majority of srnas is  <dig> to 30 nt-long and maps to repetitive and silenced transposable elements marked by dna methylation. a subset of this population also targets dna methylated protein-coding genes, suggesting that gene body methylation might be srna-driven in diatoms. remarkably, 25-30 nt srnas display a well-defined and unprecedented 180 nt-long periodic distribution at several highly methylated regions that awaits characterization. while canonical mirnas are not detectable, other 21-25 nt srnas of unknown origin are highly expressed. besides, non-coding rnas with well-described function, namely trnas and u <dig> snrna, constitute a major source of 21-25 nt srnas and likely play important roles under stressful environmental conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
p. tricornutum has evolved diversified srna pathways, likely implicated in the regulation of largely still uncharacterized genetic and epigenetic processes. these results uncover an unexpected complexity of diatom srna population and previously unappreciated features, providing new insights into the diversification of srna-based processes in eukaryotes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
diatomsphaeodactylum tricornutumsmall rnastrnasu <dig> snrnatransposable elementsdna methylationperiodic small rnas distributionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

