BACKGROUND
the histones in the core of nucleosomes may be subject to covalent post-transcriptional modifications. these modifications are thought to correlate with and possibly affect various genomic functions, including transcription. each modification may alone or in combination with other modifications influence or be influenced by transcription. we aimed to identify correlations between single modifications or combinations of modifications at specific nucleosome sized gene regions with transcription activity based on global histone modification and transcription data of human cd4+ t cells and three other human cell lines. transcription activity was defined in a binary fashion as either on or off. the analysis was done using the classification and regression tree  data mining protocol, and the multifactorial dimensionality reduction  method was performed to confirm the cart results. these powerful methods have not previously been used for analysis of histone modification data.


RESULTS
we showed that analysis of the single histone modification h2bk5ac at only four gene regions correctly predicted transcription activity status of over 75% of genes in cd4+ t-cells. the h2bk5ac modification status also had high power for prediction of gene transcription activity in the three other cell lines studied. the informative gene regions with the h2bk5ac modification were all positioned proximal to transcription initiation sites. the cart and mdr methods were appropriate tools for the analysis performed. in the study, we also developed a non-arbitrary protocol for binary classification of genes as transcriptionally active or inactive.


CONCLUSIONS
the importance of h2bk5ac modification with regards to transcription control has not previously been emphasized. analysis of this single modification at only four nucleosome sized gene regions, all of which are at or proximal to transcription initiation, has high power for prediction of gene transcription activity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
histone modificationstranscriptioncartmdrh2bk5acschool of biological sciences, institute for research in fundamental siences issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

