BACKGROUND
phasianidae is a family of galliformes containing  <dig> genera and approximately  <dig> species, which is grouped into two tribes based on their morphological features, the pheasants and partridges. several studies have attempted to reconstruct the phylogenetic relationships of the phasianidae, but many questions still remain unaddressed, such as the taxonomic status and phylogenetic relationships among crossoptilon species. the mitochondrial genome  has been extensively used to infer avian genetic diversification with reasonable resolution. here, we sequenced the entire mitogenomes of three crossoptilon species  to investigate their evolutionary relationship among crossoptilon species.


RESULTS
the complete mitogenomes of c. harmani, c. mantchuricum and c. crossoptilon are  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp in length, respectively, encoding a standard set of  <dig> protein-coding genes,  <dig> ribosomal rna genes,  <dig> transfer rna genes, and a putative control region. c. auritum and c. mantchuricum are more closely related genetically, whereas c. harmani is more closely related to c. crossoptilon. crossoptilon has a closer relationship with lophura, and the following phylogenetic relationship was reconstructed:  + ). the divergence time between the clades c. harmani-c. crossoptilon and c. mantchuricum-c. auritum is consistent with the uplift of the tibetan plateau during the tertiary pliocene. the ka/ks analysis showed that atp <dig> gene in the crossoptilon likely experienced a strong selective pressure in adaptation to the plateau environment.


CONCLUSIONS
c. auritum with c. mantchuricum and c. harmani with c. crossoptilon form two pairs of sister groups. the genetic distance between c. harmani and c. crossoptilon is far less than the interspecific distance and is close to the intraspecific distance of crossoptilon, indicating that c. harmani is much more closely related to c. crossoptilon. our mito-phylogenomic analysis supports the monophyly of crossoptilon and its closer relationship with lophura. the uplift of tibetan plateau is suggested to impact the divergence between c. harmani-c. crossoptilon clade and c. mantchuricum-c. auritum clade during the tertiary pliocene. atp <dig> gene in the crossoptilon species might have experienced a strong selective pressure for adaptation to the plateau environment.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mitochondrial genomecrossoptilonphylogenydivergence timeka/ksissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

