BACKGROUND
pyropia yezoensis is a model organism often used to investigate the mechanisms underlying stress tolerance in intertidal zones. the digital gene expression  approach was used to characterize a genome-wide comparative analysis of differentially expressed genes  that influence the physiological, developmental or biochemical processes in samples subjected to  <dig> treatments: high-temperature stress , chilling stress , freezing stress  and normal temperature .


RESULTS
equal amounts of total rnas collected from  <dig> samples  were sequenced using the illumina/solexa platform. compared with nt, a total of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed unigenes were detected in ht, cs and fs respectively. clustering analysis suggested p. yezoensis acclimates to low and high-temperature stress condition using different mechanisms: in heat stress, the unigenes related to replication and repair of dna and protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum were active; however at low temperature stresses, unigenes related to carbohydrate metabolism and energy metabolism were active. analysis of gene differential expression showed that four categories of degs functioning as temperature sensors were found, including heat shock proteins, h2a, histone deacetylase complex and transcription factors. heat stress caused chloroplast genes down-regulated and unigenes encoding metacaspases up-regulated, which is an important regulator of pcd. cold stress caused an increase in the expression of fad to improve the proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acids. an up-regulated unigene encoding farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase was found in cold stress, indicating that the plant hormone aba also played an important role in responding to temperature stress in p. yezoensis.


CONCLUSIONS
the variation of amount of unigenes and different gene expression pattern under different temperature stresses indicated the complicated and diverse regulation mechanism in response to temperature stress in p. yezoensis. several common metabolism pathways were found both in p. yezoensis and in higher plants, such as fad in low-temperature stress and hsp in heat stress. meanwhile, many chloroplast genes and unigene related to the synthesis of abscisic acid were detected, revealing its unique temperature-regulation mechanism in this intertidal species. this sequencing dataset and analysis may serve as a valuable resource to study the mechanisms involved in abiotic stress tolerance in intertidal seaweeds.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pyropia yezoensisrna-seqhigh temperature stresschilling stressfreezing stressdgetranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

