BACKGROUND
some apple  varieties have attractive striping patterns, a quality attribute that is important for determining apple fruit market acceptance. most apple cultivars  produce fruit with a defined fruit pigment pattern, but in the case of 'honeycrisp' apple, trees can produce fruits of two different kinds: striped and blushed. the causes of this phenomenon are unknown.


RESULTS
here we show that striped areas of 'honeycrisp' and 'royal gala' are due to sectorial increases in anthocyanin concentration. transcript levels of the major biosynthetic genes and myb <dig>  a transcription factor that upregulates apple anthocyanin production, correlated with increased anthocyanin concentration in stripes. however, nucleotide changes in the promoter and coding sequence of myb <dig> do not correlate with skin pattern in 'honeycrisp' and other cultivars differing in peel pigmentation patterns. a survey of methylation levels throughout the coding region of myb <dig> and a  <dig>  kb region 5' of the atg translation start site indicated that an area  <dig> bp long, starting  <dig> bp upstream of the translation start site, is highly methylated. cytosine methylation was present in all three contexts, with higher methylation levels observed for chh and chg  than for cg. comparisons of methylation levels of the myb <dig> promoter in 'honeycrisp' red and green stripes indicated that they correlate with peel phenotypes, with an enrichment of methylation observed in green stripes.


CONCLUSIONS
differences in anthocyanin levels between red and green stripes can be explained by differential transcript accumulation of myb <dig>  different levels of myb <dig> transcript in red versus green stripes are inversely associated with methylation levels in the promoter region. although observed methylation differences are modest, trends are consistent across years and differences are statistically significant. methylation may be associated with the presence of a trim retrotransposon within the promoter region, but the presence of the trim element alone cannot explain the phenotypic variability observed in 'honeycrisp'. we suggest that methylation in the myb <dig> promoter is more variable in 'honeycrisp' than in 'royal gala', leading to more variable color patterns in the peel of this cultivar.

