BACKGROUND
the last universal common ancestor represents the primordial cellular organism from which diversified life was derived. this urancestor accumulated genetic information before the rise of organismal lineages and is considered to be either a simple 'progenote' organism with a rudimentary translational apparatus or a more complex 'cenancestor' with almost all essential biological processes. recent comparative genomic studies support the latter model and propose that the urancestor was similar to modern organisms in terms of gene content. however, most of these studies were based on molecular sequences, which are fast evolving and of limited value for deep evolutionary explorations.


RESULTS
here we engage in a phylogenomic study of protein domain structure in the proteomes of  <dig> free-living fully sequenced organisms. domains were defined at the highly conserved fold superfamily  level of structural classification and an iterative phylogenomic approach was used to reconstruct max_set and min_set fsf repertoires as upper and lower bounds of the urancestral proteome. while the functional make up of the urancestral sets was complex, they represent only 5-11% of the  <dig>  fsfs of extant proteomes and their make up and reuse was at least  <dig> and  <dig> times smaller than proteomes of free-living organisms, repectively. trees of proteomes reconstructed directly from fsfs or from molecular functions, which included the max_set and min_set as articial taxa, showed that urancestors were always placed at their base and rooted the tree of life in archaea. finally, a molecular clock of fsfs suggests the min_set reflects urancestral genetic make up more reliably and confirms diversified life emerged about  <dig>  billion years ago during the start of planet oxygenation.


CONCLUSIONS
the minimum urancestral fsf set reveals the urancestor had advanced metabolic capabilities, was especially rich in nucleotide metabolism enzymes, had pathways for the biosynthesis of membrane sn <dig>  glycerol ester and ether lipids, and had crucial elements of translation, including a primordial ribosome with protein synthesis capabilities. it lacked however fundamental functions, including transcription, processes for extracellular communication, and enzymes for deoxyribonucleotide synthesis. proteomic history reveals the urancestor is closer to a simple progenote organism but harbors a rather complex set of modern molecular functions.

