BACKGROUND
phosphorus is an essential macronutrient for the growth of plants. however, in most soils a large portion of phosphorus becomes insoluble and therefore, unavailable to plants. knowledge on biodiversity of phosphate-solubilizing fluorescent pseudomonads is essential to understand their ecological role and their utilization in sustainable agriculture.


RESULTS
of  <dig> fluorescent pseudomonad strains tested,  <dig> strains  showed positive for the solubilization of tri-calcium phosphate 2) by the formation of visible dissolution halos on pikovskaya's agar. these phosphate solubilizing strains showed high variability in utilizing various carbon sources. numerical taxonomy of the phosphate solubilizing strains based on their carbon source utilization profiles resulted into three major phenons at a  <dig>  similarity coefficient level. genotypic analyses of strains by box -polymerase chain reaction  resulted into three distinct genomic clusters and  <dig> distinct box profiles at a 80% similarity level. on the basis of phenotypic characterization and 16s rrna gene phylogenetic analyses strains were identified as pseudomonas aeruginosa, p. mosselii, p. monteilii, p. plecoglossicida, p. putida, p. fulva and p. fluorescens. these phosphate solubilizing strains also showed the production of plant growth promoting enzymes, hormones and exhibited antagonism against phytopathogenic fungi that attack on various crops. gene specific primers have identified the putative antibiotic producing strains. these putative strains were grown in fermentation media and production of antibiotics was confirmed by thin layer chromatography  and high performance liquid chromatography .


CONCLUSIONS
present study revealed a high degree of functional and genetic diversity among the phosphate solubilizing fluorescent pseudomonad bacteria. due to their innate potential of producing an array of plant growth promoting enzymes, hormones and antifungal metabolites these phosphate solubilizing strains are considered to play a vital role in plant growth promotion, disease suppression and subsequent enhancement of yield.

