BACKGROUND
the integration of many aspects of protein/dna structure analysis is an important requirement for software products in general area of structural bioinformatics. in fact, there are too few software packages on the internet which can be described as successful in this respect. we might say that what is still missing is publicly available, web based software for interactive analysis of the sequence/structure/function of proteins and their complexes with dna and ligands. some of existing software packages do have certain level of integration and do offer analysis of several structure related parameters, however not to the extent generally demanded by a user.


RESULTS
we are reporting here about new sting millennium suite  version which is fully accessible , web based software for molecular structure and sequence/structure/function analysis. the new sms client version is now operational also on linux boxes and it works with non-public pdb formatted files , eliminating earlier requirement for the registration if sms components were to be used with user's local files. at the same time the new sms offers some important additions and improvements such as link to protherm as well as significant re-engineering of sms component consseq. also, we have added  <dig> new sms mirror sites to existing network of global sms servers: argentina, japan and spain.


CONCLUSIONS
sms is already established software package and many key data base and software servers worldwide, do offer either a link to, or host the sms. sms  is web-based publicly available software developed to aid researches in their quest for translating information about the structures of macromolecules into knowledge. sms allows to a user to interactively analyze molecular structures, cross-referencing visualized information with a correlated one, available across the internet. sms is already used as a didactic tool by some universities. sms analysis is now possible on linux os boxes and with no requirement for registration when using local files.

