BACKGROUND
high-throughput genotype  data has been used primarily in genome-wide association  studies; however, gwa results explain only a limited part of the complete genetic variation of traits. in systems genetics, network approaches have been shown to be able to identify pathways and their underlying causal genes to unravel the biological and genetic background of complex diseases and traits, e.g., the weighted gene co-expression network analysis  method based on microarray gene expression data. the main objective of this study was to develop a scale-free weighted genetic interaction network method using whole genome htg data in order to detect biologically relevant pathways and potential genetic biomarkers for complex diseases and traits.


RESULTS
we developed the weighted interaction snp hub  network method that uses htg data to detect genome-wide interactions between single nucleotide polymorphism  and its relationship with complex traits. data dimensionality reduction was achieved by selecting snps based on its: 1) degree of genome-wide significance and 2) degree of genetic variation in a population. network construction was based on pairwise pearson's correlation between snp genotypes or the epistatic interaction effect between snp pairs. to identify modules the topological overlap measure  was calculated, reflecting the degree of overlap in shared neighbours between snp pairs. modules, clusters of highly interconnected snps, were defined using a tree-cutting algorithm on the snp dendrogram created from the dissimilarity tom . modules were selected for functional annotation based on their association with the trait of interest, defined by the genome-wide module association test . we successfully tested the established wish network method using simulated and real snp interaction data and gwa study results for carcass weight in a pig resource population; this resulted in detecting modules and key functional and biological pathways related to carcass weight.


CONCLUSIONS
we developed the wish network method which is a novel 'systems genetics' approach to study genetic networks underlying complex trait variation. the wish network method reduces data dimensionality and statistical complexity in associating genotypes with phenotypes in gwa studies and enables researchers to identify biologically relevant pathways and potential genetic biomarkers for any complex trait of interest.

13- <dig> february  <dig> high-throughput omics and data integration workshop barcelona, spain

