BACKGROUND
although protein-protein interaction  networks have been explored by various experimental methods, the maps so built are still limited in coverage and accuracy. to further expand the ppi network and to extract more accurate information from existing maps, studies have been carried out to integrate various types of functional relationship data. a frequently updated database of computationally analyzed potential ppis to provide biological researchers with rapid and easy access to analyze original data as a biological network is still lacking.


RESULTS
by applying a probabilistic model, we integrated  <dig> heterogeneous genomic, proteomic and functional annotation datasets to predict ppi networks in human. in addition to previously studied data types, we show that phenotypic distances and genetic interactions can also be integrated to predict ppis. we further built an easy-to-use, updatable integrated ppi database, the integrated network database  online, to provide automatic prediction and visualization of ppi network among genes of interest. the networks can be visualized in svg  format for zooming in or out. intnetdb also provides a tool to extract topologically highly connected network neighborhoods from a specific network for further exploration and research. using the mcode  algorithm,  <dig> such neighborhoods were detected among all the predicted interactions. the predicted ppis can also be mapped to worm, fly and mouse interologs.


CONCLUSIONS
intnetdb includes  <dig>  predicted protein-protein interactions among  <dig>  human proteins and represents a useful resource for the research community. our study has increased prediction coverage by five-fold. intnetdb also provides easy-to-use network visualization and analysis tools that allow biological researchers unfamiliar with computational biology to access and analyze data over the internet. the web interface of intnetdb is freely accessible at . visualization requires mozilla version  <dig>   or internet explorer with installation of svgviewer.

