BACKGROUND
calcineurin, a serine/threonine-specific protein phosphatase, plays an important role in the control of cell morphology and virulence in fungi. calcineurin regulates localization and activity of a transcription factor called crz <dig>  recently, we characterize aspergillus fumigatus crz <dig> homologue, afcrza. here, we investigate which pathways are influenced by a. fumigatus afcrza during a short pulse of calcium by comparatively determining the transcriptional profile of a. fumigatus wild type and Δafcrza mutant strains.


RESULTS
we were able to observe  <dig>  genes modulated in at least one timepoint in the mutant when compared to the wild type strain . decreased mrna abundance in the Δcrza was seen for genes encoding calcium transporters, transcription factors and genes that could be directly or indirectly involved in calcium metabolism. increased mrna accumulation was observed for some genes encoding proteins involved in stress response. afcrza overexpression in a. fumigatus increases the expression of several of these genes. the deleted strain of one of these genes, afrcna, belonging to a class of endogenous calcineurin regulators, calcipressins, had more calcineurin activity after exposure to calcium and was less sensitive to menadione  <dig> μm, hydrogen peroxide  <dig>  mm, egta  <dig> mm, and mncl <dig>  <dig> mm. we constructed deletion, overexpression, and gfp fusion protein for the closely related a. nidulans anrcna. gfp::rcna was mostly detected along the germling, did not accumulate in the nuclei and its location is not affected by the cellular response to calcium chloride.


CONCLUSIONS
we have performed a transcriptional profiling analysis of the a. fumigatus Δafcrza mutant strain exposed to calcium stress. this provided an excellent opportunity to identify genes and pathways that are under the influence of afcrza. afrcna, one of these selected genes, encodes a modulator of calcineurin activity. concomitantly with a. fumigatus afrcna molecular analysis, we decided to exploit the conserved features of a. nidulans calcineurin system and investigated the a. nidulans anrcna homologue. a. nidulans anrcna mutation is suppressing cnaa mutation and it is responsible for modulating the calcineurin activity and mrna accumulation of genes encoding calcium transporters.

