BACKGROUND
dna microarray technology allows the analysis of genome structure and dynamics at genome-wide scale. expression microarrays  contain probes for annotated open reading frames  and are widely used for the analysis of differential gene expression. by contrast, tiling microarrays  have a much higher probe density and provide unbiased genome-wide coverage. the purpose of this study was to develop a protocol to exploit the high resolution of tmas for quantitative measurement of dna strand-specific differential expression of annotated and non-annotated transcripts.


RESULTS
we extensively filtered probes present in affymetrix genechip yeast genome  <dig>  expression and genechip s. pombe  <dig> fr tiling microarrays to generate custom chip description files  in order to compare their efficiency. we experimentally tested the potential of our approach by measuring the differential expression of  <dig> genes in the yeast schizosaccharomyces pombe growing under conditions of oxidative stress. the results showed a pearson correlation coefficient of  <dig>  between both platforms, indicating that tmas are as reliable as emas for quantitative expression analysis. a significant advantage of tmas over emas is the possibility of detecting non-annotated transcripts generated only under specific physiological conditions. to take full advantage of this property, we have used a target-labelling protocol that preserves the original polarity of the transcripts and, therefore, allows the strand-specific differential expression of non-annotated transcripts to be determined. by using a segmentation algorithm prior to generating the corresponding custom cdfs, we identified and quantitatively measured the expression of  <dig> transcripts longer than  <dig> nucleotides and not overlapping previously annotated orfs that were differentially expressed at least 2-fold under oxidative stress.


CONCLUSIONS
we show that the information derived from tma hybridization can be processed simultaneously for high-resolution qualitative and quantitative analysis of the differential expression of well-characterized genes and of previously non-annotated and antisense transcripts. the consistency of the performance of tma, their genome-wide coverage and adaptability to updated genome annotations, and the possibility of measuring strand-specific differential expression makes them a tool of choice for the analysis of gene expression in any organism for which tma platforms are available.

