BACKGROUND
our prior solvent partition analysis, published in  <dig>  yielded pka values for unconjugated bilirubin of about  <dig>  and  <dig> , but these results have been challenged and studies by other methods have suggested pka values below  <dig> .

methods
we repeated our published solvent partition studies, using 14c-unconjugated bilirubin highly purified by extraction of residual labeled impurities from chcl <dig> into an aqueous buffer, ph  <dig> . partition ratios at six ph values from  <dig>  to  <dig>  were determined by radioassay and compared with our prior values obtained by diazo assay.


RESULTS
at ph values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> , stable aqueous/chloroform 14c-partition ratios did not differ significantly from our published partition ratios based on diazo assay.


CONCLUSIONS
these results support the high pka values of unconjugated bilirubin, above  <dig> , derived from our earlier solvent partition study. in both studies, our measurements were based on the rapid analysis of clearly under-saturated solutions of highly-purified bilirubin over a wide ph range, using properly purified and preserved solvents. no previous direct estimate of the aqueous pka values of unconjugated bilirubin meets all these preconditions. three theoretical factors acting in combination, each related to the unique, extensive internal h-bonding of the -cooh groups, are proposed to support high pka values of unconjugated bilirubin in water: a) donation of an h-bond from the -oh moiety of the -cooh group, which is broken on ionization; b) hindered solvation of the -coo- group after ionization; and c) restricted rotation of the -coo- and -cooh groups. our findings and rationale rebut methodological and theoretical criticisms leveled against our prior work. high pka values for unconjugated bilirubin dictate that: a) bilirubin diacid, which readily diffuses across membranes and can cause neurotoxicity, is the dominant unbound bilirubin species of unconjugated bilirubin in plasma at physiological ph; b) at the near-neutral ph range of gallbladder bile, the monoanion is the major unconjugated bilirubin anion present, concordant with the finding that the calcium bilirubinate precipitated in gallstones is the monoanion salt. our conclusions are thus relevant to understanding bilirubin-induced neurological disease in severely jaundiced neonates and the precipitation of calcium bilirubinate salts in gallstones.

