BACKGROUND
gene expression profiling has become a tool of choice to study pathological or developmental questions but in most cases the material is scarce and requires sample amplification. two main procedures have been used: in vitro transcription  and polymerase chain reaction , the former known as linear and the latter as exponential. previous reports identified enzymatic pitfalls in pcr and ivt protocols; however the possible differences between the sequences affected by these amplification defaults were only rarely explored.


RESULTS
screening a bovine cdna array dedicated to embryonic stages with embryonic  and somatic tissues , we proceeded to moderate amplifications starting from  <dig> μg of total rna . whatever the tissue, 16% of the probes were involved in deviating gene expressions due to amplification defaults. these distortions were likely due to the molecular features of the affected sequences  but also to the relative abundance of these transcripts within the tissues. these deviating genes mainly encoded housekeeping genes from physiological or cellular processes  and constituted  <dig> subsets which did not overlap . however, the differential expressions identified between embryonic stages were both reliable  and relevant . in addition, the relative expression levels of those genes were biologically similar between amplified and unamplified samples.


CONCLUSIONS
conversely to the most recent reports which challenged the use of intense amplification procedures on minute amounts of rna, we chose moderate pcr and ivt amplifications for our gene profiling study. conclusively, it appeared that systematic biases arose even with moderate amplification procedures, independently of  the sample used: brain, ovary or embryos,  the enzymatic properties initially inferred  and  the preliminary optimization of the protocols. moreover the use of an in-house developed array, small-sized but well suited to the tissues we worked with, was of real interest for the search of differential expressions.

