BACKGROUND
information extraction  is a component of text mining that facilitates knowledge discovery by automatically locating instances of interesting biomedical events from huge document collections. as events are usually centred on verbs and nominalised verbs, understanding the syntactic and semantic behaviour of these words is highly important. corpora annotated with information concerning this behaviour can constitute a valuable resource in the training of ie components and resources.


RESULTS
we have defined a new scheme for annotating sentence-bound gene regulation events, centred on both verbs and nominalised verbs. for each event instance, all participants  in the same sentence are identified and assigned a semantic role from a rich set of  <dig> roles tailored to biomedical research articles, together with a biological concept type linked to the gene regulation ontology. to our knowledge, our scheme is unique within the biomedical field in terms of the range of event arguments identified. using the scheme, we have created the gene regulation event corpus , consisting of  <dig> medline abstracts, in which events relating to gene regulation and expression have been annotated by biologists. a novel method of evaluating various different facets of the annotation task showed that average inter-annotator agreement rates fall within the range of 66% - 90%.


CONCLUSIONS
the grec is a unique resource within the biomedical field, in that it annotates not only core relationships between entities, but also a range of other important details about these relationships, e.g., location, temporal, manner and environmental conditions. as such, it is specifically designed to support bio-specific tool and resource development. it has already been used to acquire semantic frames for inclusion within the biolexicon . initial experiments have also shown that the corpus may viably be used to train ie components, such as semantic role labellers. the corpus and annotation guidelines are freely available for academic purposes.

