BACKGROUND
the simulation of protein unfolding usually requires recording long molecular dynamics trajectories. the present work aims to figure out whether nmr restraints data can be used to probe protein conformations in order to accelerate the unfolding simulation. the sh <dig> domain of nephrocystine  was shown by nmr to be destabilized by point mutations, and was thus chosen to illustrate the proposed method.


RESULTS
the nmr restraints observed on the wt nph sh <dig> domain were sorted from the least redundant to the most redundant ones. protein nmr conformations were then calculated with:  the set full including all nmr restraints measured on nph sh <dig>   the set reduced where the least redundant restraints with respect to the set full were removed,  the sets random where randomly picked-up restraints were removed. from each set of conformations, we recorded series of 5-ns md trajectories. the β barrel architecture of nph sh <dig> in the trajectories starting from sets  and  appears to be stable. on the contrary, on trajectories based on the set , a displacement of the hydrophobic core residues and a variation of the β barrel inner cavity profile were observed. the overall nph sh <dig> destabilization agrees with previous experimental and simulation observations made on other sh <dig> domains. the destabilizing effect of mutations was also found to be enhanced by the removal of the least redundant restraints.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the nmr restraint redundancy is connected to the instability of the sh <dig> nph domain. this restraint redundancy generalizes the contact order parameter, which is calculated from the contact map of a folded protein and was shown in the literature to be correlated to the protein folding rate. the relationship between the nmr restraint redundancy and the protein folding is also reminiscent of the previous use of the gaussian network model to predict protein folding parameters.

nmrprotein foldingsh <dig> domainmolecular dynamics simulationqueencontact order: gaussian network model

