BACKGROUND
african wildlife experienced a reduction in population size and geographical distribution over the last millennium, particularly since the 19th century as a result of human demographic expansion, wildlife overexploitation, habitat degradation and cattle-borne diseases. in many areas, ungulate populations are now largely confined within a network of loosely connected protected areas. these metapopulations face gene flow restriction and run the risk of genetic diversity erosion. in this context, we assessed the “genetic health” of free ranging southern african cape buffalo populations  and investigated the origins of their current genetic structure. the analyses were based on  <dig> samples from  <dig> southern african countries that were genotyped for  <dig> autosomal and  <dig> y-chromosomal microsatellites.


RESULTS
the analyses differentiated three significant genetic clusters, hereafter referred to as northern , central  and southern  clusters. the results suggest that splitting of the n and c clusters occurred around  <dig> to  <dig> years ago. both n and c clusters displayed high genetic diversity  of  <dig> , average genetic diversity over loci of  <dig> , mean private alleles  of 11), low differentiation, and an absence of an inbreeding depression signal . the third  cluster, a tiny population enclosed within a small isolated protected area, likely originated from a more recent isolation and experienced genetic drift . this study also highlighted the impact of translocations between clusters on the genetic structure of several african buffalo populations. lower differentiation estimates were observed between c and n sampling localities that experienced translocation over the last century.


CONCLUSIONS
we showed that the current genetic structure of southern african cape buffalo populations results from both ancient and recent processes. the splitting time of n and c clusters suggests that the current pattern results from human-induced factors and/or from the aridification process that occurred during the holocene period. the more recent s cluster genetic drift probably results of processes that occurred over the last centuries . management practices of african buffalo populations should consider the micro-evolutionary changes highlighted in the present study.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
syncerus caffer cafferpopulation geneticsgenetic structuretranslocationsouthern africaconservation implicationsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

