BACKGROUND
sequencing of the atlantic salmon genome is now being planned by an international research consortium. full-length sequenced inserts from cdnas  are an important tool for correct annotation and clustering of the genomic sequence in any species. the large amount of highly similar duplicate sequences caused by the relatively recent genome duplication in the salmonid ancestor represents a particular challenge for the genome project. flics will therefore be an extremely useful resource for the atlantic salmon sequencing project. in addition to be helpful in order to distinguish between duplicate genome regions and in determining correct gene structures, flics are an important resource for functional genomic studies and for investigation of regulatory elements controlling gene expression. in contrast to the large number of ests available, including the ests from  <dig> developmental and tissue specific cdna libraries contributed by the salmon genome project , the number of sequences where the full-length of the cdna insert has been determined has been small.


RESULTS
high quality full-length insert sequences from  <dig> pre-smolt white muscle tissue specific cdnas were generated, accession numbers . five hundred and ten  of the transcripts were annotated using gene ontology  terms and  <dig> of the flics are likely to contain a complete coding sequence . the sequence information was used to identify putative paralogs, characterize salmon kozak motifs, polyadenylation signal variation and to identify motifs likely to be involved in the regulation of particular genes. finally, conserved 7-mers in the 3'utrs were identified, of which some were identical to mirna target sequences.


CONCLUSIONS
this paper describes the first atlantic salmon flics from a tissue and developmental stage specific cdna library. we have demonstrated that many flics contained a complete coding sequence . this suggests that the remaining cdna libraries generated by sgp represent a valuable ccds flic source. the conservation of 7-mers in 3'utrs indicates that these motifs are functionally important. identity between some of these 7-mers and mirna target sequences suggests that they are mirna targets in salmo salar transcripts as well.

