BACKGROUND
helitrons are class-ii eukaryotic transposons that transpose via a rolling circle mechanism. due to their ability to capture and mobilize gene fragments, they play an important role in the evolution of their host genomes. we have used a bioinformatics approach for the identification of helitrons in two pleurotus ostreatus genomes using de novo detection and homology-based searching. we have analyzed the presence of helitron-captured genes as well as the expansion of helitron-specific helicases in fungi and performed a phylogenetic analysis of their conserved domains with other representative eukaryotic species.


RESULTS
our results show the presence of two helitron families in p. ostreatus that disrupt gene colinearity and cause a lack of synteny between their genomes. both putative autonomous and non-autonomous helitrons were transcriptionally active, and some of them carried highly expressed captured genes of unknown origin and function. in addition, both families contained eukaryotic, bacterial and viral domains within the helitron’s boundaries. a phylogenetic reconstruction of rephel helicases using the helitron-like and pif1-like helicase conserved domains revealed a polyphyletic origin for eukaryotic helitrons.


CONCLUSIONS
p. ostreatus helitrons display features similar to other eukaryotic helitrons and do not tend to capture host genes or gene fragments. the occurrence of genes probably captured from other hosts inside the helitrons boundaries pose the hypothesis that an ancient horizontal transfer mechanism could have taken place. the viral domains found in some of these genes and the polyphyletic origin of rephel helicases in the eukaryotic kingdom suggests that virus could have played a role in a putative lateral transfer of helitrons within the eukaryotic kingdom. the high similarity of some helitrons, along with the transcriptional activity of its rephel helicases indicates that these elements are still active in the genome of p. ostreatus.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
helitrontransposable elementgene expressiongene capturepleurotus ostreatushelicasebasidiomycetegenome structureissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

