BACKGROUND
in contrast to international pig breeds, the iberian breed has not been admixed with asian germplasm. this makes it an important model to study both domestication and relevance of asian genes in the pig. besides, iberian pigs exhibit high meat quality as well as appetite and propensity to obesity. here we provide a genome wide analysis of nucleotide and structural diversity in a reduced representation library from a pool  and shotgun genomic sequence from a single sow of the highly inbred guadyerbas strain. in the pool, we applied newly developed tools to account for the peculiarities of these data.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  snps in the pool  and  <dig>  in the guadyerbas sow  were called. the nucleotide diversity  is very similar to that reported in wild boar. a much lower than expected diversity in the x chromosome was confirmed . a strong  correlation between recombination and variability was observed, but not with gene density or gc content. multicopy regions affected about 4% of annotated pig genes in their entirety, and 2% of the genes partially. genes within the lowest variability windows comprised interferon genes and, in chromosome x, genes involved in behavior like htr2c or mcep <dig>  a modified hudson-kreitman-aguadé test for pools also indicated an accelerated evolution in genes involved in behavior, as well as in spermatogenesis and in lipid metabolism.


CONCLUSIONS
this work illustrates the strength of current sequencing technologies to picture a comprehensive landscape of variability in livestock species, and to pinpoint regions containing genes potentially under selection. among those genes, we report genes involved in behavior, including feeding behavior, and lipid metabolism. the pig x chromosome is an outlier in terms of nucleotide diversity, which suggests selective constraints. our data further confirm the importance of structural variation in the species, including iberian pigs, and allowed us to identify new paralogs for known gene families.

iberian pignext generation sequencingpigselection testsstructural variation

