BACKGROUND
the cell shape and morphology of plant tissues are intimately related to structural modifications in the primary cell wall that are associated with key processes in the regulation of cell growth and differentiation. the primary cell wall is composed mainly of cellulose immersed in a matrix of hemicellulose, pectin, lignin and some structural proteins. xyloglucan is a hemicellulose polysaccharide present in the cell walls of all land plants  and is the main hemicellulose in non-graminaceous angiosperms.


RESULTS
in this work, we used a comparative genomic approach to obtain new insights into the evolution of the xyloglucan-related enzymatic machinery in green plants. detailed phylogenetic analyses were done for enzymes involved in xyloglucan synthesis  and mobilization/degradation -glucan synthase, α-fucosyltransferases, β-galactosyltransferases and α-xylosyl transferase) based on  <dig> fully sequenced genomes and expressed sequence tags from  <dig> species of green plants. evidence from chlorophyta and streptophyta green algae indicated that part of the embryophyta xyloglucan-related machinery evolved in an aquatic environment, before land colonization. streptophyte algae have at least three enzymes of the xyloglucan machinery: xyloglucan transglycosylase/hydrolase, β--glucan synthase from the celullose synthase-like c family and α-xylosidase that is also present in chlorophytes. interestingly, gymnosperm sequences orthologs to xyloglucan transglycosylase/hydrolases with exclusively hydrolytic activity were also detected, suggesting that such activity must have emerged within the last common ancestor of spermatophytes. there was a positive correlation between the numbers of founder genes within each gene family and the complexity of the plant cell wall.


CONCLUSIONS
our data support the idea that a primordial xyloglucan-like polymer emerged in streptophyte algae as a pre-adaptation that allowed plants to subsequently colonize terrestrial habitats. our results also provide additional evidence that charophycean algae and land plants are sister groups.

