BACKGROUND
the persistence of microbial communities and how they change in indoor environments is of immense interest to public health. moreover, hospital acquired infections are significant contributors to morbidity and mortality. evidence suggests that, in hospital environments agent transfer between surfaces causes healthcare associated infections in humans, and that surfaces are an important transmission route and may act as a reservoir for some of the pathogens.

this study aimed to evaluate the diversity of microorganisms that persist on noncritical equipment and surfaces in a main hospital in portugal, and are able to grow in selective media for pseudomonas, and relate them with the presence of pseudomonas aeruginosa.


RESULTS
during 2 years, a total of  <dig> environmental samples were analyzed, in  <dig> different wards. the percentage of equipment in each ward that showed low contamination level varied between 22% and 38%, and more than 50% of the equipment sampled was highly contaminated. p. aeruginosa was repeatedly isolated from sinks , from the taps’ biofilm , and from the showers and bedside tables . two eric clones were isolated more than once. the contamination level of the different taps analyzed showed correlation with the contamination level of the hand gels support, soaps and sinks. ten different bacteria genera were frequently isolated in the selective media for pseudomonas. organisms usually associated with nosocomial infections as stenotrophomonas maltophilia, enterococcus feacalis, serratia nematodiphila were also repeatedly isolated on the same equipment.


CONCLUSIONS
the environment may act as a reservoir for at least some of the pathogens implicated in nosocomial infections. the bacterial contamination level was related to the presence of humidity on the surfaces, and tap water  was a point of dispersion of bacterial species, including potentially pathogenic organisms. the materials of the equipment sampled could not be related to the microbial contamination level. the presence of a disinfectant in the isolation medium suggests that the number of microorganism in the environment could be higher and shows the diversity of disinfectant resistant species. the statistical analysis suggests that the presence of bacteria could increase the risk of transmission by hand manipulation.

pseudomonas aeruginosahospital environmentsurface microbial colonizationstenotrophomonas maltophilia

