BACKGROUND
the blenniiformes comprises six families,  <dig> genera and nearly  <dig> species of small teleost fishes closely associated with coastal benthic habitats. they provide an unparalleled opportunity for studying marine biogeography because they include the globally distributed families tripterygiidae  and blenniidae , the temperate clinidae , and three largely neotropical families . however, interpretation of these distributional patterns has been hindered by largely unresolved inter-familial relationships and the lack of evidence of monophyly of the labrisomidae.


RESULTS
we explored the phylogenetic relationships of the blenniiformes based on one mitochondrial  and four nuclear  loci for  <dig> blenniiform species, and representative outgroups . according to the consensus of bayesian inference, maximum likelihood, and maximum parsimony analyses, the monophyly of the blenniiformes and the tripterygiidae, blenniidae, clinidae, and dactyloscopidae is supported. the tripterygiidae is the sister group of all other blennies, and the blenniidae is the sister group of the remaining blennies. the monophyly of the labrisomidae is supported with the exclusion of the cryptotremini and inclusion of stathmonotus, and we elevate two subgenera of labrisomus to establish a monophyletic classification within the family. the monophyly of the chaenopsidae is supported with the exclusion of stathmonotus  and neoclinus and mccoskerichthys . the origin of the blenniiformes was estimated in the present-day indopacific region, corresponding to the tethys sea approximately  <dig>  mya. a largely neotropical lineage including the labrisomidae, chaenopsidae and dactyloscopidae  evolved around  <dig>  mya when the neotropics were increasingly separated from the indopacific, but well before the closure of the tethys sea.


CONCLUSIONS
relationships recovered in this study are similar to those of earlier analyses within the clinidae and chaenopsidae, and partially similar within the blenniidae, but tripterygiid relationships remain poorly resolved. we present the first comprehensive phylogenetic hypothesis for a monophyletic labrisomidae with five tribes . global distributions of blenny genera included in our analysis support the evolution of a largely neotropical clade whose closest relatives  are temperate in distribution.

tripterygiidaeblenniidaelabrisomidaeclinidaedactyloscopidaechaenopsidaeneotropicstethys seabiogeography

