BACKGROUND
the arrival of rna-seq as a high-throughput method competitive to the established microarray technologies has necessarily driven a need for comparative evaluation. to date, cross-platform comparisons of these technologies have been relatively few in number of platforms analyzed and were typically gene name annotation oriented. here, we present a more extensive and yet precise assessment to elucidate differences and similarities in performance of numerous aspects including dynamic range, fidelity of raw signal and fold-change with sample titration, and concordance with qrt-pcr . to ensure that these results were not confounded by incompatible comparisons, we introduce the concept of probe mapping directed “transcript pattern”. a transcript pattern identifies probes across platforms that target a common set of transcripts for a specific gene. thus, three levels of data were examined: entire data sets, data derived from a subset of  <dig>  refseq genes common across platforms, and data derived from the transcript pattern defined subset of  <dig>  refseq genes.


RESULTS
in general, there were substantial core similarities between all  <dig> platforms evaluated; but, to varying degrees, the two rna-seq protocols outperformed three of the four microarray platforms in most categories. notably, a fourth microarray platform, agilent with a modified protocol, was comparable, or marginally superior, to the rna-seq protocols within these same assessments, especially in regards to fold-change evaluation. furthermore, these  <dig> platforms  demonstrated over 80 % fold-change concordance with the gold standard qrt-pcr .


CONCLUSIONS
this study suggests that microarrays can perform on nearly equal footing with rna-seq, in certain key features, specifically when the dynamic range is comparable. furthermore, the concept of a transcript pattern has been introduced that may minimize potential confounding factors of multi-platform comparison and may be useful for similar evaluations.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcript patternfold-changerna-seqmicroarraytaqman assayissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

