BACKGROUND
aquaculture represents the most sustainable alternative of seafood supply to substitute for the declining marine fisheries, but severe production bottlenecks remain to be solved. the application of genomic technologies offers much promise to rapidly increase our knowledge on biological processes in farmed species and overcome such bottlenecks. here we present an integrated platform for mrna expression profiling in the gilthead sea bream , a marine teleost of great importance for aquaculture.


RESULTS
a public data base was constructed, consisting of  <dig>  unique clusters . functional annotation was obtained for  <dig>  clusters. over  <dig>  sequences were also associated with a go entry. two 60mer probes were designed for each gene and in-situ synthesized on glass slides using agilent sureprint™ technology. platform reproducibility and accuracy were assessed on two early stages of sea bream development . correlation between technical replicates was always >  <dig> , with strong positive correlation between paired probes. a two class sam test identified  <dig>  differentially expressed genes between the two developmental stages. functional analysis suggested that down-regulated transcripts  in older larvae are mostly essential/housekeeping genes, whereas tissue-specific genes are up-regulated in parallel with the formation of key organs . cross-validation of microarray data was carried out using quantitative qrt-pcr on  <dig> target genes, selected to reflect the whole range of fold-change and both up-regulated and down-regulated genes. a statistically significant positive correlation was obtained comparing expression levels for each target gene across all biological replicates. good concordance between qrt-pcr and microarray data was observed between 2- and 7-fold change, while fold-change compression in the microarray was present for differences greater than 10-fold in the qrt-pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
a highly reliable oligo-microarray platform was developed and validated for the gilthead sea bream despite the presently limited knowledge of the species transcriptome. because of the flexible design this array will be able to accommodate additional probes as soon as novel unique transcripts are available.

