BACKGROUND
large efforts have focused on screening for genes involved in the virulence and pathogenicity of verticillium dahliae, a destructive fungal pathogen of numerous plant species that is difficult to control once the plant is infected. although agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation  has been widely used for gene screening, a quick and easy method has been needed to facilitate transformation.


RESULTS
high-quality protoplasts, with excellent regeneration efficiency  in tb <dig> broth , were generated using driselase  and transformed with the gfp plasmid or linear gfp cassette using peg or electroporation. peg-mediated transformation yielded  <dig> transformants per microgram dna for the linear gfp cassette and  <dig> for the gfp plasmid; electroporation resulted in  <dig> transformants per microgram dna for the linear gfp cassette and  <dig> for the gfp plasmid. to determine whether short interfering rnas  can be delivered to the protoplasts and used for silencing genes, we targeted the gfp gene of vd-gfp  by delivering one of four different sirnas—19-nt duplex with 2-nt 3′ overhangs —into the vd-gfp protoplasts using peg-mediated transformation. up to  <dig> % silencing of gfp was obtained with sirna-gfp4; the other sirnas were less effective . verticillium transcription activator of adhesion  gene of v. dahliae was also silenced with four sirnas  independently and together using the same approach; sirna-vta <dig> had the highest silencing efficiency as assessed by colony diameter and quantitative real time pcr  analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
our quick, easy transformation method can be used to investigate the function of genes involved in growth, virulence and pathogenicity of v. dahliae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
verticillium dahliaedriselasetransformationsirnasnational nonprofit industry research 201503109cheng hongmei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

