BACKGROUND
intralocus sexual conflict, arising from selection for different alleles at the same locus in males and females, imposes a constraint on sex-specific adaptation. intralocus sexual conflict can be alleviated by the evolution of sex-limited genetic architectures and phenotypic expression, but pleiotropic constraints may hinder this process. here, we explored putative intralocus sexual conflict and genetic variance in a poorly understood behavior with near male-limited expression. same-sex sexual behaviors  generally do not conform to classic evolutionary models of adaptation but are common in male animals and have been hypothesized to result from perception errors and selection for high male mating rates. however, perspectives incorporating sex-specific selection on genes shared by males and females to explain the expression and evolution of ssbs have largely been neglected.


RESULTS
we performed two parallel sex-limited artificial selection experiments on ssb in male and female seed beetles, followed by sex-specific assays of locomotor activity and male sex recognition  and adult reproductive success . our experiments reveal both shared and sex-limited genetic variance for ssb. strikingly, genetically correlated responses in locomotor activity and male sex-recognition were associated with sexually antagonistic fitness effects, but these effects differed qualitatively between male and female selection lines, implicating intralocus sexual conflict at both male- and female-specific genetic components underlying ssb.


CONCLUSIONS
our study provides experimental support for the hypothesis that widespread pleiotropy generates pervasive intralocus sexual conflict governing the expression of ssbs, suggesting that ssb in one sex can occur due to the expression of genes that carry benefits in the other sex.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
intralocus sexual conflictsexual antagonismsame-sex sexual behaviorpleiotropymating strategysexual selectionb-matrixgenetic constraintsartificial selectionbehavioral syndromehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000781european research counciladg-294333agingsexdiffarnqvist göran maklakov alexei a. svenska vetenskapsrådet repatriation grantberger david svenska vetenskapsrådet repatriation grantlind martin i. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

