BACKGROUND
aggressiveness in humans is a hereditary behavioral trait that mobilizes all systems of the body—first of all, the nervous and endocrine systems, and then the respiratory, vascular, muscular, and others—e.g., for the defense of oneself, children, family, shelter, territory, and other possessions as well as personal interests. the level of aggressiveness of a person determines many other characteristics of quality of life and lifespan, acting as a stress factor. aggressive behavior depends on many parameters such as age, gender, diseases and treatment, diet, and environmental conditions. among them, genetic factors are believed to be the main parameters that are well-studied at the factual level, but in actuality, genome-wide studies of aggressive behavior appeared relatively recently. one of the biggest projects of the modern science— <dig> genomes—involves identification of single nucleotide polymorphisms , i.e., differences of individual genomes from the reference genome. snps can be associated with hereditary diseases, their complications, comorbidities, and responses to stress or a drug. clinical comparisons between cohorts of patients and healthy volunteers  allow for identifying snps whose allele frequencies significantly separate them from one another as markers of the above conditions. computer-based preliminary analysis of millions of snps detected by the  <dig> genomes project can accelerate clinical search for snp markers due to preliminary whole-genome search for the most meaningful candidate snp markers and discarding of neutral and poorly substantiated snps.


RESULTS
here, we combine two computer-based search methods for snps  {i} web service snp_tata_comparator  and {ii} pubmed-based manual search for articles on aggressiveness using heuristic keywords. near the known binding sites for tata-binding protein  in human gene promoters, we found aggressiveness-related candidate snp markers, including rs <dig> , rs <dig> , and rs <dig> .


CONCLUSIONS
after validation of these candidate markers by clinical protocols, these snps may become useful for physicians  and for the general population .

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aggressivenessgenepromotertata-binding proteinsingle nucleotide polymorphismcandidate snp markerkeyword-based searchprediction in silicothe international conference on bioinformatics of genome regulation and structure\systems biology  novosibirsk, russia  <dig> august- <dig> september  <dig> http://conf.bionet.nsc.ru/bgrssb2016issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

