BACKGROUND
the splicing of pre-mrnas is conspicuously often variable and produces multiple alternatively spliced  isoforms that encode different messages from one gene locus. computational studies uncovered a class of highly similar isoforms, which were related to tandem 5'-splice sites  and 3'-splice sites , yet with very sparse anecdotal evidence in experimental studies. to compare the types and levels of alternative tandem splice site exons occurring in different human organ systems and cell types, and to study known sequence features involved in the recognition and distinction of neighboring splice sites, we performed large-scale, stringent alignments of cdna sequences and ests to the human and mouse genomes, followed by experimental validation.


RESULTS
we analyzed alternative 5'ss exons  and alternative 3'ss exons , derived from transcript sequences that were aligned to assembled genome sequences to infer patterns of as occurring in several thousands of genes. comparing the levels of overlapping  and non-overlapping  a5es and a3es, a clear preference of isoforms was seen for tandem acceptors and donors, with four nucleotides and three to six nucleotides long exon extensions, respectively. a subset of inferred a5e tandem exons was selected and experimentally validated. with the focus on a5es, we investigated their transcript coverage, sequence conservation and base-paring to u <dig> snrna, proximal and distal splice site classification, candidate motifs for cis-regulatory activity, and compared a5es with a3es, constitutive and pseudo-exons, in h. sapiens and m. musculus. the results reveal a small but authentic enriched set of tandem splice site preference, with specific distances between proximal and distal 5'ss , which showed a marked dichotomy between the levels of in- and out-of-frame splicing for a5es and a3es, respectively, identified a number of candidate nmd targets, and allowed a rough estimation of a number of undetected tandem donors based on splice site information.


CONCLUSIONS
this comparative study distinguishes tandem 5'ss and 3'ss, with three to six nucleotides long extensions, as having unusually high proportions of as, experimentally validates tandem donors in a panel of different human tissues, highlights the dichotomy in the types of as occurring at tandem splice sites, and elucidates that human alternative exons spliced at overlapping 5'ss posses features of typical splice variants that could well be beneficial for the cell.

