BACKGROUND
intestinal microbes play significant roles in fish and can be possibly used as probiotics in aquaculture. in our previous study, flaviramulus ichthyoenteri th78t, a novel species in the family flavobacteriaceae, was isolated from fish intestine and showed strong quorum quenching  ability. to identify the qq enzymes in th78t and explore the potential roles of th78t in fish intestine, we sequenced the genome of th78t and performed extensive genomic analysis.


RESULTS
an n-acyl homoserine lactonase fial belonging to the metallo-β-lactamase superfamily was identified and the qq activity of heterologously expressed fial was confirmed in vitro. fial has relatively little similarity to the known lactonases . various digestive enzymes including alginate lyases and lipases can be produced by th78t, and enzymes essential for production of b vitamins such as biotin, riboflavin and folate are predicted. genes encoding sialic acid lyases, sialidases, sulfatases and fucosidases, which contribute to utilization of mucus, are present in the genome. in addition, genes related to response to different stresses and gliding motility were also identified. comparative genome analysis shows that th78t has more specific genes involved in carbohydrate transport and metabolism compared to other two isolates in flavobacteriaceae, both isolated from sediments.


CONCLUSIONS
the genome of th78t exhibits evident advantages for this bacterium to survive in the fish intestine, including production of qq enzyme, utilization of various nutrients available in the intestine as well as the ability to produce digestive enzymes and vitamins, which also provides an application prospect of th78t to be used as a probiotic in aquaculture.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
flaviramulus ichthyoenterigenome analysisquorum quenchingintestine microbesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

