BACKGROUND
sclerotinia stem rot  is the most important soybean disease in eastern canada. the development of resistant cultivars represents the most cost-effective means of limiting the impact of this disease. in view of ensuring durable resistance, it is imperative to identify germplasm harbouring different resistance loci and to provide breeders with closely linked molecular markers to facilitate breeding. with this end in view, we assessed resistance using a highly reproducible artificial inoculation method on a diverse collection of  <dig> soybean lines, mostly composed of plant introductions  and some of which had previously been reported to be resistant to sclerotinia stem rot.


RESULTS
overall, 50% of the lines exhibited a level of resistance equal to or better than the resistant checks among elite material. of the  <dig> lines previously reported to be resistant, only  <dig> were in this category and a few were highly susceptible under these inoculation conditions. the collection of lines was genetically characterized using a genotyping by sequencing  protocol that we have optimized for soybean. a total of  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms  were obtained and used to perform an association analysis for ssr by using a mixed linear model as implemented in the tassel software. three genomic regions were found to exhibit a significant association at a stringent threshold  and all of the most highly resistant pis shared the same alleles at these three qtls. the strongest association was found on chromosome gm <dig> . the other significantly associated markers were found on chromosomes gm <dig> and gm <dig> with p-values <10− <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
this work will facilitate breeding efforts for increased resistance to sclerotinia stem rot through the use of these pis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
soybeansclerotiniaqtlassociation mappingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

