BACKGROUND
penicillin g acylase of escherichia coli  is a commercially valuable enzyme for which efficient bacterial expression systems have been developed. the enzyme is used as a catalyst for the hydrolytic production of β-lactam nuclei or for the synthesis of semi-synthetic penicillins such as ampicillin, amoxicillin and cephalexin. to become a mature, periplasmic enzyme, the inactive prepropeptide of pga has to undergo complex processing that begins in the cytoplasm , continues at crossing the cytoplasmic membrane , and it is completed in the periplasm. since there are reports on impressive cytosolic expression of bacterial proteins in pichia, we have cloned the leader-less gene encoding pgaec in this host and studied yeast production capacity and enzyme authenticity.


RESULTS
leader-less pga gene encoding pgaecunder the control of aox <dig> promoter was cloned in pichia pastoris x- <dig>  the intracellular overproduction of heterologous pgaec was evaluated in a stirred  <dig> litre bioreactor in high-cell density, fed batch cultures using different profiles of transient phases. under optimal conditions, the average volumetric activity of  <dig> u l- <dig> was reached. the hpgaec was purified, characterized and compared with the wild-type pgaec. the α-subunit of the hpgaec formed in the cytosol was processed aberrantly resulting in two forms with c- terminuses extended to the spacer peptide. the enzyme exhibited modified traits: the activity of the purified enzyme was reduced to 49%, the ratios of hydrolytic activities with cephalexin, phenylacetamide or 6-nitro-3-phenylacetylamidobenzoic acid  to penicillin g increased and the enzyme showed a better synthesis/hydrolysis ratio for the synthesis of cephalexin.


CONCLUSIONS
presented results provide useful data regarding fermentation strategy, intracellular biosynthetic potential, and consequences of the heterologous expression of pgaec in p. pastoris x- <dig>  aberrant processing of the precursor of pgaec in the cytosol yielded the mature enzyme with modified traits.

