BACKGROUND
early microbial colonization of the gut reduces the incidence of infectious, inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. recent population studies reveal that childhood hygiene is a significant risk factor for development of inflammatory bowel disease, thereby reinforcing the hygiene hypothesis and the potential importance of microbial colonization during early life. the extent to which early-life environment impacts on microbial diversity of the adult gut and subsequent immune processes has not been comprehensively investigated thus far. we addressed this important question using the pig as a model to evaluate the impact of early-life environment on microbe/host gut interactions during development.


RESULTS
genetically-related piglets were housed in either indoor or outdoor environments or in experimental isolators. analysis of over  <dig>  16s rrna sequences revealed major differences in mucosa-adherent microbial diversity in the ileum of adult pigs attributable to differences in early-life environment. pigs housed in a natural outdoor environment showed a dominance of firmicutes, in particular lactobacillus, whereas animals housed in a hygienic indoor environment had reduced lactobacillus and higher numbers of potentially pathogenic phylotypes. our analysis revealed a strong negative correlation between the abundance of firmicutes and pathogenic bacterial populations in the gut. these differences were exaggerated in animals housed in experimental isolators. affymetrix microarray technology and real-time polymerase chain reaction revealed significant gut-specific gene responses also related to early-life environment. significantly, indoor-housed pigs displayed increased expression of type  <dig> interferon genes, major histocompatibility complex class i and several chemokines. gene ontology and pathway analysis further confirmed these results.


CONCLUSIONS
early-life environment significantly affects both microbial composition of the adult gut and mucosal innate immune function. we observed that a microbiota dominated by lactobacilli may function to maintain mucosal immune homeostasis and limit pathogen colonization.

