BACKGROUND
cyclic nucleotide-gated channels  are ca2+-permeable cation transport channels, which are present in both animal and plant systems. they have been implicated in the uptake of both essential and toxic cations, ca2+ signaling, pathogen defense, and thermotolerance in plants. to date there has not been a genome-wide overview of the cngc gene family in any economically important crop, including rice . there is an urgent need for a thorough genome-wide analysis and experimental verification of this gene family in rice.


RESULTS
in this study, a total of  <dig> full length rice cngc genes distributed on chromosomes 1– <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  were identified by employing comprehensive bioinformatics analyses. based on phylogeny, the family of oscngcs was classified into four major groups  and two sub-groups . likewise, the cngcs from all plant lineages clustered into four groups , where group ii was conserved in all land plants. gene duplication analysis revealed that both chromosomal segmentation  and tandem duplications  significantly contributed to the expansion of this gene family. motif composition and protein sequence analysis revealed that the cngc specific domain “cyclic nucleotide-binding domain ” comprises a “phosphate binding cassette”  and a “hinge” region that is highly conserved among the oscngcs. in addition, oscngc proteins also contain various other functional motifs and post-translational modification sites. we successively built a stringent motif: --x--x-g- <cit> -ell-x-w-x-sa-x-t-x--af-x-l) that recognizes the rice cngcs specifically. prediction of cis-acting regulatory elements in 5′ upstream sequences and expression analyses through quantitative qpcr demonstrated that oscngc genes were highly responsive to multiple stimuli including hormonal , biotic  and abiotic  stress.


CONCLUSIONS
there are  <dig> cngc genes in rice, which were probably expanded through chromosomal segmentation and tandem duplications and comprise a pbc and a “hinge” region in the cnbd domain, featured by a stringent motif. the various cis-acting regulatory elements in the upstream sequences may be responsible for responding to multiple stimuli, including hormonal, biotic and abiotic stresses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cngcsricebiotic and abiotic stressbioinformaticsphylogenetic analysisresistanceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

