BACKGROUND
lawsonia intracellularis is the etiologic agent of proliferative enteropathy, which causes diarrhea in several animal species, including swine. serology can be used both to determine the prevalence of antibodies against a specific pathogen in a herd and to obtain the serological profile, which is used to determine the dynamics of infection in the herd. the objective of this study was to determine the serological profile and seroprevalence of anti-l. intracellularis antibodies in swine herds from intensive production regions of minas gerais, brazil, and to identify the risk factors related to the herd-level seropositivity.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> serum samples were collected for this cross–sectional study in the four major regions of intensive swine production in minas gerais, brazil. to obtain better estimates and increase the external validity of the seroprevalence, the sample data were weighted based on the pig population of each herd, the stratum in which the herd was classified and the swine population of the region where each herd was located. a questionnaire was used to identify potential risk factors related to this herd-level seropositivity. the overall weighted prevalence in minas gerais was  <dig>  % , and there was no significant difference among the sampled regions, with the seroprevalence rates ranging between  <dig>  and  <dig>  %. finishing pigs were the most prevalent among the sampled categories. among the evaluated risk factors, “cleaning before disinfecting” had a negative impact in the seroprevalence  and was considered a protective factor.


CONCLUSIONS
the anti-l. intracellularis antibodies were detected in all of the investigated herds in minas gerais, which indicated a wide distribution of the agent in the state. the predominant serological profile was consistent with the dynamics of infection previously observed in pig herds in other countries with similar antimicrobial usage, in which the nursery pigs usually show the lowest seroprevalence and the finishing pigs exhibit the highest. herds that adopt the practice of “cleaning before disinfection” can decrease their l. intracellularis antibody seropositivity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
proliferative enteropathyipmadiarrheaserologyantibodiesepidemiologyswinecnpqissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

