BACKGROUND
the thymus is a central lymphoid organ, in which bone marrow-derived t cell precursors undergo a complex process of maturation. developing thymocytes interact with thymic microenvironment in a defined spatial order. a component of thymic microenvironment, the thymic epithelial cells, is crucial for the maturation of t-lymphocytes through cell-cell contact, cell matrix interactions and secretory of cytokines/chemokines. there is evidence that extracellular matrix molecules play a fundamental role in guiding differentiating thymocytes in both cortical and medullary regions of the thymic lobules. the interaction between the integrin α5β <dig>  and fibronectin is relevant for thymocyte adhesion and migration within the thymic tissue. our previous results have shown that adhesion of thymocytes to cultured tec line is enhanced in the presence of fibronectin, and can be blocked with anti-vla- <dig> antibody.


RESULTS
herein, we studied the role of cd49e expressed by the human thymic epithelium. for this purpose we knocked down the cd49e by means of rna interference. this procedure resulted in the modulation of more than  <dig> genes, some of them coding for other proteins also involved in adhesion of thymocytes; others related to signaling pathways triggered after integrin activation, or even involved in the control of f-actin stress fiber formation. functionally, we demonstrated that disruption of vla- <dig> in human tec by cd49e-sirna-induced gene knockdown decreased the ability of tec to promote thymocyte adhesion. such a decrease comprised all cd4/cd8-defined thymocyte subsets.


CONCLUSIONS
conceptually, our findings unravel the complexity of gene regulation, as regards key genes involved in the heterocellular cell adhesion between developing thymocytes and the major component of the thymic microenvironment, an interaction that is a mandatory event for proper intrathymic t cell differentiation.

18– <dig> october  <dig> 5th international conference of the brazilian association for bioinformatics and computational biology  angra dos reis, rj, brazil

