BACKGROUND
it is believed that animal-to-human transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome  coronavirus  is the cause of the sars outbreak worldwide. the spike  protein is one of the best characterized proteins of sars-cov, which plays a key role in sars-cov overcoming species barrier and accomplishing interspecies transmission from animals to humans, suggesting that it may be the major target of selective pressure. however, the process of adaptive evolution of s protein and the exact positively selected sites associated with this process remain unknown.


RESULTS
by investigating the adaptive evolution of s protein, we identified twelve amino acid sites  in the s protein under positive selective pressure. based on phylogenetic tree and epidemiological investigation, sars outbreak was divided into three epidemic groups: 02– <dig> interspecies, 03-early-mid, and 03-late epidemic groups in the present study. positive selection was detected in the first two groups, which represent the course of sars-cov interspecies transmission and of viral adaptation to human host, respectively. in contrast, purifying selection was detected in 03-late group. these indicate that s protein experiences variable positive selective pressures before reaching stabilization. a total of  <dig> sites in 02– <dig> interspecies epidemic group and  <dig> sites in 03-early-mid epidemic group were identified under positive selection. the identified sites were different between these two groups except for site  <dig>  which suggests that positively selected sites are changeable between groups. moreover, it was showed that a larger proportion  of positively selected sites was located in receptor-binding domain  than in heptad repeat 1-hr <dig> region in 02– <dig> interspecies epidemic group , and a greater percentage  of these sites occurred in hr1–hr <dig> region than in rbd in 03-early-mid epidemic group . these suggest that functionally different domains of s protein may not experience same positive selection in each epidemic group. in addition, three specific replacements  were only found between 03-human sars-covs and strains from 02– <dig> interspecies epidemic group, which reveals that selective sweep may also force the evolution of s genes before the jump of sars-covs into human hosts. since certain residues at these positively selected sites are associated with receptor recognition and/or membrane fusion, they are likely to be the crucial residues for animal-to-human transmission of sars-covs, and subsequent adaptation to human hosts.


CONCLUSIONS
the variation of positive selective pressures and positively selected sites are likely to contribute to the adaptive evolution of s protein from animals to humans.

