BACKGROUND
deep-sequencing has enabled the identification of large numbers of mirnas and sirnas, making the high-throughput target identification a main limiting factor in defining their function. in plants, several tools have been developed to predict targets, majority of them being trained on arabidopsis datasets. an extensive and systematic evaluation has not been made for their suitability for predicting targets in species other than arabidopsis. nor, these have not been evaluated for their suitability for high-throughput target prediction at genome level.


RESULTS
we evaluated the performance of  <dig> computational tools in identifying genome-wide targets in arabidopsis and other plants with procedures that optimized score-cutoffs for estimating targets. targetfinder was most efficient  in predicting ‘true-positive’ targets in arabidopsis mirna-mrna interactions. in contrast, only 46% of true positive interactions from non-arabidopsis species were detected, indicating low ‘recall’ values. score optimizations increased the ‘recall’ to only 70%  for datasets of true mirna-mrna interactions in species other than arabidopsis. combining the results of targetfinder and psrnatarget delivers high true positive coverage, whereas the intersection of psrnatarget and tapirhybrid outputs deliver highly ‘precise’ predictions. the large number of ‘false negative’ predictions delivered from non-arabidopsis datasets by all the available tools indicate the diversity in mirnas-mrna interaction features between arabidopsis and other species. a subset of mirna-mrna interactions differed significantly for features in seed regions as well as the total number of matches/mismatches.


CONCLUSIONS
although, many plant mirna target prediction tools may be optimized to predict targets with high specificity in arabidopsis, such optimized thresholds may not be suitable for many targets in non-arabidopsis species. more importantly, non-conventional features of mirna-mrna interaction may exist in plants indicating alternate mode of mirna target recognition. incorporation of these divergent features would enable next-generation of algorithms to better identify target interactions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mirnatarget predictionplantsdeep-sequencingnon-model plantsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

