BACKGROUND
waddington’s epigenetic landscape is an intuitive metaphor for the
developmental and evolutionary potential of biological regulatory processes. it
emphasises time-dependence and transient behaviour. nowadays, we can derive this
landscape by modelling a specific regulatory network as a dynamical system and
calculating its so-called potential surface. in this sense, potential surfaces are
the mathematical equivalent of the waddingtonian landscape metaphor. in order to
fully capture the time-dependent  transient behaviour of
biological processes, we must be able to characterise potential landscapes and how
they change over time. however, currently available mathematical tools focus on
the asymptotic  behaviour of autonomous dynamical systems, which
restricts how biological systems are studied.


RESULTS
we present a pragmatic first step towards a methodology for dealing with transient
behaviours in non-autonomous systems. we propose a classification scheme for
different kinds of such dynamics based on the simulation of a simple genetic
toggle-switch model with time-variable parameters. for this low-dimensional
system, we can calculate and explicitly visualise numerical approximations to the
potential landscape. focussing on transient dynamics in non-autonomous systems
reveals a range of interesting and biologically relevant behaviours that would be
missed in steady-state analyses of autonomous systems. our simulation-based
approach allows us to identify four qualitatively different kinds of dynamics:
transitions, pursuits, and two kinds of captures. we describe these in detail, and
illustrate the usefulness of our classification scheme by providing a number of
examples that demonstrate how it can be employed to gain specific mechanistic
insights into the dynamics of gene regulation.


CONCLUSIONS
the practical aim of our proposed classification scheme is to make the analysis of
explicitly time-dependent transient behaviour tractable, and to encourage the
wider use of non-autonomous models in systems biology. our method is applicable to
a large class of biological processes.

