BACKGROUND
the x chromosome plays an important role in human diseases and traits. however, few x-linked associations have been reported in genome-wide association studies, partly due to analytical complications and low statistical power.


RESULTS
in this study, we propose tests of x-linked association that capitalize on variance heterogeneity caused by various factors, predominantly the process of x-inactivation. in the presence of x-inactivation, the expression of one copy of the chromosome is randomly silenced. due to the consequent elevated randomness of expressed variants, females that are heterozygotes for a quantitative trait locus might exhibit higher phenotypic variance for that trait. we propose three tests that build on this phenomenon: 1) a test for inflated variance in heterozygous females; 2) a weighted association test; and 3) a combined test. test  <dig> captures the novel signal proposed herein by directly testing for higher phenotypic variance of heterozygous than homozygous females. as a test of variance it is generally less powerful than standard tests of association that consider means, which is supported by extensive simulations. test  <dig> is similar to a standard association test in considering the phenotypic mean, but differs by accounting for  the variance heterogeneity. as expected in light of x-inactivation, this test is slightly more powerful than a standard association test. finally, test  <dig> further improves power by combining the results of the first two tests. we applied the these tests to the aric cohort data and identified a novel x-linked association near gene aff <dig> with blood pressure, which was not significant based on standard association testing of mean blood pressure.


CONCLUSIONS
variance-based tests examine overdispersion, thereby providing a complementary type of signal to a standard association test. our results point to the potential to improve power of detecting x-linked associations in the presence of variance heterogeneity.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

