BACKGROUND
bp <dig> peptide is a synthetic bp100-magainin derivative possessing strong inhibitory activity against plant pathogenic bacteria, offering a great potential for future applications in plant protection and other fields. here we report the production and recovery of a bioactive bp <dig> peptide using rice seeds as biofactories.


RESULTS
a synthetic gene encoding the bp <dig> peptide was prepared and introduced in rice plants. the gene was efficiently expressed in transgenic rice under the control of an endosperm-specific promoter. among the three endosperm-specific rice promoters , best results were obtained when using the globulin  <dig> promoter. the bp <dig> peptide accumulated in the seed endosperm and was easily recovered from rice seeds using a simple procedure with a yield of 21 μg/g. the transgene was stably inherited for at least three generations, and peptide accumulation remained stable during long term storage of transgenic seeds. the purified peptide showed in vitro activity against the bacterial plant pathogen dickeya sp., the causal agent of the dark brown sheath rot of rice. seedlings of transgenic events showed enhanced resistance to the fungal pathogen fusarium verticillioides, supporting that the in planta produced peptide was biologically active.


CONCLUSIONS
the strategy developed in this work for the sustainable production of bp <dig> peptide using rice seeds as biofactories represents a promising system for future production of peptides for plant protection and possibly in other fields.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
antimicrobial peptideoryza sativarice biofactoryprotein bodiespeptide recoverypathogen resistanceera-net plant-kbbe programeui2008- <dig> and eui2008-03572montesinos emilio http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006531departament d'universitats, recerca i societat de la informació2014sgr697montesinos emilio university of gironagrant research improvement 2015-2018montesinos emilio issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

