BACKGROUND
plasmodium falciparum, the deadliest malaria-causing parasite, has an extremely at-rich  genome. because of high at-content, sequence-based annotation of genes and functional elements remains challenging. in order to better understand the regulatory network controlling gene expression in the parasite, a more complete genome annotation as well as analysis tools adapted for at-rich genomes are needed. recent studies on genome-wide nucleosome positioning in eukaryotes have shown that nucleosome landscapes exhibit regular characteristic patterns at the 5’- and 3’-end of protein and non-protein coding genes. in addition, nucleosome depleted regions can be found near transcription start sites. these unique nucleosome landscape patterns may be exploited for the identification of novel genes. in this paper, we propose a computational approach to discover novel putative genes based exclusively on nucleosome positioning data in the at-rich genome of p. falciparum.


RESULTS
using binary classifiers trained on nucleosome landscapes at the gene boundaries from two independent nucleosome positioning data sets, we were able to detect a total of  <dig> regions containing putative genes in the genome of plasmodium falciparum, of which  <dig> highly confident genes were found in both data sets. eighty-eight of these  <dig> newly predicted genes exhibited transcription signal in rna-seq data, indicative of active transcription. in addition,  <dig> out of  <dig> selected gene candidates were further validated by rt-pcr, and  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes showed significant matches using blastn against an expressed sequence tag  database. furthermore,  <dig>  out of the  <dig> putative novel genes overlapped with previously identified but unannotated long non-coding rnas. collectively, these results provide experimental validation for  <dig> predicted genes . finally,  <dig> out of  <dig> genes were found to be potentially translated based on their signal in polysome-associated rna-seq representing transcripts that are actively being translated.


CONCLUSIONS
our results clearly indicate that nucleosome positioning data contains sufficient information for novel gene discovery. as distinct nucleosome landscapes around genes are found in many other eukaryotic organisms, this methodology could be used to characterize the transcriptome of any organism, especially when coupled with other dna-based gene finding and experimental methods .

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
malarianucleosomegene predictiontranscriptionnon-coding rnagenome annotationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

