BACKGROUND
loaches of the family nemacheilidae are one of the most speciose elements of palearctic freshwater ichthyofauna and have undergone rapid ecological adaptations and colonizations. their cytotaxonomy is largely unexplored; with the impact of cytogenetical changes on this evolutionary diversification still unknown. an extensive cytogenetical survey was performed in  <dig> nemacheilid species using both conventional  and molecular n probes) methods. a phylogenetic tree of the analysed specimens was constructed based on one mitochondrial  and two nuclear  genes.


RESULTS
seventeen species showed karyotypes composed of 2n =  <dig> chromosomes but differentiated by fundamental chromosome number . nemachilichthys ruppelli  and schistura notostigma  displayed reduced 2n with an elevated number of large metacentric chromosomes. only schistura fasciolata showed morphologically differentiated sex chromosomes with a multiple system of the xy1y <dig> type. chromomycin a <dig> - fluorescence revealed interspecific heterogeneity in the distribution of gc-rich heterochromatin including its otherwise very rare association with 5s rdna sites. the 45s rdna sites were mostly located on a single chromosome pair contrasting markedly with a pattern of two  to  <dig> sites  of 5s rdna. the cytogenetic changes did not follow the phylogenetic relationships between the samples. a high number of 5s rdna sites was present in species with small effective population sizes.


CONCLUSIONS
despite a prevailing conservatism of 2n, nemacheilidae exhibited a remarkable cytogenetic variability on microstructural level. we suggest an important role for pericentric inversions, tandem and centric fusions in nemacheilid karyotype differentiation. short repetitive sequences, genetic drift, founder effect, as well as the involvement of transposable elements in the dispersion of ribosomal dna sites, might also have played a role in evolutionary processes such as reproductive isolation. these remarkable dynamics of their genomes qualify river loaches as a model for the study of the cytogenetic background of major evolutionary processes such as radiation, endemism and colonization of a wide range of habitats.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fish cytotaxonomykaryotype variability vs. 2n uniformityfish45s - 5s ribosomal geneschromosome bandingpericentric inversionrobertsonian translocationeffective population sizeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

