BACKGROUND
disturbed uterine involution impairs ovarian function in the first weeks after calving. this study analyzed the long-term effect of metritis on luteal function of  <dig> lactating holstein-friesian cows during the first four postpartum estrous cycles. cows with abnormal uterine enlargement and malodorous lochia were classified as having metritis , and all others were considered healthy . luteal size was measured once between days  <dig> and  <dig> of the first , second  and fourth  postpartum luteal phases. serum progesterone concentration was measured at the same time. sixteen cows  underwent transvaginal luteal biopsy for gene expression analysis of steroidogenic regulatory proteins during the second and fourth cycles. cows with persistence of the corpus luteum  underwent determination of luteal size, luteal biopsy and serum progesterone measurement once between days  <dig> and  <dig>  followed by prostaglandin treatment to induce luteolysis. the same procedures were repeated once between days  <dig> and  <dig> of the induced cycle.


RESULTS
the cows in group m had smaller first-cycle cls than the cows in group h , but progesterone concentrations did not differ between groups. luteal size, progesterone concentration and gene expression did not differ between the two groups during the second and fourth cycles. compared with healthy cows , there was a trend  toward a higher prevalence of persistent cls in cows with metritis . persistent cls were limited to the first cycle. persistent cls and the induced cyclic cls did not differ with regard to the variables investigated.


CONCLUSIONS
an effect of metritis on luteal activity was apparent in the first postpartum estrous cycle. however, after the first postpartum cycle, no differences occurred in analyzed parameters between metritis and control cows. therefore, a metritis is able to impair luteal activity transiently, but does not seem to have a long-term effect on luteal function.

metritisluteal sizeprogesteronepersistent corpus luteumgene expressionbovine

