BACKGROUND
mutant allium sativum leaf agglutinin  is a potent, biosafe, antifungal protein that exhibits fungicidal activity against different phytopathogenic fungi, including rhizoctonia solani.

methods
the effect of masal on the morphology of r.solani was monitored primarily by scanning electron and light microscopic techniques. besides different fluorescent probes were used for monitoring various intracellular changes associated with masal treatment like change in mitochondrial membrane potential , intracellular accumulation of reactive oxygen species  and induction of programmed cell death . in addition ligand blot followed by lc-ms/ms analyses were performed to detect the putative interactors of masal.


RESULTS
knowledge on the mode of function for any new protein is a prerequisite for its biotechnological application. detailed morphological analysis of masal treated r. solani hyphae using different microscopic techniques revealed a detrimental effect of masal on both the cell wall and the plasma membrane. moreover, exposure to masal caused the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential  and the subsequent intracellular accumulation of reactive oxygen species  in the target organism. in conjunction with this observation, evidence of the induction of programmed cell death  was also noted in the masal treated r. solani hyphae.

furthermore, we investigated its interacting partners from r. solani. using ligand blots followed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry  analyses, we identified different binding partners including actin, hsp <dig>  atpase and 14-3- <dig> protein.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, the present study provides insight into the probable mode of action of the antifungal protein, masal on r. solani which could be exploited in future biotechnological applications.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mutant allium sativum leaf agglutininrhizoctonia solaniantifungal proteinsmolecular targetspcdplasma membrane permeabilizationlc-ms/msissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

