BACKGROUND
yeasts belonging to the subphylum saccharomycotina have been used for centuries in food processing and, more recently, biotechnology. over the past few decades, these yeasts have also been studied in the interest of their potential to produce oil to replace fossil resources. developing yeasts for massive oil production requires increasing yield and modifying the profiles of the fatty acids contained in the oil to satisfy specific technical requirements. for example, derivatives of medium-chain fatty acids  are used for the production of biodiesels, cleaning products, lubricants and cosmetics. few studies are available in the literature on the production of mcfas in yeasts.


RESULTS
we analyzed the mcfa content in saccharomyces cerevisiae grown in various conditions. the results revealed that mcfas preferentially accumulated when cells were grown on synthetic media with a high c/n ratio at low temperature . upon screening deletion mutant strains for genes encoding lipid droplet-associated proteins, we found two genes, loa <dig> and tgl <dig>  involved in mcfa homeostasis. a phylogenetic analysis on  <dig> saccharomycotina species showed that fatty acid profiles differed drastically among yeasts. interestingly, mcfas are only present in post-whole genome duplication yeast species.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we produced original data on fatty acid diversity in yeasts. we demonstrated that yeasts are amenable to genetic and metabolic engineering to increase their mcfa production. furthermore, we revealed that yeast lipid biodiversity has not been fully explored, but that yeasts likely harbor as-yet-undiscovered strains or enzymes that can contribute to the production of high-value fatty acids for green chemistry.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lipidmedium-chain fatty acidssaccharomycotinayeastsphylogenyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

