BACKGROUND
ramie , popularly known as “china grass”, is one of the oldest crops in china and the second most important fiber crop in terms of area sown. ramie fiber, extracted from the plant bast, is important in the textile industry. however, the molecular mechanism of ramie fiber development remains unknown.


RESULTS
a whole sequencing run was performed on the  <dig> gs flx + platform using four separately pooled parts of ramie bast. this generated  <dig> , <dig> reads with an average length of 457 bp. among the  <dig>  unigenes  that were generated through de novo assembly,  <dig> were differentially expressed. as a result,  <dig> genes that belong to the cellulose synthase gene family , the expansin gene family  and the xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase  gene family  were up-regulated in the top part of the bast, which was in contrast to the other three parts. the identification of these  <dig> concurrently up-regulated unigenes indicated that the early stage  might be important for the molecular regulation of ramie fiber development. further analysis indicated that four of the  <dig> unigenes from the expansin  and xth  families shared a coincident expression pattern during the whole growth season, which implied they were more relevant to ramie fiber development  during the different seasons than the other genes.


CONCLUSIONS
to the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to characterize ramie fiber development at different developmental stages. the identified transcripts will improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in ramie fiber development. moreover, the identified differentially expressed genes will accelerate molecular research on ramie fiber growth and the breeding of ramie with better fiber yields and quality.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ramiebast fibertranscriptomecellulose synthaseexpansinxyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

