BACKGROUND
whiteflies threaten agricultural crop production worldwide, are polyphagous in nature, and transmit hundreds of plant viruses. little is known how whitefly gene expression is altered due to feeding on plants infected with a semipersistently transmitted virus. tomato chlorosis virus  is transmitted by the whitefly  in a semipersistent manner and infects several globally important agricultural and ornamental crops, including tomato.


RESULTS
to determine changes in global gene regulation in whiteflies after feeding on tomato plants infected with a crinivirus , comparative transcriptomic analysis was performed using rna-seq on whitefly  populations after  <dig>   <dig>  and 72 h acquisition access periods on either tocv-infected or uninfected tomatoes. significant differences in gene expression were detected between whiteflies fed on tocv-infected tomato and those fed on uninfected tomato among the three feeding time periods:  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated at 24 h,  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated at 48 h, and  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated at 72 h. analysis revealed differential regulation of genes associated with metabolic pathways, signal transduction, transport and catabolism, receptors, glucose transporters, α-glucosidases, and the uric acid pathway in whiteflies fed on tocv-infected tomatoes, as well as an abundance of differentially regulated novel orphan genes. results demonstrate for the first time, a specific and temporally regulated response by the whitefly to feeding on a host plant infected with a semipersistently transmitted virus, and advance the understanding of the whitefly vector-virus interactions that facilitate virus transmission.


CONCLUSIONS
whitefly transmission of semipersistent viruses is believed to require specific interactions between the virus and its vector that allow binding of virus particles to factors within whitefly mouthparts. results provide a broader understanding of the potential mechanism of crinivirus transmission by whitefly, aid in discerning genes or loci in whitefly that influence virus interactions or transmission, and subsequently facilitate development of novel, genetics-based control methods against whitefly and whitefly-transmitted viruses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
whiteflybemisia tabaci meam <dig> tomato chlorosis viruscrinivirusrna-seqsemipersistent transmissionorphan genesgene expressionhttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000200united states agency for international development58-0210-3-012usda-ars2038-22000-013-00dissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

