BACKGROUND
plants exposed to environmental stresses draw upon many genetic and epigenetic strategies, with the former sometimes modulated by the latter. this can help the plant, and its immediate progeny, at least, to better endure the stress. some evidence has led to proposals that  genetic changes can be both selective and sustainably heritable, while other evidence suggests that changes are effectively stochastic, and important only because they induce genetic variation. one type of stress with an arguably high level of stochasticity in its effects is temperature stress. studies of how heat and cold affect the rates of meiotic recombination  and somatic mutations  report increases, decreases, or no effect. collectively, they do not point to any consistent patterns. some of this variability, however, might arise from the stress being applied for such an extended time, typically days or weeks. here, we adopted a targeted approach by  limiting exposure to one hour; and  timing it to coincide with  gamete, and early gametophyte, development, a period of high stress sensitivity; and  a late stage of vegetative development.


RESULTS
for plants  otherwise grown at 22 °c, we measured the effects of a 1 h exposure to cold  or heat  on the rates of mr, and four types of sms  in the f <dig> progeny. one parent  was stressed, the other  carried a genetic event detector. when rates were compared to those in progeny of control  two patterns emerged. in the progeny of younger plants  heat and cold either had no effect  or  had effects that were rare and stochastic. in the progeny of older plants , while effects were also infrequent, those that were seen followed a consistent pattern: rates of all five genetic events were lowest at 12 °c and highest at 32 °c, i.e. they varied in a “dose-response” manner. this pattern was strongest  in progeny whose stressed parent was female.


CONCLUSIONS
while the infrequency of effects suggests the need for cautious inference, the consistency of responses in the progeny of older plants, indicate that in some circumstances the level of stochasticity in inherited genetic responses to heat or cold stress can be context-dependent, possibly reflecting life-cycle stages in the parental generation that are variably stress sensitive.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
arabidopsistemperature stressmeiotic recombinationsomatic mutation ratesstochasticitydepartment of biotechnology, ministry of science and technology, indiabio1011125dbtxrbasbaskar ramamurthy issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

