BACKGROUND
ltr retroelements  constitute a major group of transposable elements widely distributed in eukaryotic genomes. through their own mechanism of retrotranscription ltr res enrich the genomic landscape by providing genetic variability, thus contributing to genome structure and organization. nonetheless, transcriptomic activity of ltr res still remains an obscure domain within cell, developmental, and organism biology.


RESULTS
here we present a first comparative analysis of ltr res for anuran amphibians based on a full depth coverage transcriptome of the european pool frog, pelophylax lessonae, the genome of the african clawed frog, silurana tropicalis , and additional transcriptomes of s. tropicalis and cyclorana alboguttata. we identified over  <dig> copies of ltr res from all four families  in the genome of s. tropicalis and discovered transcripts of several of these elements in all rna-seq datasets analyzed. elements of the ty3/gypsy family were most active, especially amn-san elements, which accounted for approximately  <dig> % of the genome in silurana. some elements exhibited tissue specific expression patterns, for example hydra <dig>  and muerv-like elements in pelophylax. in s. tropicalis considerable transcription of ltr res was observed during embryogenesis as soon as the embryonic genome became activated, i.e. at midblastula transition. in the course of embryonic development the spectrum of transcribed ltr res changed; during gastrulation and neurulation muerv-like and snrv like retroviruses were abundantly transcribed while during organogenesis transcripts of the xen <dig> retroviruses became much more active.


CONCLUSIONS
the differential expression of ltr res during embryogenesis in concert with their tissue-specificity and the protein domains they encode are evidence for the functional roles these elements play as integrative parts of complex regulatory networks. our results support the meanwhile widely accepted concept that retroelements are not simple “junk dna” or “harmful genomic parasites” but essential components of the transcriptomic machinery in vertebrates.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ltr retroelementssiluranapelophylaxanurarnaseqtranscriptomeembryogenesisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

