BACKGROUND
the factors that contribute to and maintain hybrid zones between distinct species are highly variable, depending on hybrid origins, frequencies and fitness. in this study, we aimed to examine genetic origins, compositions and possible maintenance of populus × jrtyschensis, an assumed natural hybrid between two distantly related species. this hybrid poplar occurs mainly on the floodplains along the river valleys between the overlapping distributions of the two putative parents.


RESULTS
we collected  <dig> individuals from  <dig> typical populations of p. × jrtyschensis, p. nigra and p. laurifolia. we genotyped them based on the sequence variations of one maternally inherited chloroplast dna  fragment and genetic polymorphisms at  <dig> ssr loci. we further sequenced eight nuclear genes for  <dig> individuals from  <dig> populations. two groups of cpdna haplotypes characteristic of p. nigra and p. laurifolia respectively were both recovered for p. × jrtyschensis. genetic structures and coalescent tests of two sets of nuclear population genetic data suggested that p. × jrtyschensis originated from hybridizations between the two assumed parental species. all examined populations of p. × jrtyschensis comprise mainly f <dig> hybrids from interspecific hybridizations between p. nigra and p. laurifolia. in the habitats of p. × jrtyschensis, there are lower concentrations of soil nitrogen than in the habitats occupied by the other two species.


CONCLUSIONS
our extensive examination of the genetic composition of p. × jrtyschensis suggested that it is typical of f1-dominated hybrid zones. this finding plus the low concentration of soil nitrogen in the floodplain soils support the f1-dominated bounded hybrid superiority hypothesis of hybrid zone maintenance for this particular hybrid poplar.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hybrid originfirst-generation hybridshybrid superioritypopulus × jrtyschensisnational high technology research and development program of china2013aa100605liu jianquan national key project for basic research2012cb114504liu jianquan http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31260051liu jianquan  international collaboration ‘111’ collaboration projectissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

