BACKGROUND
next generation sequencing  technologies enable studies and analyses of the diversity of both t and b cell receptors  in human and animal systems to elucidate immune functions in health and disease. over the last few years, several algorithms and tools have been developed to support respective analyses of raw sequencing data of the immune repertoire. these tools focus on distinct aspects of the data processing and require a strong bioinformatics background. to facilitate the analysis of t and b cell repertoires by less experienced users, software is needed that combines the most common tools for repertoire analysis.


RESULTS
we introduce a graphical user interface  providing a complete analysis pipeline for processing raw ngs data for human and animal tcr and bcr clonotype determination and advanced differential repertoire studies. it provides two applications. clonocalc prepares the raw data for downstream analyses. it combines a demultiplexer for barcode splitting and employs mixcr for paired-end read merging and the extraction of human and animal tcr/bcr sequences. clonoplot wraps the r package tcr and further contributes self-developed plots for the descriptive comparative investigation of immune repertoires.


CONCLUSIONS
this workflow reduces the amount of programming required to perform the respective analyses and supports both communication and training between scientists and technicians, and across scientific disciplines.

the open source development in java and r is modular and invites advanced users to extend its functionality. software and documentation are freely available at https://bitbucket.org/clonosuite/clonocalc-plot.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
next-generation sequencingimmune repertoire analysisgraphical user interfacedeutsche forschungsgemeinschaftsfb 564deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftexcellence cluster inflammation at interfaces exc306horizon 2020633589european cooperation in science and technology ic1406issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

