BACKGROUND
the sea lamprey  is a jawless vertebrate that parasitizes fish as an adult and, with overfishing, was responsible for the decline in lake trout  populations in the great lakes. while laboratory studies have looked at the rates of wounding on various fish hosts, there have been few investigations on the physiological effects of lamprey wounding on the host. in the current study, two morphotypes of lake trout, leans and siscowets, were parasitized in the laboratory by sea lampreys and the liver transcriptomes of parasitized and nonparasitized fish were analyzed by rna-seq  to determine which genes and gene pathways  were altered by lamprey parasitism.


RESULTS
overall, genes encoding molecules involved in catalytic  and binding activities  predominated the regulated gene lists. in siscowets, the top upregulated gene was growth arrest and dna-damage-inducible protein and for leans it was interleukin-18-binding protein. in leans, the most significantly downregulated gene was udp-glucuronosyltransferase 2a <dig> - deseq <dig> or phosphotriesterase related - edger. for siscowets, the top downregulated gene was c-c motif chemokine  <dig> - deseq <dig> or gtp-binding protein rhes - edger. gene pathways associated with inflammatory-related responses or factors  were regulated following parasitism in both morphotypes. however, pathways related to energy metabolism  were also regulated. these pathways or the intensity or direction  of regulation were different between leans and siscowets. finally, one of the most significantly downregulated pathways in both leans and siscowets was the kynurenine  pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
the results indicate a strong transcriptional response in the lake trout to lamprey parasitism that entails genes involved in the regulation of inflammation and cellular damage. responses to energy utilization as well as hydromineral balance also occurred indicating an adjustment in the host to energy demands and osmotic imbalances during parasitism. given the role of the kynurenine pathway in promoting immunotolerance in mammals, the downregulation observed in this pathway during parasitism may signify an attempt by the host to inhibit any feedback suppression of the immune response to the lamprey.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lake troutsea lampreyparasitisminflammationrna-seqdifferential transcriptionliver transcriptomicshttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100006788great lakes fishery commissionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

