BACKGROUND
the major gram-positive coccoid pathogens cause similar invasive diseases and show high rates of antimicrobial resistance. uncharacterised proteins shared by these organisms may be involved in virulence or be targets for antimicrobial therapy.


RESULTS
forty four uncharacterised proteins from streptococcus pneumoniae with homologues in enterococcus faecalis and/or staphylococcus aureus were selected for analysis. these proteins showed differences in terms of sequence conservation and number of interacting partners. twenty eight of these proteins were monodomain proteins and  <dig> were modular, involving domain combinations and, in many cases, predicted unstructured regions. the genes coding for four of these  <dig> proteins were essential. genomic and structural studies showed one of the four essential genes to code for a promising antibacterial target. the strongest impact of gene removal was on monodomain proteins showing high sequence conservation and/or interactions with many other proteins. eleven out of  <dig> knockouts  showed growth delay and  <dig> knockouts presented a chaining phenotype. five of these chaining mutants showed a lack of putative dna-binding proteins. this suggest this phenotype results from a loss of overall transcription regulation. five knockouts showed defective autolysis in response to penicillin and vancomycin, and attenuated virulence in an animal model of sepsis.


CONCLUSIONS
uncharacterised proteins make up a reservoir of polypeptides of different physiological importance and biomedical potential. a promising antibacterial target was identified. five of the  <dig> examined proteins seemed to be virulence factors.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
antibiotic targetbacterial pathogenesishypothetical proteinpost-genomicsprotein functionprotein spaceproteomicsvirulence factorsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

