BACKGROUND
initial success of inhibitors targeting oncogenes is often followed by tumor relapse due to acquired resistance. in addition to mutations in targeted oncogenes, signaling cross-talks among pathways play a vital role in such drug inefficacy. these include activation of compensatory pathways and altered activities of key effectors in other cell survival and growth-associated pathways.


RESULTS
we propose a computational framework using bayesian modeling to systematically characterize potential cross-talks among breast cancer signaling pathways. we employed a fully bayesian approach known as the p1-model to infer posterior probabilities of gene-pairs in networks derived from the gene expression datasets of erbb2-positive breast cancer cell-lines . using this computational framework, we searched for cross-talks between egfr/erbb and other signaling pathways from reactome, kegg and wikipathway databases that contribute to lapatinib resistance. we identified  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> gene-pairs as putative drug-resistant cross-talks, respectively, each comprised of a gene in the egfr/erbb signaling pathway and a gene from another signaling pathway, that appear to be interacting in resistant cells but not in parental cells. in  <dig> of these  gene-pairs, both of the interacting partners are up-regulated in resistant conditions relative to parental conditions. these gene-pairs are prime candidates for novel cross-talks contributing to lapatinib resistance. they associate egfr/erbb signaling with six other signaling pathways: notch, wnt, gpcr, hedgehog, insulin receptor/igf1r and tgf- β receptor signaling. we conducted a literature survey to validate these cross-talks, and found evidence supporting a role for many of them in contributing to drug resistance. we also analyzed an independent study of lapatinib resistance in the bt <dig> breast cancer cell-line and found the same signaling pathways making cross-talks with the egfr/erbb signaling pathway as in the primary dataset.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the activation of compensatory pathways can potentially cause up-regulation of egfr/erbb pathway genes  via signaling cross-talk. thus, the up-regulated members of these compensatory pathways along with the members of the egfr/erbb signaling pathway are interesting as potential targets for designing novel anti-cancer therapeutics.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
drug resisancesignaling cross-talkbayesian statistical modelingp1-modelegfr signalingbreast cancerlapatinibissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

