BACKGROUND
understanding the mechanisms by which hundreds of diverse cell types develop from a single mammalian zygote has been a central challenge of developmental biology. conrad h. waddington, in his metaphoric “epigenetic landscape” visualized the early embryogenesis as a hierarchy of lineage bifurcations. in each bifurcation, a single progenitor cell type produces two different cell lineages. the tristable dynamical systems are used to model the lineage bifurcations. it is also shown that a genetic circuit consisting of two auto-activating transcription factors  with cross inhibitions can form a tristable dynamical system.


RESULTS
we used gene expression profiles of pre-implantation mouse embryos at the single cell resolution to visualize the waddington landscape of the early embryogenesis. for each lineage bifurcation we identified two clusters of tfs – rather than two single tfs as previously proposed – that had opposite expression patterns between the pair of bifurcated cell types. the regulatory circuitry among each pair of tf clusters resembled a genetic circuit of a pair of single tfs; it consisted of positive feedbacks among the tfs of the same cluster, and negative interactions among the members of the opposite clusters. our analyses indicated that the tristable dynamical system of the two-cluster regulatory circuitry is more robust than the genetic circuit of two single tfs.


CONCLUSIONS
we propose that a modular hierarchy of regulatory circuits, each consisting of two mutually inhibiting and auto-activating tf clusters, can form hierarchical lineage bifurcations with improved safeguarding of critical early embryogenesis against biological perturbations. furthermore, our computationally fast framework for modeling and visualizing the epigenetic landscape can be used to obtain insights from experimental data of development at the single cell resolution.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
waddington landscapeearly embryogenesisdifferentiationdevelopmental bifurcationsgenetic circuitsingle cell analysisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

