BACKGROUND
we have studied the impact of carbohydrate-starvation on the acclimation response to high light using arabidopsis thaliana double mutants strongly impaired in the day- and night path of photoassimilate export from the chloroplast. a complete knock-out mutant of the triose phosphate/phosphate translocator  was crossed to mutants defective in  starch biosynthesis  or  starch mobilization  as well as in  maltose export from the chloroplast .


RESULTS
all double mutants were viable and indistinguishable from the wild type when grown under low light conditions, but - except for sex1-3/tpt- <dig> - developed a high chlorophyll fluorescence  phenotype and growth retardation when grown in high light. immunoblots of thylakoid proteins, blue-native gel electrophoresis and chlorophyll fluorescence emission analyses at  <dig> kelvin with the adg1-1/tpt- <dig> double mutant revealed that hcf was linked to a specific decrease in plastome-encoded core proteins of both photosystems , whereas nuclear-encoded antennae  accumulated normally, but were predominantly not attached to their photosystems. uncoupled antennae are the major cause for hcf of dark-adapted plants. feeding of sucrose or glucose to high light-grown adg1-1/tpt- <dig> plants rescued the hcf- and growth phenotypes. elevated sugar levels induce the expression of the glucose-6-phosphate/phosphate translocator <dig> , which in principle could compensate for the deficiency in the tpt. a triple mutant with an additional defect in gpt <dig>  exhibited an identical rescue of the hcf- and growth phenotype in response to sugar feeding as the adg1-1/tpt- <dig> double mutant, indicating that this rescue is independent from the sugar-triggered induction of gpt <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
we propose that cytosolic carbohydrate availability modulates acclimation to high light in a. thaliana. it is conceivable that the strong relationship between the chloroplast and nucleus with respect to a co-ordinated expression of photosynthesis genes is modified in carbohydrate-starved plants. hence carbohydrates may be considered as a novel component involved in chloroplast-to-nucleus retrograde signaling, an aspect that will be addressed in future studies.

