BACKGROUND
reports on the effect of age and obesity on myocardial ischaemia/reperfusion  injury and ischaemic preconditioning are contradictory. the aim of this study was to re-evaluate the effects of age and diet-induced obesity  on myocardial i/r injury and preconditioning potential.

methods
four groups of wistar male rats were used: age-matched controls  receiving standard rat chow for  16 weeks and  16 months respectively; dio rats receiving a sucrose-supplemented diet for  16 weeks and  16 months respectively. the ages of groups  and  were 22 weeks  and groups  and  17 months  at time of experimentation. isolated perfused working hearts were subjected to 35 min regional ischaemia/1 h reperfusion. endpoints were infarct size  and functional recovery. hearts were preconditioned by  <dig> × 5 min ischaemia/5 min reperfusion. results were processed using graphpad prism statistical software.


RESULTS
age did not affect baseline heart function before induction of ischaemia and i/r damage as indicated by infarct size and similar values were obtained in hearts from both age groups. age also had no effect on functional recovery of hearts during reperfusion after regional ischaemia in amc rats, but cardiac output during reperfusion was better in hearts from middle-aged than young dio rats.

the diet reduced infarct size in hearts from young rats , with no differences in hearts from middle-aged rats . compared to their respective amc, diet-induced obesity had no significant effect on functional recovery of hearts from both age groups after exposure to regional ischaemia.

when exposed to the more severe stress of global ischaemia, the functional recovery potential of middle-aged dio rats appeared to be impeded compared to hearts of young dio rats, while age had no effect on the functional recovery of amc hearts.

preconditioning reduced infarct size in hearts from young control rats and both middle-aged groups, but not from young dio rats. age had a significant effect on functional recovery in preconditioning: it was improved in hearts from young control and dio rats, but depressed in both middle-aged groups.


CONCLUSIONS
the data showed that middle-age and obesity had no effect on baseline myocardial function and did not increase susceptibility to i/r damage upon exposure to regional ischaemia. on the contrary, obesity reduced i/r damage in young rats. preconditioned aging hearts showed a decreased infarct size, but a reduction in functional recovery.

keywords
agediet-induced obesityischaemic preconditioninginfarct sizemyocardial functionsa national research foundation93579issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

