BACKGROUND
different strategies  can be used to study proteins involved in cell biogenesis. the availability of the complete sequences of several plant genomes allowed the development of transcriptomic studies. although the expression patterns of some arabidopsis thaliana genes involved in cell wall biogenesis were identified at different physiological stages, detailed microarray analysis of plant cell wall genes has not been performed on any plant tissues. using transcriptomic and bioinformatic tools, we studied the regulation of cell wall genes in arabidopsis stems, i.e. genes encoding proteins involved in cell wall biogenesis and genes encoding secreted proteins.


RESULTS
transcriptomic analyses of stems were performed at three different developmental stages, i.e., young stems, intermediate stage, and mature stems. many genes involved in the synthesis of cell wall components such as polysaccharides and monolignols were identified. a total of  <dig> genes encoding predicted secreted proteins with moderate or high level of transcripts were analyzed in details. the encoded proteins were distributed into  <dig> classes, based on the presence of predicted functional domains. proteins acting on carbohydrates and proteins of unknown function constituted the two most abundant classes. other proteins were proteases, oxido-reductases, proteins with interacting domains, proteins involved in signalling, and structural proteins. particularly high levels of expression were established for genes encoding pectin methylesterases, germin-like proteins, arabinogalactan proteins, fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins, and structural proteins. finally, the results of this transcriptomic analyses were compared with those obtained through a cell wall proteomic analysis from the same material. only a small proportion of genes identified by previous proteomic analyses were identified by transcriptomics. conversely, only a few proteins encoded by genes having moderate or high level of transcripts were identified by proteomics.


CONCLUSIONS
analysis of the genes predicted to encode cell wall proteins revealed that about  <dig> genes had moderate or high levels of transcripts. among them, we identified many new genes possibly involved in cell wall biogenesis. the discrepancies observed between results of this transcriptomic study and a previous proteomic study on the same material revealed post-transcriptional mechanisms of regulation of expression of genes encoding cell wall proteins.

