BACKGROUND
ophiocordyceps sinensis, a worm and fungus combined mixture which hirsutella sinensis is parasitic on the caterpillar body, has been used as a traditional medicine or healthy food in china for thousands of years. h. sinensis is reported as the only correct anamorph of o. sinensis and its main active ingredients are similar to the natural o. sinensis.


RESULTS
h. sinensis l <dig>  asexual strain of o. sinensis, was isolated and identified in this study. three transcriptomes of h. sinensis at different cultivation periods  were sequenced for the first time by rna-seq method, and  <dig>  unigenes ,  <dig>  unigenes  and  <dig>  unigenes  were assembled and obtained, respectively. these unigenes of the three samples were further assembled into  <dig>  unigenes , and  <dig>  percent of unigenes  could be annotated based on protein databases. subsequently, the genes and enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of the active ingredients according to the sequencing and annotation results were predicted. based on the predictions, we further investigated the interaction of different pathway networks and the corresponding enzymes. furthermore, the differentially expressed genes  of h. sinensis grown during different developmental stages  were globally detected and analyzed based on the data from rna-seq, and  <dig> degs between 3d and 6d,  <dig>  degs between 3d and 9d, and  <dig> degs between 6d and 9d were found, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
this work presented here would aid in understanding and carrying out future studies on the genetic basis of h. sinensis and contribute to the further artificial production and application of this organism. this study provided a substantial contribution and basis to further characterize the gene expression profiles of h. sinensis in the metabolic pathways of active ingredients.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ophiocordyceps sinensishirsutella sinensistranscriptome sequencingmetabolic pathwaysgene differential expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

