BACKGROUND
understanding drug bioactivities is crucial for early-stage drug discovery, toxicology studies and clinical trials. network pharmacology is a promising approach to better understand the molecular mechanisms of drug bioactivities. with a dramatic increase of rich data sources that document drugs' structural, chemical, and biological activities, it is necessary to develop an automated tool to construct a drug-target network for candidate drugs, thus facilitating the drug discovery process.


RESULTS
we designed a computational workflow to construct drug-target networks from different knowledge bases including drugbank, pharmgkb, and the pina database. to automatically implement the workflow, we created a web-based tool called dtome , which is comprised of a database schema and a user-friendly web interface. the dtome tool utilizes web-based queries to search candidate drugs and then construct a dtome network by extracting and integrating four types of interactions. the four types are adverse drug interactions, drug-target interactions, drug-gene associations, and target-/gene-protein interactions. additionally, we provided a detailed network analysis and visualization process to illustrate how to analyze and interpret the dtome network. the dtome tool is publicly available at http://bioinfo.mc.vanderbilt.edu/dtome.


CONCLUSIONS
as demonstrated with the antipsychotic drug clozapine, the dtome tool was effective and promising for the investigation of relationships among drugs, adverse interaction drugs, drug primary targets, drug-associated genes, and proteins directly interacting with targets or genes. the resultant dtome network provides researchers with direct insights into their interest drug, such as the molecular mechanisms of drug actions. we believe such a tool can facilitate identification of drug targets and drug adverse interactions.

12- <dig> november  <dig> ieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine  <dig> atlanta, ga, usa

