BACKGROUND
genome-wide association study  is a useful tool for detecting and characterizing traits of interest including those associated with disease resistance in soybean. the availability of  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphism  markers  on  <dig>  soybean and wild soybean plant introductions  in the usda soybean germplasm collection allows for fast and robust identification of loci associated with a desired phenotype. by using a genome-wide marker set to predict phenotypic values, genomic prediction for phenotype-unknown but genotype-determined pis has become possible. the goal of this study was to describe the genetic architecture associated with sensitivity to tobacco ringspot virus  infection in the usda soybean germplasm collection.


RESULTS
trsv-induced disease sensitivities of the  <dig> soybean pis were rated on a one to five scale with plants rated as one exhibiting mild symptoms and plants rated as five displaying terminal bud necrosis . the gwas identified a single locus on soybean chromosome  <dig> strongly associated with trsv sensitivity. cross-validation showed a correlation of  <dig>   to trsv sensitivity without including the most significant snp marker from the gwas as a covariate, which was a better estimation compared to the mean separation by using significant snps. the genomic estimated breeding values for the remaining  <dig>  unscreened soybean pis in the usda soybean germplasm collection were obtained using the gapit r package. to evaluate the prediction accuracy, an additional  <dig> soybean accessions were evaluated for sensitivity to trsv, which resulted in a correlation of  <dig>   between actual and predicted severities.


CONCLUSIONS
a single locus responsible for trsv sensitivity in soybean was identified on chromosome  <dig>  two leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase genes were located near the locus and may control sensitivity of soybean to trsv infection. furthermore, a comprehensive genomic prediction for trsv sensitivity for all accessions in the usda soybean germplasm collection was completed.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genome association and prediction integrated tool genome-wide association studies genomic predictionsingle nucleotide polymorphism soybean tobacco ringspot virus issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

