BACKGROUND
a number of the deeper divergences in the placental mammal tree are still inconclusively resolved despite extensive phylogenomic analyses. a recent analysis of  <dig> kbp of protein coding sequences yielded only limited support for the relationships among laurasiatheria , probably because the divergences occurred only within a few million years from each other. it is generally expected that increasing the amount of data and improving the taxon sampling enhance the resolution of narrow divergences. therefore these and other difficult splits were examined by phylogenomic analysis of the hitherto largest sequence alignment. the increasingly complete genome data of placental mammals also allowed developing a novel and stringent data search method.


RESULTS
the rigorous data handling, recursive blast, successfully removed the sequences from gene families, including those from well-known families hemoglobin, olfactory, myosin and hox genes, thus avoiding alignment of possibly paralogous sequences. the current phylogenomic analysis of  <dig>  genes  from a total of  <dig> species yielded statistically significant support for most relationships. while some major clades were confirmed using genomic sequence data, the placement of the treeshrew, bat and the relationship between boreoeutheria, xenarthra and afrotheria remained problematic to resolve despite the size of the alignment. phylogenomic analysis of divergence times dated the basal placental mammal splits at 95– <dig> million years ago. many of the following divergences occurred only a few  million years later. relationships with narrow divergence time intervals received unexpectedly limited support even from the phylogenomic analyses.


CONCLUSIONS
the narrow temporal window within which some placental divergences took place suggests that inconsistencies and limited resolution of the mammalian tree may have their natural explanation in speciation processes such as lineage sorting, introgression from species hybridization or hybrid speciation. these processes obscure phylogenetic analysis, making some parts of the tree difficult to resolve even with genome data.

