BACKGROUND
transcription factor binding to dna requires both an appropriate binding element and suitably open chromatin, which together help to define regulatory elements within the genome. current methods of identifying regulatory elements, such as promoters or enhancers, typically rely on sequence conservation, existing gene annotations or specific marks, such as histone modifications and p <dig> binding methods, each of which has its own biases.


RESULTS
herein we show that an approach based on clustering of transcription factor peaks from high-throughput sequencing coupled with chromatin immunoprecipitation  can be used to evaluate markers for regulatory elements. we used  <dig> data sets for  <dig> unique transcription factors distributed over two cell lines to create regulatory element clusters. by integrating the clusters from our approach with histone modifications and data for open chromatin, we identified general methylation of lysine  <dig> on histone h <dig>  as the most specific marker for transcription factor clusters. clusters mapping to annotated genes showed distinct patterns in cluster composition related to gene expression and histone modifications. clusters mapping to intergenic regions fall into two groups either directly involved in transcription, including mirnas and long noncoding rnas, or facilitating transcription by long-range interactions. the latter clusters were specifically enriched with h3k4me <dig>  but less with acetylation of lysine  <dig> on histone  <dig> or p <dig> binding.


CONCLUSIONS
by integrating genomewide data of transcription factor binding and chromatin structure and using our data-driven approach, we pinpointed the chromatin marks that best explain transcription factor association with different regulatory elements. our results also indicate that a modest selection of transcription factors may be sufficient to map most regulatory elements in the human genome.

transcription factorchip-seqhistone modificationchromatin

