BACKGROUND
the teleost order lophiiformes, commonly known as the anglerfishes, contains a diverse array of marine fishes, ranging from benthic shallow-water dwellers to highly modified deep-sea midwater species. they comprise  <dig> living species placed in  <dig> genera,  <dig> families and  <dig> suborders, but approximately half of the species diversity is occupied by deep-sea ceratioids distributed among  <dig> families. the evolutionary origins of such remarkable habitat and species diversity, however, remain elusive because of the lack of fresh material for a majority of the deep-sea ceratioids and incompleteness of the fossil record across all of the lophiiformes. to obtain a comprehensive picture of the phylogeny and evolutionary history of the anglerfishes, we assembled whole mitochondrial genome  sequences from  <dig> lophiiforms  representing all five suborders and  <dig> of the  <dig> families. sequences of  <dig> higher teleosts including the  <dig> lophiiform sequences were unambiguously aligned and subjected to phylogenetic analysis and divergence time estimation.


RESULTS
partitioned maximum likelihood analysis confidently recovered monophyly for all of the higher taxa  with the exception of the thaumatichthyidae . the mitogenomic trees strongly support the most basal and an apical position of the lophioidei and a clade comprising chaunacoidei + ceratioidei, respectively, although alternative phylogenetic positions of the remaining two suborders  with respect to the above two lineages are statistically indistinguishable. while morphology-based intra-subordinal relationships for relatively shallow, benthic dwellers  are either congruent with or statistically indistinguishable from the present mitogenomic tree, those of the principally deep-sea midwater dwellers  cannot be reconciled with the molecular phylogeny. a relaxed molecular-clock bayesian analysis of the divergence times suggests that all of the subordinal diversifications have occurred during a relatively short time period between  <dig> and  <dig> myr ago .


CONCLUSIONS
the mitogenomic analyses revealed previously unappreciated phylogenetic relationships among the lophiiform suborders and ceratioid familes. although the latter relationships cannot be reconciled with the earlier hypotheses based on morphology, we found that simple exclusion of the reductive or simplified characters can alleviate some of the conflict. the acquisition of novel features, such as male dwarfism, bioluminescent lures, and unique reproductive modes allowed the deep-sea ceratioids to diversify rapidly in a largely unexploited, food-poor bathypelagic zone  relative to the other lophiiforms occurring in shallow coastal areas.

