BACKGROUND
nonribosomal peptide synthetases  are multimodular enzymes, found in fungi and bacteria, which biosynthesize peptides without the aid of ribosomes. although their metabolite products have been the subject of intense investigation due to their life-saving roles as medicinals and injurious roles as mycotoxins and virulence factors, little is known of the phylogenetic relationships of the corresponding nrpss or whether they can be ranked into subgroups of common function. we identified genes  encoding nrps and nrps-like proteins in  <dig> fungal genomes and undertook phylogenomic analyses in order to identify fungal nrps subfamilies, assess taxonomic distribution, evaluate levels of conservation across subfamilies, and address mechanisms of evolution of multimodular nrpss. we also characterized relationships of fungal nrpss, a representative sampling of bacterial nrpss, and related adenylating enzymes, including α-aminoadipate reductases  involved in lysine biosynthesis in fungi.


RESULTS
phylogenomic analysis identified nine major subfamilies of fungal nrpss which fell into two main groups: one corresponds to nps genes encoding primarily mono/bi-modular enzymes which grouped with bacterial nrpss and the other includes genes encoding primarily multimodular and exclusively fungal nrpss. aars shared a closer phylogenetic relationship to nrpss than to other acyl-adenylating enzymes. phylogenetic analyses and taxonomic distribution suggest that several mono/bi-modular subfamilies arose either prior to, or early in, the evolution of fungi, while two multimodular groups appear restricted to and expanded in fungi. the older mono/bi-modular subfamilies show conserved domain architectures suggestive of functional conservation, while multimodular nrpss, particularly those unique to euascomycetes, show a diversity of architectures and of genetic mechanisms generating this diversity.


CONCLUSIONS
this work is the first to characterize subfamilies of fungal nrpss. our analyses suggest that mono/bi-modular nrpss have more ancient origins and more conserved domain architectures than most multimodular nrpss. it also demonstrates that the α-aminoadipate reductases involved in lysine biosynthesis in fungi are closely related to mono/bi-modular nrpss. several groups of mono/bi-modular nrps metabolites are predicted to play more pivotal roles in cellular metabolism than products of multimodular nrpss. in contrast, multimodular subfamilies of nrpss are of more recent origin, are restricted to fungi, show less stable domain architectures, and biosynthesize metabolites which perform more niche-specific functions than mono/bi-modular nrps products. the euascomycete-only nrps subfamily, in particular, shows evidence for extensive gain and loss of domains suggestive of the contribution of domain duplication and loss in responding to niche-specific pressures.

