BACKGROUND
the sequence of the pathogen mycobacterium tuberculosis  strain h37rv has been available for over a decade, but the biology of the pathogen remains poorly understood. genome sequences from other mtb strains and closely related bacteria present an opportunity to apply the power of comparative genomics to understand the evolution of mtb pathogenesis. we conducted a comparative analysis using  <dig> genomes from the tuberculosis database , including  <dig> strains of mtb and m. bovis,  <dig> additional mycobacteria,  <dig> corynebacteria,  <dig> streptomyces, rhodococcus jostii rha <dig>  nocardia farcinia, acidothermus cellulolyticus, rhodobacter sphaeroides, propionibacterium acnes, and bifidobacterium longum.


RESULTS
our results highlight the functional importance of lipid metabolism and its regulation, and reveal variation between the evolutionary profiles of genes implicated in saturated and unsaturated fatty acid metabolism. it also suggests that dna repair and molybdopterin cofactors are important in pathogenic mycobacteria. by analyzing sequence conservation and gene expression data, we identify nearly  <dig> conserved noncoding regions. these include  <dig> predicted promoter regulatory motifs, of which  <dig> correspond to previously validated motifs, as well as  <dig> potential noncoding rnas, of which we experimentally confirm the expression of four.


CONCLUSIONS
our analysis of protein evolution highlights gene families that are associated with the adaptation of environmental mycobacteria to obligate pathogenesis. these families include fatty acid metabolism, dna repair, and molybdopterin biosynthesis. our analysis reinforces recent findings suggesting that small noncoding rnas are more common in mycobacteria than previously expected. our data provide a foundation for understanding the genome and biology of mtb in a comparative context, and are available online and through tbdb.org.

comparative genomicsm. tuberculosissynergysmall rnaslipid metabolismmolybdopterindna repair

