BACKGROUND
the match play patterns in equestrian polo are unique and require specific training programs to ensure sport performance. the effect of commonly used exercise training regimens on the adaptation of skeletal muscle is unclear. the present study investigated the modulating effects of the classic training regimen, comprised of aerobic exercise training with increasing exercise intensities and varying duration combined with match play, on the properties of muscle in polo ponies. nine healthy adult female polo ponies were subjected to four consecutive subsets of  <dig> year classic training regimen including basal activity , low intensity , low to moderate intensity , and low to moderate intensity training plus match play during polo tournament , respectively. at the end of each training period, gluteus medius muscle samples were taken for determination of muscle fiber type distribution, muscle metabolic capacity, capillary density, and lipid and glycogen content. the expression profile of metabolic genes including succinate dehydrogenase , phosphofructokinase , glycogen phosphorylase , and glycogen synthase  were also measured.


RESULTS
among all exercise training subsets, only lmp exercise period caused an increase in the number of oxidative fibers , along with increases in properties related to oxidative metabolism including high capillary density, intramuscular lipid content, and expression of sdh and pyg genes, with a corresponding decrease in the number of type iix muscle fibers.


CONCLUSIONS
the combination of low to moderate and high intensity training in lmp are only sufficient to induce changes in oxidative characteristics. as the first scientific evidence providing such insight about the classic polo training regimen, the data forms a basis for further consideration in training program design.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
exercise traininghorsematch playpolo ponyskeletal muscle adaptationthis work was financially supported by kasetsart veterinary development funds. kasetsart university, faculty of veterinary medicine. nakorn pathom, thailand.issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

