BACKGROUND
in humans, adipose tissue  originating from different depots shows varying gene expression profiles. in horses, the risk of certain metabolic disorders may also be influenced by the impact of specific at depots. macrophage infiltration in human and rat at is considered to be a source of inflammatory changes. in horses, this relationship has not been extensively studied yet. reverse transcription quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction , a useful method to evaluate differences in mrna expression across different tissues, can be used to evaluate differences between equine at depots. for a correct interpretation of the rt-qpcr results, expression data have to be normalized by the use of validated reference genes. the main objectives of this study were to compare mrna expression of inflammation-related genes, as well as adipocyte morphology and number between different equine at depots; and in addition, to investigate the presence of antigen presenting cells in equine at and any potential relationship with adipokine mrna expression.


RESULTS
in this study, the mrna expression of inflammation-related genes  and candidate reference gene stability was investigated in  <dig> different at depots collected from the nuchal, abdominal  and subcutaneous  at region. by using genorm analysis, hprt <dig>  rpl <dig>  and gapdh were found to be the most stable genes in equine at. the mrna expression of leptin, chemokine ligand  <dig>  interleukin  <dig>  interleukin 1β, adiponectin, and matrix metalloproteinase  <dig> significantly differed across at depots . no significant at depot effect was found for interleukin  <dig> and superoxide dismutase  <dig> . adipocyte area and number of antigen presenting cells per adipocyte significantly differed between at depots .


CONCLUSIONS
adipose tissue location was associated with differences in mrna expression of inflammation-related genes. this depot-specific difference in mrna expression suggests that the overall inflammatory status of horses could be partially determined by the relative proportion of the different at depots.

rt-qpcrequine adipose tissuemrna expressioninflammation

