BACKGROUND
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded  tissue samples are routinely archived in the course of patient care and can be linked to clinical outcomes with long-term follow-up. however, ffpe tissues have degraded rna which poses challenges for analyzing gene expression. next-generation sequencing  is rapidly becoming accepted as an effective tool for measuring gene expressions for research and clinical use. however, the feasibility of ngs has not been firmly established when using ffpe tissue.


RESULTS
we optimized strategies for whole transcriptome sequencing  using ffpe tissue. ribosomal rna  was successfully depleted by competitive hybridization using the ribo-zero™ kit , and rrna sequence content was less than one percent for each library. gene expression measured by ffpe rna-seq was compared to two different standards: rna-seq from fresh frozen  tissue and quantitative pcr . both ff and ffpe tumors were sequenced on an illumina genome analyzer iix with an average of  <dig> million reads. the distribution of fpkms  and number of detected genes were similar between ffpe and ff. rna-seq expressions from ff and ffpe samples from the same renal cell carcinoma  correlated highly . on hierarchical cluster analysis, samples clustered by patient identity rather than method of preservation. taqman qpcr of  <dig> rcc-related genes correlated highly with ffpe rna-seq expressions . expression fold changes were considered, to assess biologic relevance of gene expressions. expression fold changes between ffpe tumors  correlated well when comparing qpcr and rna-seq . expression fold changes between tumors from different risk groups  also correlated well when comparing rna-seq from ff and ffpe tumors .


CONCLUSIONS
ffpe rna-seq provides reliable genes expression data, comparable to that obtained from fresh frozen tissue. it represents a useful tool for discovery and validation of biomarkers.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded qpcrrenal cell carcinoma rna-seqgene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

