BACKGROUND
phloem-feeding aphids deprive plants of assimilates, but mostly manage to avoid causing the mechanical tissue damage inflicted by chewing insects. nevertheless, jasmonate signalling that is induced by infestation is important in mediating resistance to phloem feeders. aphid attack induces the jasmonic acid signalling pathway, but very little is known about the specific impact jasmonates have on the expression of genes that respond to aphid attack.


RESULTS
we have evaluated the function that jasmonates have in regulating arabidopsis thaliana responses to cabbage aphid  by conducting a large-scale transcriptional analysis of two mutants: aos, which is defective in jasmonate production, and fou <dig>  which constitutively induces jasmonic acid biosynthesis. this analysis enabled us to determine which genes' expression patterns depend on the jasmonic acid signalling pathway. we identified more than  <dig> genes whose expression in non-challenged plants depended on jasmonate levels and more than  <dig> genes that responded differently to infestation in aos and fou <dig> plants than in wt. several aphid-induced changes were compromised in the aos mutant, particularly genes connected to regulation of transcription, defence responses and redox changes. due to jasmonate-triggered pre-activation of fou <dig>  its transcriptional profile in non-challenged plants mimicked the induction of defence responses in wt. additional activation of fou <dig> upon aphid attack was therefore limited. insect fitness experiments revealed that the physiological consequences of fou <dig> mutation contributed to more effective protection against b. brassicae. however, the observed resistance of the fou <dig> mutant was based on antibiotic rather than feeding deterrent properties of the mutant as indicated by an analysis of aphid feeding behaviour.


CONCLUSIONS
analysis of transcriptional profiles of wt, aos and fou <dig> plants revealed that the expression of more than  <dig> genes is dependent on jasmonate status, regardless of external stimuli. moreover, the aphid-induced response of more than  <dig> transcripts is regulated by jasmonate signalling. thus, in plants lacking jasmonates many of the defence-related responses induced by infestation in wt plants are impaired. constant up-regulation of jasmonate signalling as evident in the fou <dig> mutant causes reduction in aphid population growth, likely as a result of antibiotic properties of fou <dig> plants. however, aos mutation does not seem to affect aphid performance when the density of b. brassicae populations on plants is low and aphids are free to move around.

aphidgene expressioninfestationjasmonic acid signallingmicroarraysplant defenceepg

