BACKGROUND
over the past two decades, chromosome microdissection has been widely used in diagnostics and research enabling analysis of chromosomes and their regions through probe generation and establishing of chromosome- and chromosome region-specific dna libraries. however, relatively small physical size of mitotic chromosomes limited the use of the conventional chromosome microdissection for investigation of tiny chromosomal regions.


RESULTS
in the present study, we developed a workflow for mechanical microdissection of giant transcriptionally active lampbrush chromosomes followed by the preparation of whole-chromosome and locus-specific fluorescent in situ hybridization -probes and high-throughput sequencing. in particular, chicken  lampbrush chromosome regions as small as single chromomeres, individual lateral loops and marker structures were successfully microdissected. the dissected fragments were mapped with high resolution to target regions of the corresponding lampbrush chromosomes. for investigation of rna-content of lampbrush chromosome structures, samples retrieved by microdissection were subjected to reverse transcription. using high-throughput sequencing, the isolated regions were successfully assigned to chicken genome coordinates. as a result, we defined precisely the loci for marker structures formation on chicken lampbrush chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  additionally, our data suggest that large dapi-positive chromomeres of chicken lampbrush chromosome arms are characterized by low gene density and high repeat content.


CONCLUSIONS
the developed technical approach allows to obtain dna and rna samples from particular lampbrush chromosome loci, to define precisely the genomic position, extent and sequence content of the dissected regions. the data obtained demonstrate that lampbrush chromosome microdissection provides a unique opportunity to correlate a particular transcriptional domain or a cytological structure with a known dna sequence. this approach offers great prospects for detailed exploration of functionally significant chromosomal regions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chromosome microdissectionchickenlampbrush chromosomesspecial loopslocus-specific fish-probesgenomic mappingnext-generation sequencinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006769russian science foundation#14-14-00131krasikova alla daad university partnership programmeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

