BACKGROUND
horizontal gene transfer  to the plant mitochondrial genome has recently been shown to occur at a surprisingly high rate; however, little evidence has been found for hgt to the plastid genome, despite extensive sequencing. in this study, we analyzed all genes from sequenced plastid genomes to unearth any neglected cases of hgt and to obtain a measure of the overall extent of hgt to the plastid.


RESULTS
although several genes gave strongly supported conflicting trees under certain conditions, we are confident of hgt in only a single case beyond the rubisco hgt already reported. most of the conflicts involved near neighbors connected by long branches , where phylogenetic methods are prone to mislead. however, three genes – clpp, ycf <dig>  and rpl <dig> – provided strong support for taxa moving far from their organismal position. further taxon sampling of clpp and ycf <dig> resulted in rejection of hgt due to long-branch attraction and a serious error in the published plastid genome sequence of oenothera elata, respectively. a single new case, a bacterial rpl <dig> gene transferred into the ancestor of the cryptophyte and haptophyte plastids, appears to be a true hgt event. interestingly, this rpl <dig> gene is a distantly related paralog of the rpl <dig> type found in other plastids and most eubacteria. moreover, the transferred gene has physically replaced the native rpl <dig> gene, yet flanking genes and intergenic regions show no sign of hgt. this suggests that gene replacement somehow occurred by recombination at the very ends of rpl <dig>  without the level and length of similarity normally expected to support recombination.


CONCLUSIONS
the rpl <dig> hgt discovered in this study is of considerable interest in terms of both molecular mechanism and phylogeny. the plastid acquisition of a bacterial rpl <dig> gene via hgt provides the first strong evidence for a sister-group relationship between haptophyte and cryptophyte plastids to the exclusion of heterokont and alveolate plastids. moreover, the bacterial gene has replaced the native plastid rpl <dig> gene by an uncertain mechanism that appears inconsistent with existing models for the recombinational basis of gene conversion.

