BACKGROUND
enterococci have emerged as an important opportunistic pathogen causing life-threatening infections in hospitals. the emergence of this pathogen is associated with a remarkable capacity to accumulate resistance to antimicrobials and multidrug-resistance particularly to vancomycin, erythromycin and streptomycin have become a major cause of concern for the infectious diseases community. in this paper, we report the prevalence of enterococcus in respect to species distribution, their virulence and antibiogram profiles.

methods
four hundred fecal samples were collected from two piggery farms in the eastern cape province of south africa. enterococcus species were isolated and confirmed with generic specific primers targeting the tuf gene . the confirmed isolates were speciated with enterococci species specific primers that aimed at delineating them into six species that are commonly associated with infections in humans. antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed by disc diffusion method. six virulence genes and antimicrobial resistance profiles of the isolates were evaluated molecularly.


RESULTS
molecular identification of the presumptive isolates confirmed  <dig> isolates as enterococcus spp. attempt at speciation of the isolates with primers specific for e. faecalis, e. durans, e. casseliflavus, e. hirae and e. faecium delineated them as follows: e. faecalis , e. hirae , e. durans  and e. faecium  while e. casseliflavus was not detected. all the isolates were resistant to vancomycin, streptomycin and cloxacillin, and to at least two different classes of antibiotics, with  <dig>  isolates being resistant to five or more antibiotics. also, three out of the six virulence genes were detected in majority of the isolates and they are adhesion of collagen in e. faecalis  , gelatinase   and surface protein  .


CONCLUSIONS
there was high prevalence of multi-resistant vancomycin enterococcus spp.  in the fecal samples of pigs in the farms studied, and this poses health implications as vancomycin is an important drug in human medicine. further studies are needed to determine the spread of vancomycin resistance among bacteria of human origin in the communities.

keywords
virulence factorsmultiple antimicrobial resistancevancomycin resistanceenterococcus sppissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

