BACKGROUND
a variety of approaches to understanding protein structure and function require production of recombinant protein. mammalian based expression systems have advantages over bacterial systems for certain classes of protein but can be slower and more laborious. thus the availability of a simple system for production and rapid screening of constructs or conditions for mammalian expression would be of great benefit. to this end we have coupled an efficient recombinant protein production system based on transient transfection in hek- <dig> ebna <dig>  suspension cells with a dot blot method allowing pre-screening of proteins expressed in cells in a high throughput manner.


RESULTS
a nested pcr approach was used to clone  <dig> extracellular domains of mouse receptors as cd <dig> fusions within a mammalian gateway expression vector system. following transient transfection, hek-293e cells grown in  <dig> ml cultures in 24-deep well blocks showed similar growth kinetics, viability and recombinant protein expression profiles, to those grown in  <dig> ml shake flask cultures as judged by western blotting. following optimisation, fluorescent dot blot analysis of transfection supernatants was shown to be a rapid method for analysing protein expression yielding similar results as western blot analysis. addition of urea enhanced the binding of glycoproteins to a nitrocellulose membrane. a good correlation was observed between the results of a plate based small scale transient transfection dot blot pre-screen and successful purification of proteins expressed at the  <dig> ml scale.


CONCLUSIONS
the combination of small scale multi-well plate culture and dot blotting described here will allow the multiplex analysis of different mammalian expression experiments enabling a faster identification of high yield expression constructs or conditions prior to large scale protein production. the methods for parallel gateway cloning and expression of multiple constructs in cell culture will also be useful for applications such as the generation of receptor protein microarrays.

