BACKGROUND
brassica includes many successfully cultivated crop species of polyploid origin, either by ancestral genome triplication or by hybridization between two diploid progenitors, displaying complex repetitive sequences and transposons. the u’s triangle, which consists of three diploids and three amphidiploids, is optimal for the analysis of complicated genomes after polyploidization. next-generation sequencing enables the transcriptome profiling of polyploids on a global scale.


RESULTS
we examined the gene expression patterns of three diploids  and three amphidiploids  via digital gene expression analysis. in total, the libraries generated between  <dig>  and  <dig>  million raw reads, and the clean tags of each library were mapped to 18547– <dig> genes of b. rapa genome. the unambiguous tag-mapped genes in the libraries were compared. moreover, the majority of differentially expressed genes  were explored among diploids as well as between diploids and amphidiploids. gene ontological analysis was performed to functionally categorize these degs into different classes. the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes analysis was performed to assign these degs into approximately  <dig> pathways, among which the metabolic pathway, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, and peroxisomal pathway were enriched. the non-additive genes in brassica amphidiploids were analyzed, and the results indicated that orthologous genes in polyploids are frequently expressed in a non-additive pattern. methyltransferase genes showed differential expression pattern in brassica species.


CONCLUSIONS
our results provided an understanding of the transcriptome complexity of natural brassica species. the gene expression changes in diploids and allopolyploids may help elucidate the morphological and physiological differences among brassica species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
brassica spppolyploidizationsequencingdigital gene expression issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

