BACKGROUND
in functional genomics, transcript measurement is of fundamental importance. quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  assays are the most popular technology and depend on the initial molecular step, the reverse transcription . this study provides a complex overview of the influence of elements such as rt systems, amount of background rna, and transcript abundance on the efficiency of qrt-pcr. using qrt-pcr, we compared the efficiency of some commonly used rt systems and measured the production of pcr-amplifiable products and the influence of pcr inhibitor contents.


RESULTS
the qrt-pcr assays were conducted using the taqman system, although we also tested the sybr green i chemistry, which is not compatible with all the rt systems. when dealing with low-abundance transcripts, the superscript ii system generated more detectable molecules than the four other systems tested: sensiscript, omniscript, superscript iii and powerscript . however, the sensiscript and powerscript systems were more efficient for detecting high-abundance transcripts in the presence of  <dig> to  <dig> μg background rna . the most striking aspect was the influence of the dilution of the rt reaction on the subsequent pcr. indeed, some inhibition was released when diluted rt reactions were used for the quantitative pcr measurements. furthermore, the amount of background rna in the rt reaction was also a major component influencing a downstream step in qrt-pcr, the pcr reaction. whereas sensiscript was less biased, the other systems contained an important source of pcr inhibitors, interfering as much as 70% with the qrt-pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a complex overview of the influence of elements such as rt systems, qrtpcr chemistry, amount of background rna, and transcript abundance on the efficiency of qrt-pcr. whereas the most significant influencing factor is the presence of inhibitors in the rt systems, total background rna is also a major influencing component that affects the pcr reaction. whenever the aim of a study is to obtain a precise gene expression measurement or to profile the global transcriptome , the rt step is critical and should be examined with care.

