BACKGROUND
nac transcription factors comprise a large plant-specific gene family involved in the regulation of diverse biological processes. despite the growing number of studies on nac transcription factors in various species, little information is available about this family in conifers. the goal of this study was to identify the nac transcription family in maritime pine , to characterize ataf-like genes in response to various stresses and to study their molecular regulation.

methods
we have isolated two maritime pine nac genes and using a transient expression assay in n. benthamiana leaves estudied the promoter jasmonate response.


RESULTS
in this study, we identified  <dig> nac genes from maritime pine and classified them into six main subfamilies. the largest group includes  <dig> sequences corresponding to stress-related genes. two of these nac genes, ppnac <dig> and ppnac <dig>  were isolated and their expression profiles were examined at various developmental stages and in response to various types of stress. the expression of both genes was strongly induced by methyl jasmonate , mechanical wounding, and high salinity. the promoter regions of these genes were shown to contain cis-elements involved in the stress response and plant hormonal regulation, including e-boxes, which are commonly found in the promoters of genes that respond to jasmonate, and binding sites for bhlh proteins. using a transient expression assay in n. benthamiana leaves, we found that the promoter of ppnac <dig> was rapidly induced upon meja treatment, while this response disappeared in plants in which the transcription factor nbbhlh <dig> was silenced.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that ppnac <dig> and ppnac <dig> encode stress-responsive nac transcription factors involved in the jasmonate response in pine. furthermore, these data also suggest that the jasmonate signaling pathway is conserved between angiosperms and gymnosperms. these findings may be useful for engineering stress tolerance in pine via biotechnological approaches.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pinus pinasternac gene familystressmethyl jasmonatepromoterissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

