BACKGROUND
drug-target networks are receiving a lot of attention in late years, given its relevance for pharmaceutical innovation and drug lead discovery. different in silico approaches have been proposed for the identification of new drug-target interactions, many of which are based on kernel methods. despite technical advances in the latest years, these methods are not able to cope with large drug-target interaction spaces and to integrate multiple sources of biological information.


RESULTS
we propose kronrls-mkl, which models the drug-target interaction problem as a link prediction task on bipartite networks. this method allows the integration of multiple heterogeneous information sources for the identification of new interactions, and can also work with networks of arbitrary size. moreover, it automatically selects the more relevant kernels by returning weights indicating their importance in the drug-target prediction at hand. empirical analysis on four data sets using twenty distinct kernels indicates that our method has higher or comparable predictive performance than  <dig> competing methods in all prediction tasks. moreover, the predicted weights reflect the predictive quality of each kernel on exhaustive pairwise experiments, which indicates the success of the method to automatically reveal relevant biological sources.


CONCLUSIONS
our analysis show that the proposed data integration strategy is able to improve the quality of the predicted interactions, and can speed up the identification of new drug-target interactions as well as identify relevant information for the task.

availability
the source code and data sets are available at www.cin.ufpe.br/~acan/kronrlsmkl/.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
artificial intelligencesupervised machine learningkernel methodsmultiple kernel learningdrug discoveryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

