BACKGROUND
cytolytic cells of the immune system destroy pathogen-infected cells by polarised exocytosis of secretory lysosomes containing the pore-forming protein perforin. precise delivery of this lethal hit is essential to ensuring that only the target cell is destroyed. in cytotoxic t lymphocytes , this is accomplished by an unusual movement of the centrosome to contact the plasma membrane at the centre of the immunological synapse formed between killer and target cells. secretory lysosomes are directed towards the centrosome along microtubules and delivered precisely to the point of target cell recognition within the immunological synapse, identified by the centrosome. we asked whether this mechanism of directing secretory lysosome release is unique to ctl or whether natural killer  and invariant nkt  cytolytic cells of the innate immune system use a similar mechanism to focus perforin-bearing lysosome release.


RESULTS
nk cells were conjugated with b-cell targets lacking major histocompatibility complex class i  <dig>  cells, and inkt cells were conjugated with glycolipid-pulsed cd1-bearing targets, then prepared for thin-section electron microscopy. high-resolution electron micrographs of the immunological synapse formed between nk and inkt cytolytic cells with their targets revealed that in both nk and inkt cells, the centrioles could be found associated  with the plasma membrane within the immunological synapse. secretory clefts were visible within the synapses formed by both nk and inkt cells, and secretory lysosomes were polarised along microtubules leading towards the docked centrosome. the golgi apparatus and recycling endosomes were also polarised towards the centrosome at the plasma membrane within the synapse.


CONCLUSIONS
these results reveal that, like ctls of the adaptive immune system, the centrosomes of nk and inkt cells  direct secretory lysosomes to the immunological synapse. morphologically, the overall structure of the immunological synapses formed by nk and inkt cells are very similar to those formed by ctls, with both exocytic and endocytic organelles polarised towards the centrosome at the plasma membrane, which forms a focal point for exocytosis and endocytosis within the immunological synapse. we conclude that centrosomal polarisation provides a rapid, responsive and precise mechanism for secretory lysosome delivery to the immunological synapse in ctls, nk cells and inkt cells.

