BACKGROUND
in the past decade the göttingen minipig has gained increasing recognition as animal model in pharmaceutical and safety research because it recapitulates many aspects of human physiology and metabolism. genome-based comparison of drug targets together with quantitative tissue expression analysis allows rational prediction of pharmacology and cross-reactivity of human drugs in animal models thereby improving drug attrition which is an important challenge in the process of drug development.


RESULTS
here we present a new chromosome level based version of the göttingen minipig genome together with a comparative transcriptional analysis of tissues with pharmaceutical relevance as basis for translational research. we relied on mapping and assembly of wgs  derived reads to the reference genome of the duroc pig and predict  <dig>  human orthologous protein-coding genes. genome-based prediction of the sequence of human drug targets enables the prediction of drug cross-reactivity based on conservation of binding sites. we further support the finding that the genome of sus scrofa contains about ten-times less pseudogenized genes compared to other vertebrates. among the functional human orthologs of these minipig pseudogenes we found hepn <dig>  a putative tumor suppressor gene. the genomes of sus scrofa, the tibetan boar, the african bushpig, and the warthog show sequence conservation of all inactivating hepn <dig> mutations suggesting disruption before the evolutionary split of these pig species. we identify  <dig> sus scrofa specific, conserved long non-coding rnas  in the minipig genome and show that these transcripts are highly conserved in the african pigs and the tibetan boar suggesting functional significance. using a new minipig specific microarray we show high conservation of gene expression signatures in  <dig> tissues with biomedical relevance between humans and adult minipigs. we underline this relationship for minipig and human liver where we could demonstrate similar expression levels for most phase i drug-metabolizing enzymes. higher expression levels and metabolic activities were found for fmo <dig>  akr/crs and for phase ii drug metabolizing enzymes in minipig as compared to human. the variability of gene expression in equivalent human and minipig tissues is considerably higher in minipig organs, which is important for study design in case a human target belongs to this variable category in the minipig. the first analysis of gene expression in multiple tissues during development from young to adult shows that the majority of transcriptional programs are concluded four weeks after birth. this finding is in line with the advanced state of human postnatal organ development at comparative age categories and further supports the minipig as model for pediatric drug safety studies.


CONCLUSIONS
genome based assessment of sequence conservation combined with gene expression data in several tissues improves the translational value of the minipig for human drug development. the genome and gene expression data presented here are important resources for researchers using the minipig as model for biomedical research or commercial breeding. potential impact of our data for comparative genomics, translational research, and experimental medicine are discussed.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
comparative genomicstranscriptional profilingpseudogenelong non-coding rnadrug development and safetyminipigissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

