BACKGROUND
patient-derived tumour xenografts are an attractive model for preclinical testing of anti-cancer drugs. insights into tumour biology and biomarkers predictive of responses to chemotherapeutic drugs can also be gained from investigating xenograft models. as a first step towards examining the equivalence of epigenetic profiles between xenografts and primary tumours in paediatric leukaemia, we performed genome-scale dna methylation and gene expression profiling on a panel of  <dig> paediatric b-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia  tumours that were stratified by prednisolone response.


RESULTS
we found high correlations in dna methylation and gene expression profiles between matching primary and xenograft tumour samples with pearson’s correlation coefficients ranging between  <dig>  and  <dig> . in order to demonstrate the potential utility of epigenetic analyses in bcp-all xenografts, we identified dna methylation biomarkers that correlated with prednisolone responsiveness of the original tumour samples. differential methylation of caps <dig>  arhgap <dig>  arx and hoxb <dig> were confirmed by locus specific analysis. we identified  <dig> genes showing an inverse relationship between dna methylation and gene expression in association with prednisolone response. pathway analysis of these genes implicated apoptosis, cell signalling and cell structure networks in prednisolone responsiveness.


CONCLUSIONS
the findings of this study confirm the stability of epigenetic and gene expression profiles of paediatric bcp-all propagated in mouse xenograft models. further, our preliminary investigation of prednisolone sensitivity highlights the utility of mouse xenograft models for preclinical development of novel drug regimens with parallel investigation of underlying gene expression and epigenetic responses associated with novel drug responses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
acute lymphoblastic leukaemiaxenograftsgenome-wide dna methylationmicroarray analysis of gene expressionglucocorticoid resistanceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

