BACKGROUND
in eukaryotes, transcriptional regulation is usually mediated by interactions of multiple transcription factors  with their respective specific cis-regulatory elements  in the so-called cis-regulatory modules  in dna. although the knowledge of cres and crms in a genome is crucial to elucidate gene regulatory networks and understand many important biological phenomena, little is known about the cres and crms in most eukaryotic genomes due to the difficulty to characterize them by either computational or traditional experimental methods. however, the exponentially increasing number of tf binding location data produced by the recent wide adaptation of chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with microarray hybridization  or high-throughput sequencing  technologies has provided an unprecedented opportunity to identify crms and cres in genomes. nonetheless, how to effectively mine these large volumes of chip data to identify cres and crms at nucleotide resolution is a highly challenging task.


RESULTS
we have developed a novel graph-theoretic based algorithm depcrm for genome-wide de novo predictions of cres and crms using a large number of chip datasets. depcrm predicts cres and crms by identifying overrepresented combinatorial cre motif patterns in multiple chip datasets in an effective way. when applied to  <dig> chip datasets of  <dig> tfs from d. melanogaster, depcrm identified  <dig> and  <dig> overrepresented cre motifs and their combinatorial patterns, respectively, and predicted a total of  <dig>  crms in the genome. the predictions recover  <dig> % of known crms in the datasets and  <dig> % of known crms containing at least one predicted cre. we found that the putative crms as well as cres as a whole in a crm are more conserved than randomly selected sequences.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that the crms predicted by depcrm are highly likely to be functional. our algorithm is the first of its kind for de novo genome-wide prediction of cres and crms using larger number of transcription factor chip datasets. the algorithm and predictions will hopefully facilitate the elucidation of gene regulatory networks in eukaryotes. all the predicted cres, crms, and their target genes are available at http://bioinfo.uncc.edu/mniu/pcrms/www/.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cis-regulatory elementscis-regulatory moduleschip-chipchip-seqdrosophila melanogasterissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

