BACKGROUND
in recent years, the microscopy technology for imaging cells has developed greatly and rapidly. the accompanying requirements for automatic segmentation and quantification of the imaged cells are becoming more and more. after studied widely in both scientific research and industrial applications for many decades, cell segmentation has achieved great progress, especially in segmenting some specific types of cells, e.g. muscle cells. however, it lacks a framework to address the cell segmentation problems generally. on the contrary, different segmentation methods were proposed to address the different types of cells, which makes the research work divergent. in addition, most of the popular segmentation and quantification tools usually require a great part of manual work.


RESULTS
to make the cell segmentation work more convergent, we propose a framework that is able to segment different kinds of cells automatically and robustly in this paper. this framework evolves the previously proposed method in segmenting the muscle cells and generalizes it to be suitable for segmenting and quantifying a variety of cell images by adding more union cases. compared to the previous methods, the segmentation and quantification accuracy of the proposed framework is also improved by three novel procedures:  a simplified calibration method is proposed and added for the threshold selection process;  a noise blob filter is proposed to get rid of the noise blobs.  a boundary smoothing filter is proposed to reduce the false seeds produced by the iterative erosion. as it turned out, the quantification accuracy of the proposed framework increases from  <dig>  to  <dig> % compared to the previous method. in addition, the accuracy of the proposed framework is also better in quantifying the muscle cells than two available state-of-the-art methods.


CONCLUSIONS
the proposed framework is able to automatically segment and quantify more types of cells than state-of-the-art methods.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
boundary filteringnoise blob filteringthreshold selectioncalibrationiterative erosionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002367chinese academy of sciencesy5a1270101wang zhenzhou issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

