BACKGROUND
the sequential nature of gel-based marker systems entails low throughput and high costs per assay. commonly used marker systems such as ssr and snp are also dependent on sequence information. these limitations result in high cost per data point and significantly limit the capacity of breeding programs to obtain sufficient return on investment to justify the routine use of marker-assisted breeding for many traits and particularly quantitative traits. diversity arrays technology  is a cost effective hybridisation-based marker technology that offers a high multiplexing level while being independent of sequence information. this technology offers sorghum breeding programs an alternative approach to whole-genome profiling. we report on the development, application, mapping and utility of dart™ markers for sorghum germplasm.


RESULTS
a genotyping array was developed representing approximately  <dig>  genomic clones using psti+banii complexity with a subset of clones obtained through the suppression subtractive hybridisation  method. the genotyping array was used to analyse a diverse set of sorghum genotypes and screening a recombinant inbred lines  mapping population. over  <dig> markers detected variation among  <dig> accessions used in a diversity analysis. cluster analysis discriminated well between all  <dig> genotypes. to confirm that the sorghum dart markers behave in a mendelian manner, we constructed a genetic linkage map for a cross between r931945-2- <dig> and is  <dig> integrating dart and other marker types. in total,  <dig> markers could be placed on the integrated linkage map, which spanned  <dig>  cm. the genetic linkage map had an average marker density of 1/ <dig>  cm, with an average dart marker density of 1/ <dig>  cm.


CONCLUSIONS
we have successfully developed dart markers for sorghum bicolor and have demonstrated that dart provides high quality markers that can be used for diversity analyses and to construct medium-density genetic linkage maps. the high number of dart markers generated in a single assay not only provides a precise estimate of genetic relationships among genotypes, but also their even distribution over the genome offers real advantages for a range of molecular breeding and genomics applications.

