BACKGROUND
the similarities between swine and humans in physiological and genomic patterns, and the great correlation in size and anatomy, make pigs extremely useful in preclinical studies. new-born piglets can represent a model for congenital and genetic diseases in new-born children. it is known that piglets may have significant differences in clinicopathological results compared to adult pigs. therefore, adult laboratory reference intervals cannot be applied to piglets. the aim of this study was to compare haematological and chemical variables in piglets of two ages and determinate age-related reference intervals for commercial hybrid young pigs.

blood samples were collected under general anaesthesia from  <dig> animals divided into five-  and 30-  day-old piglets. only p <dig> animals were treated with parenteral iron after birth. samples were analysed using automated haematology  and chemistry analysers, and age-related reference intervals were calculated.


RESULTS
significant higher values of rbc, hb and hct were observed in p <dig> animals when compared to p <dig>  with an opposite trend for mcv. these results were associated with a reduction of the rbc regeneration process and the thrombopoietic response. the tsat and tibc were significantly higher in p <dig> compared to p5; however, piglets remained iron deficient compared to adult reference intervals reported previously.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this paper emphasises the high variability occurring in clinicopathological variables between new-born and 30-day-old pigs, and between piglets and adult pigs. this study provides valuable reference data for piglets at precise ages and could be used in the future as historical control improving the reduction in animal experiments, as suggested by the 3rs principle.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
advia 2120clinical chemistryhaematologyreference intervalsswineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

