BACKGROUND
eeg studies investigating the neural networks that facilitate action observation  and kinaesthetic motor imagery  have shown reduced, or desynchronized, power in the alpha  and beta  frequency bands relative to rest, reflecting efficient activation of task-relevant areas. functional modulation of these networks through expertise in dance has been established using fmri, with greater activation among experts during ao. while there is evidence for experience-dependent plasticity of alpha power during ao of dance, the influence of familiarity on beta power during ao, and alpha and beta activity during kmi, remain unclear. the purpose of the present study was to measure the impact of familiarity on confidence ratings and eeg activity during  ao of a brief ballet sequence,  kmi of this same sequence, and  kmi of non-dance movements among ballet dancers, dancers from other genres, and non-dancers.


RESULTS
ballet dancers highly familiar with the genre of the experimental stimulus demonstrated higher individual alpha peak frequency , greater alpha desynchronization, and greater task-related beta power during ao, as well as faster iapf during kmi of non-dance movements. while no between-group differences in alpha or beta power were observed during kmi of dance or non-dance movements, all participants showed significant desynchronization relative to baseline, and further desynchronization during dance kmi relative to non-dance kmi indicative of greater cognitive load.


CONCLUSIONS
these findings confirm and extend evidence for experience-dependent plasticity of alpha and beta activity during ao of dance and kmi. we also provide novel evidence for modulation of iapf that is faster when tuned to the specific motor repertoire of the observer. by considering the multiple functional roles of these frequency bands during the same task , we have disentangled the compounded contribution of familiarity and expertise to alpha desynchronization for mediating task engagement among familiar ballet dancers and reflecting task difficulty among unfamiliar non-dance subjects, respectively. that kmi of a complex dance sequence relative to everyday, non-dance movements recruits greater cognitive resources suggests it may be a more powerful tool in driving neural plasticity of action networks, especially among the elderly and those with movement disorders.

keywords
eegmotor imageryaction observationdanceplasticityalphabetasensorimotorexpertisefamiliarityhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canadayork university faculty of healthissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

