BACKGROUND
phylogenetic studies, particularly those based on rdna sequences from plant roots and basidiomata, have revealed a strikingly high genetic diversity in the sebacinales. however, the factors determining this genetic diversity at higher and lower taxonomic levels within this order are still unknown. in this study, we analysed patterns of genetic variation within two morphological species, sebacina epigaea and s. incrustans, based on  <dig> dna haplotype sequences of independent genetic markers from the nuclear  and mitochondrial  genomes for  <dig> population samples. by characterising the genetic population structure within these species, we provide insights into species boundaries and the possible factors responsible for genetic diversity at a regional geographic scale.


RESULTS
we found that recombination events are relatively common between natural populations within sebacina epigaea and s. incrustans, and play a significant role in generating intraspecific genetic diversity. furthermore, we also found that rpb <dig> and atp <dig> genes display higher levels of intraspecific synonymous polymorphism. phylogenetic and demographic analyses based on nuclear and mitochondrial loci revealed three distinct phylogenetic lineages within of each of the morphospecies s. epigaea and s. incrustans: one major and widely distributed lineage, and two geographically restricted lineages, respectively. we found almost no differential morphological or ecological characteristics that could be used to discriminate between these lineages.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that recombination and negative selection have played significant roles in generating genetic diversity within these morphological species at small geographical scales. concordance between gene genealogies identified lineages/cryptic species that have evolved independently for a relatively long period of time. these putative species were not associated with geographic provenance, geographic barrier, host preference or distinct phenotypic innovations.

cryptic speciesspeciationdiversitypopulation structuremultilocus genealogiesbasidiomycotasebacinalessympatrysynonymous polymorphismectomycorrhiza

