BACKGROUND
subjective tinnitus is characterized by an auditory phantom perception in the absence of any physical sound source. consequently, in a quiet environment, tinnitus patients differ from control participants because they constantly perceive a sound whereas controls do not. we hypothesized that this difference is expressed by differential activation of distributed cortical networks.


RESULTS
the analysis was based on a sample of  <dig> participants:  <dig> patients with chronic tinnitus and  <dig> healthy control participants. to investigate the architecture of these networks, we used phase locking analysis in the 1– <dig> hz frequency range of a minute of resting-state meg recording. we found: 1) for tinnitus patients: a significant decrease of inter-areal coupling in the alpha  band and an increase of inter-areal coupling in the 48– <dig> hz gamma frequency range relative to the control group. 2) for both groups: an inverse relationship  of the alpha and gamma network coupling. 3) a discrimination of 83% between the patient and the control group based on the alpha and gamma networks. 4) an effect of manifestation on the distribution of the gamma network: in patients with a tinnitus history of less than  <dig> years, the left temporal cortex was predominant in the gamma network whereas in patients with tinnitus duration of more than  <dig> years, the gamma network was more widely distributed including more frontal and parietal regions.


CONCLUSIONS
in the here presented data set we found strong support for an alteration of long-range coupling in tinnitus. long-range coupling in the alpha frequency band was decreased for tinnitus patients while long-range gamma coupling was increased. these changes discriminate well between tinnitus and control participants. we propose a tinnitus model that integrates this finding in the current knowledge about tinnitus. furthermore we discuss the impact of this finding to tinnitus therapies using transcranial magnetic stimulation .

