BACKGROUND
rna interference  leads to sequence specific knock-down of gene expression and has emerged as an important tool to analyse gene functions, pathway analysis and gene therapy. although rnai is a conserved cellular process involving common elements and factors, species-specific differences have been observed among different eukaryotes. identification of components for rnai pathway is pursued intensively and successful genome-wide screens have been performed for components of rnai pathways in various organisms. functional comparative genomics analysis offers evolutionary insight that forms basis of discoveries of novel rnai-factors within related organisms. keeping in view the academic and commercial utility of insect derived cell-line from spodoptera frugiperda, we pursued the identification and functional analysis of components of rnai-machinery of sf <dig> cell-line using genome-wide application.


RESULTS
the genome and transcriptome of sf <dig> was assembled and annotated. in silico application of comparative genome analysis among insects allowed us to identify several rnai factors in sf <dig> line. the candidate rnai factors from assembled genome were validated by knockdown analysis of candidate factors using the sirna screens on the sf21-gfp reporter cell-line. forty two  potential factors were identified using the cell based assay. these include core rnai elements including dicer- <dig>  argonaute- <dig>  drosha, aubergine and auxiliary modules like chromatin factors, rna helicases, rna processing module, signalling allied proteins and others. phylogenetic analyses and domain architecture revealed that spodoptera frugiperda homologs retained identity with lepidoptera  or coleoptera  sustaining an evolutionary conserved scaffold in post-transcriptional gene silencing paradigm within insects.


CONCLUSIONS
the database of rnai-factors generated by whole genome association survey offers comprehensive outlook about conservation as well as specific differences of the proteins of rnai machinery. understanding the interior involved in different phases of gene silencing also offers impending tool for rnai-based applications.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna interferencesirna screeningsf <dig> cellsgenome-wide screeninginsect rnaispodoptera frugiperdaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

