BACKGROUND
pollen development from the microspore involves a series of coordinated cellular events, and the resulting mature pollen has a specialized function to quickly germinate, produce a polar-growth pollen tube derived from the vegetative cell, and deliver two sperm cells into the embryo sac for double fertilization. the gene expression profiles of developing and germinated pollen have been characterised by use of the eudicot model plant arabidopsis. rice, one of the most important cereal crops, has been used as an excellent monocot model. a comprehensive analysis of transcriptome profiles of developing and germinated pollen in rice is important to understand the conserved and diverse mechanism underlying pollen development and germination in eudicots and monocots.


RESULTS
we used affymetrix genechip® rice genome array to comprehensively analyzed the dynamic changes in the transcriptomes of rice pollen at five sequential developmental stages from microspores to germinated pollen. among the  <dig>  transcripts on the array, we found  <dig>  pollen-preferential transcripts, among which  <dig>  were development stage-enriched. the diversity of transcripts decreased greatly from microspores to mature and germinated pollen, whereas the number of stage-enriched transcripts displayed a "u-type" change, with the lowest at the bicellular pollen stage; and a transition of overrepresented stage-enriched transcript groups associated with different functional categories, which indicates a shift in gene expression program at the bicellular pollen stage. about 54% of the now-annotated rice f-box protein genes were expressed preferentially in pollen. the transcriptome profile of germinated pollen was significantly and positively correlated with that of mature pollen. analysis of expression profiles and coexpressed features of the pollen-preferential transcripts related to cell cycle, transcription, the ubiquitin/26s proteasome system, phytohormone signalling, the kinase system and defense/stress response revealed five expression patterns, which are compatible with changes in major cellular events during pollen development and germination. a comparison of pollen transcriptomes between rice and arabidopsis revealed that  <dig> % of the rice pollen preferential genes had homologs in arabidopsis genome, but  <dig> % of these homologs were expressed, with a small proportion being expressed preferentially, in arabidopsis pollen. rice and arabidopsis pollen had non-conservative transcription factors each.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrated that rice pollen expressed a set of reduced but specific transcripts in comparison with vegetative tissues, and the number of stage-enriched transcripts displayed a "u-type" change during pollen development, with the lowest at the bicellular pollen stage. these features are conserved in rice and arabidopsis. the shift in gene expression program at the bicellular pollen stage may be important to the transition from earlier cell division to later pollen maturity. pollen at maturity pre-synthesized transcripts needed for germination and early pollen tube growth. the transcription regulation associated with pollen development would have divergence between the two species. our results also provide novel insights into the molecular program and key components of the regulatory network regulating pollen development and germination.

