BACKGROUND
the diuretic effect of valproates and its relation to urinary potassium  and chloride  excretion have not yet been investigated, so the aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of a single dose of sodium valproate  on 24-h urinary k+ and cl- excretion in young adult wistar rats of both genders. for measurement of k+ in urine, the same animals and samples as in our earlier publication were used . the authors propose a new approach to the pathophysiological mechanisms of navpa effect on k+ and cl- metabolism.

twenty six wistar rats were examined after a single intragastric administration of  <dig> mg/kg navpa ,  <dig> control intact wistar rats  were studied as a control group. the 24-h urinary k+, cl-, creatinine and ph levels were measured.


RESULTS
total 24-h diuresis and 24-h diuresis per  <dig> g of body weight were found to be significantly higher in navpa-rats of both genders than in rats of the control group . the data showed navpa to enhance 24-h k+ excretion in navpa-males and navpa-females with significant gender-related differences: 24-h k+ excretion in navpa-male rats was significantly higher than in control males  and navpa-female rats . regarding the 24-h k+ excretion, navpa-female rats did not show a statistically significant difference versus females of the control group . 24-h urinary k+ excretion per  <dig> g of body weight in navpa-male rats was significantly higher than in control males . navpa enhanced cl- urinary excretion: 24-h cl- urinary excretion, 24-h urinary cl- excretion per  <dig> g of body weight and the cl-/creatinine ratio were significantly higher in navpa-male and navpa-female rats than in gender-matched controls . 24-h chloriduretic response to navpa in male rats was significantly higher than in female rats .


CONCLUSIONS
navpa causes kaliuretic and chloriduretic effects with gender-related differences in rats. further investigations are necessary to elucidate the mechanism of such pharmacological effects of navpa.

