BACKGROUND
recent molecular studies have revealed considerably more diversity in the phylum chlamydiae than was previously thought. evidence is growing that many of these novel chlamydiae may be important pathogens in humans and animals. a significant barrier to characterising these novel chlamydiae is the requirement for culturing. we recently identified a range of novel uncultured chlamydiae in captive snakes in switzerland, however, nothing is known about their biology. using a metagenomics approach, the aim of this study was to characterise the genome of a novel chlamydial taxon from the choana of a captive snake. in doing so, we propose a new candidate species in the genus chlamydia  and reveal new information about the biological diversity of this important group of pathogens.


RESULTS
we identified two chlamydial genomic contigs: a  <dig> , <dig> bp contig, and a  <dig>  bp contig, representing the chromosome and plasmid of ca. chlamydia sanzinia strain 2742- <dig>  respectively. the  <dig> predicted coding regions include an expanded repertoire of outer membrane proteins , some of which exhibited frameshift mutations, as well as several chlamydial virulence factors such as the translocating actin-recruitment phosphoprotein  and macrophage inhibition potentiator . a suite of putative inclusion membrane proteins were also predicted. notably, no evidence of a traditional chlamydial plasticity zone was identified. phylogenetically, ca. chlamydia sanzinia forms a clade with c. pneumoniae and c. pecorum, distinct from former “chlamydophila” species.


CONCLUSIONS
genomic characterisation of a novel uncultured chlamydiae from the first reptilian host has expanded our understanding of the diversity and biology of a genus that was thought to be the most well-characterised in this unique phylum. it is anticipated that this method will be suitable for characterisation of other novel chlamydiae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chlamydiaculture-independent sequencinggenomicsreptileissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

