BACKGROUND
numerous studies have highlighted the elevated degree of comorbidity associated with autism spectrum disorder . these comorbid conditions may add further impairments to individuals with autism and are substantially more prevalent compared to neurotypical populations. these high rates of comorbidity are not surprising taking into account the overlap of symptoms that asd shares with other pathologies. from a research perspective, this suggests common molecular mechanisms involved in these conditions. therefore, identifying crucial genes in the overlap between asd and these comorbid disorders may help unravel the common biological processes involved and, ultimately, shed some light in the understanding of autism etiology.


RESULTS
in this work, we used a two-fold systems biology approach specially focused on biological processes and gene networks to conduct a comparative analysis of autism with  <dig> frequently comorbid disorders in order to define a multi-disorder subcomponent of asd and predict new genes of potential relevance to asd etiology. we validated our predictions by determining the significance of our candidate genes in high throughput transcriptome expression profiling studies. using prior knowledge of disease-related biological processes and the interaction networks of the disorders related to autism, we identified a set of  <dig> genes not previously linked to asd that were significantly differentially regulated in individuals with autism. in addition, these genes were of potential etiologic relevance to autism, given their enriched roles in neurological processes crucial for optimal brain development and function, learning and memory, cognition and social behavior.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our approach represents a novel perspective of autism from the point of view of related comorbid disorders and proposes a model by which prior knowledge of interaction networks may enlighten and focus the genome-wide search for autism candidate genes to better define the genetic heterogeneity of asd.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
autism spectrum disorderautism sibling disordersgene set enrichmentprocess enrichmentcomparative network analysissystems biologyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of health1r01mh090611hartwell foundation's autism research and technology initiative http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002878consejería de economía, innovación, ciencia y empleo, junta de andalucíabio-302esteban francisco j. meic saf2015-70270-redtesteban francisco j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

