BACKGROUND
in the past few decades, non-coding rnas  have emerged as important regulators of gene expression in eukaryotes. most studies of ncrnas in plants have focused on the identification of silencing micrornas  and small interfering rnas . another important family of ncrnas that has been well characterized in plants is the small nucleolar rnas  and the related small cajal body-specific rnas . both target chemical modifications of ribosomal rnas  and small nuclear rnas . in plants, the snorna genes are organized in clusters, transcribed by rna pol ii from a common promoter and subsequently processed into mature molecules. the promoter regions of snorna polycistronic genes in plants are highly enriched in two conserved cis-regulatory elements , telo-box and site ii, which coordinate the expression of snornas and ribosomal protein coding genes throughout the cell cycle.


RESULTS
in order to identify novel ncrna genes, we have used the snorna telo-box/site ii motifs combination as a functional promoter indicator to screen the arabidopsis genome. the predictions generated by this process were tested by detailed exploration of available rna-seq and expression data sets and experimental validation. as a result, we have identified several snornas, scarnas and 'orphan' snornas. we also show evidence for  <dig> novel ncrnas that lack similarity to any reported rna family. finally, we have identified two dicistronic genes encoding precursors that are processed to mature snorna and mirna molecules. we discuss the evolutionary consequences of this result in the context of a tight link between snornas and mirnas in eukaryotes.


CONCLUSIONS
we present an alternative computational approach for non-coding rna detection. instead of depending on sequence or structure similarity in the whole genome screenings, we have explored the properties of promoter regions of well-characterized ncrnas. interestingly, besides expected ncrnas predictions we were also able to recover single precursor arrangement for snorna-mirna. accompanied by analyses performed on rice sequences, we conclude that such arrangement might have interesting functional and evolutionary consequences and discuss this result in the context of a tight link between snornas and mirnas in eukaryotes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
telo-boxsite iinon-coding rnasnornamirnacis-regulatory elementsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

