BACKGROUND
the fungal genus phlebia consists of a number of species that are significant in wood decay. biotechnological potential of a few species for enzyme production and degradation of lignin and pollutants has been previously studied, when most of the species of this genus are unknown. therefore, we carried out a wider study on biochemistry and systematics of phlebia species.

methods
isolates belonging to the genus phlebia were subjected to four-gene sequence analysis in order to clarify their phylogenetic placement at species level and evolutionary relationships of the genus among phlebioid polyporales. rrna-encoding  and two protein-encoding gene  sequences were adopted for the evolutionary analysis, and its sequences  were aligned for in-depth species-level phylogeny. the  <dig> fungal isolates were cultivated on semi-solid milled spruce wood medium for 21 days in order to follow their production of extracellular lignocellulose-converting oxidoreductases and carbohydrate active enzymes.


RESULTS
four-gene phylogenetic analysis confirmed the polyphyletic nature of the genus phlebia. ten species-level subgroups were formed, and their lignocellulose-converting enzyme activity profiles coincided with the phylogenetic grouping. the highest enzyme activities for lignin modification  were obtained for phlebia radiata group, which supports our previous studies on the enzymology and gene expression of this species on lignocellulosic substrates.


CONCLUSIONS
our study implies that there is a species-level connection of molecular systematics  to the efficiency in production of both lignocellulose-converting carbohydrate active enzymes and oxidoreductases  on spruce wood. thus, we may propose a similar phylogrouping approach for prediction of lignocellulose-converting enzyme phenotypes in new fungal species or genetically and biochemically less-studied isolates of the wood-decay polyporales.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
white rot funguswood decaylignocelluloselignin biodegradationoxidoreductasescarbohydrate active enzymesmolecular systematicsmulti-locus phylogenyphlebiapolyporalesbasidiomycotaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

