BACKGROUND
aberrational epigenetic marks are believed to play a major role in establishing the abnormal features of cancer cells. rational use and development of drugs aimed at epigenetic processes requires an understanding of the range, extent, and roles of epigenetic reprogramming in cancer cells. using chip-chip and medip-chip approaches, we localized well-established and prevalent epigenetic marks  on a genome scale in several lines of putative glioma stem cells  and, for comparison, normal human fetal neural stem cells .


RESULTS
we determined a substantial “core” set of promoters possessing each mark in every surveyed btsc cell type, which largely overlapped the corresponding fnsc sets. however, there was substantial diversity among cell types in mark localization. we observed large differences among cell types in total number of h3k9me3+ positive promoters and peaks and in broad modifications  for h3k27me <dig> and, to a lesser extent, h3k9me <dig>  we verified that a change in a broad modification affected gene expression of cacng <dig>  we detected large numbers of bivalent promoters, but most bivalent promoters did not display direct overlap of contrasting epigenetic marks, but rather occupied nearby regions of the proximal promoter. there were significant differences in the sets of promoters bearing bivalent marks in the different cell types and few consistent differences between fnscs and btscs.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, our “core set” data establishes sets of potential therapeutic targets, but the diversity in sets of sites and broad modifications among cell types underscores the need to carefully consider btsc subtype variation in epigenetic therapy. our results point toward substantial differences among cell types in the activity of the production/maintenance systems for h3k9me <dig> and for broad regions of modification . finally, the unexpected diversity in bivalent promoter sets among these multipotent cells indicates that bivalent promoters may play complex roles in the overall biology of these cells. these results provide key information for forming the basis for future rational drug therapy aimed at epigenetic processes in these cells.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cancer stem cellsepigeneticschromatin immunoprecipitationhistone modificationsbivalent promotersissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

