BACKGROUND
iron homeostasis is an essential process over the entire lives of both hosts and bacterial pathogens, and also plays roles in many other metabolic functions. currently, knowledge is limited on the iron scavenging mechanism of the cell envelope in the aquatic pathogen, aeromonas hydrophila. to understand the iron homeostasis mechanism in a. hydrophila, a dimethyl labelling based quantitative proteomics method was used to compare the differential expression of cell envelope proteins under iron starvation.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> cell envelope proteins were identified by lc-ms/ms, with  <dig> down-regulated and  <dig> up-regulated proteins. bioinformatics analysis showed that outer membrane siderophores, heme and iron receptors, periplasmic iron binding proteins, inner membrane abc transporters and h+-atp synthase subunits increased in abundance while iron-cluster proteins, electron transport chain and redox proteins were down-regulated. further q-pcr validation, in vivo addition of exogenous metabolites, and an enzyme inhibition assay revealed that redox, the energy generation process, and atp synthase elevated the susceptibility of a. hydrophila to iron starvation.


CONCLUSIONS
our study demonstrates that the redox and energy generation process, and atp synthase in a. hydrophila may play critical roles in iron acquisition under conditions of iron-stress. an understanding of the iron scavenging mechanism may be helpful for the development of strategies for preventing and treating a. hydrophila infection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aeromonas hydrophilacell envelopedimethyl labelingiron homeostasishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 3120010531470238lin xiangmin the fujian agricultural and forestry university foundation for distinguished young scholarsxjq201201lin xiangmin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

