BACKGROUND
acetyl-coa-derived chemicals are suitable for multiple applications in many industries. the bio-production of these chemicals has become imperative owing to the economic and environmental problems. however, acetate overflow is the major drawback for acetyl-coa-derived chemicals production. approaches for overcoming acetate overflow may be beneficial for the production of acetyl-coa-derived chemicals.


RESULTS
in this study, a transcriptional regulator iclr was knocked out in e.coli bl <dig> to overcome acetate overflow and improve the chemicals production. two important acetyl-coa-derived chemicals, phloroglucinol  and 3-hydroxypropionate  were used to evaluate it. it is revealed that knockout of iclr significantly increased expressions of acebak operon. the cell yields and glucose utilization efficiencies were higher than those of control strains. the acetate concentrations were decreased by more than 50% and the productions of pg and 3hp were increased more than twice in iclr mutants. the effects of iclr knockout on cell physiology, cell metabolism and production of acetyl-coa-derived chemicals were similar to those of arca knockout in our previous study. however, the arca-iclr double mutants couldn’t gain higher productions of pg and 3hp. the mechanisms are unclear and needed to be resolved in future.


CONCLUSIONS
knockout of iclr significantly increased gene expression of acebak operon and concomitantly activated glyoxylate pathway. this genetic modification may be a good way to overcome acetate overflow, and improve the production of a wide range of acetyl-coa-derived chemicals.

keywords
acetyl-coaescherichia coliiclrarca3-hydroxypropionatephloroglucinol100-talent project of caszdrw-zs-2016-3mtaishan scholars climbing program of shandong no.tspd20150210liu huizhou scientific and technological project of tianjin 14zczdsy00047zhao guang the 60-class general financial grant from the china postdoctoral science foundation 2016m600564liu min issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

