BACKGROUND
accumulated evidence suggests that insulin resistance and impairments in cerebral insulin receptor signaling may contribute to age-related cognitive deficits and alzheimer's disease. the enhancement of insulin receptor signaling is, therefore, a promising strategy for the treatment of age-related cognitive disorders. the mitochondrial respiratory chain, being involved in insulin-stimulated h2o <dig> production, has been identified recently as a potential target for the enhancement of insulin signaling. the aim of the present study is to examine:  whether a specific respiratory substrate, dicholine salt of succinic acid , can enhance insulin-stimulated insulin receptor autophosphorylation in neurons, and  whether cs can ameliorate cognitive deficits of various origins in animal models.


RESULTS
in a primary culture of cerebellar granule neurons, cs significantly enhanced insulin-stimulated insulin receptor autophosphorylation. in animal models, cs significantly ameliorated cognitive deficits, when administered intraperitoneally for  <dig> days. in 16-month-old middle-aged c57bl/ <dig> mice , cs enhanced spatial learning in the morris water maze, spontaneous locomotor activity, passive avoidance performance, and increased brain n-acetylaspartate/creatine levels, as compared to the age-matched control . in rats with chronic cerebral hypoperfusion, cs enhanced spatial learning, passive avoidance performance, and increased brain n-acetylaspartate/creatine levels, as compared to control rats . in rats with beta-amyloid peptide--induced amnesia, cs enhanced passive avoidance performance and increased activity of brain choline acetyltransferase, as compared to control rats . in all used models, cs effects lasted beyond the seven-day treatment period and were found to be significant about two weeks following the treatment.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of the present study suggest that dicholine salt of succinic acid, a novel neuronal insulin sensitizer, ameliorates cognitive deficits and neuronal dysfunctions in animal models relevant to age-related cognitive impairments, vascular dementia, and alzheimer's disease.

