BACKGROUND
the ability to generate transcriptional data on the scale of entire genomes has been a boon both in the improvement of biological understanding and in the amount of data generated. the latter, the amount of data generated, has implications when it comes to effective storage, analysis and sharing of these data. a number of software tools have been developed to store, analyze, and share microarray data. however, a majority of these tools do not offer all of these features nor do they specifically target the commonly used two color agilent dna microarray platform. thus, the motivating factor for the development of edge <dig> was to incorporate the storage, analysis and sharing of microarray data in a manner that would provide a means for research groups to collaborate on agilent-based microarray experiments without a large investment in software-related expenditures or extensive training of end-users.


RESULTS
edge <dig> has been developed with two major functions in mind. the first function is to provide a workflow process for the generation of microarray data by a research laboratory or a microarray facility. the second is to store, analyze, and share microarray data in a manner that doesn't require complicated software. to satisfy the first function, edge <dig> has been developed as a means to establish a well defined experimental workflow and information system for microarray generation. to satisfy the second function, the software application utilized as the user interface of edge <dig> is a web browser. within the web browser, a user is able to access the entire functionality, including, but not limited to, the ability to perform a number of bioinformatics based analyses, collaborate between research groups through a user-based security model, and access to the raw data files and quality control files generated by the software used to extract the signals from an array image.


CONCLUSIONS
here, we present edge <dig>  an open-source, web-based application that allows for the storage, analysis, and controlled sharing of transcription-based microarray data generated on the agilent dna platform. in addition, edge <dig> provides a means for managing rna samples and arrays during the hybridization process. edge <dig> is freely available for download at .

