BACKGROUND
there is a growing concern regarding the increase of antimicrobial resistant bacteria in companion animals. yet, there are no studies comparing the resistance levels of these organisms in european countries. the aim of this study was to investigate geographical and temporal trends of antimicrobial resistant bacteria causing urinary tract infection  in companion animals in europe. the antimicrobial susceptibility of  <dig>  <dig> bacteria isolated from dogs and cats with uti was determined. samples were collected between  <dig> and  <dig> from  <dig> laboratories of  <dig> european countries. the prevalence of antimicrobial resistance of the most common bacteria was determined for each country individually in the years 2012– <dig> and temporal trends of bacteria resistance were established by logistic regression.


RESULTS
the aetiology of uropathogenic bacteria differed between dogs and cats. for all bacterial species, southern countries generally presented higher levels of antimicrobial resistance compared to northern countries. multidrug-resistant escherichia coli were found to be more prevalent in southern countries. during the study period, the level of fluoroquinolone-resistant e. coli isolated in belgium, denmark, france and the netherlands decreased significantly. a temporal increase in resistance to amoxicillin-clavulanate and gentamicin was observed among e. coli isolates from the netherlands and switzerland, respectively. other country-specific temporal increases were observed for fluoroquinolone-resistant proteus spp. isolated from companion animals from belgium.


CONCLUSIONS
this work brings new insights into the current status of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria isolated from companion animals with uti in europe and reinforces the need for strategies aiming to reduce resistance.

keywords
antimicrobial resistancetemporal trendsmrsamrspdogcatportuguese foundation for science and technology sfrh/bd/77886/2011marques cátia portuguese foundation for science and technology sfrh/bd/113142/2015belas adriana issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

