BACKGROUND
lactobacillus gasseri is one of the dominant lactobacillus species in the vaginal ecosystem. some strains of this species have a high potential for being used as probiotics in order to maintain vaginal homeostasis, since they may confer colonization resistance against pathogens in the vagina by direct inhibition through production of antimicrobial compounds, as bacteriocins. in this work we have studied bacteriocin production of gassericin e , a novel bacteriocin produced by l. gasseri ev <dig>  a strain isolated from the vagina of a healthy woman, and whose production was shown to be promoted by the presence of certain specific bacteria in co-culture. biochemical and genetic characterization of this novel bacteriocin are addressed.


RESULTS
we found that the inhibitory spectrum of l. gasseri ev <dig> was broad, being directed to species both related and non-related to the producing strain. interestingly, l. gasseri ev <dig> inhibited the grown of pathogens usually associated with bacterial vaginosis . the antimicrobial activity was due to the production of a novel bacteriocin, gassericin e . production of this bacteriocin in broth medium only was achieved at high cell densities. at low cell densities, bacteriocin production ceased and only was restored after the addition of a supernatant from a previous bacteriocin-producing ev <dig> culture , or through co-cultivation with several other gram-positive strains . dna sequence of the gase locus revealed the presence of two putative operons which could be involved in biosynthesis and immunity of this bacteriocin , and in regulation, transport and processing . the gaepkr encodes a putative three-component regulatory system, involving an autoinducer peptide , a histidine protein kinase  and a response regulator , while the gaetc encodes for an abc transporter  and their accessory protein , involved in transport and processing of the bacteriocin. the gaeaxi, encodes for the bacteriocin gassericin e , a putative peptide bacteriocin , and their immunity protein .


CONCLUSIONS
the origin of the strain  and its ability to produce bacteriocins with inhibitory activity against vaginal pathogens may be an advantage for using l. gasseri ev <dig> as a probiotic strain to fight and/or prevent bacterial infections as bacterial vaginosis , since it could be better adapted to live and compete into the vaginal environment.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacteriocinquorum sensinggassericinthree-component regulatory systemspanish ministry of economy and competitivenessagl2012-33400agl2013-41980-pruiz-barba josé luis junta de andalucía excellence projectagr-07345ruiz-barba josé luis issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

