BACKGROUND
this study investigated the antinociceptive effects of a constant rate infusion  of lidocaine during xylazine and ketamine anesthesia in horses and aimed to correlate these effects with cardiorespiratory variables, bispectral index  and plasma lidocaine concentrations. six adult crossbred mares weighing 320–400 kg were anesthetized on three different occasions. sedation was performed with xylazine  and anesthetic induction with guaifenesin  and ketamine . anesthesia was maintained with  <dig>  μg/kg/min of xylazine and  <dig>  μg/kg/min of ketamine both administered intravenously for 75 min. the three treatments consisted of: lidocaine ; lidocaine ; and saline ; all given 15 min after induction and maintained for 1 h. antinociception was measured by response to electrical stimulation and bispectral index  was recorded during anesthesia. parametric and non-parametric data were compared using anova followed by student-newman-keuls and friedman tests, respectively.


RESULTS
plasma lidocaine concentrations peaked at the end of lidocaine loading dose and was greater in thl  vs tll . electrical noxious stimulation caused purposeful movement in all horses from ts, but no response in thl. the bis was decreased in thl only and was less when compared to the other treatments throughout anesthesia. blood pressure, pao <dig> and paco <dig> increased and heart rate , respiratory rate , ph, total plasma protein and temperature decreased during anesthesia in all treatments. paco <dig> and hr were greater and rr and ph less in thl compared to tll and ts at 30 min during anesthesia. all recoveries were considered excellent. time to standing was longer after thl  than following tll and ts .


CONCLUSIONS
at the highest dose administered  lidocaine cri during xylazine/ketamine anesthesia decreased bis and motor response to noxious stimulation, and prolonged recovery time without significant added cardiorespiratory depression.

anesthesiaintravenousbispectral indexelectroencephalographyantinociceptionanalgesia

