BACKGROUND
bone-eating worms of the genus osedax  have adapted to whale fall environments by acquiring a novel characteristic called the root, which branches and penetrates into sunken bones. the worms lack a digestive tract and mouth opening, and it has been suggested that osedax degrade vertebrate bones and uptake nutrients through acidification and secretion of enzymes from the root. symbiotic bacteria in the root tissue may have a crucial role in the metabolism of osedax. however, the molecular mechanisms and cells responsible for bone digestion and nutrient uptake are still unclear, and information on the metabolic interaction between osedax and symbiotic bacteria is limited.


RESULTS
we compared transcriptomes from three different rna samples from the following tissues: trunk + palps, root + ovisac, and larva + male. a pfam domain enrichment analysis revealed that protease- and transporter-related genes were enriched in the root + ovisac specific genes compared with the total transcriptome. through targeted gene annotation we found gene family expansions resulting in a remarkably large number of matrix metalloproteinase  genes in the osedax compared with other invertebrates. twelve of these osedax mmp genes were expressed in the root epidermal cells. genes encoding various types of transporters, including amino acid, oligopeptide, bicarbonate, and sulfate/carboxylate transporters, were also expressed in root epidermal cells. in addition, amino acid and other metabolite transporter genes were expressed in bacteriocytes. these protease and transporter genes were first expressed in root tissues at the juvenile stage, when the root starts to develop.


CONCLUSIONS
the expression of various proteinase and transporter genes in the root epidermis supports the theory that the root epidermal cells are responsible for bone digestion and subsequent nutrient uptake. expression of transporter genes in the host bacteriocytes suggests the presence of metabolic interaction between osedax and symbiotic bacteria.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
matrix metalloproteinasebone digestionsolute carrier family transporternutrient uptakehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of sciencegrants-in-aid for research activity start-up 23870044miyamoto norio issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

