BACKGROUND
the quinoxaline  <dig> -di-n-oxides  were known as potent antibacterial agents. for the purpose of evaluating the bioactivity of existing animal-used qdnos drugs against representative pathogenic microorganism, the representative drugs of quinoxalines including cyadox, mequindox, quinocetone and their metabolites were submitted to the in vitro evaluation for antituberculosis, antimycoplasma, antifungal and antiviral activities.


RESULTS
in antituberculosis assays, the prototype compounds were active  against mycobacterium tuberculosis h37rv and m. bovis. combined antimicrobial susceptibility test indicated that cyadox, mequindox and quinocetone combined with rifampicin had additive effect against m. tuberculosis complex with fractional inhibitory concentration index  of  <dig> . results of antifungal assays showed that quinocetone was active against microsporum canis with mic of 8 μg/ml. antimycoplasma screening showed a generally good activity of quinocetone against mycoplasma gallisepticum and mycoplasma hyopneumoniae, with mic between  <dig> and 16 μg/ml. as shown from the combined antimicrobial susceptibility test, cyadox, mequindox and quinocetone combined with tetracycline had additive effect against mycoplasma gallisepticum with fic of  <dig> . these compounds were also submitted to antiviral assay against infectious bursal disease virus, porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus, porcine parvovirus and classical swine fever virus. the results obtained showed that these qdnos and their metabolites have no inhibitory activity against these viruses in vitro.


CONCLUSIONS
qdnos exhibit antimicrobial activities against mycobacteria, mycoplasma and fungi. this study gives new insight in further application of qdnos and offers a way to promote the healthcare of animal husbandry.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
quinoxaline  <dig> -di-n-oxidesantituberculosisantimycoplasmaantifungicombined antimicrobial susceptibility testthe national high technology research and development program of china2011aa10a214dai menghong the national natural science foundation of china31502115cheng guyue the national program for risk assessment of quality and safety of livestock and poultry productsgjfp2016008yuan zonghui issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

