BACKGROUND
chemosensory signal transduction guides the behavior of many insects, including anopheles gambiae, the major vector for human malaria in sub-saharan africa. to better understand the molecular basis of mosquito chemosensation we have used whole transcriptome rna sequencing  to compare transcript expression profiles between the two major chemosensory tissues, the antennae and maxillary palps, of adult female and male an. gambiae.


RESULTS
we compared chemosensory tissue transcriptomes to whole body transcriptomes of each sex to identify chemosensory enhanced genes. in the six data sets analyzed, we detected expression of nearly all known chemosensory genes and found them to be highly enriched in both olfactory tissues of males and females. while the maxillary palps of both sexes demonstrated strict chemosensory gene expression overlap, we observed acute differences in sensory specialization between male and female antennae. the relatively high expression levels of chemosensory genes in the female antennae reveal its role as an organ predominately assigned to chemosensation. remarkably, the expression of these genes was highly conserved in the male antennae, but at much lower relative levels. alternatively, consistent with a role in mating, the male antennae displayed significant enhancement of genes involved in audition, while the female enhancement of these genes was observed, but to a lesser degree.


CONCLUSIONS
these findings suggest that the chemoreceptive spectrum, as defined by gene expression profiles, is largely similar in female and male an. gambiae. however, assuming sensory receptor expression levels are correlated with sensitivity in each case, we posit that male and female antennae are perceptive to the same stimuli, but possess inverse receptive prioritizations and sensitivities. here we have demonstrated the use of rna-seq to characterize the sensory specializations of an important disease vector and grounded future studies investigating chemosensory processes.

