BACKGROUND
micrornas  can post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression and have been shown to be critical regulators to the fine-tuning of epithelial immune responses. however, the role of mirnas in bovine responses to e. coli and s. aureus, two mastitis causing pathogens, is not well understood.


RESULTS
the global expression of mirnas in bovine mammary epithelial cells  challenged with and without heat-inactivated staphylococcus aureus  or escherichia coli  bacteria at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 48 hr was profiled using rna-seq. a total of  <dig> known bovine mirnas were identified with more than  <dig> counts per million in at least one of  <dig> libraries and  <dig> mirnas including bta-mir-21-5p, mir-27b, mir-22-3p, mir- <dig> and let-7f represented more than 50% of the abundance. one hundred and thirteen novel mirnas were also identified and more than one third of them belong to the bta-mir- <dig> family. seventeen mirnas were significantly  differentially regulated by the presence of pathogens. e. coli initiated an earlier regulation of mirnas  while s. aureus presented a delayed response. five differentially expressed mirnas  were unique to e. coli while four  were unique to s. aureus. in addition, our study revealed a temporal differential regulation of five mirnas  in unchallenged cells. target gene predictions of pathogen differentially expressed mirnas indicate a significant enrichment in gene ontology functional categories in development/cellular processes, biological regulation as well as cell growth and death. furthermore, target genes were significantly enriched in several kegg pathways including immune system, signal transduction, cellular process, nervous system, development and human diseases.


CONCLUSIONS
using next-generation sequencing, our study identified a pathogen directed differential regulation of mirnas in mac-t cells with roles in immunity and development. our study provides a further confirmation of the involvement of mammary epithelia cells in contributing to the immune response to infecting pathogens and suggests the potential of mirnas to serve as biomarkers for diagnosis and development of control measures.

micrornae. colis. aureusmastitismicrorna-sequencingbovine mammary epithelial cells

