BACKGROUND
principal component analysis  has been widely used to visualize high-dimensional metabolomic data in a two- or three-dimensional subspace. in metabolomics, some metabolites  have been subjectively selected when using factor loading in pca, and biological inferences are made for these metabolites. however, this approach may lead to biased biological inferences because these metabolites are not objectively selected with statistical criteria.


RESULTS
we propose a statistical procedure that selects metabolites with statistical hypothesis testing of the factor loading in pca and makes biological inferences about these significant metabolites with a metabolite set enrichment analysis . this procedure depends on the fact that the eigenvector in pca for autoscaled data is proportional to the correlation coefficient between the pc score and each metabolite level. we applied this approach to two sets of metabolomic data from mouse liver samples:  <dig> of  <dig> metabolites in the first case study and  <dig> of  <dig> metabolites in the second case study were statistically significant. this result suggests that to set the number of metabolites before the analysis is inappropriate because the number of significant metabolites differs in each study when factor loading is used in pca. moreover, when an msea of these significant metabolites was performed, significant metabolic pathways were detected, which were acceptable in terms of previous biological knowledge.


CONCLUSIONS
it is essential to select metabolites statistically to make unbiased biological inferences from metabolomic data when using factor loading in pca. we propose a statistical procedure to select metabolites with statistical hypothesis testing of the factor loading in pca, and to draw biological inferences about these significant metabolites with msea. we have developed an r package “mseapca” to facilitate this approach. the “mseapca” package is publicly available at the cran website.

principal component analysisstatistical hypothesis testing of factor loadingmetabolite set enrichment analysis

