BACKGROUND
female moths synthesize species-specific sex pheromone components and release them to attract male moths, which depend on precise sex pheromone chemosensory system to locate females. two types of genes involved in the sex pheromone biosynthesis and degradation pathways play essential roles in this important moth behavior. to understand the function of genes in the sex pheromone pathway, this study investigated the genome-wide and digital gene expression of sex pheromone biosynthesis and degradation genes in various adult tissues in the diamondback moth , plutella xylostella, which is a notorious vegetable pest worldwide.


RESULTS
a massive transcriptome data  was generated by sequencing  <dig> adult tissues including male antennae, female antennae, heads, legs, abdomen and female pheromone glands from dbm by using illumina  <dig> next-generation sequencing and mapping to a published dbm genome. bioinformatics analysis yielded a total of  <dig>  unigenes among which  <dig> transcripts were putatively related to seven gene families in the sex pheromone biosynthesis pathway. among these, seven  were mainly expressed in the pheromone glands with likely function in the three essential sex pheromone biosynthesis steps: desaturation, reduction, and esterification. we also identified  <dig> odorant-degradation related genes  from seven major enzyme groups. among these genes,  <dig> genes are new identified and two aldehyde oxidases , one aldehyde dehydrogenase , five carboxyl/cholinesterases , five udp-glycosyltransferases , eight cytochrome p <dig>  and three glutathione s-transferases  displayed more robust expression in the antennae, and thus are proposed to participate in the degradation of sex pheromone components and plant volatiles.


CONCLUSIONS
to date, this is the most comprehensive gene data set of sex pheromone biosynthesis and degradation enzyme related genes in dbm created by genome- and transcriptome-wide identification, characterization and expression profiling. our findings provide a basis to better understand the function of genes with tissue enriched expression. the results also provide information on the genes involved in sex pheromone biosynthesis and degradation, and may be useful to identify potential gene targets for pest control strategies by disrupting the insect-insect communication using pheromone-based behavioral antagonists.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pheromone-biosynthesis enzymespheromone-degrading enzymesdetoxificationcarboxyl/cholinesterasealdehyde oxidasefatty acyl reductasedesaturasehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3140175031401750he peng wang jun natural science foundation of guizhou province of chinaqkh-j  <cit> 2062he peng scientific research foundation of guizhou university, chinarjh project grant no. 2013-28he peng major program of innovation research team of educational commission of guizhou province of chinaqjh-ky <cit> 113he ming national natrual science foundation of china21262009xu wei-ming science and technology project of guizhou province  6012he ming science and technology platform for talent of guizhou provinceqkh  <cit> 5608he ming issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

