BACKGROUND
prediction of de novo protein-protein interaction is a critical step toward reconstructing ppi networks, which is a central task in systems biology. recent computational approaches have shifted from making ppi prediction based on individual pairs and single data source to leveraging complementary information from multiple heterogeneous data sources and partial network structure. however, how to quickly learn weights for heterogeneous data sources remains a challenge. in this work, we developed a method to infer de novo ppis by combining multiple data sources represented in kernel format and obtaining optimal weights based on random walk over the existing partial networks.


RESULTS
our proposed method utilizes barker algorithm and the training data to construct a transition matrix which constrains how a random walk would traverse the partial network. multiple heterogeneous features for the proteins in the network are then combined into the form of weighted kernel fusion, which provides a new "adjacency matrix" for the whole network that may consist of disconnected components but is required to comply with the transition matrix on the training subnetwork. this requirement is met by adjusting the weights to minimize the element-wise difference between the transition matrix and the weighted kernels. the minimization problem is solved by linear programming. the weighted kernel fusion is then transformed to regularized laplacian  kernel to infer missing or new edges in the ppi network, which can potentially connect the previously disconnected components.


CONCLUSIONS
the results on synthetic data demonstrated the soundness and robustness of the proposed algorithms under various conditions. and the results on real data show that the accuracies of ppi prediction for yeast data and human data measured as auc are increased by up to  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively, as compared to a control method without using optimal weights. moreover, the weights learned by our method weight optimization by linear programming  are very consistent with that learned by sampling, and can provide insights into the relations between ppis and various feature kernel, thereby improving ppi prediction even for disconnected ppi networks.

keywords
protein interaction networknetwork inferenceinteraction predictionrandom walklinear programmingieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine  <dig> washington, dc, usa 9- <dig> november  <dig> http://cci.drexel.edu/ieeebibm/bibm2015/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

