BACKGROUND
new "next generation" dna sequencing technologies offer individual researchers the ability to rapidly generate large amounts of genome sequence data at dramatically reduced costs. as a result, a need has arisen for new software tools for storage, management and analysis of genome sequence data. although bioinformatic tools are available for the analysis and management of genome sequences, limitations still remain. for example, restrictions on the submission of data and use of these tools may be imposed, thereby making them unsuitable for sequencing projects that need to remain in-house or proprietary during their initial stages. furthermore, the availability and use of next generation sequencing in industrial, governmental and academic environments requires biologist to have access to computational support for the curation and analysis of the data generated; however, this type of support is not always immediately available.


RESULTS
to address these limitations, we have developed dragnet . dragnet is an open source web application which allows researchers, with no experience in programming and database management, to setup their own in-house projects for storing, retrieving, organizing and managing annotated draft and complete genome sequence data. the software provides a web interface for the use of blast, allowing users to perform preliminary comparative analysis among multiple genomes. we demonstrate the utility of dragnet for performing comparative genomics on closely related bacterial strains. furthermore, dragnet can be further developed to incorporate additional tools for more sophisticated analyses.


CONCLUSIONS
dragnet is designed for use either by individual researchers or as a collaborative tool available through internet  deployment. for genome projects that require genome sequencing data to initially remain proprietary, dragnet provides the means for researchers to keep their data in-house for analysis using local programs or until it is made publicly available, at which point it may be uploaded to additional analysis software applications. the dragnet home page is available at http://www.dragnet.cvm.iastate.edu and includes example files for examining the functionalities, a link for downloading the dragnet setup package and a link to the dragnet source code hosted with full documentation on sourceforge.

