BACKGROUND
maintenance of homeostasis requires that an organism perceive selected physical and chemical signals within an informationally dense environment. functionally, an organism uses a variety of signal transduction arrays to amplify and convert these perceived signals into appropriate gene transcriptional responses. these changes in gene expression serve to modify selective metabolic processes and thus optimize reproductive success. here we analyze a chloroplast-encoded his-to-asp signal transduction circuit in the stramenopile heterosigma akashiwo  hada ex y. hara et chihara . the presence, structure and putative function of this protein pair are discussed in the context of their evolutionary homologues.


RESULTS
bioinformatic analysis of the heterosigma akashiwo chloroplast genome sequence revealed the presence of a single two-component his-to-asp  pair in this stramenopile . these data represent the first documentation of a his-to-asp array in stramenopiles and counter previous reports suggesting that such regulatory proteins are lacking in this taxonomic cluster. comparison of the  <dig> kda h. akashiwo tsg <dig> with bacterial sensor kinases showed that the algal protein exhibits a moderately maintained pas motif in the sensor kinase domain as well as highly conserved h, n, g <dig> and f motifs within the histidine kinase atp binding site. molecular modelling of the  <dig> kda h. akashiwo trg <dig> regulator protein was consistent with a winged helix-turn-helix identity – a class of proteins that is known to impact gene expression at the level of transcription. the occurrence of trg <dig> protein in actively growing h. akashiwo cells was verified by western analysis. the presence of a phob-like rna polymerase loop in trg <dig> and its homologues in the red-algal lineage support the hypothesis that trg <dig> and its homologues interact with a sigma  <dig>  subunit  of a eubacterial type polymerase. sequence analysis of h. akashiwo rpod showed this nuclear-encoded gene has a well-defined  <dig>  domain, a region that augments rna polymerase interaction with transcriptional regulatory proteins and also serves in - <dig> promoter recognition. the presence/loss of the his-to-asp pairs in primary and secondary chloroplast lineages is assessed.


CONCLUSIONS
his-to-asp signal transduction components are found in most rhodophytic chloroplasts, as well as in their putative cyanobacterial progenitors. the evolutionary conservation of these proteins argues that they are important for the maintenance of chloroplast homeostasis. our data suggest that chloroplast gene transcription may be impacted by the interaction of the his-to-asp regulator protein  with the rna polymerase σ <dig> subunit.

