BACKGROUND
marek’s disease  is a lymphoproliferative disease of poultry induced by marek’s disease virus , a highly oncogenic alphaherpesvirus. identifying the underlying genes conferring md genetic resistance is desired for more efficacious control measures including genomic selection, which requires accurately identified genetic markers throughout the chicken genome.

methods
hypothesizing that variants located in transcriptional regulatory regions are the main mechanism underlying this complex trait, a genome-wide association study was conducted by genotyping a ~ <dig>  bird md resource population derived from experimental inbred layers with snps containing  <dig>  previously identified allele-specific expression  snps in response to mdv infection as well as  <dig>  random snps equally spaced throughout the chicken genome. based on the calculated associations, genomic predictions were determined for  <dig> roosters and selected sires had their progeny tested for marek’s disease incidence.


RESULTS
our analyses indicate that these ase snps account for more than 83 % of the genetic variance and exhibit nearly all the highest associations. to validate these findings,  <dig> roosters had their genetic merit predicted from the ase snps only, and the top  <dig> and bottom  <dig> ranked roosters were reciprocally mated to random hens. the resulting progeny showed that after only one generation of bidirectional selection, there was a 22 % difference in md incidence and this approach gave a 125 % increase in accuracy compared to current pedigree-based estimates.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that variation in transcriptional regulation is the major driving cause for genetic resistance to md, and ase snps identify the underlying genes and are sufficiently linked to the causative polymorphisms that they can be used for accurate genomic prediction as well as help define the underlying molecular basis. furthermore, this approach should be applicable to other complex traits.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptional regulationcomplex traitsallele-specific expressiondisease resistancegenetic architecturegenomic selectionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

