BACKGROUND
bacillus amyloliquefaciens sqr <dig> is a plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria  with outstanding abilities to enhance plant growth and to control soil-borne diseases. root exudates is known to play important roles in plant-microbe interactions. to explore the rhizosphere interactions and plant-beneficial characteristics of sqr <dig>  the complete genome sequence as well as the transcriptome in response to maize root exudates under biofilm-forming conditions were elucidated.


RESULTS
maize root exudates stimulated sqr <dig> biofilm formation in liquid culture, which is known to be positively correlated with enhanced root colonization. transcriptional profiling via rna-sequencing of sqr <dig> under static conditions indicated that, at 24 h post-inoculation, root exudates stimulated the expression of metabolism-relevant genes, while at 48 h post-inoculation, genes related to extracellular matrix production  were activated by root exudates. the individual components in maize root exudates that stimulated biofilm formation included glucose, citric acid, and fumaric acid, which either promoted the growth of sqr <dig> cells or activated extracellular matrix production. in addition, numerous groups of genes involved in rhizosphere adaptation and in plant-beneficial traits, including plant polysaccharide utilization, cell motility and chemotaxis, secondary antibiotics synthesis clusters, and plant growth promotion-relevant, were identified in the sqr <dig> genome. these genes also appeared to be induced by the maize root exudates.


CONCLUSIONS
enhanced biofilm formation of b. amyloliquefaciens sqr <dig> by maize root exudates could mainly be attributed to promoting cell growth and to inducing extracellular matrix production. the genomic analysis also highlighted the elements involved in the strain’s potential as a pgpr. this study provides useful information for understanding plant-rhizobacteria interactions and hence for promoting the agricultural applications of this strain.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
plant growth-promoting rhizobacteriagenomeroot exudatesbiofilmtranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

