BACKGROUND
sinapic acid and its esters have broad functions in different stages of seed germination and plant development and are thought to play a role in protecting against ultraviolet irradiation. to better understand the interactions between sinapic acid esters and seed germination processes in response to various stresses, we analyzed the role of the plant hormone abscisic acid  in the regulation of sinapic acid esters involved in seed germination and early seedling growth.


RESULTS
we found that exogenous sinapic acid promotes seed germination in a dose-dependent manner in arabidopsis thaliana. high-performance liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis showed that exogenous sinapic acid increased the sinapoylcholine content of imbibed seeds. furthermore, sinapic acid affected aba catabolism, resulting in reduced aba levels and increased levels of the aba-glucose ester. using mutants deficient in the synthesis of sinapate esters, we showed that the germination of mutant sinapoylglucose accumulator  <dig>  and bright trichomes  <dig>  seeds was more sensitive to aba than the wild-type. moreover, arabidopsis mutants deficient in either abscisic acid deficient  <dig>  or abscisic acid insensitive  <dig>  displayed increased expression of the sinapoylglucose:choline sinapoyltransferase  and sinapoylcholine esterase  genes with sinapic acid treatment. this treatment also affected the accumulation of sinapoylcholine and free choline during seed germination.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that sinapoylcholine, which constitutes the major phenolic component in seeds among various minor sinapate esters, affected aba homeostasis during seed germination and early seedling growth in arabidopsis. our findings provide insights into the role of sinapic acid and its esters in regulating aba-mediated inhibition of arabidopsis seed germination in response to drought stress.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
sinapic acidsinapic acid estersabscisic acid homeostasisseed germinationarabidopsis thalianaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

