BACKGROUND
the cynomolgus monkey  is one of the most widely used surrogate animal models for an increasing number of human diseases and vaccines, especially immune-system-related ones. towards a better understanding of the gene expression background upon its immunogenetics, we constructed a cdna library from epstein-barr virus -transformed b lymphocytes of a cynomolgus monkey and sequenced  <dig>  randomly picked clones.


RESULTS
after processing,  <dig>  high-quality expressed sequence tags  were generated and assembled into  <dig>  unigenes. annotations of these uniquely expressed transcripts demonstrated that out of the  <dig>  open reading frame  positive unigenes ,  <dig> % shared significant similarities  with the ncbi nucleotide  database, while only  <dig> %  did so with the ncbi non-redundant protein  database. further analysis revealed that  <dig> % of the unigenes that shared no similarities to the nr database could be assigned to human chromosomes, in which  <dig> did not match significantly to any cynomolgus monkey and human ests. the mapping regions to known human genes on the human genome were described in detail. the protein family and domain analysis revealed that the first, second and fourth of the most abundantly expressed protein families were all assigned to immunoglobulin and major histocompatibility complex -related proteins. the expression profiles of these genes were compared with that of homologous genes in human blood, lymph nodes and a ramos cell line, which demonstrated expression changes after transformation with ebv. the degree of sequence similarity of the mhc class i and ii genes to the human reference sequences was evaluated. the results indicated that class i molecules showed weak amino acid identities , while class ii showed slightly higher ones.


CONCLUSIONS
these results indicated that the genes expressed in the cynomolgus monkey could be used to identify novel protein-coding genes and revise those incomplete or incorrect annotations in the human genome by comparative methods, since the old world monkeys and humans share high similarities at the molecular level, especially within coding regions. the identification of multiple genes involved in the immune response, their sequence variations to the human homologues, and their responses to ebv infection could provide useful information to improve our understanding of the cynomolgus monkey immune system.

