BACKGROUND
expression traits can vary quantitatively between individuals and have a complex inheritance. identification of the genetics underlying transcript variation can help in the understanding of phenotypic variation due to genetic factors regulating transcript abundance and shed light into divergence patterns. so far, only a limited number of studies have addressed this subject in arabidopsis, with contrasting results due to dissimilar statistical power. here, we present the transcriptome architecture in leaf tissue of two ril sets obtained from a connected-cross design involving  <dig> commonly used accessions. we also present the transcriptome architecture observed in developing seeds of a third independent cross.


RESULTS
the utilisation of the novel r/eqtl package  allowed us to map  <dig>  and  <dig>  eqtls in the cvi- <dig> × col- <dig> and bur- <dig> × col- <dig> recombinant populations respectively. in agreement with previous studies, we observed a larger phenotypic variance explained by eqtls in linkage with the controlled gene , compared to distant loci . distant eqtls hotspots were essentially not conserved between crosses, but instead, cross-specific. accounting for confounding factors using a probabilistic approach  increased the mapping resolution and the number of significant associations. moreover, using local eqtls obtained from this approach, we detected evidence for a directional allelic effect in genes with related function, where significantly more eqtls than expected by chance were up-regulated from one of the accessions. primary experimental data, analysis parameters, eqtl results and visualisation of lod score curves presented here are stored and accessible through the qtlstore service database http://qtlstore.versailles.inra.fr/.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate the extensive diversity and moderately conserved eqtl landscape between crosses and validate the utilisation of expression traits to explore for candidates behind phenotypic variation among accessions. furthermore, this stresses the need for a wider spectrum of diversity to fully understand expression trait variation within a species.

eqtlnatural variationselectionrils

