BACKGROUND
similarity of sequences is a key mathematical notion for classification and phylogenetic studies in biology. it is currently primarily handled using alignments. however, the alignment methods seem inadequate for post-genomic studies since they do not scale well with data set size and they seem to be confined only to genomic and proteomic sequences. therefore, alignment-free similarity measures are actively pursued. among those, usm  has gained prominence. it is based on the deep theory of kolmogorov complexity and universality is its most novel striking feature. since it can only be approximated via data compression, usm is a methodology rather than a formula quantifying the similarity of two strings. three approximations of usm are available, namely ucd , ncd  and cd . their applicability and robustness is tested on various data sets yielding a first massive quantitative estimate that the usm methodology and its approximations are of value. despite the rich theory developed around usm, its experimental assessment has limitations: only a few data compressors have been tested in conjunction with usm and mostly at a qualitative level, no comparison among ucd, ncd and cd is available and no comparison of usm with existing methods, both based on alignments and not, seems to be available.


RESULTS
we experimentally test the usm methodology by using  <dig> compressors, all three of its known approximations and six data sets of relevance to molecular biology. this offers the first systematic and quantitative experimental assessment of this methodology, that naturally complements the many theoretical and the preliminary experimental results available. moreover, we compare the usm methodology both with methods based on alignments and not. we may group our experiments into two sets. the first one, performed via roc  analysis, aims at assessing the intrinsic ability of the methodology to discriminate and classify biological sequences and structures. a second set of experiments aims at assessing how well two commonly available classification algorithms, upgma  and nj , can use the methodology to perform their task, their performance being evaluated against gold standards and with the use of well known statistical indexes, i.e., the f-measure and the partition distance. based on the experiments, several conclusions can be drawn and, from them, novel valuable guidelines for the use of usm on biological data. the main ones are reported next.


CONCLUSIONS
ucd and ncd are indistinguishable, i.e., they yield nearly the same values of the statistical indexes we have used, accross experiments and data sets, while cd is almost always worse than both. upgma seems to yield better classification results with respect to nj, i.e., better values of the statistical indexes , on a substantial fraction of experiments, compressors and usm approximation choices. the compression program ppmd, based on ppm , for generic data and gencompress for dna, are the best performers among the compression algorithms we have used, although the difference in performance, as measured by statistical indexes, between them and the other algorithms depends critically on the data set and may not be as large as expected. ppmd used with ucd or ncd and upgma, on sequence data is very close, although worse, in performance with the alignment methods . yet, it scales well with data set size and it can work on data other than sequences. in summary, our quantitative analysis naturally complements the rich theory behind usm and supports the conclusion that the methodology is worth using because of its robustness, flexibility, scalability, and competitiveness with existing techniques. in particular, the methodology applies to all biological data in textual format. the software and data sets are available under the gnu gpl at the supplementary material web page.

