BACKGROUND
mosquito saliva is a complex cocktail whose pharmacological properties play an essential role in blood feeding by counteracting host physiological response to tissue injury. moreover, vector borne pathogens are transmitted to vertebrates and exposed to their immune system in the context of mosquito saliva which, in virtue of its immunomodulatory properties, can modify the local environment at the feeding site and eventually affect pathogen transmission. in addition, the host antibody response to salivary proteins may be used to assess human exposure to mosquito vectors. even though the role of quite a few mosquito salivary proteins has been clarified in the last decade, we still completely ignore the physiological role of many of them as well as the extent of their involvement in the complex interactions taking place between the mosquito vectors, the pathogens they transmit and the vertebrate host. the recent release of the genomes of  <dig> anopheles species offered the opportunity to get insights into function and evolution of salivary protein families in anopheline mosquitoes.


RESULTS
orthologues of fifty three anopheles gambiae salivary proteins were retrieved and annotated from  <dig> additional anopheline species belonging to the three subgenera cellia, anopheles, and nyssorhynchus. our analysis included  <dig> full-length salivary proteins from  <dig> different families and allowed the identification of  <dig> novel salivary genes and re-annotation of  <dig> wrong predictions. the comparative, structural and phylogenetic analyses yielded an unprecedented view of the anopheline salivary repertoires and of their evolution over  <dig> million years of anopheline radiation shedding light on mechanisms and evolutionary forces that contributed shaping the anopheline sialomes.


CONCLUSIONS
we provide here a comprehensive description, classification and evolutionary overview of the main anopheline salivary protein families and identify two novel candidate markers of human exposure to malaria vectors worldwide. this anopheline sialome catalogue, which is easily accessible as hyperlinked spreadsheet, is expected to be useful to the vector biology community and to improve the capacity to gain a deeper understanding of mosquito salivary proteins facilitating their possible exploitation for epidemiological and/or pathogen-vector-host interaction studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
salivary glandssalivary proteinsanophelinesmosquito salivavector biologyevolutionsalivary markershuman exposure to malaria vectorspositive selectionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004963seventh framework programme228421arcà bruno italian ministry of education, university and research2010c2lkkj_004arcà bruno http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100006492division of intramural research, national institute of allergy and infectious diseasesbrazilian research council faperjissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

