BACKGROUND
copy number variable regions  can result in drastic phenotypic differences and may therefore be subject to selection during domestication. studying copy number variation in relation to domestication is highly relevant in pigs because of their very rich natural and domestication history that resulted in many different phenotypes. to investigate the evolutionary dynamic of cnvrs, we applied read depth method on next generation sequence data from  <dig> individuals, comprising wild boars and domestic pigs from europe and asia.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig>  cnvrs with an average size of  <dig> kilobases comprising a total of  <dig>  megabases of the pig genome and  <dig> overlapping genes. functional analyses revealed that cnvrs are enriched with genes related to sensory perception, neurological process and response to stimulus, suggesting their contribution to adaptation in the wild and behavioral changes during domestication. variations of copy number  of antimicrobial related genes suggest an ongoing process of evolution of these genes to combat food-borne pathogens. likewise, some genes related to the omnivorous lifestyle of pigs, like genes involved in detoxification, were observed to be cn variable. a small portion of cnvrs was unique to domestic pigs and may have been selected during domestication. the majority of cnvrs, however, is shared between wild and domesticated individuals, indicating that domestication had minor effect on the overall diversity of cnvrs. also, the excess of cnvrs in non-genic regions implies that a major part of these variations is likely to be  neutral. comparison between different populations showed that larger populations have more cnvrs, highlighting that cnvrs are, like other genetic variation such as snps and microsatellites, reflecting demographic history rather than phenotypic diversity.


CONCLUSIONS
cnvrs in pigs are enriched for genes related to sensory perception, neurological process, and response to stimulus. the majority of cnvrs ascertained in domestic pigs are also variable in wild boars, suggesting that the domestication of the pig did not result in a change in cnvrs in domesticated pigs. the majority of variable regions were found to reflect demographic patterns rather than phenotypic.

structural variationcopy number variationnext generation sequencing dataread depth method

