BACKGROUND
odontocete cetaceans occupy the top position of the marine food-web and are particularly sensitive to the bioaccumulation of lipophilic contaminants. the effects of environmental pollution on these species are highly debated and various ecotoxicological studies have addressed the impact of xenobiotic compounds on marine mammals, raising conservational concerns. despite its sensitivity, quantitative real-time pcr  has never been used to quantify gene induction caused by exposure of cetaceans to contaminants. a limitation for the application of qrt-pcr is the need for appropriate reference genes which allow the correct quantification of gene expression. a systematic evaluation of potential reference genes in cetacean skin biopsies is presented, in order to validate future qrt-pcr studies aiming at using the expression of selected genes as non-lethal biomarkers.


RESULTS
ten commonly used housekeeping genes  were partially sequenced in the striped dolphin  and, for each gene, pcr primer pairs were specifically designed and tested in qrt-pcr assays. the expression of these potential control genes was examined in  <dig> striped dolphin skin biopsy samples, obtained from specimens sampled in the north-western mediterranean sea. the stability of selected control genes was determined using three different specific vba applets  which produce highly comparable results. glyceraldehyde-3p-dehydrogenase  and tyrosine 3-monooxygenase  always rank as the two most stably expressed hkgs according to the analysis with genorm and normfinder, and are defined as optimal control genes by bestkepeer. ribosomal protein l <dig>  and s <dig>  also exhibit a remarkable stability of their expression levels. on the other hand, transferrin receptor , phosphoglycerate kinase  <dig> , hypoxanthine ribosyltransferase  and β-2-microglobin  show variable expression among the studied samples and appear as less suitable reference genes for data normalization.


CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we have provided essential background information for the selection of control genes in qrt-pcr studies of cetacean skin biopsies, as a molecular technique to investigate ecotoxicological hazard in marine mammals. of  <dig> hkgs tested, those encoding for ywhaz and gapdh appear as the most reliable control genes for the normalization of qrt-pcr data in the analysis of striped dolphin skin biopsies. potentially useful reference genes are also those encoding for ribosomal proteins l <dig> and s <dig> 

