BACKGROUND
marine iguanas  inhabit the coastlines of large and small islands throughout the galápagos archipelago, providing a rich system to study the spatial and temporal factors influencing the phylogeographic distribution and population structure of a species. here, we analyze the microevolution of marine iguanas using the complete mitochondrial control region  as well as  <dig> microsatellite loci representing more than  <dig> individuals from  <dig> islands.


RESULTS
cr data show that marine iguanas occupy three general clades: one that is widely distributed across the northern archipelago, and likely spread from east to west by way of the south equatorial current, a second that is found mostly on the older eastern and central islands, and a third that is limited to the younger northern and western islands. generally, the cr haplotype distribution pattern supports the colonization of the archipelago from the older, eastern islands to the younger, western islands. however, there are also signatures of recurrent, historical gene flow between islands after population establishment. bayesian cluster analysis of microsatellite genotypes indicates the existence of twenty distinct genetic clusters generally following a one-cluster-per-island pattern. however, two well-differentiated clusters were found on the easternmost island of san cristóbal, while nine distinct and highly intermixed clusters were found on youngest, westernmost islands of isabela and fernandina. high mtdna and microsatellite genetic diversity were observed for populations on isabela and fernandina that may be the result of a recent population expansion and founder events from multiple sources.


CONCLUSIONS
while a past genetic study based on pure fst analysis suggested that marine iguana populations display high levels of nuclear  gene flow due to male-biased dispersal, the results of our sex-biased dispersal tests and the finding of strong genetic differentiation between islands do not support this view. therefore, our study is a nice example of how recently developed analytical tools such as bayesian clustering analysis and dna sequence-based demographic analyses can overcome potential biases introduced by simply relying on fst estimates from markers with different inheritance patterns.

