BACKGROUND
infectious keratoconjunctivitis  is an ocular infectious disease caused by mycoplasma conjunctivae which affects small domestic and wild mountain ruminants. domestic sheep maintain the pathogen but the detection of healthy carriers in wildlife has raised the question as to whether m. conjunctivae may also persist in the wild. furthermore, the factors shaping the dynamics of ikc outbreaks in wildlife have remained largely unknown. the aims of this study were  to verify the etiological role of m. conjunctivae in ikc outbreaks recorded between  <dig> and  <dig> at four study sites in different regions of france ;  to establish whether there existed any epidemiological links between the different regions through a cluster analysis of the detected strains ;  to explore selected pathogen, host and environmental factors potentially influencing the dynamics of ikc in wildlife, by joining results obtained by molecular analyses and by field observations . all of the samples were tested for m. conjunctivae by qpcr, and cluster analysis was based on a highly variable part of the lpps gene.


RESULTS
we documented infections with m. conjunctivae in epidemic and endemic situations, both in symptomatic and asymptomatic animals. the identified m. conjunctivae strains were site-specific and persisted in the local wild population for at least 6 years. in epidemic situations, peaks of cases and disease resurgence were associated with the emergence of new similar strains in a given area. social interactions, seasonal movements and the landscape structure such as natural and anthropogenic barriers influenced the spatio-temporal spread of ikc. adults were more affected than young animals and host susceptibility differed depending on the involved strain.


CONCLUSIONS
our study indicates that ikc is a multifactorial disease and that m. conjunctivae can persist in wildlife populations. the disease course in individual animals and populations is influenced by both host and mycoplasma characteristics, and the disease spread within and among populations is shaped by host behavior and landscape structure.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
molecular epidemiologymycoplasma conjunctivaepersistenceresurgenceocular diseasedisease spreadchamoisibexfunding was covered by the involved institutionsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

