BACKGROUND
bacterial tyrosine-kinases , which play an important role in numerous cellular processes, are characterized as a separate class of enzymes and share no structural similarity with their eukaryotic counterparts. however, in silico methods for predicting by-kinases have not been developed yet. since these enzymes are involved in key regulatory processes, and are promising targets for anti-bacterial drug design, it is desirable to develop a simple and easily interpretable predictor to gain new insights into bacterial tyrosine phosphorylation. this study proposes a novel scmbyk method for predicting and characterizing by-kinases.


RESULTS
a dataset consisting of  <dig> by-kinases and  <dig> non-by-kinases was established to design the scmbyk predictor, which achieved training and test accuracies of  <dig>  and  <dig> %, respectively. furthermore, the leave-one-phylum-out method was used to predict specific bacterial phyla hosts of target sequences, gaining  <dig> % average test accuracy. after analyzing scmbyk-derived propensity scores, four characteristics of by-kinases were determined: 1) by-kinases tend to be composed of α-helices; 2) the amino-acid content of extracellular regions of by-kinases is expected to be dominated by residues such as val, ile, phe and tyr; 3) by-kinases structurally resemble nuclear proteins; 4) different domains play different roles in triggering by-kinase activity.


CONCLUSIONS
the scmbyk predictor is an effective method for identification of possible by-kinases. furthermore, it can be used as a part of a novel drug repurposing method, which recognizes putative by-kinases and matches them to approved drugs. among other results, our analysis revealed that azathioprine could suppress the virulence of m. tuberculosis, and thus be considered as a potential antibiotic for tuberculosis treatment.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
by-kinasescoring card methoddrug repurposingpropensity scoresdipeptide15th international conference on bioinformatics  incob 2016queenstown, singapore 21- <dig> september  <dig> http://incob <dig> apbionet.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

