BACKGROUND
lymphocystis disease  is the main viral infection reported to affect cultured gilthead seabream  in europe. the existence of subclinical lymphocystis disease virus  infection in this fish species has been recognised by using polymerase chain reaction -based methods. nevertheless, these methods do not provide quantitative results that can be useful in epidemiological and pathological studies. moreover, carrier fish have been involved in viral transmission, therefore the use of specific and sensitive diagnostic methods to detect lcdv will be relevant for lcd prevention.


RESULTS
we have developed a real-time pcr  assay to detect and quantify lcdv. the assay was evaluated for viral diagnosis in surveillance studies in gilthead seabream farms, and also to identify viral reservoirs in a hatchery. the prevalence of lcdv infection in the asymptomatic gilthead seabream populations tested varied from  <dig> to 100 %, including data from one farm without previous records of lcd. estimated viral load in caudal fin of subclinically infected fish was two to five orders of magnitude lower than in diseased fish. the qpcr assay allowed the detection of carrier fish in broodstock from a farm with a history of clinical lcd in juvenile fish. in addition, the quantitative detection of lcdv was achieved in all samples collected in the hatchery, including fertilized eggs, larvae and fingerlings, and also rotifer cultures and artemia metanauplii and cysts used for larval rearing.


CONCLUSIONS
the qpcr assay developed in this study has proved to be a rapid, sensitive, and reliable method for lcdv diagnosis, which could be valuable to identify lcdv reservoirs or to study viral replication in gilthead seabream.

keywords
lymphocystis disease virusvirus surveillancefarmed gilthead seabreamreal-time pcrhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002878consejería economía, innovación, ciencia y empleo, junta de andalucia p12-rnm-2261borrego juan j. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004837ministerio de ciencia e innovación  & feder agl2010-17880castro dolores http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004837ministerio de ciencia e innovación bes2011-043607issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

