BACKGROUND
in proteomics, batch effects are technical sources of variation that confounds proper analysis, preventing effective deployment in clinical and translational research.


RESULTS
using simulated and real data, we demonstrate existing batch effect-correction methods do not always eradicate all batch effects. worse still, they may alter data integrity, and introduce false positives. moreover, although principal component analysis  is commonly used for detecting batch effects. the principal components  themselves may be used as differential features, from which relevant differential proteins may be effectively traced. batch effect are removable by identifying pcs highly correlated with batch but not class effect.

however, neither pc-based nor existing batch effect-correction methods address well subtle batch effects, which are difficult to eradicate, and involve data transformation and/or projection which is error-prone. to address this, we introduce the concept of batch-effect resistant methods and demonstrate how such methods incorporating protein complexes are particularly resistant to batch effect without compromising data integrity.


CONCLUSIONS
protein complex-based analyses are powerful, offering unparalleled differential protein-selection reproducibility and high prediction accuracy. we demonstrate for the first time their innate resistance against batch effects, even subtle ones. as complex-based analyses require no prior data transformation , data integrity is protected. individual checks on top-ranked protein complexes confirm strong association with phenotype classes and not batch. therefore, the constituent proteins of these complexes are more likely to be clinically relevant.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
proteomicsbioinformaticsprincipal component analysisheterogeneitybatch effectsthe fifteenth asia pacific bioinformatics conference apbc 2017shenzhen, china 16- <dig> january  <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

