BACKGROUND
anabaena  sp. strain pcc <dig>  hereafter anabaena, is a cyanobacterium that fixes atmospheric n <dig> in specialized cells called heterocysts. heterocyst differentiation is regulated by a homodimeric transcription factor, hetr. hetr is expressed at a basal level in all cells but its expression increases in differentiating cells early after nitrogen deprivation. hetr is required for heterocyst development, and therefore nitrogen fixation and diazotrophic growth. overexpression of hetr leads to multiple contiguous heterocysts . hetr binds in vitro to dna fragments upstream of several genes upregulated in heterocysts, including hetz, hetp, hepa, pats, pkne, and hetr itself. hetr binds an inverted repeat sequence upstream of a few of these genes; however, hetr binds to promoters that do not contain this sequence, such as the promoter regions for pats and pkne.


RESULTS
we employed chromatin pull-down and deep sequencing  to globally identify hetr dna targets in vivo at six hours after fixed-nitrogen deprivation. we identified novel dna binding targets of tagged hetr-6xhis and defined a consensus hetr binding site from these hetr target sequences. promoter-gfp reporter fusions were used to determine the spatiotemporal expression of four potential hetr-target genes. the promoter region for asr <dig> was expressed transiently in differentiating heterocysts, alr <dig> was upregulated in heterocysts, asl <dig> was expressed in vegetative cells, and alr <dig> was derepressed in vegetative cells of a hetr mutant strain.


CONCLUSIONS
in addition to identifying known hetr target genes hetr and hetp, the chip-seq data were used to identify new potential hetr targets and to define a consensus hetr-binding site. the in vivo chip-seq analysis of hetr’s regulon suggests a possible role for hetr in vegetative cells in addition to its role in heterocyst development. the potential hetr target genes identified in this study provide new subjects for future work on the role of hetr in gene regulation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cyanobacteriaheterocyst developmenthetrchip-seqissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

