BACKGROUND
chickpea  is an economically important cool season grain legume crop that is valued for its nutritive seeds having high protein content. however, several biotic and abiotic stresses and the low genetic variability in the chickpea genome have continuously hindered the chickpea molecular breeding programs. stms  markers which are preferred for the construction of saturated linkage maps in several crop species, have also emerged as the most efficient and reliable source for detecting allelic diversity in chickpea. however, the number of stms markers reported in chickpea is still limited and moreover exhibit low rates of both inter and intraspecific polymorphism, thereby limiting the positions of the ssr markers especially on the intraspecific linkage maps of chickpea. hence, this study was undertaken with the aim of developing additional stms markers and utilizing them for advancing the genetic linkage map of chickpea which would have applications in qtl identification, mas and for de novo assembly of high throughput whole genome sequence data.


RESULTS
a microsatellite enriched library of chickpea n and n repeats) was constructed from which  <dig> putative microsatellite containing clones were identified. from these,  <dig> stms primers were designed of which  <dig> were developed as functional markers. an intraspecific mapping population of chickpea,  and comprising of  <dig> rils, was genotyped for mapping. of the  <dig> chickpea stms markers  were polymorphic in the parents and were used to genotype the rils. at a lod score of  <dig> , eight linkage groups defining the position of  <dig> markers were obtained that spanned  <dig>  cm with an average marker density of  <dig>  cm. further, based on the common loci present between the current map and the previously published chickpea intraspecific map, integration of maps was performed which revealed improvement of marker density and saturation of the region in the vicinity of sfl  gene thereby bringing about an advancement of the current map.


CONCLUSIONS
an arsenal of  <dig> new chickpea stms markers was reported. the developed intraspecific linkage map defined map positions of  <dig> markers which included  <dig> new locations.map integration with a previously published map was carried out which revealed an advanced map with improved density. this study is a major contribution towards providing advanced genomic resources which will facilitate chickpea geneticists and molecular breeders in developing superior genotypes with improved traits.

