BACKGROUND
stimulation of dictyostelium discoideum with camp evokes an elevation of the cytosolic free ca2+ concentration . the i-change is composed of liberation of stored ca2+ and extracellular ca2+-entry. the significance of the i-transient for chemotaxis is under debate. abolition of chemotactic orientation and migration by ca2+-buffers in the cytosol indicates that a i-increase is required for chemotaxis. yet, the ipla- mutant disrupted in a gene bearing similarity to ip3-receptors of higher eukaryotes aggregates despite the absence of a camp-induced i-transient which favours the view that i-changes are insignificant for chemotaxis.


RESULTS
we investigated ca2+-fluxes and the effect of their disturbance on chemotaxis and development of ipla- cells. differentiation was altered as compared to wild type amoebae and sensitive towards manipulation of the level of stored ca2+. chemotaxis was impaired when i-transients were suppressed by the presence of a ca2+-chelator in the cytosol of the cells. analysis of ion fluxes revealed that capacitative ca2+-entry was fully operative in the mutant. in suspensions of intact and permeabilized cells camp elicited extracellular ca2+-influx and liberation of stored ca2+, respectively, yet to a lesser extent than in wild type. in suspensions of partially purified storage vesicles atp-induced ca2+-uptake and ca2+-release activated by fatty acids or ca2+-atpase inhibitors were similar to wild type. mn2+-quenching of fura <dig> fluorescence allows to study ca2+-influx indirectly and revealed that the responsiveness of mutant cells was shifted to higher concentrations: roughly  <dig> times more mn2+ was necessary to observe agonist-induced mn2+-influx. camp evoked a i-elevation when stores were strongly loaded with ca2+, again with a similar shift in sensitivity in the mutant. in addition, basal i was significantly lower in ipla- than in wild type amoebae.


CONCLUSIONS
these results support the view that i-transients are essential for chemotaxis and differentiation. moreover, capacitative and agonist-activated ion fluxes are regulated by separate pathways that are mediated either by two types of channels in the plasma membrane or by distinct mechanisms coupling ca2+-release from stores to ca2+-entry in dictyostelium. the ipla- strain retains the capacitative ca2+-entry pathway and an impaired agonist-activated pathway that operates with reduced efficiency or at higher ionic pressure.

