BACKGROUND
the structural arrangement of the γ-aminobutyric acid type a receptor  is known to be crucial for the maintenance of cerebral-dependent homeostatic mechanisms during the promotion of highly adaptive neurophysiological events of the permissive hibernating rodent, i.e the syrian golden hamster. in this study, in vitro quantitative autoradiography and in situ hybridization were assessed in major hypothalamic nuclei. reverse transcription reaction-polymerase chain reaction  tests were performed for specific gabaar receptor subunit gene primers synthases of non-hibernating  and hibernating  hamsters. attempts were made to identify the type of αβγ subunit combinations operating during the switching on/off of neuronal activities in some hypothalamic nuclei of hibernators.


RESULTS
both autoradiography and molecular analysis supplied distinct expression patterns of all α subunits considered as shown by a strong  prevalence of α <dig> ratio  in the medial preoptic area  and arcuate nucleus  of nhibs with respect to hibs. at the same time α <dig> subunit levels proved to be typical of periventricular nucleus  and arc of hib, while strong α <dig> expression levels were detected during awakening state in the key circadian hypothalamic station, i.e. the suprachiasmatic nucleus . regarding the other two subunits , elevated β <dig> and γ <dig> mrnas levels mostly characterized mpoa of hibs, while prevalently elevated expression concentrations of the same subunits were also typical of sch, even though this time during the awakening state. in the case of arc, notably elevated levels were obtained for β <dig> and γ <dig> during hibernating conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that different αβγ subunits are operating as major elements either at the onset of torpor or during induction of the arousal state in the syrian golden hamster. the identification of a brain regional distribution pattern of distinct gabaar subunit combinations may prove to be very useful for highlighting gabaergic mechanisms functioning at least during the different physiological states of hibernators and this may have interesting therapeutic bearings on neurological sleeping disorders.

