BACKGROUND
the tea plant  o. kuntze) is one of the most economically important woody crops. recently, many leaf color genotypes have been developed during tea plant breeding and have become valuable materials in the processing of green tea. although the physiological characteristics of some leaf color mutants of tea plants have been partially revealed, little is known about the molecular mechanisms leading to the chlorina phenotype in tea plants.


RESULTS
the yellow-leaf tea cultivar zhonghuang  <dig>  was selected during tea plant breeding. in comparison with longjing  <dig> , a widely planted green tea cultivar, zh <dig> exhibited the chlorina phenotype and displayed significantly decreased chlorophyll contents. transmission electron microscopy analysis revealed that the ultrastructure of the chloroplasts was disrupted, and the grana were poorly stacked in zh <dig>  moreover, the contents of theanine and free amino acids were significantly higher, whereas the contents of carotenoids, catechins and anthocyanin were lower in zh <dig> than in lj <dig>  microarray analysis showed that the expression of  <dig> genes related to amino acid metabolism, photosynthesis and pigment metabolism was significantly altered in zh <dig> shoots compared with those of lj <dig> plants. pathway analysis of  <dig>  differentially expressed genes identified  <dig> pathways as being significantly regulated, including ‘cysteine and methionine metabolism’, ‘glycine, serine and threonine metabolism’, ‘flavonoid biosynthesis’, ‘porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism’ and ‘carotenoid biosynthesis’. furthermore, a number of differentially expressed genes could be mapped to the ‘theanine biosynthesis’, ‘chlorophyll biosynthesis’ and ‘flavonoid biosynthesis’ pathways. changes in the expression of genes involved in these pathways might be responsible for the different phenotype of zh <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
a novel chlorophyll-deficient chlorina tea plant cultivar was identified. biochemical characteristics were analyzed and gene expression profiling was performed using a custom oligonucleotide-based microarray. this study provides further insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the phenotype of the chlorina cultivar of camellia sinensis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chlorinachlorophyll deficiencygene expressionmicroarraytea plant issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

