BACKGROUND
the vigour and precocity of trees highly influences their efficiency in commercial production. in apple, dwarfing rootstocks allow high-density plantings while their precocious flowering enables earlier fruit production. currently, there is a lack of pear  rootstocks that are equivalent to the high yielding apple rootstock ‘m9’. for the efficient breeding of new pyrus rootstocks it is crucial to understand the genetic determinants of vigour control and precocity. in this study we used quantitative trait loci  analysis to identify genetic loci associated with the desired traits, using a segregating population of 405 f <dig> p. communis seedlings from a cross between ‘old home’ and ‘louise bonne de jersey’ . the seedlings were grafted as rootstocks with ‘doyenne du comice’ scions and comprehensively phenotyped over four growing seasons for traits related to tree architecture and flowering, in order to describe the growth of the scions.


RESULTS
a high density single nucleotide polymorphism -based genetic map comprising  <dig> polymorphic pear and  <dig> apple markers enabled the detection of qtls influencing expression of scion vigour and precocity located on linkage groups  <dig> and lg <dig> of ‘old home’. the lg <dig> qtl maps to a position that is syntenic to the apple ‘malling 9’  dw <dig> locus at the upper end of lg <dig>  an allele of a simple sequence repeat  associated with apple dw <dig> segregated with dwarfing and precocity in pear and was identified in other pear germplasm accessions. the orthology of the vigour-controlling lg <dig> qtl between apple and pear raises the possibility that the dwarfing locus dw <dig> arose before the divergence of apple and pear, and might therefore be present in other rosaceae species.


CONCLUSIONS
we report the first qtls associated with vigour control and flowering traits in pear rootstocks. orthologous loci were found to control scion growth and precocity in apple and pear rootstocks. the application of our results may assist in the breeding process of a pear rootstock that confers both vigour control and precocity to the grafted scion cultivar.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genetic mappingmaloideaemalus x domestica borkhmarker assisted selectionpyrus communis lsnpvigour controlissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

