BACKGROUND
since the first fungal genome sequences became available, investigators have been employing comparative genomics to understand how fungi have evolved to occupy diverse ecological niches. the secretome, i.e. the entirety of all proteins secreted by an organism, is of particular importance, as by these proteins fungi acquire nutrients and communicate with their surroundings.


RESULTS
it is generally assumed that fungi with similar nutritional lifestyles have similar secretome compositions. in this study, we test this hypothesis by annotating and comparing the soluble secretomes, defined as the sets of proteins containing classical signal peptides but lacking transmembrane domains of fungi representing a broad diversity of nutritional lifestyles. secretome size correlates with phylogeny and to a lesser extent with lifestyle. plant pathogens and saprophytes have larger secretomes than animal pathogens. small secreted cysteine-rich proteins , which may comprise many effectors important for the interaction of plant pathogens with their hosts, are defined here to have a mature length of ≤  <dig> aa residues, at least four cysteines, and a total cysteine content of ≥5%. sscps are found enriched in the secretomes of the pezizomycotina and basidiomycota in comparison to saccharomycotina. relative sscp content is noticeably higher in plant pathogens than in animal pathogens, while saprophytes were in between and closer to plant pathogens. expansions and contractions of gene families and in the number of occurrences of functional domains are largely lineage specific, e.g. contraction of glycoside hydrolases in saccharomycotina, and are only weakly correlated with lifestyle. however, within a given lifestyle a few general trends exist, such as the expansion of secreted family m <dig> metallopeptidases and chitin-binding proteins in plant pathogenic pezizomycotina.


CONCLUSIONS
while the secretomes of fungi with similar lifestyles share certain characteristics, the expansion and contraction of gene families is largely lineage specific, and not shared among all fungi of a given lifestyle.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fungisecretomecysteine-richsspsscpclustercontractionexpansionphylogenynutritional lifestyleissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

