BACKGROUND
natural selection has molded evolution across all taxa. at an arguable date of around  <dig>  years ago there were already at least two different types of cattle that became ancestors of nearly all modern cattle, the bos taurus taurus more adapted to temperate climates and the tropically adapted bos taurus indicus. after domestication, human selection exponentially intensified these differences. to better understand the genetic differences between these subspecies and detect genomic regions potentially under divergent selection, animals from the international bovine hapmap experiment were genotyped for over  <dig>  snp across the genome and compared using smoothed fst. the taurine sample was represented by ten breeds and the contrasting zebu cohort by three breeds.


RESULTS
each cattle group evidenced similar numbers of polymorphic markers well distributed across the genome. principal components analyses and unsupervised clustering confirmed the well-characterized main division of domestic cattle. the top 1% smoothed fst, potentially associated to positive selection, contained  <dig> genomic regions across  <dig> chromosomes. nearly half of the top fst signals  were previously detected using a lower density snp assay. amongst the strongest signals were the bta7:~ <dig> mb and bta14:~ <dig> mb; both regions harboring candidate genes and different patterns of linkage disequilibrium that potentially represent intrinsic differences between cattle types. the bottom 1% of the smoothed fst values, potentially associated to balancing selection, included  <dig> regions across  <dig> chromosomes. these regions often overlap with copy number variants, including the highly variable region at bta23:~ <dig> mb that harbors a large number of mhc genes. under these regions,  <dig> unique ensembl genes are annotated with a significant overrepresentation of immune related pathways.


CONCLUSIONS
genomic regions that are potentially linked to purifying or balancing selection processes in domestic cattle were identified. these regions are of particular interest to understand the natural and human selective pressures to which these subspecies were exposed to and how the genetic background of these populations evolved in response to environmental challenges and human manipulation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bostaurusindicusfstselectionspeciationissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013

