BACKGROUND
protein lysine succinylation is an important post-translational modification and plays a critical regulatory role in almost every aspects of cell metabolism in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. common wheat is one of the major global cereal crops. however, to date, little is known about the functions of lysine succinylation in this plant. here, we performed a global analysis of lysine succinylation in wheat and examined its overlap with lysine acetylation.


RESULTS
in total,  <dig> lysine succinylated modification sites were identified in  <dig> proteins. bioinformatics analysis showed that the modified proteins are distributed in multiple subcellular compartments and are involved in a wide variety of biological processes such as photosynthesis and the calvin-benson cycle, suggesting an important role for lysine succinylation in these processes. five putative succinylation motifs were identified. a protein interaction network analysis revealed that diverse interactions are modulated by protein succinylation. moreover,  <dig> succinyl-lysine sites were found to be acetylated at the same position, and  <dig> proteins were modified by both acetylation and succinylation, suggesting an extensive overlap between succinylation and acetylation in common wheat. comparative analysis indicated that lysine succinylation is conserved between common wheat and brachypodium distachyon.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that lysine succinylation is involved in diverse biological processes, especially in photosynthesis and carbon fixation. this systematic analysis represents the first global analysis of lysine succinylation in common wheat and provides an important resource for exploring the physiological role of lysine succinylation in this cereal crop and likely in all plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lysine succinylationsuccinylometriticum aestivum l.post-translational modificationphotosynthesisthe major key technology project for independent innovation in shandong province2014gjjs0201lin qi the innovation team of wheat for modern agricultural technology system in shandong provincesdait-04-021-09lin qi the science and technology support plan for high-yielding wheat2014gjjs0201lin qi the national natural science foundation of china31401027liang wenxing the taishan scholar construction foundation of shandong province6631114314liang wenxing issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

