BACKGROUND
the emergence of high-throughput genomic datasets from different sources and platforms , and copy number variation ) has greatly enhanced our understandings of the interplay of these genomic factors as well as their influences on the complex diseases. it is challenging to explore the relationship between these different types of genomic data sets. in this paper, we focus on a multivariate statistical method, canonical correlation analysis  method for this problem. conventional cca method does not work effectively if the number of data samples is significantly less than that of biomarkers, which is a typical case for genomic data . sparse cca  methods were introduced to overcome such difficulty, mostly using penalizations with l- <dig> norm  or the combination of l-1and l- <dig> norm . however, they overlook the structural or group effect within genomic data in the analysis, which often exist and are important .


RESULTS
we propose a new group sparse cca method  along with an effective numerical algorithm to study the mutual relationship between two different types of genomic data . we then extend the model to a more general formulation that can include the existing scca models. we apply the model to feature/variable selection from two data sets and compare our group sparse cca method with existing scca methods on both simulation and two real datasets . we use a graphical representation of the samples with a pair of canonical variates to demonstrate the discriminating characteristic of the selected features. pathway analysis is further performed for biological interpretation of those features.


CONCLUSIONS
the cca-sparse group method incorporates group effects of features into the correlation analysis while performs individual feature selection simultaneously. it outperforms the two scca methods  by identifying the correlated features with more true positives while controlling total discordance at a lower level on the simulated data, even if the group effect does not exist or there are irrelevant features grouped with true correlated features. compared with our proposed cca-group sparse models, cca-l <dig> tends to select less true correlated features while cca-group inclines to select more redundant features.

group sparse ccagenomic data integrationfeature selectionsnp

