BACKGROUND
one of the overarching goals of soybean breeding is to develop lines that combine increased yield with improved quality characteristics. high-density-marker qtl mapping can serve as an effective strategy to identify novel genomic information to facilitate crop improvement. in this study, we genotyped a recombinant inbred line  population  using a restriction-site associated dna sequencing  approach. a high-density soybean genetic map was constructed and used to identify several qtls that were shown to influence six yield-related and two quality traits.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  single-nucleotide polymorphisms  were detected for the rils that were integrated into  <dig> recombination bin units, with an average distance of  <dig>  cm between adjacent markers. forty seven qtls for yield-related traits and  <dig> qtls for grain quality traits were found to be distributed on  <dig> chromosomes in the 2 year studies. among them,  <dig> qtls were stable, and were identified in both analyses. twenty six qtls were identified for the first time, with a single qtl  in a 56 kb region explaining  <dig> % of phenotypic variation, and an additional  <dig> of these were novel, stable qtls. moreover,  <dig> qtl hotpots on four different chromosomes were identified for the correlated traits.


CONCLUSIONS
with rad-sequencing, some novel qtls and important qtl clusters for both yield-related and quality traits were identified based on a new, high-density bin linkage map. three predicted genes were selected as candidates that likely have a direct or indirect influence on both yield and quality in soybean. our findings will be helpful for understanding common genetic control mechanisms of co-localized traits and to select cultivars for further analysis to predictably modulate soybean yield and quality simultaneously.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
qtlyield-related traitsquality traitsrad-sequencingsoybeanchina agricultural research systemcars-04-ps09nian hai major projects of new varieties cultivation of genetically modified organisms 2014zx08004-002nian hai issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

