BACKGROUND
slc10a2-mediated reabsorption of bile acids at the distal end of the ileum is the first step in enterohepatic circulation. because bile acids act not only as detergents but also as signaling molecules in lipid metabolism and energy production, slc10a <dig> is important as the key transporter for understanding the in vivo kinetics of bile acids. slc10a family members and the homologous genes of various species share a highly conserved region corresponding to gly104–pro <dig> of slc10a <dig>  the functional importance of this region has not been fully elucidated.


RESULTS
to elucidate the functional importance of this region, we previously performed mutational analysis of the uncharged polar residues and proline in the distal one-third  of the highly conserved region in mouse slc10a <dig>  in this study, proline and uncharged polar residues in the remaining two-thirds of this region in mouse slc10a <dig> were subjected to mutational analysis, and taurocholic acid uptake and cell surface localization were examined. cell surface localization of slc10a <dig> is necessary for bile acid absorption. mutants in which asp or leu were substituted for pro <dig>  were abundantly expressed, but their cell surface localization was impaired. the s126a mutant was completely impaired in cellular expression. the t110a and s128a mutants exhibited remarkably enhanced membrane expression. the s112a mutant was properly expressed at the cell surface but transport activity was completely lost. replacement of tyr <dig> with various amino acids resulted in reduced transport activity. the degree of reduction roughly depended on the van der waals volume of the side chains.


CONCLUSIONS
the functional importance of proline and uncharged polar residues in the highly conserved region of mouse slc10a <dig> was determined. this information will contribute to the design of bile acid-conjugated prodrugs for efficient drug delivery or slc10a <dig> inhibitors for hypercholesterolemia treatment.

bile acidenterohepatic circulationileal sodium-dependent bile acid transporter

