BACKGROUND
the coordination of pollen tube  growth, guidance and timely growth arrest and rupture mediated by pt-pistil interaction is crucial for the pt to transport sperm cells into ovules for double fertilization. the plasma membrane  represents an important interface for cell–cell interaction, and pm proteins of pts are pioneers for mediating pt integrity and interaction with pistils. thus, understanding the mechanisms underlying these events is important for proteomics.


RESULTS
using the efficient aqueous polymer two-phase system and alkali buffer treatment, we prepared high-purity pm from mature and germinated pollen of rice. we used itraq quantitative proteomic methods and identified  <dig>  pm-related proteins  ;  <dig> showed differential expression in the two pollen cell types,  <dig> increased and  <dig> decreased in abundance during germination. the pmrp and differentially expressed pmrp sets all showed a functional skew toward signal transduction, transporters, wall remodeling/metabolism and membrane trafficking. their genomic loci had strong chromosome bias. we found  <dig> receptor-like kinases  from  <dig> kinase subfamilies and  <dig> transporters involved in flux of diversified ions and metabolites. in combination with the rice pollen transcriptome data, we revealed that in general, the protein expression of these pmrps disagreed with their mrna expression, with inconsistent mrna expression for 74% of differentially expressed pmrps.


CONCLUSIONS
this study identified genome-wide pollen pmrps, and provided insights into the membrane profile of receptor-like kinases and transporters important for pollen tube growth and interaction with pistils. these pollen pmrps and their mrnas showed discordant expression. this work provides resource and knowledge to further dissect mechanisms by which pollen or the pt controls pmrp abundance and monitors interactions and ion and metabolite exchanges with female cells in rice.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
plasma membranereceptor-like kinasetransportersquantitative proteomicsitraqpollen-pistil interactionricehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002855ministry of science and technology of the people's republic of china2012cb9105042013cb945101wang tai issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

