BACKGROUND
taxonomic annotation of reads is an important problem in metagenomic analysis. existing annotation tools, which rely on the approach of aligning each read to the taxonomic structure, are unable to annotate many reads efficiently and accurately as reads  are short and most of them come from unknown genomes. previous work has suggested assembling the reads to make longer contigs before annotation. more reads/contigs can be annotated as a longer contig  can be aligned to a taxon even if it is from an unknown species as long as it contains a conserved region of that taxon. unfortunately existing metagenomic assembly tools are not mature enough to produce long enough contigs. binning tries to group reads/contigs of similar species together. intuitively, reads in the same group  should be annotated to the same taxon and these reads altogether should cover a significant portion of the genome alleviating the problem of short contigs if the quality of binning is high. however, no existing work has tried to use binning results to help solve the annotation problem. this work explores this direction.


RESULTS
in this paper, we describe metacluster-ta, an assembly-assisted binning-based annotation tool which relies on an innovative idea of annotating binned reads instead of aligning each read or contig to the taxonomic structure separately. we propose the novel concept of the 'virtual contig'  to represent a set of reads and then represent each cluster as a set of 'virtual contigs'  for annotation. metacluster-ta can outperform widely-used megan <dig> and can annotate  more reads since the virtual contigs are much longer;  more accurately since each cluster of long virtual contigs contains global information of the sampled genome which tends to be more accurate than short reads or assembled contigs which contain only local information of the genome; and  more efficiently since there are much fewer long virtual contigs to align than short reads. metacluster-ta outperforms metacluster  <dig>  as a binning tool since binning itself can be more sensitive and precise given long virtual contigs and the binning results can be improved using the reference taxonomic database.


CONCLUSIONS
metacluster-ta can outperform widely-used megan <dig> and can annotate more reads with higher accuracy and higher efficiency. it also outperforms metacluster  <dig>  as a binning tool.

issue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2014

