BACKGROUND
hybrid vigor is highly valued in the agricultural industry. male sterility is an important trait for crop breeding. pollen development is under strict control of both gametophytic and sporophytic factors, and defects in this process can result in male sterility. both in the dicot arabidopsis and in the moncot rice, proper timing of programmed cell death  in the tapetum ensures pollen development. dynamic ros levels have been reported to control tapetal pcd, and thus pollen development, in arabidopsis and rice. however, it was unclear whether it is evolutionarily conserved, as only those two distantly related species were studied.


RESULTS
here, we performed histological analyses of anther development of two economically important dicot species, tobacco and tomato. we identified the same ros amplitude during anther development in these two species and found that dynamic ros levels correlate with the initiation and progression of tapetal pcd. we further showed that manipulating ros levels during anther development severely impaired pollen development, resulting in partial male sterility. finally, real-time quantitative pcr showed that several tobacco and tomato rbohs, encoding nadph oxidases, are preferentially expressed in anthers.


CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrated evolutionarily conserved ros amplitude during anther development by examining two commercially important crop species in the solanaceae. manipulating ros amplitude through genetic interference of rbohs therefore may provide a practical way to generate male sterile plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
male sterilitypollenanther developmenttapetumroshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007129natural science foundation of shandong provincezr2014cm027li sha http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31471304zhang yan issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

