BACKGROUND
genomic imprinting is an epigenetic mechanism that can lead to differential gene expression depending on the parent-of-origin of a received allele. while most studies on imprinting address its underlying molecular mechanisms or attempt at discovering genomic regions that might be subject to imprinting, few have focused on the amount of phenotypic variation contributed by such epigenetic process. in this report, we give a brief review of a one-locus imprinting model in a quantitative genetics framework, and provide a decomposition of the genetic variance according to this model. analytical deductions from the proposed imprinting model indicated a non-negligible contribution of imprinting to genetic variation of complex traits. also, we performed a whole-genome scan analysis on mouse body mass index  aiming at revealing potential consequences when existing imprinting effects are ignored in genetic analysis.


RESULTS
 <dig>  snp markers were used to perform a whole-genome single marker regression on mouse bmi using an additive and an imprinting model. markers significant for imprinting indicated that bmi is subject to imprinting. marked variance changed from  <dig>  ×10− <dig> to  <dig>  ×10− <dig> when imprinting was considered in the analysis, implying that one third of marked variance would be lost if existing imprinting effects were not accounted for. when both marker and pedigree information were used, estimated heritability increased from  <dig>  to  <dig>  when imprinting was considered.


CONCLUSIONS
when a complex trait is subject to imprinting, using an additive model that ignores this phenomenon may result in an underestimate of additive variability, potentially leading to wrong inferences about the underlying genetic architecture of that trait. this could be a possible factor explaining part of the missing heritability commonly observed in genome-wide association studies .

keywords
epigeneticsgenomic imprintinggenome-wide association studiesmissing heritabilitymouse body mass indexissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

