BACKGROUND
unconventional natural gas  extraction  is ongoing in  <dig> north american shale basins , with ~ <dig> wells found within the fayetteville shale . if the chemical signature of fracking is detectable in streams, it can be employed to bookmark potential impacts. we evaluated benthic biofilm community composition as a proxy for stream chemistry so as to segregate anthropogenic signatures in eight arkansas river catchments. in doing so, we tested the hypothesis that fracking characteristics in study streams are statistically distinguishable from those produced by agriculture or urbanization.


RESULTS
four tributary catchments had ung-wells significantly more dense and near to our sampling sites and were grouped as ‘potentially-impacted catchment zones’ . four others were characterized by significantly larger forested area with greater slope and elevation but reduced pasture, and were classified as ‘minimally-impacted’ . overall,  <dig> bacterial phyla/ <dig> classes were identified, with  <dig> phyla  and  <dig> classes  across all samples. picz-sites were ecologically more variable than micz-sites, with significantly greater nutrient levels , and elevated cyanobacteria as bioindicators that tracked these conditions. picz-sites also exhibited elevated conductance  and depressed salt-intolerant spartobacteria, suggesting the presence of brine as a fracking effect. biofilm communities at picz-sites were significantly less variable than those at micz-sites.


CONCLUSIONS
study streams differed by group according to morphology, land use, and water chemistry but not in biofilm community structure. those at picz-sites covaried according to anthropogenic impact, and were qualitatively similar to communities found at sites disturbed by fracking. the hypothesis that fracking signatures in study streams are distinguishable from those produced by other anthropogenic effects was statistically rejected. instead, alterations in biofilm community composition, as induced by fracking, may be less specific than initially predicted, and thus more easily confounded by agriculture and urbanization effects . study streams must be carefully categorized with regard to the magnitude and extent of anthropogenic impacts. they must also be segregated with statistical confidence  before fracking impacts are monitored.

keywords
16s ribosomal rnaanthropogenic impactsbioindicatorsfayetteville shalegroundwatermicrobiomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

