BACKGROUND
campylobacter is a major cause of human disease worldwide and poultry are identified as a significant source of this pathogen. most disease in humans is associated with the consumption of contaminated poultry or cross-contamination with other foods. the primary drugs of choice for treatment of human campylobacteriosis include erythromycin and ciprofloxacin. in this study, we investigated the prevalence of resistance to erythromycin and ciprofloxacin in campylobacter isolates recovered from turkey carcasses at two processing plants in the upper midwest us. further analysis of a subset of isolates was carried out to assess resistance and genotype profiles.


RESULTS
campylobacter isolates from plant a  and plant b  were tested for susceptibility to ciprofloxacin and erythromycin using agar dilution. c. coli were more frequently resistant than c. jejuni in both plants, including resistance to ciprofloxacin . erythromycin resistance was low among c. jejuni  compared to c. coli . one hundred resistant and susceptible isolates were selected for additional antimicrobial susceptibility testing, restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis of the flaa gene , and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis . fla-pfge types obtained  were associated with a specific plant with the exception of one type that was isolated from both plants. c. coli isolates  were grouped into  <dig> types, while c. jejuni isolates  were grouped into  <dig> types. most isolates with identical fla-pfge patterns shared identical or very similar antimicrobial resistance profiles. pfge alone and composite analysis using fla-pfge with resistance profiles separated c. jejuni and c. coli into distinct groups.


CONCLUSIONS
ciprofloxacin and erythromycin resistance in campylobacter recovered from processed turkey occurred more frequently among c. coli than c. jejuni. fla-pfge types were associated with a particular species, antimicrobial resistance profiles, and a specific plant. molecular subtyping in this study provided more information about the relationships among antimicrobial-resistant campylobacter at the processing level.

