BACKGROUND
insulin-like growth factor i  is one important family of growth factors, which plays key role in intestinal growth, regeneration, and damage repair. however, the low natural abundance of igf-i limits its research opportunities and practical application in the fields of medicine and animal husbandry. in this study, a tandem repeat strategy was used to express three copies of the same pigf-i <dig> protein in l. lactis. the activity of recombinant pigf-i <dig>  was further examined by a mouse model of dextran sulfate sodium –induced colitis. in addition, the potential of recombinant l. lactis expressing pigf-i <dig> to reduce inflammatory disease was evaluated.


RESULTS
pigf-i <dig> could be expressed in l. lactis by the detection of sds–page and western blot. experimental colitis was induced in balb/c mice by administration of  <dig> % dss in drinking water, and the clinical symptoms were observed in dss-treated mice. oral administration of recombinant l. lactis expressing pigf-i <dig> improved the colonic architecture, and significantly reduced the increase of colonic damage score . furthermore, recombinant l. lactis expressing pigf-i <dig> treatment significantly reduced serum dao activity and colonic mpo level, and elevated colonic occludin level compared to the dss group .


CONCLUSIONS
the pigf-i <dig> expressed in l. lactis has good biological activity, and oral administration of recombinant l. lactis expressing pigf-i <dig> attenuated the symptoms and development of dss-induced colitis in mice. these suggested that l. lactis could be a potential host bacterium for production and delivery of igf-i against intestinal diseases.

keywords
insulin-like growth factor ilactococcus lactiscolitisintestinal repairmodern agro-industry technology research system, chinacars-36xu ziwei national key technology r & d program, china2012bad39b03-04xu ziwei natural science foundation of zhejiang province, chinalq12c17004liu shujie special scientific research fund of public welfare profession , china201403047deng bo issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

