BACKGROUND
dictyostelium discoideum is one of the most famous model organisms for studying motile processes like cell movement, organelle transport, cytokinesis, and endocytosis. members of the myosin superfamily, that move on actin filaments and power many of these tasks, are tripartite proteins consisting of a conserved catalytic domain followed by the neck region consisting of a different number of so-called iq motifs for binding of light chains. the tails contain functional motifs that are responsible for the accomplishment of the different tasks in the cell. unicellular organisms like yeasts contain three to five myosins while vertebrates express over  <dig> different myosin genes. recently, the question has been raised how many myosins a simple multicellular organism like dictyostelium would need to accomplish all the different motility-related tasks.


RESULTS
the analysis of the dictyostelium genome revealed thirteen myosins of which three have not been described before. the phylogenetic analysis of the motor domains of the new myosins placed myo1f to the class-i myosins and myo5a to the class-v myosins. the third new myosin, an orphan myosin, has been named myog. it contains an n-terminal extension of over  <dig> residues, and a tail consisting of four iq motifs and two myth4/ferm  tandem domains that are separated by a long region containing an sh <dig>  domain. in contrast to previous analyses, an extensive comparison with  <dig> class-vii, class-x, class-xv, and class-xxii myosins now showed that myoi does not group into any of these classes and should not be used as a model for class-vii myosins.

the search for calmodulin related proteins revealed two further potential myosin light chains. one is a close homolog of the two ef-hand motifs containing mlcb, and the other, cbp <dig>  phylogenetically groups to the elc/rlc/calmodulin  branch of the tree.


CONCLUSIONS
dictyostelium contains thirteen myosins together with 6– <dig> mlcs  to assist in a variety of actin-based processes in the cell. although they are homologous to myosins of higher eukaryotes, the myosins of dictyostelium should be considered with care as models for specific functions of vertebrate myosins.

