BACKGROUND
knowing the three-dimensional  structure of the chromatin is important for obtaining a complete picture of the regulatory landscape. changes in the 3d structure have been implicated in diseases. while there exist approaches that attempt to predict the long-range chromatin interactions, they focus only on interactions between specific genomic regions — the promoters and enhancers, neglecting other possibilities, for instance, the so-called structural interactions involving intervening chromatin.


RESULTS
we present a method that can be trained on 5c data using the genetic sequence of the candidate loci to predict potential genome-wide interaction partners of a particular locus of interest. we have built locus-specific support vector machine -based predictors using the oligomer distance histograms  representation. the method shows good performance with a mean test auc  curve) of  <dig>  or higher for various regions across cell lines gm <dig>  k <dig> and hela-s <dig>  in cases where any locus did not have sufficient candidate interaction partners for model training, we employed multitask learning to share knowledge between models of different loci. in this scenario, across the three cell lines, the method attained an average performance increase of  <dig>  in the auc. performance evaluation of the models trained on 5c data regarding prediction on an independent high-resolution hi-c dataset  shows  <dig>  auc, on average. additionally, we have developed new, intuitive visualization methods that enable interpretation of sequence signals that contributed towards prediction of locus-specific interaction partners. the analysis of these sequence signals suggests a potential general role of short tandem repeat sequences in genome organization.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated how our approach can 1) provide insights into sequence features of locus-specific interaction partners, and 2) also identify their cell-line specificity. that our models deem short tandem repeat sequences as discriminative for prediction of potential interaction partners, suggests that they could play a larger role in genome organization. thus, our approach can  be beneficial to broadly understand, at the sequence-level, chromatin interactions and higher-order structures like  topologically associating domains ;  study regions omitted from existing prediction approaches using various information sources ; and  improve methods that predict the 3d structure of the chromatin.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
long-range interactions predictionsupport vector machinesmultitask learninghi-cvisualizationsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

