BACKGROUND
despite the recent identification of several prognostic gene signatures, the lack of common genes among experimental cohorts has posed a considerable challenge in uncovering the molecular basis underlying hepatocellular carcinoma  recurrence for application in clinical purposes. to overcome the limitations of individual gene-based analysis, we applied a pathway-based approach for analysis of hcc recurrence.


RESULTS
by implementing a permutation-based semi-supervised principal component analysis algorithm using the optimal principal component, we selected sixty-four pathways associated with hepatitis b virus -positive hcc recurrence , from our microarray dataset composed of  <dig> hbv-positive hccs. in relation to the public hbv- and public hepatitis c virus -positive hcc datasets, we detected  <dig>  and  <dig>  common recurrence-associated pathways, respectively. however, overlap of recurrence-associated genes between datasets was rare, further supporting the utility of the pathway-based approach for recurrence analysis between different hcc datasets. non-supervised clustering of the  <dig> recurrence-associated pathways facilitated the classification of hcc patients into high- and low-risk subgroups, based on risk of recurrence . the pathways identified were additionally successfully applied to discriminate subgroups depending on recurrence risk within the public hcc datasets. through multivariate analysis, these recurrence-associated pathways were identified as an independent prognostic factor  along with tumor number, tumor size and edmondson’s grade. moreover, the pathway-based approach had a clinical advantage in terms of discriminating the high-risk subgroup  among patients  with small hcc .


CONCLUSIONS
using pathway-based analysis, we successfully identified the pathways involved in recurrence of hbv-positive hcc that may be effectively used as prognostic markers.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
recurrence-associated pathwayhepatocellular carcinomaprincipal component analysisprognosisrisksmall tumorissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

