BACKGROUND
the drug/metabolite transporter superfamily comprises a diversity of protein domain families with multiple functions including transport of nucleotide sugars. drug/metabolite transporter domains are contained in both solute carrier families  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> proteins as well as in acyl-malonyl condensing enzyme proteins. in this paper, we present an evolutionary analysis of nucleotide sugar transporters in relation to the entire superfamily of drug/metabolite transporters that considers crucial intra-protein duplication events that have shaped the transporters. we use a method that combines the strengths of hidden markov models and maximum likelihood to find relationships between drug/metabolite transporter families, and branches within families.


RESULTS
we present evidence that the triose-phosphate transporters, domain unknown function  <dig>  uracil-diphosphate glucose-n-acetylglucosamine, and nucleotide sugar transporter families have evolved from a domain duplication event before the radiation of viridiplantae in the eama family . we identify previously unknown branches in the solute carrier  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> protein families that emerged simultaneously as key physiological developments after the radiation of viridiplantae, including the "35c/e" branch of eama, which formed in the lineage of t. adhaerens . we identify a second cluster of dmts, called the domain unknown function  <dig> cluster, which has non-cytosolic n- and c-termini, and thus appears to have been formed from a different domain duplication event. we identify a previously uncharacterized motif, g-x-g, which is overrepresented in the fifth transmembrane helix of c-terminal domains. we present evidence that the family called fatty acid elongases are homologous to transporters, not enzymes as had previously been thought.


CONCLUSIONS
the nucleotide sugar transporters families were formed through differentiation of the gene cluster eama  before viridiplantae, showing for the first time the significance of eama.

slc30slc35slc39drug/metabolite transportersnucleotide sugar transporterseamaemremulti drug resistance proteindual-topology proteinstransmembrane helix

