BACKGROUND
bombyx mori was domesticated from the chinese wild silkworm, bombyx mandarina. wild and domestic silkworms are good models in which to investigate genes related to silk protein synthesis that may be differentially expressed in silk glands, because their silk productions are very different. here we used the mrna deep sequencing  approach to identify the differentially expressed genes  in the transcriptomes of the median/posterior silk glands of two domestic and two wild silkworms.


RESULTS
the results indicated that about 58% of the total genes were expressed  ≥ 1) in each silkworm. comparisons of the domestic and wild silkworm transcriptomes revealed  <dig> degs, of which  <dig> were up-regulated in the domestic silkworms compared with in the wild silkworms, and the other  <dig> were up-regulated in the wild silkworms compared with in the domestic silkworms. quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction  was performed for  <dig> randomly selected degs in domestic versus wild silkworms. the qpcr results were mostly consistent with the expression levels determined from the rna-seq data. based on a gene ontology  enrichment analysis and manual annotation, five of the up-regulated degs in the wild silkworms were predicted to be involved in immune response, and seven of the up-regulated degs were related to the go term “oxidoreductase activity”, which is associated with antioxidant systems. in the domestic silkworms, the up-regulated degs were related mainly to tissue development, secretion of proteins and metabolism.


CONCLUSIONS
the up-regulated degs in the two domestic silkworms may be involved mainly in the highly efficient biosynthesis and secretion of silk proteins, while the up-regulated degs in the two wild silkworms may play more important roles in tolerance to pathogens and environment adaptation. our results provide a foundation for understanding the molecular mechanisms of the silk production difference between domestic and wild silkworms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bombyx moridomesticationsilk glandrna-seqdifferentially expressed geneissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

