BACKGROUND
independent transcriptome profile analyses of mirnas or mrnas under conditions of cadmium  stress have been widely reported in plants. however, a combined analysis of srna sequencing expression data with mirna target expression data to infer the relative activities of mirnas that regulate gene expression changes resulting from cd stress has not been reported in rice. to elucidate the roles played by mirnas in the regulation of changes in gene expression in response to cd stress in rice , we simultaneously characterized changes in the mirna and mrna profiles following treatment with cd.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> mirnas and  <dig>  mrnas were identified to be differentially expressed under cd stress, and the changes in the gene expression profile in the shoot were distinct from those in the root. at the mirna level,  <dig> known mirnas belonging to  <dig> families, and  <dig> known mirnas in  <dig> families were identified to be differentially expressed in the root and shoot, respectively. in addition, we identified eight new mirna candidates from the root and five from the shoot that were differentially expressed in response to cd treatment. for the mrnas, we identified  <dig>  genes in the root and  <dig> genes in the shoot that were up-regulated, while  <dig> and  <dig> genes were down-regulated in the root and shoot, respectively. go and kegg enrichment analyses showed that genes encoding secondary, metabolite synthases, signaling molecules, and abc transporters were significantly enriched in the root, while only ribosomal protein and carotenoid biosynthesis genes were significantly enriched in the shoot. then  <dig> known mirna-mrna interaction pairs and six new candidate ones, that showed the opposite expression patterns, were identified by aligning our two datasets against online databases and by using the uea srna toolkit respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first to use high throughput dna sequencing to simultaneously detect changes in mirna and mrna expression patterns in the root and shoot in response to cd treatment. these integrated high-throughput expression data provide a valuable resource to examine global genome expression changes in response to cd treatment and how these are regulated by mirnas.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cd stressmirnamrnahigh-throughput deep sequencingriceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

