BACKGROUND
the identification of genetic variation underlying desired phenotypes is one of the main challenges of current livestock genetic research. high-throughput transcriptome sequencing  offers new opportunities for the detection of transcriptome variants  in different tissues and species. in this study, we used rna-seq on milk sheep somatic cells  with the goal of characterizing the genetic variation within the coding regions of the milk transcriptome in churra and assaf sheep, two common dairy sheep breeds farmed in spain.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  variants were detected in the mscs transcriptome of the eight ewes analyzed. among them, a total of  <dig>  variants were detected in the regions harboring quantitative trait loci  for milk yield, protein percentage and fat percentage, of which  <dig> % were novel variants. among the total variants detected,  <dig>  and  <dig>   were predicted to produce high or moderate impact changes in the corresponding transcriptional unit, respectively. in the functional enrichment analysis of the genes positioned within selected qtl regions harboring novel relevant functional variants , the kegg pathway with the highest enrichment was “protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum”. additionally, a total of  <dig> and  <dig>  variants were identified in the genes encoding principal milk proteins and molecules involved in the lipid metabolism, respectively. of these variants,  <dig> mutations were found to have putative relevant effects on the encoded proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
we present herein the first transcriptomic approach aimed at identifying genetic variants of the genes expressed in the lactating mammary gland of sheep. through the transcriptome analysis of variability within regions harboring qtl for milk yield, protein percentage and fat percentage, we have found several pathways and genes that harbor mutations that could affect dairy production traits. moreover, remarkable variants were also found in candidate genes coding for major milk proteins and proteins related to milk fat metabolism. several of the snps found in this study could be included as suitable markers in genotyping platforms or custom snp arrays to perform association analyses in commercial populations and apply genomic selection protocols in the dairy production industry.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dairy sheepmilk somatic cellsrna-seqtranscriptome variantshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007136secretaría de estado de investigación, desarrollo e innovaciónagl2015-66035-rissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

