BACKGROUND
the treatment of leishmaniasis with pentavalent antimonials is problematic because of their toxicity. investigations of potentially active molecules are important to discover less toxic drugs that are viable economic alternatives for the treatment of leishmaniasis. thiosemicarbazones are a group of molecules that are known for their wide versatility and biological activity. in the present study, we examined the antileishmania activity, mechanism of action, and biochemical alterations produced by a novel molecule, 4-nitrobenzaldehyde thiosemicarbazone , derived from s-limonene against leishmania amazonensis.


RESULTS
bzts inhibited the growth of the promastigote and axenic amastigote forms, with an ic <dig> of  <dig>  and  <dig>  μm, respectively. intracellular amastigotes were inhibited by the compound with an ic <dig> of  <dig>  μm. bzts also had a cc <dig> of  <dig>  μm for the macrophage strain j774a <dig>  bzts altered the shape, size, and ultrastructure of the parasites, including damage to mitochondria, reflected by extensive swelling and disorganization of the inner mitochondrial membrane, intense cytoplasmic vacuolization, and the presence of concentric membrane structures inside the organelle. cytoplasmic lipid bodies, vesicles inside vacuoles in the flagellar pocket, and enlargement were also observed. bzts did not induce alterations in the plasma membrane or increase annexin-v fluorescence intensity, indicating no phosphatidylserine exposure. however, it induced the production of mitochondrial superoxide anion radicals.


CONCLUSIONS
the present results indicate that bzts induced dramatic effects on the ultrastructure of l. amazonensis, which might be associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative damage, leading to parasite death.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
antileishmanial activitybenzaldehyde thiosemicarbazoneleishmania amazonensisultrastructural alterationsmitochondria damageelectron microscopycellular disorganizationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

