BACKGROUND
domestic cats  have a reputation for being rather unpredictable in their dietary choices. while their appetite for protein or savory flavors is consistent with their nutritional needs, their preference among protein-sufficient dietary options may relate to differences in the response to other flavor characteristics. studies of domestic cat taste perception are limited, in part, due to the lack of receptor sequence information. several studies have described the phylogenetic relationship of specific cat taste receptor sequences as compared with other carnivores. for example, domestic cats are obligate carnivores and their receptor tas1r <dig>  associated with the human perception of sweet, is present only as a pseudogene. similarly, the cat perception of bitter may differ from that of other mammals due to variations in their repertoire of bitter receptor  genes. this report includes the first functional characterization of domestic cat taste receptors.


RESULTS
we functionally expressed two uncharacterized domestic sequences tas2r <dig> and tas2r <dig> and deorphanized the receptors using a cellular functional assay. statistical significance was determined using an unpaired, two-tailed t-test. the cat sequence for tas2r <dig> contains  <dig> major amino acid residues known to confer the taster phenotype , which is associated with sensitivity to the bitter compounds prop and ptc. however, in contrast to human tas2r <dig>  cat tas2r <dig> is activated by ptc but not by prop. furthermore, like its human counterpart, cat tas2r <dig> is activated by aloin and denatonium, but differs from the human tas2r <dig> by insensitivity to saccharin. the responses of both cat receptors to the bitter ligands were concentration-dependent and were inhibited by the human bitter blocker probenecid.


CONCLUSIONS
these data demonstrate that the response profiles of the cat bitter receptors tas2r <dig> and tas2r <dig> are distinct from those of their orthologous human receptors. results with cat tas2r <dig> also demonstrate that additional residues beyond those classically associated with prop sensitivity in humans influence the sensitivity to prop and ptc. functional studies of the human bitter receptor family are being applied to the development of food and medicinal products with more appealing flavor profiles. our work lays the foundation for similar work applied to felines.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bitterflavorfelinedomestic cattastetas2r38tas2r43issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

