BACKGROUND
mammalian sex-chromosomes originated from a pair of autosomes. a step-wise cessation of recombination is necessary for the proper maintenance of sex-determination and, consequently, generates a four strata structure on the x chromosome. each stratum shows a specific per-site nucleotide sequence difference  between the x and y chromosomes, depending on the time of recombination arrest. stratum  <dig> covers the distal half of the human x chromosome short arm and the p-distance of the stratum is ~10%, on average. however, a 100-kb region, which includes kalx and vcx, in the middle of stratum  <dig> shows a significantly lower p-distance , suggesting frequent sequence exchanges or gene conversions between the x and y chromosomes in humans. to examine the evolutionary mechanism for this low p-distance region, sequences of a corresponding region including kalx/y from seven species of non-human primates were analyzed.


RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis of this low p-distance region in humans and non-human primate species revealed that gene conversion like events have taken place at least ten times after the divergence of new world monkeys and catarrhini . a kaly-converted kalx allele in white-handed gibbons also suggests a possible recent gene conversion between the x and y chromosomes. in these primate sequences, the proximal boundary of this low p-distance region is located in a line element shared between the x and y chromosomes, suggesting the involvement of this element in frequent gene conversions. together with a palindrome on the y chromosome, a segmental palindrome structure on the x chromosome at the distal boundary near vcx, in humans and chimpanzees, may mediate frequent sequence exchanges between x and y chromosomes.


CONCLUSIONS
gene conversion events between the x and y homologous regions have been suggested, mainly in humans. here, we found frequent gene conversions in the evolutionary course of primates. an insertion of a line element at the proximal end of the region may be a cause for these frequent conversions. this gene conversion in humans may also be one of the genetic causes of kallmann syndrome.

