BACKGROUND
assays that are capable of detecting genome-wide chromatin interactions have produced massive amount of data and led to great understanding of the chromosomal three-dimensional  structure. as technology becomes more sophisticated, higher-and-higher resolution data are being produced, going from the initial  <dig> megabases  resolution to the current  <dig> kilobases  or even  <dig> kb resolution. the availability of genome-wide interaction data necessitates development of analytical methods to recover the underlying 3d spatial chromatin structure, but challenges abound. most of the methods were proposed for analyzing data at low resolution . their behaviors are thus unknown for higher resolution data. for such data, one of the key features is the high proportion of “0” contact counts among all available data, in other words, the excess of zeros.


RESULTS
to address the issue of excess of zeros, in this paper, we propose a truncated random effect expression  method that can handle data at various resolutions. we then assess the performance of trex and a number of leading existing methods for recovering the underlying chromatin 3d structure. this was accomplished by creating in-silico data to mimic multiple levels of resolution and submit the methods to a “stress test”. finally, we applied trex and the comparison methods to a hi-c dataset for which fish measurements are available to evaluate estimation accuracy.


CONCLUSIONS
the proposed trex method achieves consistently good performance in all  <dig> simulated settings considered. it is not only robust to resolution level and underlying parameters, but also insensitive to model misspecification. this conclusion is based on observations made in terms of 3d structure estimation accuracy and preservation of topologically associated domains. application of the methods to the human lymphoblastoid cell line data on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> further substantiates the superior performance of trex: the constructed 3d structure from trex is consistent with the fish measurements, and the corresponding distances predicted by trex have higher correlation with the fish measurements than any of the comparison methods.

software
an open-source r-package is available at http://www.stat.osu.edu/~statgen/software/trex.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
data resolutionexcess of zeroscorrelated read countsnational institute of general medical sciencesr01gm114142lin shili national science foundationdms-1042946lin shili national science foundationdms-1220772lin shili issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

