BACKGROUND
the specific role of the two cerebral hemispheres in processing idiomatic language is highly debated. while some studies show the involvement of the left inferior frontal gyrus , other data support the crucial role of right-hemispheric regions, and particularly of the middle/superior temporal area. time-course and neural bases of literal vs. idiomatic language processing were compared. fifteen volunteers silently read  <dig> idiomatic and literal italian sentences and decided whether they were semantically related or unrelated to a following target word, while their eegs were recorded from  <dig> electrodes. word length, abstractness and frequency of use, sentence comprehensibility, familiarity and cloze probability were matched across classes.


RESULTS
participants responded more quickly to literal than to idiomatic sentences, probably indicating a difference in task difficulty. occipito/temporal n <dig> component had a greater amplitude in response to idioms between 250- <dig> ms. related swloreta source reconstruction revealed a difference in the activation of the left fusiform gyrus  and medial frontal gyri for the contrast idiomatic-minus-literal. centroparietal n <dig> was much larger to idiomatic than to literal phrases . the intra-cortical generators of this effect included the left and right fg, the left cingulate gyrus, the right limbic area, the right mtg  and the left middle frontal gyrus . finally, an anterior late positivity  was larger to idiomatic than literal phrases. erps also showed a larger right centro-parietal n <dig> to associated than non-associated targets , and a greater right frontal p <dig> to idiomatic than literal associated targets.


CONCLUSIONS
the data indicate bilateral involvement of both hemispheres in idiom comprehension, including the right mtg after  <dig> ms and the right medial frontal gyrus in the time windows 270- <dig> and 500- <dig> ms. in addition, the activation of left and right limbic regions  suggests that they have a role in the emotional connotation of colourful idiomatic language. the data support the view that there is direct access to the idiomatic meaning of figurative language, not dependent on the suppression of its literal meaning, for which the lifg was previously thought to be responsible.

