BACKGROUND
the completion of whole-genome sequencing for corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis strain  <dig> has contributed to major advances in research aimed at understanding the biology of this microorganism. this bacterium causes significant loss to goat and sheep farmers because it is the causal agent of the infectious disease caseous lymphadenitis, which may lead to outcomes ranging from skin injury to animal death. in the current study, we simulated the conditions experienced by the bacteria during host infection. by sequencing transcripts using the solidtm  <dig> plus platform, we identified new targets expected to potentiate the survival and replication of the pathogen in adverse environments. these results may also identify possible candidates useful for the development of vaccines, diagnostic kits or therapies aimed at the reduction of losses in agribusiness.


RESULTS
under the  <dig> simulated conditions ,  <dig> differentially expressed genes exhibiting at least a 2-fold change in expression levels were identified. important genes to the infection process were induced, such as those involved in virulence, defence against oxidative stress, adhesion and regulation, and many genes encoded hypothetical proteins, indicating that further investigation of the bacterium is necessary. the data will contribute to a better understanding of the biology of c. pseudotuberculosis and to studies investigating strategies to control the disease.


CONCLUSIONS
despite the veterinary importance of c. pseudotuberculosis, the bacterium is poorly characterised; therefore, effective treatments for caseous lymphadenitis have been difficult to establish. through the use of rnaseq, these results provide a better biological understanding of this bacterium, shed light on the most likely survival mechanisms used by this microorganism in adverse environments and identify candidates that may help reduce or even eradicate the problems caused by this disease.

differential gene expressiontranscriptsrnaseqsolid™stressc. pseudotuberculosis

