BACKGROUND
chinese bayberry  is an important subtropical evergreen fruit tree in southern china. generally dioecious, the female plants are cultivated for fruit and have been studied extensively, but male plants have received very little attention. knowledge of males may have a major impact on conservation and genetic improvement as well as on breeding. using  <dig> polymorphic ssrs, we genotyped 213 m. rubra individuals  and compared the difference in genetic diversity between the female and the male populations.


RESULTS
neighbour-joining cluster analysis separated m. rubra from three related species, and the male from female populations within m. rubra. by structure analysis, 178 m. rubra accessions were assigned to two subpopulations: male dominated  and female dominated . the well-known cultivars ‘biqi’ and ‘dongkui’, and the landraces ‘fenhong’ are derived from three different gene pools. female population had a slightly higher values of genetic diversity parameters  than the male population, but not significantly different. the ssr loci zju <dig> and zju <dig> showed an empirical fst value of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, which are significantly above the  <dig> % confidence level, indicating that they are outlier loci related to sex separation.


CONCLUSIONS
the male and female populations of chinese bayberry have similar genetic diversity in terms of average number of alleles and level of heterozygosity, but were clearly separated by genetic structure analysis due to two markers associated with sex type, zju <dig> and zju <dig>  zhejiang province china could be the centre of diversity of m. rubra in china, with wide genetic diversity coverage; and the two representative cultivars ‘biqi’ and ‘dongkui’, and one landrace ‘fenhong’ in three female subpopulations. this research provides genetic information on male and female chinese bayberry and will act as a reference for breeding programs.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

