BACKGROUND
we have developed a rice-based oral cholera vaccine named mucorice-ctb  by using an agrobacterium tumefaciens–mediated co-transformation system. to assess the genome-wide effects of this system on the rice genome, we compared the genomes of three selection marker–free mucorice-ctb lines with those of two wild-type rice lines . mutation profiles of the transgenic and wild-type genomes were examined by next-generation sequencing .


RESULTS
using paired-end short-read sequencing, a total of more than  <dig> million reads for each line were obtained and mapped onto the rice reference genome. the number and distribution of variants were similar in all five lines: the numbers of line-specific variants ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> and corresponding mutation rates ranged from  <dig>  × 10− <dig> per site to  <dig>  × 10− <dig> per site. the frequency of guanine-to-thymine and cytosine-to-adenine transversions was higher in mucorice-ctb lines than in wt lines. the transition-to-transversion ratio was  <dig>  in mucorice-ctb lines and  <dig>  in wt lines. analysis of variant-sharing profiles showed that the variants common to all five lines were the most abundant, and the numbers of line-specific variant for all lines were similar. the numbers of non-synonymous amino acid substitutions in mucorice-ctb lines  were slightly higher than those in wt lines , whereas the numbers of frame shifts were similar in all five lines.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that mucorice-ctb and wt are almost identical at the genomic level and that genome-wide effects caused by the agrobacterium-mediated transformation system for marker-free mucorice-ctb lines were slight. the comparative whole-genome analyses between mucorice-ctb and wt lines using ngs provides a reliable estimate of genome-wide differences. a similar approach may be applicable to other transgenic rice plants generated by using this agrobacterium-mediated transformation system.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
plant-made pharmaceuticalsoral vaccinewhole-genome resequencingtransgenic ricemucorice-ctbvariant comparisonissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

