BACKGROUND
inclined or slippery surfaces and various other types of obstacles are common demands in our environment. dogs with impaired locomotion might have difficulties to manage rough terrain. gait analyses using force plates or pressure plates, which are well established to characterize limb loads in human medicine as well as in animals, are mostly limited to level surfaces. therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the effect of cross-slope walking in ten healthy labrador retrievers using a pressure plate walkway system. the dogs walked over the pressure plate on a level surface, with a lateral elevation angle of 10°  or 15°  until five valid trials were achieved. three measurements were obtained at weekly intervals. peak vertical force , vertical impulse , step length, and velocity were determined.


RESULTS
compared to level walking , cross-slope walking was associated with a significant decrease in grf of the up-slope  hindlimb, which was compensated for by the down-slope  forelimb. the other diagonal limb pair showed less pronounced effects during cs <dig>  but in cs <dig> more weight was shifted onto the ds hindlimb during the first two measurements, thus reducing weight on the us forelimb . the effect diminished from trial to trial, with grf values approaching lw standards finally. the ifz was a more sensitive measure than the pfz. the step length of the ds forelimb was significantly decreased in both cross-slope conditions, while the step length of the us forelimb only decreased during cs <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
the dogs adapted their gait pattern and step length to compensate for the discrepancy in apparent leg length caused by the cross-slope. the results suggest that cross-slope walking requires functional musculoskeletal adaptations that may be difficult for animals with impaired locomotion. further, this knowledge might be of clinical impact for early diagnosis of neurological disorders, mild lameness and proprioceptive deficits.

keywords
cross-slopedoggait analysisground reaction forcespressure plateissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

