BACKGROUND
with the growing demand for fossil fuels and the severe energy crisis, lignocellulose is widely regarded as a promising cost-effective renewable resource for ethanol production, and the use of lignocellulose residues as raw material is remarkable. polar organisms have important value in scientific research and development for their novelty, uniqueness and diversity.


RESULTS
in this study, a fungus aspergillus sydowii ms- <dig>  with the potential for lignocellulose degradation was screened out and isolated from an antarctic region. the growth profile of aspergillus sydowii ms- <dig> was measured, revealing that aspergillus sydowii ms- <dig> could utilize lignin as a sole carbon source. its ability to synthesize low-temperature lignin peroxidase  and manganese peroxidase  enzymes was verified, and the properties of these enzymes were also investigated. high-throughput sequencing was employed to identify and characterize the transcriptome of aspergillus sydowii ms- <dig>  carbohydrate-active enzymes -annotated genes in aspergillus sydowii ms- <dig> were compared with those in the brown-rot fungus representative species, postia placenta and penicillium decumbens. there were 701cazymes annotated in aspergillus sydowii ms- <dig>  including  <dig> cellulases and  <dig> feruloyl esterases related to lignocellulose-degradation. remarkably, one sequence annotated as laccase was obtained, which can degrade lignin. three peroxidase sequences sharing a similar structure with typical lignin peroxidase and manganese peroxidase were also found and annotated as haem-binding peroxidase, glutathione peroxidase and catalase-peroxidase.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, the fungus aspergillus sydowii ms- <dig> was isolated and shown to synthesize low-temperature lignin-degrading enzymes: lignin peroxidase  and manganese peroxidase . these findings provide useful information to improve our understanding of low-temperature lignocellulosic enzyme production by polar microorganisms and to facilitate research and applications of the novel antarctic aspergillus sydowii strain ms- <dig> as a potential lignocellulosic enzyme source.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
polar organismsaspergillus sydowiitranscriptomelignocellulose degradationlow temperature enzymelignin peroxidasemanganese peroxidasechinese national natural science foundationno: 41006102cong bailin basic scientific fund for national public research institutes of china  chinese polar environment comprehensive investigation & assessment programs chinare-01- <dig> and chinare-02-01cong bailin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

