BACKGROUND
congenital heart defect  account for 25% of all human congenital abnormalities. however, very few chd-causing genes have been identified so far. a promising approach for the identification of essential cardiac regulators whose mutations may be linked to human chd, is the molecular and genetic analysis of heart development. with the use of a triple retinoic acid competitive antagonist  we previously developed a mouse model of congenital heart defects , thymic abnormalities  and neural tube defects . d-tga  was the most prevalent cardiac defect observed . recently we were able to partially rescue this abnormal phenotype , by oral administration of folic acid . now we have performed a microarray analysis in our mouse models to discover genes/transcripts potentially implicated in the pathogenesis of this chd.


RESULTS
we analysed mouse embryos  treated with bms <dig> alone and with bms <dig> plus folic acid  by microarray and qrt-pcr. by selecting a fold change  ≥ ±  <dig> , we detected  <dig> genes that were differentially expressed in bms-treated embryos vs. untreated control embryos, while  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in bms-treated embryos whose mothers had also received fa supplementation vs. bms-treated embryos. on the basis of microarray and qrt-pcr results, we further analysed the hif1α gene. in fact hif1α is down-regulated in bms-treated embryos vs. untreated controls  and its expression level is increased in bms+fa-treated embryos compared to bms-treated embryos . immunofluorescence experiments confirmed the under-expression of hif1α protein in bms-treated embryos compared to untreated and bms+fa-treated embryos and, moreover, we demonstrated that at  <dig>  dpc, hif1α is mainly expressed in the embryo heart region.


CONCLUSIONS
we propose that hif1α down-regulation in response to blocking retinoic acid binding may contribute to the development of cardiac defects in mouse newborns. in line with our hypothesis, when hif1α expression level is restored , a decrement of chd is found. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report that links retinoic acid metabolism to hif1α regulation and the development of d-tga.

