BACKGROUND
superior kidding rate is an important economic trait in production of meat goat, and ovulation rate is the precondition of kidding rate. micrornas  play critical roles in almost all ovarian biological processes, including folliculogenesis, follicle development, follicle atresia, luteal development and regression. to find out the different ovarian activity and follicle recruitment with mirna-mediated posttranscriptional regulation, the small rnas expressed pattern in the ovarian tissues of multiple and uniparous anhui white goats during follicular phase was analyzed using solexa sequencing data.


RESULTS
 <dig> mirnas co-expressed,  <dig> and  <dig> mirnas specifically expressed in the ovaries of multiple and uniparous goats during follicular phase were identified. the  <dig> most highly expressed mirnas in the multiple library were also the highest expressed in the uniparous library, and there were no significantly different between each other. the highest specific expressed mirna in the multiple library was mir-29c, and the one in the uniparous library was mir- <dig>   <dig> novel mirnas were predicted in total. go annotation and kegg pathway analyses were implemented on target genes of all mirna in two libraries. rt-pcr was applied to detect the expression level of  <dig> randomly selected mirnas in multiple and uniparous hircine ovaries, and the results were consistent with the solexa sequencing data.


CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, the different expression of mirnas in the ovaries of multiple and uniparous goats during follicular phase were characterized and investigated using deep sequencing technology. the result will help to further understand the role of mirnas in kidding rate regulation and also may help to identify mirnas which could be potentially used to increase hircine ovulation rate and kidding rate in the future.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
micrornakidding ratesolexa sequencingovaryfollicular phasegoatissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

