BACKGROUND
corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis biovar ovis is a facultative intracellular pathogen, and the etiological agent of caseous lymphadenitis in small ruminants. during the infection process, the bacterium is subjected to several stress conditions, including nitrosative stress, which is caused by nitric oxide . in silico analysis of the genome of c. pseudotuberculosis ovis  <dig> predicted several genes that could influence the resistance of this pathogen to nitrosative stress. here, we applied high-throughput proteomics using high definition mass spectrometry to characterize the functional genome of c. pseudotuberculosis ovis  <dig> in the presence of no-donor diethylenetriamine/nitric oxide adduct , with the aim of identifying proteins involved in nitrosative stress resistance.


RESULTS
we characterized  <dig> proteins, representing approximately 41% of the predicted proteome of c. pseudotuberculosis ovis  <dig>  following exposure to nitrosative stress. in total,  <dig> proteins were exclusive to the proteome of deta/no-induced cells, and a further  <dig> proteins were differentially regulated between the deta/no and control conditions. an interactomic analysis of the differential proteome of c. pseudotuberculosis in response to nitrosative stress was also performed. our proteomic data set suggested the activation of both a general stress response and a specific nitrosative stress response, as well as changes in proteins involved in cellular metabolism, detoxification, transcriptional regulation, and dna synthesis and repair.


CONCLUSIONS
our proteomic analysis validated previously-determined in silico data for c. pseudotuberculosis ovis  <dig>  in addition, proteomic screening performed in the presence of no enabled the identification of a set of factors that can influence the resistance and survival of c. pseudotuberculosis during exposure to nitrosative stress.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
corynebacterium pseudotuberculosiscaseous lymphadenitisproteomicslabel-free proteomicsnitrosative stressnitric oxideissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

