BACKGROUND
metabolic stress associated with negative energy balance in high producing dairy cattle and obesity in women is a risk factor for decreased fertility. non-esterified fatty acids  are involved in this pathogenesis as they jeopardize oocyte and embryo development. growing evidence indicates that maternal metabolic disorders can disturb epigenetic programming, such as dna methylation, in the offspring. oocyte maturation and early embryo development coincide with methylation changes and both are sensitive to adverse environments. therefore, we investigated whether elevated nefa concentrations affect establishment and maintenance of dna methylation in oocytes and embryos, subsequently altering transcriptomic profiles and developmental competence of resultant blastocysts.


RESULTS
bovine oocytes and embryos were exposed to different nefa concentrations in separate experiments. in the first experiment, oocytes were matured in vitro for 24 h in medium containing: 1) physiological  concentrations of oleic , palmitic  and stearic  acid or 2) pathophysiological  concentrations of oa, pa and sa. in the second experiment, zygotes were cultivated in vitro for  <dig>  days under basal or high combi conditions. developmental competence was evaluated by assessing cleavage and blastocyst rate. overall gene expression and dna methylation of resultant blastocysts were analyzed using microarray. dna methylation data were re-evaluated by pyrosequencing. high combi-exposed oocytes and embryos displayed a lower competence to develop into blastocysts compared to basal-exposed counterparts  . high combi-exposed oocytes and embryos resulted in blastocysts with altered dna methylation and transcriptomic fingerprints, compared to basal-exposed counterparts. differences in gene expression and methylation were more pronounced after exposure during culture compared to maturation suggesting that zygotes are more susceptible to adverse environments. main gene networks affected were related to lipid and carbohydrate metabolism, cell death, immune response and metabolic disorders.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, high variation in methylation between blastocysts made it difficult to draw conclusions concerning methylation of individual genes, although a clear overview of affected pathways was obtained. this may offer clues regarding the high rate of embryonic loss and metabolic diseases during later life observed in offspring from mothers displaying lipolytic disorders.

keywords
oocyteembryofertilityfree fatty acidsmaternal metabolismdna methylationepigeneticshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003130fonds wetenschappelijk onderzoek11l8716ndesmet k. l. j http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000921european cooperation in science and technologyfa1201desmet k. l. j http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002790canadian network for research and innovation in machining technology, natural sciences and engineering research council of canadanetgp 340825-06desmet k. l. j issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

