BACKGROUND
porphyromonas gingivalis is a gram-negative anaerobic bacterium associated with periodontal disease onset and progression. genetic tools for the manipulation of bacterial genomes allow for in-depth mechanistic studies of metabolism, physiology, interspecies and host-pathogen interactions. analysis of the essential genes, protein-coding sequences necessary for survival of p. gingivalis by transposon mutagenesis has not previously been attempted due to the limitations of available transposon systems for the organism. we adapted a mariner transposon system for mutagenesis of p. gingivalis and created an insertion mutant library. by analyzing the location of insertions using massively-parallel sequencing technology we used this mutant library to define genes essential for p. gingivalis survival under in vitro conditions.


RESULTS
in mutagenesis experiments we identified  <dig> genes in p. gingivalis strain atcc  <dig> that are putatively essential for viability in vitro. comparing the  <dig> p. gingivalis essential genes with previous essential gene studies,  <dig> of the  <dig> are homologues to essential genes in other species;  <dig> are shared with more than one other species. twenty-five genes are known to be essential in p. gingivalis and b. thetaiotaomicron only. significant enrichment of essential genes within cluster of orthologous groups ‘d’ , ‘i’  and ‘j’  were identified. previously, the p. gingivalis core genome was shown to encode  <dig>  proteins out of a possible  <dig> ;  <dig> of  <dig> essential genes are contained within the core genome. thus, for the species p. gingivalis twenty-two, seventy-seven and twenty-three percent of the genome respectively are devoted to essential, core and accessory functions.


CONCLUSIONS
a mariner transposon system can be adapted to create mutant libraries in p. gingivalis amenable to analysis by next-generation sequencing technologies. in silico analysis of genes essential for in vitro growth demonstrates that although the majority are homologous across bacterial species as a whole, species and strain-specific subsets are apparent. understanding the putative essential genes of p. gingivalis will provide insights into metabolic pathways and niche adaptations as well as clinical therapeutic strategies.

porphyromonas gingivalistransposon mutagenesisessential genestn-seqperiodontal disease

