BACKGROUND
influenza a virus  infection-induced inflammatory regulatory networks  are extremely complex and dynamic. specific biological experiments for investigating the interactions between individual inflammatory factors cannot provide a detailed and insightful multidimensional view of irns. recently, data from high-throughput technologies have permitted system-level analyses. the construction of large and cell-specific irns from high-throughput data is essential to understanding the pathogenesis of iav infection.


RESULTS
in this study, we proposed a computational method, which combines nonlinear ordinary differential equation -based optimization with mutual information, to construct a cell-specific optimized irn during iav infection by integrating gene expression data with a prior knowledge of network topology. moreover, we used the average relative error and sensitivity analysis to evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed approach. furthermore, from the optimized irn, we confirmed  <dig> interactions between proteins in biological experiments and identified  <dig> new regulatory interactions and  <dig> false positive interactions, including the following interactions: il1β regulates tlr <dig>  tlr <dig> regulates ifn-β and tnf regulates il <dig>  most of these regulatory interactions are statistically significant by z-statistic. the functional annotations of the optimized irn demonstrated clearly that the defense response, immune response, response to wounding and regulation of cytokine production are the pivotal processes of iav-induced inflammatory response. the pathway analysis results from the kyoto encyclopaedia of genes and genomes  showed that  <dig> pathways are enriched significantly. the  <dig> pathways were validated by experiments, and  <dig> other pathways, including the intestinal immune network for iga production, the cytosolic dna-sensing pathway and the allograft rejection pathway, are the predicted novel pathways involved in the inflammatory response.


CONCLUSIONS
integration of knowledge-driven and data-driven methods allows us to construct an effective irn during iav infection. based on the constructed network, we have identified new interactions among inflammatory factors and biological pathways. these findings provide new insight into our understanding of the molecular mechanisms in the inflammatory network in response to iav infection. further characterization and experimental validation of the interaction mechanisms identified from this study may lead to a novel therapeutic strategy for the control of infections and inflammatory responses.

