BACKGROUND
fear and anxiety based problems are common in dogs. alongside behaviour modification programmes, a range of psychopharmacological agents may be recommended to treat such problems, but few are licensed for use in dogs and the onset of action of some can be delayed. the low affinity partial benzodiazepine receptor agonist imepitoin  is licensed for treating canine epilepsy, has a fast onset of action in dogs and has demonstrated anxiolytic properties in rodent models. this case series reports on the use of imepitoin in a group of dogs identified as having fear/anxiety based problems. twenty dogs were enrolled into the study, attended a behaviour consultation and underwent routine laboratory evaluation. nineteen dogs proceeded to be treated with imepitoin orally twice daily  alongside a patient-specific behaviour modification plan for a period of 11–19 weeks. progress was monitored via owner report through daily diary entries and telephone follow-up every two weeks. a positive and negative activation scale  of temperament was also completed by owners during baseline and at the end of the study.


RESULTS
the primary outcome measure was average weekly global scores  from the owner diaries. average weekly reaction scores  for each type of eliciting context was used as a secondary outcome. seventeen dogs completed the trial. treatment with imepitoin alongside a behaviour modification programme resulted in owner reported improvement with reduced awg and reduced awr for anxiety across a range of social and non-social eliciting contexts including noise sensitivities. significant improvement was apparent within the first week of treatment, and further improvements seen at the 11 week review point. there was a significant reduction in negative activation  with  <dig> % of owners opting to continue imepitoin at their own expense after completion of the study.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides initial evidence indicating the potential value of imepitoin  alongside appropriate behaviour modification for the rapid alleviation of signs of fear and anxiety in dogs. further research with a larger subject population and a placebo control would be useful to confirm the apparent efficacy reported here.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
anxietydogdrugfeargabaimepitoinhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008349boehringer ingelheimissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

