BACKGROUND
fatty acid composition of muscle is an important trait contributing to meat quality. recently, genome-wide association study  has been extensively used to explore the molecular mechanism underlying important traits in cattle. in this study, we performed gwas using high density snp array to analyze the association between snps and fatty acids and evaluated the accuracy of genomic prediction for fatty acids in chinese simmental cattle.


RESULTS
using the bayesb method, we identified  <dig> and  <dig> regions in chinese simmental cattle that displayed significant associations with individual fatty acids and fatty acid groups, respectively. we further obtained several candidate genes which may be involved in fatty acid biosynthesis including elongation of very long chain fatty acids protein  <dig> , fatty acid synthase , caspase  <dig>  and thyroglobulin . specifically, we obtained strong evidence of association signals for one snp located at  <dig>  mb for fasn using genome-wide rapid association mixed model and regression-genomic control  approaches. also, region-based association test identified multiple snps within fasn and elovl <dig> for c14: <dig>  in addition, our result revealed that the effectiveness of genomic prediction for fatty acid composition using bayesb was slightly superior over gblup in chinese simmental cattle.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified several significantly associated regions and loci which can be considered as potential candidate markers for genomics-assisted breeding programs. using multiple methods, our results revealed that fasn and elovl <dig> are associated with fatty acids with strong evidence. our finding also suggested that it is feasible to perform genomic selection for fatty acids in chinese simmental cattle.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fatty acidgenome-wide association studygenomic predictionhigh-density genotypessimmental cattleissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

