BACKGROUND
organisms living at high altitudes must overcome three major environmental challenges: hypoxia, cold, and intense uv radiation. the molecular mechanisms that enable these challenges to be overcome have mainly been studied in endothermic organisms; relatively little attention has been paid to poikilothermic species. here, we present deep transcriptome sequencing in two closely related lizards, the high altitude-dwelling phrynocephalus erythrurus and the lowland-dwelling p. putjatia, to identify candidate genes under positive selection and to explore the convergent evolutionary adaptation of poikilothermic animals to high altitude life.


RESULTS
more than  <dig> million sequence reads were generated for each species via illumina sequencing. de novo assembly produced  <dig>  and  <dig>  transcripts for p. erythrurus and p. putjatia, respectively. p. erythrurus had higher ka/ks ratios than p. putjatia, implying an accelerated evolutionary rate in the high altitude lizard lineage.  <dig> gene ontology  categories with accelerated evolutionary rates and  <dig> candidate positively selected genes were detected along the p. erythrurus lineage. some of these go categories have functions associated with responses to hypoxia, energy metabolism and responses to uv damage. we also found that the high-altitude ranid frog r. kukunoris had higher ka/ks ratios than the closely related low-altitude frog r. chensinensis, and that the functional categories with accelerated evolutionary rates in r. kukunoris overlapped extensively with those detected along the p. erythrurus lineage.


CONCLUSIONS
the mechanisms of high altitude adaptation in p. erythrurus were tentatively inferred. by comparing two pairs of low- and high-altitude poikilothermic species, we found that similar functional categories had undergone positive selection in high altitude-dwelling phrynocephalus and rana lineages, indicating that similar mechanisms of adaptation to high altitude might have evolved in both genera. our findings provide important guidance for future functional studies on high altitude adaptation in poikilothermic animals.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lizardhigh altitude adaptationpositive selectionaccelerate evolutionary ratehypoxiauv damageissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

