BACKGROUND
sugarcane smut, which is caused by sporisorium scitamineum, has been threatening global sugarcane production. breeding smut resistant sugarcane varieties has been proven to be the most effective method of controlling this particular disease. however, a lack of genome information of sugarcane has hindered the development of genome-assisted resistance breeding programs. furthermore, the molecular basis of sugarcane response to s. scitamineum infection at the proteome level was incomplete and combining proteomic and transcriptional analysis has not yet been conducted.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed proteins in sugarcane smut-resistant  and susceptible  genotypes at 48 h after inoculation with s. scitamineum by employing an isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification . the proteome quantitative data were then validated by multiple reaction monitoring . the integrative analysis showed that the correlations between the quantitative proteins and the corresponding genes that was obtained in our previous transcriptome study were poor, which were  <dig>  and  <dig>  in yacheng05- <dig> and roc <dig>  respectively, thereby revealing a post-transcriptional event during yacheng05-179-s. scitamineum incompatible interaction and roc22-s. scitamineum compatible interaction. most differentially expressed proteins were closely related to sugarcane smut resistance such as beta- <dig> -glucanase, peroxidase, pathogenesis-related protein  <dig> , endo- <dig> -beta-xylanase, heat shock protein, and lectin. ethylene and gibberellic acid pathways, phenylpropanoid metabolism and prs, such as pr <dig>  pr <dig>  pr <dig> and pr <dig>  were more active in yacheng05- <dig>  which suggested of their possible roles in sugarcane smut resistance. however, calcium signaling, reactive oxygen species, nitric oxide, and abscisic acid pathways in yacheng05- <dig> were repressed by s. scitamineum and might not be crucial for defense against this particular pathogen.


CONCLUSIONS
these results indicated complex resistance-related events in sugarcane-s. scitamineum interaction, and provided novel insights into the molecular mechanism underlying the response of sugarcane to s. scitamineum infection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
saccharum spp.sporisorium scitamineumitraqrna-seqtranscriptomeproteomenatural science foundation of fujian province, china2015j060062015j05055su yachun que youxiong the research funds for distinguished young scientists in fujian agriculture and forestry universityxjq201630su yachun the program for new century excellent talents in fujian province universityja14095que youxiong the earmarked fund for the modern agriculture technology of chinacars-20xu liping research funds for distinguished young scientists in fujian provincial department of educationja13090que youxiong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

