BACKGROUND
plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria  can protect plants against pathogenic microbes through a diversity of mechanisms including competition for nutrients, production of antibiotics, and stimulation of the host immune system, a phenomenon called induced systemic resistance . in the past 30 years, the pseudomonas spp. pgpr strains wcs <dig>  wcs <dig> and wcs <dig> of the willie commelin scholten  collection have been studied in detail in pioneering papers on the molecular basis of pgpr-mediated isr and mechanisms of biological control of soil-borne pathogens via siderophore-mediated competition for iron.


RESULTS
the genomes of the model wcs pgpr strains were sequenced and analyzed to unearth genetic cues related to biological questions that surfaced during the past 30 years of functional studies on these plant-beneficial microbes. whole genome comparisons revealed important novel insights into iron acquisition strategies with consequences for both bacterial ecology and plant protection, specifics of bacterial determinants involved in plant-pgpr recognition, and diversity of protein secretion systems involved in microbe-microbe and microbe-plant communication. furthermore, multi-locus sequence alignment and whole genome comparison revealed the taxonomic position of the wcs model strains within the pseudomonas genus. despite the enormous diversity of pseudomonas spp. in soils, several plant-associated pseudomonas spp. strains that have been isolated from different hosts at different geographic regions appear to be nearly isogenic to wcs <dig>  wcs <dig>  or wcs <dig>  interestingly, all these wcs look-a-likes have been selected because of their plant protective or plant growth-promoting properties.


CONCLUSIONS
the genome sequences of the model wcs strains revealed that they can be considered representatives of universally-present plant-beneficial pseudomonas spp. with their well-characterized functions in the promotion of plant growth and health, the fully sequenced genomes of the wcs strains provide a genetic framework that allows for detailed analysis of the biological mechanisms of the plant-beneficial traits of these pgpr. considering the increasing focus on the role of the root microbiome in plant health, functional genomics of the wcs strains will enhance our understanding of the diversity of functions of the root microbiome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
plant growth-promoting rhizobacteriainduced systemic resistancesiderophoreslipopolysaccharidesantibioticsprotein secretion systemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

