BACKGROUND
sphingomonas wittichii strain rw <dig> can completely oxidize dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans, which are persistent contaminants of soils and sediments. for successful application in soil bioremediation systems, strain rw <dig> must cope with fluctuations in water availability, or water potential. thus far, however, little is known about the adaptive strategies used by sphingomonas bacteria to respond to changes in water potential. to improve our understanding, strain rw <dig> was perturbed with either the cell-permeating solute sodium chloride or the non-permeating solute polyethylene glycol with a molecular weight of  <dig> . these solutes are assumed to simulate the solute and matric components of the total water potential, respectively. the responses to these perturbations were then assessed and compared using a combination of growth assays, transcriptome profiling, and membrane fatty acid analyses.


RESULTS
under conditions producing a similar decrease in water potential but without effect on growth rate, there was only a limited shared response to perturbation with sodium chloride or peg <dig>  this shared response included the increased expression of genes involved with trehalose and exopolysaccharide biosynthesis and the reduced expression of genes involved with flagella biosynthesis. mostly, the responses to perturbation with sodium chloride or peg <dig> were very different. only sodium chloride triggered the increased expression of two ecf-type rna polymerase sigma factors and the differential expression of many genes involved with outer membrane and amino acid metabolism. in contrast, only peg <dig> triggered the increased expression of a heat shock-type rna polymerase sigma factor along with many genes involved with protein turnover and repair. membrane fatty acid analyses further corroborated these differences. the degree of saturation of membrane fatty acids increased after perturbation with sodium chloride but had the opposite effect and decreased after perturbation with peg <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
a combination of growth assays, transcriptome profiling, and membrane fatty acid analyses revealed that permeating and non-permeating solutes trigger different adaptive responses in strain rw <dig>  suggesting these solutes affect cells in fundamentally different ways. future work is now needed that connects these responses with the responses observed in more realistic scenarios of soil desiccation.

