BACKGROUND
overexpressing novel antimicrobial peptides  in plants is a promising approach for crop disease resistance engineering. however, the in planta stability and subcellular localization of each amp should be validated for the respective plant species, which can be challenging due to the small sizes and extreme pi ranges of amps which limits the utility of standard proteomic gel-based methods. despite recent advances in quantitative shotgun proteomics, its potential for amp analysis has not been utilized and high throughput methods are still lacking.


RESULTS
we created transgenic nicotiana attenuata plants that independently express  <dig> different amps under a constitutive 35s promoter and compared the extracellular accumulation of each amp using a universal and versatile protein quantification method. we coupled a rapid apoplastic peptide extraction with label-free protein quantification by nanouplc-mse analysis using hi <dig> method and identified/quantified  <dig> of  <dig> expressed amps in the transgenic plants ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids in length. the quantitative comparison among the transgenic plant lines showed that three particular peptides, belonging to the defensin, knottin and lipid-transfer protein families, attained the highest concentrations of  <dig> to  <dig> pmol per g leaf fresh mass, which identified them as best suited for ectopic expression in n. attenuata. the chosen mass spectrometric approach proved to be highly sensitive in the detection of different amp types and exhibited the high level of analytical reproducibility required for label-free quantitative measurements along with a simple protocol required for the sample preparation.


CONCLUSIONS
heterologous expression of amps in plants can result in highly variable and non-predictable peptide amounts and we present a universal quantitative method to confirm peptide stability and extracellular deposition. the method allows for the rapid quantification of apoplastic peptides without cumbersome and time-consuming purification or chromatographic steps and can be easily adapted to other plant species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
intercellular fluidcysteine-rich peptidesheterologous expressiontransgenic plantsvacuum infiltrationdata-independent acquisitiondefensinlipid-transfer proteinknottinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

