BACKGROUND
ejaculates contain a diverse mixture of sperm and seminal fluid proteins, the combination of which is crucial to male reproductive success under competitive conditions. males should therefore tailor the production of different ejaculate components according to their social environment, with particular sensitivity to cues of sperm competition risk . here we test this hypothesis using an established vertebrate model system, the house mouse , combining experimental data with a quantitative proteomics analysis of seminal fluid composition. our study tests for the first time how both sperm and seminal fluid components of the ejaculate are tailored to the social environment.


RESULTS
our quantitative proteomics analysis reveals that the relative production of different proteins found in seminal fluid – i.e. seminal fluid proteome composition – differs significantly according to cues of sperm competition risk. using a conservative analytical approach to identify differential expression of individual seminal fluid components, at least seven of  <dig> secreted seminal fluid proteins examined showed consistent differences in relative abundance under high versus low sperm competition conditions. notably three important proteins with potential roles in sperm competition – svs  <dig>  svs  <dig> and ceacam  <dig> – were more abundant in the high competition treatment groups. total investment in both sperm and seminal fluid production also increased with cues of heightened sperm competition risk in the social environment. by contrast, relative investment in different ejaculate components was unaffected by cues of mating opportunities.


CONCLUSIONS
our study reveals significant plasticity in different ejaculate components, with the production of both sperm and non-sperm fractions of the ejaculate strongly influenced by the social environment. sperm competition risk is thus shown to be a key factor in male ejaculate production decisions, including driving plasticity in seminal fluid composition.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
evolutionphenotypic plasticityproteomicsrandom forest analysisseminal fluidsperm competitionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

