BACKGROUND
glucocorticoids have been proven to be effective in the therapy of recurrent airway obstruction  in horses via systemic as well as local  administration. elective analysis of the effects of this drug on bronchoconstriction in viable lung tissue offers an insight into the mechanism of action of the inflammatory cascade occurring during rao which is still unclear. the mechanism of action of steroids in treatment of rao is thought to be induced through classical genomic pathways. we aimed at electively studying the effects of the glucocorticoid beclomethasone dipropionate on equine precision-cut lung slices .

pcls were used to analyze ex-vivo effects of beclomethasone on inhibiting bronchoconstriction in the horse. the inhibiting effect was measured through instillation of a known mediator of inflammation and bronchoconstriction, leukotriene c <dig>  for this, the accessory lobes of  <dig> horses subjected to euthanasia for reasons unrelated to the respiratory apparatus were used to obtain viable lung slices.


RESULTS
after 30 minutes of pcls incubation, beclomethasone showed to significantly inhibit the contraction of the bronchioles after instillation with leukotriene c <dig>  the ec <dig> values of the two contraction curves  differed significantly from each other . the possibility of a non-genomic rapid mechanism of action seems likely since transcriptional activities require a longer lag period.


CONCLUSIONS
in human neuroendocrinology, high levels of glucocorticoids have been proven to function via a non-genomic mechanism of membrane receptors. the concentration of beclomethasone used on the lung slices in our study can be considered as high. this allows speculation about similar rapid non-genomic mechanisms of high-dosage inhaled glucocorticoids in the lower airways of horses. however, further assessment on a molecular basis is needed to confirm this.

beclomethasonehorseleukotrienenon-genomic membrane receptorsrecurrent airway obstructionraoprecision-cut lung slicespcls

