BACKGROUND
transposable-element mediated chromosomal rearrangements require the involvement of two transposons and two double-strand breaks  located in close proximity. in radiobiology, dsb proximity is also a major factor contributing to rearrangements. however, the whole issue of dsb proximity remains virtually unexplored.


RESULTS
based on dna sequencing analysis we show that the genomes of  <dig> derived mutations, arrufatina  and nero , share a similar 2 mb deletion of chromosome  <dig>  a 7 kb mutator-like element found in clemenules was present in arrufatina in inverted orientation flanking the 5′ end of the deletion. the arrufatina mule displayed “dissimilar” 9-bp target site duplications separated by 2 mb. fine-scale single nucleotide variant analyses of the deleted fragments identified a ttc-repeat sequence motif located in the center of the deletion responsible of a meiotic crossover detected in the citrus reference genome.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, this information is compatible with the proposal that in both mutants, the ttc-repeat motif formed a triplex dna structure generating a loop that brought in close proximity the originally distinct reactive ends. in arrufatina, the loop brought the mule ends nearby the  <dig> distinct insertion target sites and the inverted insertion of the transposable element between these target sites provoked the release of the in-between fragment. this proposal requires the involvement of a unique transposon and sheds light on the unresolved question of how two distinct sites become located in close proximity. these observations confer a crucial role to the ttc-repeats in fundamental plant processes as meiotic recombination and chromosomal rearrangements.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
double-strand breakscrossover hot spotstructural variationstransposable-elementissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

