BACKGROUND
in anchorage dependent cells, myosin generated contractile forces affect events closely associated with adhesion such as the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions, and temporally distal events such as entry of the cell into s-phase. as occurs in many signaling pathways, a phosphorylation reaction  is directly responsible for cell response. western blotting has been useful in measuring intracellular phosphorylation events, but cells are lysed in the process of sample preparation for western blotting, and spatial information such as morphology, localization of the phosphorylated species, and the distribution of individual cell responses across the population is lost. we report here a reliable automated microscopy method for quantitative measurement of myosin light chain phosphorylation in adherent cells. this method allows us to concurrently examine cell morphology, cell-cell contact, and myosin light chain diphosphorylation in vascular smooth muscle cells.


RESULTS
paraformaldehyde fixation and triton x- <dig> permeabilization preserved cell morphology and myosin light chain phosphorylation better than the alternative fixation/permeabilization methods tested. we utilized automated microscopy methods to acquire three color images, determine cell spread area, and quantify the intensity of staining within each cell with anti-phospho-mlc antibody. our results indicate that a <dig> rat aortic smooth muscle cells exhibit a re producible non-gaussian distribution of mlc phosphorylation across a population of unsynchronized genetically identical cells. adding an inhibitor of rho kinase, y <dig>  or plating cells on a low density of fibronectin, reduced phospho-myosin light chain signal as expected. on the other hand, adding calyculin a, an activator of contractility, increased myosin light chain phosphorylation. the ic <dig> for myosin light chain phosphorylation using y <dig> was determined to be  <dig>  ±  <dig>  micrometers. we observed a positive linear relationship between cell area and myosin light chain diphosphorylation, which is consistent with what has been reported in the literature using other methods.


CONCLUSIONS
our results show that using proper specimen fixation techniques and background subtraction methods, imaging cytometry can be used to reliably measure relative myosin light chain phosphorylation in individual adherent cells. importantly, the ability to make this measurement in adherent cells allows for simultaneous measurement of and correlation with other parameters of cellular topography such as morphology and cell-cell proximity. this assay has potential application in screening for drug development.

