BACKGROUND
many areas critical to agricultural production and research, such as the breeding and trait mapping in plants and livestock, require robust and scalable genotyping platforms. genotyping-by-sequencing  is a one such method highly suited to non-human organisms. in the gbs protocol, genomic dna is fractionated via restriction digest, then reduced representation is achieved through size selection. since many restriction sites are conserved across a species, the sequenced portion of the genome is highly consistent within a population. this makes the gbs protocol highly suited for experiments that require surveying large numbers of markers within a population, such as those involving genetic mapping, breeding, and population genomics. we have modified the gbs technology in a number of ways. custom, enzyme specific adaptors have been replaced with standard illumina adaptors compatible with blunt-end restriction enzymes. multiplexing is achieved through a dual barcoding system, and bead-based library preparation protocols allows for in-solution size selection and eliminates the need for columns and gels.


RESULTS
a panel of eight restriction enzymes was selected for testing on b <dig> maize and nipponbare rice genomic dna. quality of the data was demonstrated by identifying that the vast majority of reads from each enzyme aligned to restriction sites predicted in silico. the link between enzyme parameters and experimental outcome was demonstrated by showing that the sequenced portion of the genome was adaptable by selecting enzymes based on motif length, complexity, and methylation sensitivity. the utility of the new gbs protocol was demonstrated by correctly mapping several in a maize f <dig> population resulting from a b <dig> × country gentleman test cross.


CONCLUSIONS
this technology is readily adaptable to different genomes, highly amenable to multiplexing and compatible with over forty commercially available restriction enzymes. these advancements represent a major improvement in genotyping technology by providing a highly flexible and scalable gbs that is readily implemented for studies on genome-wide variation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genotypinggbsreduced representation sequencingpopulation genomicstrait mappingplant breedingagricultural genomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

