BACKGROUND
the humoral immune system response is based on the interaction between antibodies and antigens for the clearance of pathogens and foreign molecules. the interaction between these proteins occurs at specific positions known as antigenic determinants or b-cell epitopes. the experimental identification of epitopes is costly and time consuming. therefore the use of in silico methods, to help discover new epitopes, is an appealing alternative due the importance of biomedical applications such as vaccine design, disease diagnostic, anti-venoms and immune-therapeutics. however, the performance of predictions is not optimal been around 70% of accuracy. further research could increase our understanding of the biochemical and structural properties that characterize a b-cell epitope.


RESULTS
we investigated the possibility of linear epitopes from the same protein family to share common properties. this hypothesis led us to analyze physico-chemical  and predicted secondary structure  features of a curated dataset of epitope sequences available in the literature belonging to two different groups of antigens . we discovered statistically significant parameters with data mining techniques which allow us to distinguish neurotoxin from metalloproteinase and these two from random sequences. after a five cross fold validation we found that pcp based models obtained area under the curve values  and accuracy above  <dig>  for regression, decision tree and support vector machine.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that antigen's family can be inferred from properties within a single group of linear epitopes . also we discovered the characteristics that represent these two epitope groups including their similarities and differences with random peptides and their respective amino acid sequence. these findings open new perspectives to improve epitope prediction by considering the specific antigen's protein family. we expect that these findings will help to improve current computational mapping methods based on physico-chemical due it's potential application during epitope discovery.

>data miningb cell epitopesmetalloproteinasesneurotoxinsprotein familyepitope prediction28- <dig> october  <dig> brazilian symposium on bioinformatics  <dig> belo horizonte, brazil

