BACKGROUND
nucleoside triphosphate  hydrolysis is a key reaction in biology. it involves breaking two very stable bonds , in either a concurrent or a sequential way. here, we systematically examine how protonation of the triphosphate affects the mechanism of hydrolysis.


RESULTS
the hydrolysis reaction of methyl triphosphate in vacuum is computed with protons in various numbers and position on the three phosphate groups. protonation is seen to have a strong catalytic effect, with the reaction mechanism depending highly on the protonation pattern.


CONCLUSIONS
this dependence is apparently complicated, but is shown to obey a well-defined set of rules: protonation of the α- and β-phosphate groups favors a sequential hydrolysis mechanism, whereas γ-protonation favors a concurrent mechanism, the two effects competing with each other in cases of simultaneous protonation. the rate-limiting step is always the breakup of the water molecule while it attacks the γ-phosphorus, and its barrier is lowered by γ-protonation. this step has significantly lower barriers in the sequential reactions, because the dissociated γ-metaphosphate intermediate  is a much better target for water attack than the un-dissociated γ-phosphate . the simple chemical logic behind these rules helps to better understand the catalytic strategy used by ntpase enzymes, as illustrated here for the catalytic pocket of myosin.

a set of rules was determined that describes how protonating the phosphate groups affects the hydrolysis mechanism of methyl triphosphate: protonation of the α- and/or β- phosphate groups promotes a sequential mechanism in which p-o bond breaking precedes the breakup of the attacking water, whereas protonation of the γ-phosphate promotes a concurrent mechanism and lowers the rate-limiting barrier of water breakup. the role played by individual protein residues in the catalytic pocket of triphosphate hydrolysing enzymes can be assigned accordingly.

graphical abstract




electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
atp hydrolysisatpasegtpaseenzymatic mechanismconcurrent and sequential mechanismscomputational biochemistrydeutsche forschungsgemeinschaft sonderforschungbericht- <dig>  heidelberg universityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

