BACKGROUND
cystic fibrosis  lung disease has a unique profile of pathogens predominated by pseudomonas aeruginosa  and staphylococcus aureus . these microorganisms must overcome host immune defense to colonize the cf lungs. polymorphonuclear neutrophils are a major component of the host defense against bacterial infection. a crucial microbicidal mechanism is the production of oxidants including hydrogen peroxide  and hypochlorous acid  by neutrophils to achieve efficient bacterial killing. to determine to what degrees various cf pathogens resist the oxidants relative to non-cf pathogens, we compared the susceptibility of psa, sa, burkholderia cepacia , klebsiella pneumoniae , and escherichia coli  to various concentrations of h2o <dig> or hocl, in vitro. the comparative oxidant-resistant profiles were established. oxidant-induced damage to atp production and cell membrane integrity of the microbes were quantitatively assessed. correlation of membrane permeability and atp levels with bacterial viability was statistically evaluated.


RESULTS
psa was relatively resistant to both h2o <dig>  and hocl . sa was susceptible to h2o <dig>  but resistant to hocl . interestingly, kp was extremely resistant to high doses of h2o <dig>  but was very sensitive to low doses of hocl . bc was intermediate to resist both oxidants: h2o <dig>  and hocl . ec displayed the least resistance to h2o <dig>  and hocl . the identified profile of h2o2-resistance was kp > psa > bc > ec > sa and the profile of hocl-resistance psa > sa > bc > ec > kp. moreover, both oxidants affected atp production and membrane integrity of the cells. however, the effects varied among the tested organisms and, the oxidant-mediated damage correlated differentially with the bacterial viability.


CONCLUSIONS
the order of hocl-resistance identified herein best fits the clinical profile of cf infections. even though oxidants are able to disrupt atp production and cell membrane integrity, the degrees of damage vary among the organisms and correlate differentially with their viability.

hydrogen peroxidehypochlorous acidmicrobicidalcystic fibrosisneutrophilsoxidants

