BACKGROUND
in contrast to the western palearctic and nearctic biogeographic regions, the phylogeography of eastern-palearctic terrestrial vertebrates has received relatively little attention. in east asia, tectonic events, along with pleistocene climatic conditions, likely affected species distribution and diversity, especially through their impact on sea levels and the consequent opening and closing of land-bridges between eurasia and the japanese archipelago. to better understand these effects, we sequenced mitochondrial and nuclear markers to determine phylogeographic patterns in east-asian tree frogs, with a particular focus on the widespread h. japonica.


RESULTS
we document several cryptic lineages within the currently recognized h. japonica populations, including two main clades of late miocene divergence . one occurs on the northeastern japanese archipelago  and the russian far-east islands , and the second one inhabits the remaining range, comprising southwestern japan, the korean peninsula, transiberian china, russia and mongolia. each clade further features strong allopatric plio-pleistocene subdivisions , especially among continental and southwestern japanese tree frog populations. combined with paleo-climate-based distribution models, the molecular data allowed the identification of pleistocene glacial refugia and continental routes of postglacial recolonization. phylogenetic reconstructions further supported genetic homogeneity between the korean h. suweonensis and chinese h. immaculata, suggesting the former to be a relic population of the latter that arose when the yellow sea formed, at the end of the last glaciation.


CONCLUSIONS
patterns of divergence and diversity were likely triggered by miocene tectonic activities and quaternary climatic fluctuations , causing the formation and disappearance of land-bridges between the japanese islands and the continent. overall, this resulted in a ring-like diversification of h. japonica around the sea of japan. our findings urge for important taxonomic revisions in east-asian tree frogs. first, they support the synonymy of h. suweonensis  and h. immaculata . second, the nominal h. japonica  represents at least two species: an eastern  on the northern japanese and russian far east islands, and a southwestern species  on southern japanese islands and possibly also forming continental populations. third, these continental tree frogs may also represent an additional entity, previously described as h. stepheni boulenger,  <dig> . a complete revision of this group requires further taxonomic and nomenclatural analyses, especially since it remains unclear to which taxon the species-epitheton japonica corresponds to.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
amphibian conservationeastern palearcticshylidaephylogeographyrefugia within refugiaquaternary glaciationshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftsto 493/2-2russian foundation of basic research14-04- <dig> and 15-29-02546sichuan science and technology bureau 2016hh0083issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

