BACKGROUND
the nuclear envelope that separates the contents of the nucleus from the cytoplasm provides a surface for chromatin attachment and organization of the cortical nucleoplasm. proteins associated with it have been well characterized in many eukaryotes but not in plants. sun  domain proteins reside in the inner nuclear membrane and function with other proteins to form a physical link between the nucleoskeleton and the cytoskeleton. these bridges transfer forces across the nuclear envelope and are increasingly recognized to play roles in nuclear positioning, nuclear migration, cell cycle-dependent breakdown and reformation of the nuclear envelope, telomere-led nuclear reorganization during meiosis, and karyogamy.


RESULTS
we found and characterized a family of maize sun-domain proteins, starting with a screen of maize genomic sequence data. we characterized five different maize zmsun genes , which fell into two classes . the first , here designated canonical c-terminal sun-domain , includes structural homologs of the animal and fungal sun-domain protein genes. the second , here designated plant-prevalent mid-sun  <dig> transmembrane , includes a novel but conserved structural variant sun-domain protein gene class. mircroarray-based expression analyses revealed an intriguing pollen-preferred expression for zmsun <dig> mrna but low-level expression  in multiple tissues for all the others. cloning and characterization of a full-length cdna for a pm3-type maize gene, zmsun <dig>  is described. peptide antibodies to zmsun <dig>   <dig> were used in western-blot and cell-staining assays to show that they are expressed and show concentrated staining at the nuclear periphery.


CONCLUSIONS
the maize genome encodes and expresses at least five different sun-domain proteins, of which the pm <dig> subfamily may represent a novel class of proteins with possible new and intriguing roles within the plant nuclear envelope. expression levels for zmsun1- <dig> are consistent with basic cellular functions, whereas zmsun <dig> expression levels indicate a role in pollen. models for possible topological arrangements of the ccsd-type and pm3-type sun-domain proteins are presented.

