BACKGROUND
strawberry  is the familiar name of a group of economically important crop plants and wild relatives that also represent an emerging system for the study of gene and genome evolution. its small stature, rapid seed-to-seed cycle, transformability and miniscule basic genome make strawberry an attractive system to study processes related to plant physiology, development and crop production; yet it lacks substantial genomics-level resources. this report addresses this deficiency by characterizing  <dig>  mbp of gene space from a diploid species . the twenty large genomic tracks  captured as fosmid inserts comprise gene regions with roles in flowering, disease resistance, and metabolism.


RESULTS
a detailed description of the studied regions reveals  <dig> blastx-supported gene sites and eight additional est-supported gene sites. only  <dig> genes have complete est coverage, enabling gene modelling, while  <dig> lack est support. instances of microcolinearity with arabidopsis thaliana were identified in twelve inserts. a relatively high portion  of targeted genes were found in unanticipated tandem duplications. the effectiveness of six fgenesh training models was assessed via comparisons among ab initio predictions and homology-based gene and start/stop codon identifications. fourteen transposable-element-related sequences and  <dig> simple sequence repeat loci were delineated.


CONCLUSIONS
this report details the structure and content of targeted regions of the strawberry genome. the data indicate that the strawberry genome is gene-dense, with an average of one protein-encoding gene or pseudogene per  <dig>  kb. current overall est coverage is sparse. the unexpected gene duplications and their differential patterns of est support suggest possible subfunctionalization or pseudogenization of these sequences. this report provides a high-resolution depiction of targeted gene neighborhoods that will aid whole-genome sequence assembly, provide valuable tools for plant breeders and advance the understanding of strawberry genome evolution.

