BACKGROUND
rna interference -mediated by the expression of short hairpin rnas  has emerged as a powerful experimental tool for reverse genetic studies in mammalian cells. a number of recent reports have described approaches allowing regulated production of shrnas based on modified rna polymerase ii  or rna polymerase iii  promoters, controlled by drug-responsive transactivators or repressors such as tetracycline -dependent transactivators and repressors. however, the usefulness of these approaches is often times limited, caused by inefficient delivery and/or expression of shrna-encoding sequences in target cells and/or poor design of shrnas sequences. with a view toward optimizing tet-regulated shrna expression in mammalian cells, we compared the capacity of a variety of hybrid pol iii promoters to express short shrnas in target cells following lentivirus-mediated delivery of shrna-encoding cassettes.


RESULTS
rnai-mediated knockdown of gene expression in target cells, controlled by a modified tet-repressor  in the presence of doxycycline  was robust. expression of shrnas from engineered human u <dig>  promoters containing a single tetracycline operator  sequence between the proximal sequence element  and the tata box, or an improved second-generation tet-responsive promoter element  placed upstream of the promoter was tight and reversible as judged using quantitative protein measurements. we also established and tested a novel hu <dig> promoter system in which the distal sequence element  of the hu <dig> promoter was replaced with a second-generation tre. in this system, positive regulation of shrna production is mediated by novel tet-dependent transactivators bearing transactivation domains derived from the human sp <dig> transcription factor.


CONCLUSIONS
our modified lentiviral vector system resulted in tight and reversible knockdown of target gene expression in unsorted cell populations. tightly regulated target gene knockdown was observed with vectors containing either a single to sequence or a second-generation tre using carefully controlled transduction conditions. we expect these vectors to ultimately find applications for tight and reversible rnai in mammalian cells in vivo.

