BACKGROUND
loose silky bentgrass  is an important weed in europe with a recent increase in herbicide resistance cases. the lack of genetic information about this noxious weed limits its biological understanding such as growth, reproduction, genetic variation, molecular ecology and metabolic herbicide resistance. this study produced a reference transcriptome for a. spica-venti from different tissues  and various growth stages . the de novo assembly was performed on individual and combined dataset followed by functional annotations. individual transcripts and gene families involved in metabolic based herbicide resistance were identified.


RESULTS
eight separate transcriptome assemblies were performed and compared. the combined transcriptome assembly consists of  <dig>  contigs with an n <dig> and average contig length of  <dig> and 658 bp, respectively. this dataset contains  <dig>  transcripts consisting of total  <dig> ,111 bp. among them 94% had a homologue to uniprotkb, 73% retrieved a go mapping, and 50% were functionally annotated. compared with other grass species, a. spica-venti has 26% proteins in common to brachypodium distachyon, and 41% to lolium spp. glycosyltransferases had the highest number of transcripts in each tissue followed by the cytochrome p450s. the gstf <dig> and cyp89a <dig> transcripts were recovered from the majority of tissues and aligned at a maximum of  <dig> and 30% to proven herbicide resistant allele from alopecurus myosuroides and lolium rigidum, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS

de novo transcriptome assembly enabled the generation of the first reference transcriptome of a. spica-venti. this can serve as stepping stone for understanding the metabolic herbicide resistance as well as the general biology of this problematic weed. furthermore, this large-scale sequence data is a valuable scientific resource for comparative transcriptome analysis for poaceae grasses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cytochrome p450glutathione s-transferaseherbicide resistanceloose silky bentgrassweed transcriptomicsinnovation fund denmark0603-00516bkristensen michael issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

