BACKGROUND
as the architecture of complex traits incorporates a widening spectrum of genetic variation, analyses integrating common and rare variation are needed. body mass index  represents a model trait, since common variation shows robust association but accounts for a fraction of the heritability. a combined analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms  and copy number variation  was performed using  <dig> european and  <dig> african-americans from the study of addiction: genetics and environment. genetic risk sum scores  were constructed using  <dig> bmi-validated snps and aggregate-risk methods were compared: count versus weighted and proxy versus imputation.


RESULTS
the weighted snp-grss constructed from imputed probabilities of risk alleles performed best and was highly associated with bmi  accounting for 3% of the phenotypic variance. in addition to bmi-validated snps, common and rare bmi/obesity-associated cnvs were identified from the literature. of the  <dig> cnvs previously reported, only 21-kilobase deletions on 16p <dig>  showed evidence for association with bmi , with two cnvs nominally associated with class ii obesity, 1p <dig>  duplications  and 5q <dig>  deletions . all other cnvs, individually and in aggregate, were not associated with bmi or obesity. the combined model, including covariates, snp-grss, and 16p <dig>  deletion accounted for  <dig> % of phenotypic variance in bmi . models significantly predicted obesity classification with maximum discriminative ability for morbid-obesity .


CONCLUSIONS
results show that incorporating validated effect sizes and allelic probabilities improve prediction algorithms. although rare-cnvs did not account for significant phenotypic variation, results provide a framework for integrated analyses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
body mass indexobesitygenome-wide associationcopy number variationrisk predictionpolygenic scoreftomc4rissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

