BACKGROUND
the different actions of abscisic acid  in the aboveground and belowground parts of plants suggest the existence of a distinct perception mechanism between these organs. although characterization of the soluble aba receptors pyr1/pyl/rcar as well as core signaling components has greatly advanced our understanding of aba perception, signal transduction, and responses, the environment-dependent organ-specific sensitivity of plants to aba is less well understood.


RESULTS
by performing real-time quantitative pcr assays, we comprehensively compared transcriptional differences of core aba signaling components in response to aba or osmotic/dehydration stress between maize  roots and leaves. our results demonstrated up-regulation of the transcript levels of zmpyls homologous to dimeric-type arabidopsis aba receptors by aba in maize primary roots, whereas those of zmpyls homologous to monomeric-type arabidopsis aba receptors were down-regulated. however, this trend was reversed in the leaves of plants treated with aba via the root medium. although the mrna levels of zmpyl1- <dig> increased significantly in roots subjected to polyethylene glycol -induced osmotic stress, zmpyl4- <dig> transcripts were either maintained at a stable level or increased only slightly. in detached leaves subjected to dehydration, the transcripts of zmpyl1- <dig> together with zmpyl <dig>  zmpyl <dig>  zmpyl <dig> and zmpyl <dig> were decreased, whereas those of zmpyl <dig>  zmpyl <dig> and zmpyl <dig> were significantly increased. our results also showed that all of the evaluated transcripts of pp2cs and snrk <dig> were quickly up-regulated in roots by aba or osmotic stress; conversely they were either up-regulated or maintained at a constant level in leaves, depending on the isoforms within each family.


CONCLUSIONS
there is a distinct profile of pyr/pyl/rcar aba receptor gene expression between maize roots and leaves, suggesting that monomeric-type aba receptors are mainly involved in the transmission of aba signals in roots but that dimeric-type aba receptors primarily carry out this function in leaves. given that zmpyl <dig> and zmpyl <dig> exhibit similar transcript abundance under normal conditions, our findings may represent a novel mechanism for species-specific regulation of pyr/pyl/rcar aba receptor gene expression. a difference in the preference for core signaling components in the presence of exogenous aba versus stress-induced endogenous aba was observed in both leaves and roots. it appears that core aba signaling components perform their osmotic/dehydration stress response functions in a stress intensity-, duration-, species-, organ-, and isoform-specific manner, leading to plasticity in response to adverse conditions and, thus, acclimation to life on land. these results deepen our understanding of the diverse biological effects of aba between plant leaves and roots in response to abiotic stress at the stimulus-perception level.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aba signal transduction pathwaydrought stressgene expressionzmpylszmpp2czmsnrk2basic scientific research of northwest a&f universityno. qn2012021mu zixin basic fund of the state key laboratory of soil erosion and dryland farming on the loess plateauno. k318009902-14mu zixin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

