BACKGROUND
the basic helix-loop-helix  proteins are a large superfamily of transcription factors, and play a central role in a wide range of metabolic, physiological, and developmental processes in higher organisms. tomato is an important vegetable crop, and its genome sequence has been published recently. however, the bhlh gene family of tomato has not been systematically identified and characterized yet.


RESULTS
in this study, we identified  <dig> bhlh protein-encoding genes  in tomato genome and analyzed their structures. although bhlh domains were conserved among the bhlh proteins between tomato and arabidopsis, the intron sequences and distribution of tomato bhlh genes were extremely different compared with arabidopsis. the gene duplication analysis showed that  <dig> % and  <dig> % of slbhlh genes belonged to low-stringency and high-stringency duplication, respectively, indicating that the slbhlh genes are mainly generated via short low-stringency region duplication in tomato. subsequently, we classified the slbhlh genes into  <dig> subfamilies by phylogenetic tree analysis, and predicted their possible functions by comparison with their homologous genes of arabidopsis. moreover, the expression profile analysis of slbhlh genes from  <dig> different tissues showed that  <dig> slbhlh genes exhibited tissue-specific expression. further, we identified that  <dig> slbhlh genes were associated with fruit development and ripening . the evolutionary analysis revealed that 92% slbhlh genes might be evolved from ancestor originated from early land plant, and 8% from algae.


CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we systematically identified slbhlhs by analyzing the tomato genome sequence using a set of bioinformatics approaches, and characterized their chromosomal distribution, gene structures, duplication, phylogenetic relationship and expression profiles, as well predicted their possible biological functions via comparative analysis with bhlhs of arabidopsis. the results and information provide a good basis for further investigation of the biological functions and evolution of tomato bhlh genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tomatosolanum lycopersicumbhlh gene familytranscription factorfruit developmentissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

