BACKGROUND
a unique feature of fish is that new muscle fibres continue to be produced throughout much of the life cycle; a process termed muscle hyperplasia. in trout, this process begins in the late embryo stage and occurs in both a discrete, continuous layer at the surface of the primary myotome  and between existing muscle fibres throughout the myotome . in post-larval stages, muscle hyperplasia is only of the mosaic type and persists until 40% of the maximum body length is reached. to characterise the genetic basis of myotube neoformation in trout, we combined laser capture microdissection and microarray analysis to compare the transcriptome of hyperplastic regions of the late embryo myotome with that of adult myotomal muscle, which displays only limited hyperplasia.


RESULTS
gene expression was analysed using agilent trout oligo microarrays. our analysis identified more than  <dig> transcripts that were significantly up-regulated in the superficial hyperplastic zones of the late embryonic myotome compared to adult myotomal muscle. in addition to pax <dig>  pax <dig> and the fundamental myogenic basic helix-loop-helix regulators, we identified a large set of up-regulated transcriptional factors, including myc paralogs, members of hes family and many homeobox-containing transcriptional regulators. other cell-autonomous regulators overexpressed in hyperplastic zones included a large set of cell surface proteins belonging to the ig superfamily. among the secreted molecules found to be overexpressed in hyperplastic areas, we noted growth factors as well as signalling molecules. a novel finding in our study is that many genes that regulate planar cell polarity  were overexpressed in superficial hyperplastic zones, suggesting that the pcp pathway is involved in the oriented elongation of the neofibres.


CONCLUSIONS
the results obtained in this study provide a valuable resource for further analysis of novel genes potentially involved in hyperplastic muscle growth in fish. ultimately, this study could yield insights into particular genes, pathways or cellular processes that may stimulate muscle regeneration in other vertebrates.

myogenesismuscle growthmuscle hyperplasiagene expressiontranscriptomelaser capture microdissectionteleost

