BACKGROUND
rust fungi are biotrophic basidiomycete plant pathogens that cause major diseases on plants and trees world-wide, affecting agriculture and forestry. their biotrophic nature precludes many established molecular genetic manipulations and lines of research. the generation of genomic resources for these microbes is leading to novel insights into biology such as interactions with the hosts and guiding directions for breakthrough research in plant pathology.


RESULTS
to support gene discovery and gene model verification in the genome of the wheat leaf rust fungus, puccinia triticina , we have generated expressed sequence tags  by sampling several life cycle stages. we focused on several spore stages and isolated haustorial structures from infected wheat, generating  <dig>  ests. we produced sequences from both the sexual  and asexual  stages of the life cycle. from pycniospores and aeciospores, produced by infecting the alternate host, meadow rue ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  reads were generated, respectively. we generated  <dig>  ests from teliospores produced on the senescent primary wheat host. finally, we generated  <dig>  reads from haustoria isolated from infected wheat as well as  <dig>  sequences from germinated urediniospores. along with  <dig>  previously generated ests, we compiled a database of  <dig>  non-redundant sequences . fungal genes were predicted using the est version of the self-training genemarks algorithm. to refine the est database, we compared est sequences by blastn to a set of  <dig> pyrosequencing-generated contigs and sanger bac-end sequences derived both from the pt genome, and to ests and genome reads from wheat. a collection of  <dig>  fungal genes was identified and compared to sequences of the cereal rusts, puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici  and stripe rust, p. striiformis f. sp. tritici , and poplar leaf rust melampsora species, and the corn smut fungus, ustilago maydis . while extensive homologies were found, many genes appeared novel and species-specific; over 40% of genes did not match any known sequence in existing databases. focusing on spore stages, direct comparison to um identified potential functional homologs, possibly allowing heterologous functional analysis in that model fungus. many potentially secreted protein genes were identified by similarity searches against genes and proteins of pgt and melampsora spp., revealing apparent orthologs.


CONCLUSIONS
the current set of pt unigenes contributes to gene discovery in this major cereal pathogen and will be invaluable for gene model verification in the genome sequence.

