BACKGROUND
recurrent aphthous stomatitis  is a common oral mucosal disorder of unclear etiopathogenesis. although recent studies of the oral microbiota by high-throughput sequencing of 16s rrna genes have suggested that imbalances in the oral microbiota may contribute to the etiopathogenesis of ras, no specific bacterial species associated with ras have been identified. the present study aimed to characterize the microbiota in the oral mucosa and saliva of ras patients in comparison with control subjects at the species level.


RESULTS
the bacterial communities of the oral mucosa and saliva from ras patients with active lesions  and control subjects  were analyzed by pyrosequencing of the 16s rrna genes. there were no significant differences in the alpha diversity between the controls and the ras, but the mucosal microbiota of the ras patients showed increased inter-subject variability. a comparison of the relative abundance of each taxon revealed decreases in the members of healthy core microbiota but increases of rare species in the mucosal and salivary microbiota of ras patients. particularly, decreased streptococcus salivarius and increased acinetobacter johnsonii in the mucosa were associated with ras risk. a dysbiosis index, which was developed using the relative abundance of a. johnsonii and s. salivarius and the regression coefficients, correctly predicted 83 % of the total cases for the absence or presence of ras. interestingly, a. johnsonii substantially inhibited the proliferation of gingival epithelial cells and showed greater cytotoxicity against the gingival epithelial cells than s. salivarius.


CONCLUSIONS
ras is associated with dysbiosis of the mucosal and salivary microbiota, and two species associated with ras have been identified. this knowledge may provide a diagnostic tool and new targets for therapeutics for ras.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
recurrent aphthous stomatitisoral microbiotapyrosequencingseoul national university dental hospital research fund01-2013-0003park hee kyung http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003725national research foundation of korea nrf-2013r1a1a30056692013070465choi youngnim issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

