BACKGROUND
understanding the molecular details of protein-dna interactions is critical for deciphering the mechanisms of gene regulation. we present a machine learning approach for the identification of amino acid residues involved in protein-dna interactions.


RESULTS
we start with a naïve bayes classifier trained to predict whether a given amino acid residue is a dna-binding residue based on its identity and the identities of its sequence neighbors. the input to the classifier consists of the identities of the target residue and  <dig> sequence neighbors on each side of the target residue. the classifier is trained and evaluated  on a non-redundant set of  <dig> proteins. our results indicate the feasibility of identifying interface residues based on local sequence information. the classifier achieves 71% overall accuracy with a correlation coefficient of  <dig> , 35% specificity and 53% sensitivity in identifying interface residues as evaluated by leave-one-out cross-validation. we show that the performance of the classifier is improved by using sequence entropy of the target residue  as additional input. the classifier achieves 78% overall accuracy with a correlation coefficient of  <dig> , 44% specificity and 41% sensitivity in identifying interface residues. examination of the predictions in the context of 3-dimensional structures of proteins demonstrates the effectiveness of this method in identifying dna-binding sites from sequence information. in 33%  of the proteins, the classifier identifies the interaction sites by correctly recognizing at least half of the interface residues. in 87%  of the proteins, the classifier correctly identifies at least 20% of the interface residues. this suggests the possibility of using such classifiers to identify potential dna-binding motifs and to gain potentially useful insights into sequence correlates of protein-dna interactions.


CONCLUSIONS
naïve bayes classifiers trained to identify dna-binding residues using sequence information offer a computationally efficient approach to identifying putative dna-binding sites in dna-binding proteins and recognizing potential dna-binding motifs.

