BACKGROUND
single nucleotide polymorphisms  as defined here are single base sequence changes or short insertion/deletions between or within individuals of a given species. as a result of their abundance and the availability of high throughput analysis technologies snp markers have begun to replace other traditional markers such as restriction fragment length polymorphisms , amplified fragment length polymorphisms  and simple sequence repeats  markers for fine mapping and association studies in several species. for snp discovery from chromatogram data, several bioinformatics programs have to be combined to generate an analysis pipeline. results have to be stored in a relational database to facilitate interrogation through queries or to generate data for further analyses such as determination of linkage disequilibrium and identification of common haplotypes. although these tasks are routinely performed by several groups, an integrated open source snp discovery pipeline that can be easily adapted by new groups interested in snp marker development is currently unavailable.


RESULTS
we developed snp-phage  and genbank  submissions. this tool was applied for analyzing sequence traces from diverse soybean genotypes to discover over  <dig>  snps. this package was developed on unix/linux platform, written in perl and uses a mysql database. scripts to generate a user-friendly web interface are also provided with common queries for preliminary data analysis. a machine learning tool developed by this group for increasing the efficiency of snp discovery is integrated as a part of this package as an optional feature. the snp-phage package is being made available open source at .


CONCLUSIONS
snp-phage provides a bioinformatics solution for high throughput snp discovery, identification of common haplotypes within an amplicon, and genbank  submissions. snp selection and visualization are aided through a user-friendly web interface. this tool is useful for analyzing sequence tagged sites  of genomic sequences, and this software can serve as a starting point for groups interested in developing snp markers.

