BACKGROUND
the physiological functions of the human sterile alpha motif domain-containing  <dig>  gene and its chromosomally adjacent paralogue, samd9-like , currently remain unknown. however, the direct links between the deleterious mutations or deletions in these two genes and several human disorders, such as inherited inflammatory calcified tumors and acute myeloid leukemia, suggest their biological importance. samd <dig> and samd9l have also recently been shown to play key roles in the innate immune responses to stimuli such as viral infection. we were particularly interested in understanding the mammalian evolutionary history of these two genes. the phylogeny of samd <dig> and samd9l genes was reconstructed using the maximum likelihood method. furthermore, six different methods were applied to detect samd <dig> and samd9l codons under selective pressure: the site-specific model m <dig> implemented in the codeml program in paml software and five methods available on the datamonkey web server, including the single likelihood ancestor counting method, the fixed effect likelihood method, the random effect likelihood method, the mixed effects model of evolution method and the fast unbiased bayesian approximation method. additionally, the house mouse  genome has lost the samd <dig> gene, while keeping samd9l intact, prompting us to investigate whether this loss is a unique event during evolution.


RESULTS
our evolutionary analyses suggest that samd <dig> and samd9l arose through an ancestral gene duplication event after the divergence of marsupialia from placentalia. additionally, selection analyses demonstrated that both genes have been subjected to positive evolutionary selection. the absence of either samd <dig> or samd9l genes from some mammalian species supports a partial functional redundancy between the two genes.


CONCLUSIONS
to the best of our knowledge, this work is the first study on the evolutionary history of mammalian samd <dig> and samd9l genes. we conclude that evolutionary selective pressure has acted on both of these two genes since their divergence, suggesting their importance in multiple cellular processes, such as the immune responses to viral pathogens.

samd9samd9-likemammalsevolutionary historypositive selection

