BACKGROUND
secondary winglessness is a common phenomenon found among neopteran insects. with an estimated age of at least  <dig> million years, the cave crickets  form the oldest exclusively wingless lineage within the long-horned grasshoppers . with respect to their morphology, cave crickets are generally considered to represent a `primitive’ group of ensifera, for which no apomorphic character has been reported so far.


RESULTS
we present the first detailed investigation and description of the thoracic skeletal and muscular anatomy of the east mediterranean cave cricket troglophilus neglectus . t. neglectus possesses sternopleural muscles that are not yet reported from other neopteran insects. cave crickets in general exhibit some unique features with respect to their thoracic skeletal anatomy: an externally reduced prospinasternum, a narrow median sclerite situated between the meso- and metathorax, a star-shaped prospina, and a triramous metafurca. the thoracic muscle equipment of t. neglectus compared to that of the bush cricket conocephalus maculatus  and the house cricket acheta domesticus  reveals a number of potentially synapomorphic characters between these lineages.


CONCLUSIONS
based on the observed morphology we favor a closer relationship of rhaphidophoridae to tettigoniidae rather than to gryllidae. in addition, the comparison of the thoracic morphology of t. neglectus to that of other wingless polyneoptera allows reliable conclusions about anatomical adaptations correlated with secondary winglessness. the anatomy in apterous ensifera, viz. the reduction of discrete direct and indirect flight muscles as well as the strengthening of specific leg muscles, largely resembles the condition found in wingless stick insects , but is strikingly different from that of other related wingless insects, e.g. heel walkers , ice crawlers , and certain grasshoppers . the composition of direct flight muscles largely follows similar patterns in winged respectively wingless species within major polyneopteran lineages, but it is highly heterogeneous between those lineages.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
orthopteraensiferarhaphidophoridaewinglessnessmorphologyphylogenyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft ho2306/10-1hörnschemeyer thomas issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

