BACKGROUND
dehorning is a common practice involving calves on dairy operations in the united states. however, less than 20% of producers report using analgesics or anesthetics during dehorning. administration of a systemic analgesic drug at the time of dehorning may be attractive to dairy producers since cornual nerve blocks require  <dig> – 15 min to take effect and only provide pain relief for a few hours. the primary objectives of this trial were to  describe the compartmental pharmacokinetics of meloxicam in calves after iv administration at  <dig>  mg/kg and  to determine the effect of meloxicam  or placebo  treatment on serum cortisol response, plasma substance p  concentrations, heart rate , activity and weight gain in calves after scoop dehorning and thermocautery without local anesthesia.


RESULTS
plasma meloxicam concentrations were detectable for 50 h post-administration and fit a 2-compartment model with a rapid distribution phase  and a slower elimination phase . dehorning caused a significant increase in serum cortisol concentrations and hr . hr was significantly lower in the meloxicam-treated calves compared with placebo-treated calves at 8 h  and 10 h  after dehorning. mean plasma sp concentrations were lower in meloxicam treated calves  compared with control calves  . furthermore, the change in plasma sp from baseline was inversely proportional to corresponding plasma meloxicam concentrations . the effect of dehorning on lying behavior was less significant in meloxicam-treated calves  compared to the placebo-treated calves . calves receiving meloxicam prior to dehorning gained on average  <dig>  ±  <dig>  kg bodyweight/day over 10 days post-dehorning compared with  <dig>  ±  <dig>  kg bodyweight/day in the placebo-treated calves .


CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, this is the first published report examining the effects of meloxicam without local anesthesia on sp, activity and performance of calves post-dehorning. these findings suggest that administration of meloxicam alone immediately prior to dehorning does not mitigate signs of acute distress but may have long term physiological, behavior and performance effects.

analgesiameloxicamdehorningsubstance pcortisolheart rateaccelerometersperformance

