BACKGROUND
long intergenic noncoding rnas  are endogenous non-coding rnas  that are transcribed from ‘intergenic’ regions of the genome and may play critical roles in regulating gene expression through multiple rna-mediated mechanisms. micrornas  are single-stranded small ncrnas of approximately 21– <dig> nucleotide  that are involved in transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene regulation. while mirnas functioning as mrna repressors have been studied in detail, the influence of mirnas on lincrnas has seldom been investigated in plants.

methods
lincrnas as mirna targets or decoys were predicted via gstar.pl script with a set of rules, and lincrnas as mirna targets were validated by degradome data. conservation analysis of lincrnas as mirna targets or decoys were conducted using blastn and mafft. the function of lincrnas as mirna targets were predicted via a lincrna-mrna co-expression network, and the function of lincrnas as mirna decoys were predicted according to the competing endogenous rna  hypothesis.


RESULTS
in this work, we developed a computational method and systematically predicted  <dig> lincrnas as  <dig> mirna targets and  <dig> lincrnas as  <dig> mirna decoys in maize . furthermore,  <dig> lincrnas predicted as  <dig> mirna targets were validated based on degradome data. we found that lincrnas acting as mirna targets or decoys are a common phenomenon, which indicates that the regulated networks of mirnas also involve lincrnas. to elucidate the function of lincrnas, we reconstructed a mirna-regulated network involving  <dig> mirnas,  <dig> lincrnas and  <dig> mrnas. based on the lincrna-mrna co-expression network and the competing endogenous rna hypothesis, we predicted that  <dig> lincrnas that function as mirna targets and  <dig> lincrnas that function as mirna decoys participate in cellular and metabolic processes, and play role in catalytic activity and molecular binding functions.


CONCLUSIONS
this work provides a comprehensive view of mirna-regulated networks and indicates that lincrnas can participate in a layer of regulatory interactions as mirna targets or decoys in plants, which will enable in-depth functional analysis of lincrnas.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
maizemirnaslincrnastargetsdecoysissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

