BACKGROUND
coffee trees  and tomato  belong to the asterid clade, while grapevine  belongs to the rosid clade. coffee and tomato separated from grapevine  <dig> million years ago, while coffee and tomato diverged 83- <dig> million years ago. these long periods of divergent evolution should have permitted the genomes to reorganize significantly. so far, very few comparative mappings have been performed between very distantly related species belonging to different clades. we report the first multiple comparison between species from asterid and rosid clades, to examine both macro-and microsynteny relationships.


RESULTS
thanks to a set of  <dig> cosii markers, macrosynteny was detected between coffee, tomato and grapevine. while coffee and tomato genomes share  <dig> orthologous markers and  <dig> conserved syntenic segments , coffee and grapevine also share a similar number of syntenic markers and csss:  <dig> and  <dig> respectively. despite large genome macrostructure reorganization, several large chromosome segments showed outstanding macrosynteny shedding new insights into chromosome evolution between asterids and rosids. we also analyzed a sequence of  <dig> kb containing the ovate gene, conserved in a syntenic block between coffee, tomato and grapevine that showed a high-level of microstructure conservation. a higher level of conservation was observed between coffee and grapevine, both woody and long life-cycle plants, than between coffee and tomato. out of  <dig> coffee genes of this syntenic segment,  <dig> and  <dig> showed complete synteny between coffee and tomato or grapevine, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
these results show that significant conservation is found between distantly related species from the asterid  and rosid  clades, at the genome macrostructure and microstructure levels. at the ovate locus, conservation did not decline in relation to increasing phylogenetic distance, suggesting that the time factor alone does not explain divergences. our results are considerably useful for syntenic studies between supposedly remote species for the isolation of important genes for agronomy.

comparative genomicssyntenygenome evolutioncoffeavitissolanum

