BACKGROUND
sunflower verticillium wilt  is a vascular disease caused by root infection with verticillium dahliae . it is a serious threat to the yield and quality of sunflower. however, chemical and agronomic measures for controlling this disease are not effective. the selection of more resistant genotypes is a desirable strategy to reduce contamination. a deeper knowledge of the molecular mechanisms and genetic basis underlying sunflower verticillium wilt is necessary to accelerate breeding progress.


RESULTS
an rna-seq approach was used to perform global transcriptome profiling on the roots of resistant  and susceptible  sunflower genotypes infected with v. dahlia. different pairwise transcriptome comparisons were examined over a time course . in rd, sd and d datasets,  <dig> genes were associated with svw resistance in a genotype-common transcriptional pattern. moreover,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were directly related to svw resistance in the resistant and susceptible genotypes, respectively, in a genotype-specific transcriptional pattern. most of the genes were demonstrated to participate in plant defense responses; these genes included peroxidase , glutathione peroxidase, aquaporin pip, chitinase, l-ascorbate oxidase, and lrr receptors. for the up-regulated genotype-specific differentially expressed genes  in the resistant genotype, higher average fold-changes were observed in the resistant genotype compared to those in the susceptible genotype. an inverse effect was observed in the down-regulated genotype-specific degs in the resistant genotype. kegg analyses showed that  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes were classified into plant hormone signal transduction, plant-pathogen interaction and flavonoid biosynthesis categories, respectively. many of these genes, such as cngc, rboh, fls <dig>  jaz, myc <dig> npr <dig> and tga, regulate crucial points in defense-related pathway and may contribute to v. dahliae resistance in sunflower.


CONCLUSIONS
the transcriptome profiling results provided a clearer understanding of the transcripts associated with the crosstalk between sunflower and v. dahliae. the results identified several differentially expressed unigenes involved in the hyper sensitive response  and the salicylic acid /jasmonic acid -mediated signal transduction pathway for resistance against v. dahliae. these results are useful for screening resistant sunflower genotypes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
helianthus annuus lverticillium dahliaerna-seqdifferentially expressed genes defense responses genesthe national nature scientific foundation of china3146023461561036li qianzhong the national system of modern agriculture industrial technology of chinacars-16an yulin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

