BACKGROUND
hypocretins/orexins  are hypothalamic neuropeptides involved in sleep-wakefulness regulation. deficiency in hcrt/ox neurotransmission results in the sleep disorder narcolepsy, which is characterized by an inability to maintain wakefulness. the hcrt/ox neurons are maximally active during wakefulness and project widely to the ventral tegmental area . a dopamine-containing nucleus projecting extensively to the cerebral cortex, the vta enhances wakefulness. in the present study, we used retrograde tracing from the medial prefrontal cortex  to examine whether hcrt1/oxa neurons target vta neurons that could sustain behavioral wakefulness through their projections to mpfc.


RESULTS
the retrograde tracer fluorogold  was injected into mpfc and, after an optimal survival period, sections through the vta were processed for dual immunolabeling of anti-fg and either anti-hcrt1/oxa or anti-th antisera. most vta neurons projecting to the mpfc were located in the parabrachial nucleus of the ipsilateral vta and were non-dopaminergic. only axonal profiles showed hcrt1/oxa-immunoreactivity in vta. hcrt1/oxa reactivity was observed in axonal boutons and many unmyelinated axons. the hcrt1/oxa immunoreactivity was found filling axons but it was also observed in parts of the cytoplasm and dense-core vesicles. hcrt1/oxa-labeled boutons frequently apposed fg-immunolabeled dendrites. however, hcrt1/oxa-labeled boutons rarely established synapses, which, when they were established, were mainly asymmetric , with either fg-labeled or unlabeled dendrites.


CONCLUSIONS
our results provide ultrastructural evidence that hcrt1/oxa neurons may exert a direct synaptic influence on mesocortical neurons that would facilitate arousal and wakefulness. the paucity of synapses, however, suggest that the activity of vta neurons with cortical projections might also be modulated by hcrt1/oxa non-synaptic actions. in addition, hcrt1/oxa could modulate the postsynaptic excitatory responses of vta neurons with cortical projections to a co-released excitatory transmitter from hcrt1/oxa axons. our observation of hcrt1/oxa targeting of mesocortical neurons supports hcrt1/oxa wakefulness enhancement in the vta and could help explain the characteristic hypersomnia present in narcoleptic patients.

keywords
cortical activationsleepultrastructurewakefulnessdopaminegabaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

