BACKGROUND
chromatin is a dynamic but highly regulated structure. dna-binding proteins such as transcription factors, epigenetic and chromatin modifiers are responsible for regulating specific gene expression pattern and may result in different phenotypes. to reveal the identity of the proteins associated with the specific region on dna, chromatin immunoprecipitation  is the most widely used technique. chip assay followed by next generation sequencing  or microarray  is often used to study patterns of protein-binding profiles in different cell types and in cancer samples on a genome-wide scale. however, only a limited number of bioinformatics tools are available for chip datasets analysis.


RESULTS
we present chipseek, a web-based tool for chip data analysis providing summary statistics in graphs and offering several commonly demanded analyses. chipseek can provide statistical summary of the dataset including histogram of peak length distribution, histogram of distances to the nearest transcription start site , and pie chart  of genomic locations for users to have a comprehensive view on the dataset for further analysis. for examining the potential functions of peaks, chipseek provides peak annotation, visualization of peak genomic location, motif identification, sequence extraction, and comparison between datasets. beyond that, chipseek also offers users the flexibility to filter peaks and re-analyze the filtered subset of peaks. chipseek supports  <dig> different genome assemblies for  <dig> model organisms including human, mouse, rat, worm, fly, frog, zebrafish, chicken, yeast, fission yeast, arabidopsis, and rice. we use demo datasets to demonstrate the usage and intuitive user interface of chipseek.


CONCLUSIONS
chipseek provides a user-friendly interface for biologists to analyze large-scale chip data without requiring any programing skills. all the results and figures produced by chipseek can be downloaded for further analysis. the analysis tools built into chipseek, especially the ones for selecting and examine a subset of peaks from chip data, provides invaluable helps for exploring the high through-put data from either chip-seq or chip-chip. chipseek is freely available at http://chipseek.cgu.edu.tw.

keywords
chip-seqchip-chipanalysis toolweb-servicespeak annotationmotif identificationfilter toolscomparisonissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

