BACKGROUND
large scale gene analysis of most organisms is hampered by incomplete genomic sequences. in many organisms, such as soybean, the best source of sequence information is the existence of expressed sequence tag  libraries. soybean has a large  genome that has yet to be fully sequenced. however it does have the 6th largest est collection comprised of ests from a variety of soybean genotypes. many est libraries were constructed from rna extracted from various genetic backgrounds, thus gene identification from these sources is complicated by the existence of both gene and allele sequence differences. we used the estminer suite of programs to identify potential soybean gene transcripts from a single genetic background allowing us to observe functional classifications between gene families as well as structural differences between genes and gene paralogs within families. the identification of potential gene sequences  from soybean allows us to begin to get a picture of the genomic history of the organism as well as begin to observe the evolutionary fates of gene copies in this highly duplicated genome.


RESULTS
we identified approximately  <dig>  potential gene sequences  from est sequences of williams/williams <dig>  an inbred genotype of soybean  using a redundancy criterion to identify reproducible sequence differences between related genes within gene families. analysis of these sequences revealed single base substitutions and single base indels are the most frequently observed form of sequence variation between genes within families in the dataset. genomic sequencing of selected loci indicate that intron-like intervening sequences are numerous and are approximately  <dig> bp in length. functional annotation of gene sequences indicate functional classifications are not randomly distributed among gene families containing few or many genes.


CONCLUSIONS
the predominance of single nucleotide insertion/deletions and substitution events between genes within families  is consistent with a model of gene amplification followed by single base random mutational events expected under the classical model of duplicated gene evolution. molecular functions of small and large gene families appear to be non-randomly distributed possibly indicating a difference in retention of duplicates or local expansion.

