BACKGROUND
protein secretion is one of the most important processes in eukaryotes. it is based on a highly complex machinery involving numerous proteins in several cellular compartments. the elucidation of the cell biology of the secretory machinery is of great importance, as it drives protein expression for biopharmaceutical industry, a  <dig> billion usd global market. however, the complexity of secretory process is difficult to describe using a simple reductionist approach, and therefore a promising avenue is to employ the tools of systems biology.


RESULTS
on the basis of manual curation of the literature on the yeast, human, and mouse secretory pathway, we have compiled a comprehensive catalogue of characterized proteins with functional annotation and their interconnectivity. thus we have established the most elaborate reconstruction  of the functional secretion pathway network to date, counting  <dig> different components in mouse. by employing our mouse recon to the cho-k <dig> genome in a comparative genomic approach, we could reconstruct the protein secretory pathway of cho cells counting  <dig> cho components. this recon furthermore facilitated the development of three alternative methods to study protein secretion through graphical visualizations of omics data. we have demonstrated the use of these methods to identify potential new and known targets for engineering improved growth and igg production, as well as the general observation that cho cells seem to have less strict transcriptional regulation of protein secretion than healthy mouse cells.


CONCLUSIONS
the recon of the secretory pathway represents a strong tool for interpretation of data related to protein secretion as illustrated with transcriptomic data of chinese hamster ovary  cells, the main platform for mammalian protein production.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chinese hamster ovary cellspathway reconstructionrna-seqsecretion pathwayprotein secretionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004191novo nordisknovo nordisk foundationnnf13oc0004831brandl julian issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

