BACKGROUND
with the abundant information produced by microarray technology, various approaches have been proposed to infer transcriptional regulatory networks. however, few approaches have studied subtle and indirect interaction such as genetic compensation, the existence of which is widely recognized although its mechanism has yet to be clarified. furthermore, when inferring gene networks most models include only observed variables whereas latent factors, such as proteins and mrna degradation that are not measured by microarrays, do participate in networks in reality.


RESULTS
motivated by inferring transcriptional compensation  interactions in yeast, a stepwise structural equation modeling algorithm  is developed. in addition to observed variables, ssem also incorporates hidden variables to capture interactions  from latent factors. simulated gene networks are used to determine with which of six possible model selection criteria  ssem works best. ssem with bayesian information criterion  results in the highest true positive rates, the largest percentage of correctly predicted interactions from all existing interactions, and the highest true negative  rates. next, we apply ssem using real microarray data to infer tc interactions among  small groups of genes that are synthetic sick or lethal  to sgs <dig>  and  a group of ssl pairs of  <dig> yeast genes involved in dna synthesis and repair that are of interest. for , ssem with bic is shown to outperform three bayesian network algorithms and a multivariate autoregressive model, checked against the results of qrt-pcr experiments. the predictions for  are shown to coincide with several known pathways of sgs <dig> and its partners that are involved in dna replication, recombination and repair. in addition, experimentally testable interactions of rad <dig> are predicted.


CONCLUSIONS
ssem is a useful tool for inferring genetic networks, and the results reinforce the possibility of predicting pathways of protein complexes via genetic interactions.

