BACKGROUND
in the last 30 years, a number of dna fingerprinting methods such as rflp, rapd, aflp, ssr, dart, have been extensively used in marker development for molecular plant breeding. however, it remains a daunting task to identify highly polymorphic and closely linked molecular markers for a target trait for molecular marker-assisted selection. the next-generation sequencing  technology is far more powerful than any existing generic dna fingerprinting methods in generating dna markers. in this study, we employed a grain legume crop lupinus angustifolius  as a test case, and examined the utility of an ngs-based method of rad  sequencing as dna fingerprinting for rapid, cost-effective marker development tagging a disease resistance gene for molecular breeding.


RESULTS
twenty informative plants from a cross of rxs  in lupin were subjected to rad single-end sequencing by multiplex identifiers. the entire rad sequencing products were resolved in two lanes of the 16-lanes per run sequencing platform solexa hiseq <dig>  a total of  <dig> million raw reads, approximately  <dig> gb of sequencing data, were collected. sequence comparison among the  <dig> test plants discovered  <dig> snp markers. filtration of dna sequencing data with marker identification parameters resulted in the discovery of  <dig> molecular markers linked to the disease resistance gene lanr <dig>  five randomly selected markers were converted into cost-effective, simple pcr-based markers. linkage analysis using marker genotyping data and disease resistance phenotyping data on a f <dig> population consisting of  <dig> individual plants confirmed that all these five markers were linked to the r gene. two of these newly developed sequence-specific pcr markers, anseq <dig> and anseq <dig>  flanked the target r gene at a genetic distance of  <dig>  centimorgan , and are now replacing the markers previously developed by a traditional dna fingerprinting method for marker-assisted selection in the australian national lupin breeding program.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that more than  <dig> molecular markers linked to a target gene of agronomic trait of interest can be identified from a small portion  of one sequencing run on hiseq <dig> by applying ngs based rad sequencing in marker development. the markers developed by the strategy described in this study are all co-dominant snp markers, which can readily be converted into high throughput multiplex format or low-cost, simple pcr-based markers desirable for large scale marker implementation in plant breeding programs. the high density and closely linked molecular markers associated with a target trait help to overcome a major bottleneck for implementation of molecular markers on a wide range of germplasm in breeding programs. we conclude that application of ngs based rad sequencing as dna fingerprinting is a very rapid and cost-effective strategy for marker development in molecular plant breeding. the strategy does not require any prior genome knowledge or molecular information for the species under investigation, and it is applicable to other plant species.

