BACKGROUND
bed bugs  are hematophagous nocturnal parasites of humans that have attained high impact status due to their worldwide resurgence. the sudden and rampant resurgence of c. lectularius has been attributed to numerous factors including frequent international travel, narrower pest management practices, and insecticide resistance.


RESULTS
we performed a next-generation rna sequencing  experiment to find differentially expressed genes between pesticide-resistant  and pesticide-susceptible  strains of c. lectularius. a reference transcriptome database of  <dig>  expressed sequence tags  was created by combining the databases derived from de novo assembled mrna-seq tags  and our previous  <dig> pyrosequenced database . the two-way glmseq analysis revealed ~ <dig>  highly significant differentially expressed ests between the pr and ps strains. among the top  <dig>  differentially expressed ests,  <dig> putative defense genes  involved in penetration resistance and metabolic resistance were identified. tissue and development-specific expression of p <dig> cyp <dig> clan members showed high mrna levels in the cuticle, malpighian tubules, and midgut; and in early instar nymphs, respectively. lastly, molecular modeling and docking of a candidate cytochrome p <dig>  revealed the flexibility of the deduced protein to metabolize a broad range of insecticide substrates including ddt, deltamethrin, permethrin, and imidacloprid.


CONCLUSIONS
we developed significant molecular resources for c. lectularius putatively involved in metabolic resistance as well as those participating in other modes of insecticide resistance. rna-seq profiles of pr strains combined with tissue-specific profiles and molecular docking revealed multi-level insecticide resistance in c. lectularius. future research that is targeted towards rna interference  on the identified metabolic targets such as cytochrome p450s and cuticular proteins could lay the foundation for a better understanding of the genetic basis of insecticide resistance in c. lectularius.

