BACKGROUND
whole transcriptome sequencing  represents a powerful approach for whole transcriptome gene expression analysis. however, rna-seq carries a few limitations, e.g., the requirement of a significant amount of input rna and complications led by non-specific mapping of short reads. the ion ampliseq™ transcriptome human gene expression kit  was recently introduced by life technologies as a whole-transcriptome, targeted gene quantification kit to overcome these limitations of rna-seq. to assess the performance of this new methodology, we performed a comprehensive comparison of ampliseq with rna-seq using two well-established next-generation sequencing platforms . we analyzed standard reference rna samples and rna samples obtained from human induced pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes .


RESULTS
using published data from two standard rna reference samples, we observed a strong concordance of log <dig> fold change for all genes when comparing ampliseq to illumina hiseq  and ion torrent proton . we used roc, matthew’s correlation coefficient and rmsd to determine the overall performance characteristics. all three statistical methods demonstrate ampliseq as a highly accurate method for differential gene expression analysis. additionally, for genes with high abundance, ampliseq outperforms the two rna-seq methods. when analyzing four closely related hipsc-cm lines, we show that both ampliseq and rna-seq capture similar global gene expression patterns consistent with known sources of variations.


CONCLUSIONS
our study indicates that ampliseq excels in the limiting areas of rna-seq for gene expression quantification analysis. thus, ampliseq stands as a very sensitive and cost-effective approach for very large scale gene expression analysis and mrna marker screening with high accuracy.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
targeted gene quantificationdifferential gene expressionhipsc-cmsnational institutes of health  nhlbiu01hl107437broeckel ulrich http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000968american heart association15post22490013li wenli issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

