BACKGROUND
pullulanase is an important debranching enzyme and has been widely utilized to hydrolyse the α- <dig>  glucosidic linkages in starch/sugar industry. selecting new bacterial strains or improving bacterial strains is a prerequisite and effective solution in industrial applications. although many pullulanase genes have been cloned and sequenced, there is no report of p. polymyxa type i pullulanase gene or the recombinant strain. meanwhile most of the type i pullulanase investigated exhibit thermophilic or mesophilic properties. there are just few reports of cold-adapted pullulanases, which have optimum activity at moderate temperature and exhibit rather high catalytic activity at cold. previously, six strains showing distinct pullulan degradation ability were isolated using enrichment procedures. as containing novel bacterium resource and significant pullulanase activity, strain nws-pp <dig> was selected for in-depth study.

methods
in this study, a type i pullulanase gene  was obtained from the strain p. polymyxa nws-pp <dig> by degenerate primers. through optimization of induced conditions, the recombinant puln achieved functional soluble expression by low temperature induction. the enzyme characterizations including the enzyme activity/stability, optimum temperature, optimum ph and substrate specificity were also described through protein purification.


RESULTS
the pullulanase gene , encoding a novel cold-adapted type i pullulanase , was obtained from isolated strain paenibacillus polymyxa nws-pp <dig>  the gene had an open reading frame of 2532-bp and was functionally expressed in escherichia coli through optimization of induced conditions. the level of functional puln-like protein reached the maximum after induction for 16 h at 20 °c and reached about  <dig>  mg/ml  with an activity of  <dig>  u/ml. the purified recombinant enzyme with an apparent molecular mass of about 96 kda was able to attack specifically the α- <dig>  linkages in pullulan to generate maltotriose as the major product. the purified puln showed optimal activity at ph  <dig>  and 35 °c, and retained more than 40 % of the maximum activity at 10 °c . the pullulanase activity was significantly enhanced by co2+ and mn2+, meanwhile cu2+ and sds inhibited pullulanase activity completely. the km and vmax values of purified puln were  <dig>  mg/ml and  <dig>  u/mg, respectively. the puln hydrolyzed pullulan, amylopectin, starch, and glycogen, but not amylose. substrate specificity and products analysis proved that the purified pullulanase from paenibacillus polymyxa nws-pp <dig> belong to a type i pullulanase.


CONCLUSIONS
this report of the novel type i pullulanase in paenibacillus polymyxa would contribute to pullulanase research from paenibacillus spp. significantly. also, the cold-adapted pullulanase produced in recombinant strain shows the potential application.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pullulanase type ipaenibacillus polymyxacold-adapted pullulanasefunctional expressionenzymatic propertiesstarch hydrolysis productsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

