BACKGROUND
although there have been several reports on social isolation induced mood alterations, the independent contribution of monotonous environment in mediating mood alterations has been less studied. in view of the above, the present study is aimed at investigating the relative contribution of monotony towards mood alterations during isolation stress. monotony was induced in a specially designed isolation chamber in male sprague-dawley rats in the presence or absence of isolation by housing animals singly  or in pairs . novel objects were introduced to disrupt monotony in singly housed animals  or paired housed animals . behavioural alterations were assessed using open field test , elevated plus maze  and forced swim test . neuro-morphological changes in the ca <dig> region of hippocampus were studied by cresyl violet and golgi-cox staining. hippocampal serotonin and 5-hydroxy indole acetic acid  levels were estimated along with the expression of phospho-insulin like growth factor- <dig> receptor  and phospho cyclic amp response-element binding protein . serotonin was depleted by administering para-chlorophenylalanine  to a separate ph group , phno group  and shno group  to determine the role of serotonin in mediating monotony induced emotional mal-adaptations.


RESULTS
the results showed anxiety and depression like traits in both ph and sh groups during behavioural test such as oft, epm and fst. pyknosis along with decrease in apical dendritic arborization was observed in the ca <dig> region of sh group along with decrease in serotonin and reduced expression of pigf-1r and pcreb. disrupting monotony through intervention of novel objects in phno and shno groups ameliorated anxiety and depression like traits and augmented pigf-1r along with increase in serotonin level. depletion of hippocampal serotonin level by pcpa administration in phnopcpa and shnopcpa groups on the other hand resulted in altered mood state despite disruption of monotony by novel objects intervention.


CONCLUSIONS
the findings of our study suggest that monotonous environment independently contributes to impairment in mood state and disrupting monotony by intervention of novel objects during social isolation prevents mood disorders and emotional maladaptation through up regulation of hippocampal pigf-1r and increase in serotonin.

keywords
monotonysocial isolation stressanxietydepressionserotoninnovel objectsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

