BACKGROUND
in mammals, vasopressin  is released from magnocellular neurons of the hypothalamus when osmotic pressure exceeds a fixed set-point. avp participates to the hydromineral homeostasis  by controlling water excretion at the level of the kidneys. our current understanding of the hh and avp secretion is the result of a vast amount of data collected over the five past decades. this experimental data was collected using a number of systems under different conditions, giving a fragmented view of the components involved in hh.


RESULTS
here, we present a high-level model of the rat hh based on selected published results to predict short-term  to long-term  variation of six major homeostatic parameters:  the extracellular sodium concentration,  the avp concentration,  the intracellular volume,  the extracellular volume,  the urine volume and  the water intake. the simulation generates quantitative predictions like the daily mean of the extracellular sodium concentration , the avp concentration, , the intracellular volume , the extracellular volume , the urine volume  and the cumulative water intake . the simulation also computes the dynamics of all these parameters with a high temporal resolution of one minute. this high resolution predicts the circadian fluctuation of the avp secretion  and defines the limits of a restoration and a maintenance phase in the hh . moreover, the simulation can predict the action of pharmacological compounds that disrupt the hh. as an example, we tested the action of a diuretic  combined with a sodium deficient diet to generate quantitative prediction on the extracellular sodium concentration  and the need-induced water intake . these simulated data are compatible with experimental data .


CONCLUSIONS
the quantitative agreement of the predictions with published experimental data indicates that our simplified model of the hh integrates most of the essential systems to predict realistic physiological values and dynamics under a set of normal and perturbed hydromineral conditions.

