BACKGROUND
in modern agriculture, the call for an alternative crop protection strategy increases because of the desired reduction of fungicide and pesticide use and the continuously evolving resistance of pathogens and pests to agrochemicals. the direct activation of the plant immune system does not provide a promising plant protection measure because of high fitness costs. however, upon treatment with certain natural or synthetic compounds, plant cells can promote to a fitness cost-saving, primed state of enhanced defense. in the primed state, plants respond to biotic and abiotic stress with faster and stronger activation of defense, and this is often associated with immunity and abiotic stress tolerance. until now, the identification of chemical compounds with priming-inducing activity  relied on tedious and invasive approaches, or required the late detection of secreted furanocoumarin phytoalexins in parsley cell cultures. thus, simple, fast, straightforward, and noninvasive techniques for identifying priming-inducing compounds for plant protection are very welcome.


RESULTS
this report demonstrates that a respiration activity-monitoring system  can identify compounds with defense priming-inducing activity in parsley cell suspension in culture. ramos relies on the quasi-continuous, noninvasive online determination of the oxygen transfer rate . treatment of parsley culture cells with the known plant activator salicylic acid , a natural plant defense signal, resulted in an otr increase. addition of the defense elicitor pep <dig>  a cell wall peptide of phythophthora sojae, induced two distinctive otr peaks that were higher in sa-primed cells than in unprimed cells upon pep <dig> challenge. both, the otr increase after priming with sa and the pep <dig> challenge were dose-dependent. furthermore, there was a close correlation of a compound’s activity to enhance the oxygen consumption in parsley cells and its capacity to prime pep13-induced furanocoumarin secretion as evaluated by fluorescence spectroscopy.


CONCLUSIONS
ramos noninvasively determines the otr as a measure of the metabolic activity of plant cells. chemical enhancement of oxygen consumption by salicylic derivatives in parsley cell suspension cultures correlates with the induction of the primed state of enhanced defense that enhances the quantity of pep13-induced furanocoumarin phytoalexins. treatment with the priming-active compounds methyl jasmonate and pyraclostrobin also resulted in an enhanced respiration activity. thus, ramos is a novel technology for identifying priming-inducing compounds for agriculture.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
parsley cell cultureprimingsalicylic acidpep13oxygen transfer raterespiration activity monitoring system issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

