BACKGROUND
the usda agriculture research service national plant germplasm system  preserves the largest sorghum germplasm collection in the world, which includes  <dig>  accessions from the center of diversity in ethiopia. the characterization of this exotic germplasm at a genome-wide scale will improve conservation efforts and its utilization in research and breeding programs. therefore, we phenotyped a representative core set of  <dig> ethiopian accessions at two locations for agronomic traits and characterized the genomes.


RESULTS
using genotyping-by-sequencing, we identified  <dig>  single-nucleotide polymorphism  markers distributed across the entire genome. over half of the alleles were rare . the genetic profile of each accession was unique , and the average genetic distance among accessions was  <dig> . based on population structure and cluster analyses, we separated the collection into  <dig> populations with pairwise f
st values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . in total,  <dig> accessions  were assigned to one of these populations with an ancestry membership coefficient of larger than  <dig> ; these covered 90% of the total genomic variation. we characterized these populations based on agronomic and seed compositional traits. we performed a cluster analysis with the sorghum association panel based on  <dig>  snps and determined that nine of the ethiopian populations expanded the genetic diversity in the panel. genome-wide association analysis demonstrated that these low-coverage data and the observed population structure could be employed for the genomic dissection of important phenotypes in this core set of ethiopian sorghum germplasm.


CONCLUSIONS
the npgs ethiopian sorghum germplasm is a genetically and phenotypically diverse collection comprising  <dig> populations with high levels of admixture. genetic associations with agronomic traits can be used to improve the screening of exotic germplasm for selection of specific populations. we detected many rare alleles, suggesting that this germplasm contains potentially useful undiscovered alleles, but their discovery and characterization will require extensive effort. the genotypic data available for these accessions provide a valuable resource for sorghum breeders and geneticists to effectively improve crops.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
sorghum bicolorexotic germplasmgenotyping-by-sequencinggenome-wide association studypopulation structureissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

