BACKGROUND
babesia bovis is an apicomplexan parasite that causes babesiosis in infected cattle. genomes of pathogens contain promising information that can facilitate the development of methods for controlling infections. although the genome of b. bovis is publically available, annotated gene models are not highly reliable prior to experimental validation. therefore, we validated a preproposed gene model of b. bovis and extended the associated annotations on the basis of experimentally obtained full-length expressed sequence tags .


RESULTS
from in vitro cultured merozoites,  <dig>  clones harboring full-length cdnas were sequenced from both ends using the sanger method, and  <dig>  full-length cdnas were assembled. these were then clustered, and a nonredundant referential data set of  <dig>  full-length cdna sequences was constructed. the comparison of the preproposed gene model with our data set identified  <dig> identical genes,  <dig> almost identical genes,  <dig>  genes with potential structural inconsistencies, and  <dig> novel genes. the median length of 5' untranslated regions  was 152 nt. subsequently, we identified  <dig>  transcription start sites  and  <dig>  transcriptionally active regions  by examining 5' ests. we identified atgggg and ccccat sites as consensus motifs in tars that were distributed around -50 bp from tsss. in addition, we found acaca, tgtgt, and tatat sites, which were distributed periodically around tsss in cycles of approximately 150 bp. moreover, related periodical distributions were not observed in mammalian promoter regions.


CONCLUSIONS
the observations in this study indicate the utility of integrated bioinformatics and experimental data for improving genome annotations. in particular, full-length cdnas with one-base resolution for tsss enabled the identification of consensus motifs in promoter sequences and demonstrated clear distributions of identified motifs. these observations allowed the illustration of a model promoter composition, which supports the differences in transcriptional regulation frameworks between apicomplexan parasites and mammals.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
babesia bovisexpressed sequence tagsfull-length cdnatranscription start sitescis-elementsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

