BACKGROUND
estrogens are known to regulate the proliferation of breast cancer cells and to modify their phenotypic properties. identification of estrogen-regulated genes in human breast tumors is an essential step toward understanding the molecular mechanisms of estrogen action in cancer. to this end we generated and compared the serial analysis of gene expression  profiles of  <dig> human breast carcinomas based on their estrogen receptor α  status. thus, producing a breast cancer sage database of almost  <dig>  million tags, representing over  <dig>  transcripts.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> transcripts differentially expressed between erα-positive  and erα-negative  primary breast tumors . furthermore, we identified  <dig> high-affinity estrogen responsive elements  distributed on the promoter regions of  <dig> out of the  <dig> up-modulated genes in erα  breast tumors. in brief, we observed predominantly up-regulation of cell growth related genes, dna binding and transcription factor activity related genes based on gene ontology  biological functional annotation. go terms over-representation analysis showed a statistically significant enrichment of various transcript families including: metal ion binding related transcripts , calcium ion binding related transcripts  and steroid hormone receptor activity related transcripts . sage data associated with erα status was compared with reported information from breast cancer dna microarrays studies. a significant proportion of erα associated gene expression changes was validated by this cross-platform comparison. however, our sage study also identified novel sets of genes as highly expressed in erα  invasive breast tumors not previously reported. these observations were further validated in an independent set of human breast tumors by means of real time rt-pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
the integration of the breast cancer comparative transcriptome analysis based on erα status coupled to the genome-wide identification of high-affinity eres and go over-representation analysis, provide useful information for validation and discovery of signaling networks related to estrogen response in this malignancy.

