BACKGROUND

corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis is a pathogen classified into two biovars: c. pseudotuberculosis biovar ovis, the etiologic agent of caseous lymphadenitis and c. pseudotuberculosis biovar equi, which causes ulcerative lymphangitis. the available whole genome sequences of different c. pseudotuberculosis strains have enabled identify difference of genes related both virulence and physiology of each biovar. to evaluate be this difference could reflect at proteomic level and to better understand the shared factors and the exclusive ones of biovar ovis and biovar equi strains, we applied the label-free quantitative proteomic to characterize the proteome of the strains: 1002_ovis and 258_equi, isolated from goat  and equine , respectively.


RESULTS
from this analysis, we characterized a total of  <dig> proteins in 1002_ovis and  <dig> in 258_equi with high confidence. moreover, the core-proteome between 1002_ovis and 258_equi obtained here is composed of  <dig> proteins involved in different cellular processes, which could be necessary for the free living of c. pseudotuberculosis. in addition,  <dig> proteins from this core-proteome presented change in abundant with statistically significant differences. considering the exclusive proteome, we detected strain-specific proteins to each strain. when correlated, the exclusive proteome of each strain and proteome with change in abundant, the proteomic differences, between the 1002_ovis and 258_equi, this related to proteins involved in cellular metabolism, information storage and processing, cellular processes and signaling.


CONCLUSIONS
this study reports the first comparative proteomic study of the biovars ovis and equi of c. pseudotuberculosis. the results generated in this study provide information about factors which can contribute to understanding both the physiology and the virulence of this pathogen.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
corynebacterium pseudotuberculosiscaseous lymphadenitisulcerative lymphangitisproteomic bacteriallabel-free proteomics, proteomicissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

