BACKGROUND
archaeology reports millenary cultural contacts between peruvian coast-andes and the amazon yunga, a rainforest transitional region between andes and lower amazonia. to clarify the relationships between cultural and biological evolution of these populations, in particular between amazon yungas and andeans, we used dna-sequence data, a model-based bayesian approach and several statistical validations to infer a set of demographic parameters.


RESULTS
we found that the genetic diversity of the shimaa  is a subset of that of quechuas from central-andes. using the isolation-with-migration population genetics model, we inferred that the shimaa ancestors were a small subgroup that split less than 5300 years ago  from an ancestral andean population. after the split, the most plausible scenario compatible with our results is that the ancestors of shimaas moved toward the peruvian amazon yunga and incorporated the culture and language of some of their neighbors, but not a substantial amount of their genes. we validated our results using approximate bayesian computations, posterior predictive tests and the analysis of pseudo-observed datasets.


CONCLUSIONS
we presented a case study in which model-based bayesian approaches, combined with necessary statistical validations, shed light into the prehistoric demographic relationship between andeans and a population from the amazon yunga. our results offer a testable model for the peopling of this large transitional environmental region between the andes and the lower amazonia. however, studies on larger samples and involving more populations of these regions are necessary to confirm if the predominant andean biological origin of the shimaas is the rule, and not the exception.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
population genetics inferenceshuman evolutionnative americanissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

