BACKGROUND
new snp marker platforms offer the opportunity to investigate the relationships between wheat cultivars from different regions and assess the mechanism and processes that have led to adaptation to particular production environments. wheat breeding has a long history in kazakhstan and the aim of this study was to explore the relationship between key varieties from kazakhstan and germplasm from breeding programs for other regions.


RESULTS
the study revealed  <dig>  polymorphic markers amongst ten cultivars, of which  <dig>  were mapped in the consensus genetic map. mapped snp markers were distributed almost equally across the a and b genomes, with between  <dig> and  <dig> markers assigned to each chromosome. marker coverage was approximately 10-fold lower in the d genome. there were  <dig> snp markers identified as unique to specific cultivars, and clusters of these markers  showed specific patterns on the consensus genetic map for each cultivar. significant intra-varietal genetic polymorphism was identified in three cultivars . phylogenetic analysis based on inter-varietal polymorphism showed that the very old cultivar erythrospermum  <dig> was the most genetically distinct from the other nine cultivars from kazakhstan, falling in a clade together with the american cultivar sonora and genotypes from central and south asia. the modern cultivar kazakhstanskaya  <dig> also fell into a separate clade, together with the american cultivar thatcher. the remaining eight cultivars shared a single sub-clade but were categorised into four clusters.


CONCLUSIONS
the accumulated data for snp marker polymorphisms amongst bread wheat genotypes from kazakhstan may be used for studying genetic diversity in bread wheat, with potential application for marker-assisted selection and the preparation of a set of genotype-specific markers.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bread wheatgenetic polymorphismclusters of unique markersgenetic phylogenykazakhstannext-generation sequencing single nucleotide polymorphism unique markersissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

