BACKGROUND
in bacteria, the weak correlations at the genome scale between mrna and protein levels suggest that not all mrnas are translated with the same efficiency. to experimentally explore mrna translational level regulation at the systemic level, the detailed translational status  of all mrnas was measured in the model bacterium lactococcus lactis in exponential phase growth.


RESULTS
results demonstrated that only part of the entire population of each mrna species was engaged in translation. for transcripts involved in translation, the polysome size reached a maximum of  <dig> ribosomes. the fraction of mrna engaged in translation  and ribosome density were not constant for all genes. this high degree of variability was analyzed by bioinformatics and statistical modeling in order to identify general rules of translational regulation. for most of the genes, the ribosome density was lower than the maximum value revealing major control of translation by initiation. gene function was a major translational regulatory determinant. both ribosome occupancy and ribosome density were particularly high for transcriptional regulators, demonstrating the positive role of translational regulation in the coordination of transcriptional networks. mrna stability was a negative regulatory factor of ribosome occupancy and ribosome density, suggesting antagonistic regulation of translation and mrna stability. furthermore, ribosome occupancy was identified as a key component of intracellular protein levels underlining the importance of translational regulation.


CONCLUSIONS
we have determined, for the first time in a bacterium, the detailed translational status for all mrnas present in the cell. we have demonstrated experimentally the high diversity of translational states allowing individual gene differentiation and the importance of translation-level regulation in the complex process linking gene expression to protein synthesis.

translational regulationmrna ribosometranslatomestatistical modelinglactococcus lactis

