BACKGROUND
agriculture is facing enormous challenges to feed a growing population in the face of rapidly evolving pests and pathogens. the rusts, in particular, are a major pathogen of cereal crops with the potential to cause large reductions in yield. improving stable disease resistance is an on-going major and challenging focus for many plant breeding programs, due to the rapidly evolving nature of the pathogen. sorghum is a major summer cereal crop that is also a host for a rust pathogen puccinia purpurea, which occurs in almost all sorghum growing areas of the world, causing direct and indirect yield losses in sorghum worldwide, however knowledge about its genetic control is still limited. in order to further investigate this issue, qtl and association mapping methods were implemented to study rust resistance in three bi-parental populations and an association mapping set of elite breeding lines in different environments.


RESULTS
in total,  <dig> significant or highly significant qtl and  <dig> suggestive rust resistance qtl were identified representing  <dig> unique genomic regions. comparisons across populations within the current study and with rust qtl identified previously in both sorghum and maize revealed a high degree of correspondence in qtl location. negative phenotypic correlations were observed between rust, maturity and height, indicating a trend for both early maturing and shorter genotypes to be more susceptible to rust.


CONCLUSIONS
the significant amount of qtl co-location across traits, in addition to the consistency in the direction of qtl allele effects, has provided evidence to support pleiotropic qtl action across rust, height, maturity and stay-green, supporting the role of carbon stress in susceptibility to rust. classical rust resistance qtl regions that did not co-locate with height, maturity or stay-green qtl were found to be significantly enriched for the defence-related nbs-encoding gene family, in contrast to the lack of defence-related gene enrichment in multi-trait effect rust resistance qtl. the distinction of disease resistance qtl hot-spots, enriched with defence-related gene families from qtl which impact on development and partitioning, provides plant breeders with knowledge which will allow for fast-tracking varieties with both durable pathogen resistance and appropriate adaptive traits.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rust resistancesorghumpleiotropyheightmaturitystay-greenqtl mappingassociation mappingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

