BACKGROUND
previous evaluation by different molecular and physiological assays of staphylococcus aureus  responses to heat shock exposure yielded a still fragmentary view of the mechanisms determining bacterial survival or death at supra-physiological temperatures. this study analyzed diverse facets of s. aureus heat-shock adjustment by recording global transcriptomic and metabolic responses of bacterial cultures shifted for  <dig> min from 37°c to a sub-lethal  or eventually lethal  temperature. a relevant metabolic model of the combined action of specific stress response mechanisms with more general, energy-regulating metabolic pathways in heat-shocked s. aureus is presented.


RESULTS
while s. aureus cultures shifted to 43°c or left at 37°c showed marginal differences in growth and survival rates, bacterial cultures exposed to 48°c showed a rapid growth arrest followed by a subsequent decline in viable counts. the most substantial heat shock-induced changes at both 43°c and 48°c occurred in transcript levels of hrca- and ctsr-regulated genes, encoding classical chaperones dnak and groesl, and some hsp100/clp atpases components, respectively. other metabolic pathways up-regulated by s. aureus exposure at 48°c included genes encoding several enzymes coping with oxidative stress, and dna damage, or/and impaired osmotic balance. some major components of the pentose phosphate cycle and gluconeogenesis were also up-regulated, which reflected depletion of free glucose by bacterial cultures grown in mueller-hinton broth prior to heat shock. in contrast, most purine- and pyrimidine-synthesis pathway components and amino acyl-trna synthetases were down-regulated at 48°c, as well as arginine deiminase and major fermentative pathway components, such as alcohol, lactate and formate dehydrogenases. despite the heat-induced, increased requirements for atp-dependent macromolecular repair mechanisms combined with declining energy sources, intracellular atp levels remained remarkably constant during heat shock.


CONCLUSIONS
the sequential loss of replication and viability at 48°c cannot be explained by significant reductions in intracellular atp levels, but may reflect atp rerouting for macromolecular repair mechanisms and cell survival. our metabolic model also suggests that heat-stressed s. aureus should down-regulate the production of potential, dna-damaging reactive oxygen species that might result from electron transport-generated atp, involving excessive levels of free heavy metals, in particular iron.

