BACKGROUND
hemostasis is a critical and active function of the blood mediated by platelets. therefore, the prevention of pathological platelet aggregation is of great importance as well as of pharmaceutical and medical interest. endogenous platelet inhibition is predominantly based on cyclic nucleotides  elevation and subsequent cyclic nucleotide-dependent protein kinase  activation. in turn, platelet phosphodiesterases  and protein phosphatases counterbalance their activity. this main inhibitory pathway in human platelets is crucial for countervailing unwanted platelet activation. consequently, the regulators of cyclic nucleotide signaling are of particular interest to pharmacology and therapeutics of atherothrombosis. modeling of pharmacodynamics allows understanding this intricate signaling and supports the precise description of these pivotal targets for pharmacological modulation.


RESULTS
we modeled dynamically concentration-dependent responses of pathway effectors  to cyclic nucleotide signaling as well as to downstream signaling events and verified resulting model predictions by experimental data. experiments with various camp affecting compounds including anti-platelet drugs and their combinations revealed a high fidelity, fine-tuned camp signaling in platelets without cross-talk to the cgmp pathway. the model and the data provide evidence for two independent feedback loops: pka, which is activated by elevated camp levels in the platelet, subsequently inhibits adenylyl cyclase  but as well activates pde <dig>  by multi-experiment fitting, we established a comprehensive dynamic model with one predictive, optimized and validated set of parameters. different pharmacological conditions  are successfully tested and simulated, including statistical validation and sensitivity analysis. downstream cyclic nucleotide signaling events target different phosphorylation sites for camp- and cgmp-dependent protein kinases  in the vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein . vasp phosphorylation as well as camp levels resulting from different drug strengths and combined stimulants were quantitatively modeled. these predictions were again experimentally validated. high sensitivity of the signaling pathway at low concentrations is involved in a fine-tuned balance as well as stable activation of this inhibitory cyclic nucleotide pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
on the basis of experimental data, literature mining and database screening we established a dynamic in silico model of cyclic nucleotide signaling and probed its signaling sensitivity. thoroughly validated, it successfully predicts drug combination effects on platelet function, including synergism, antagonism and regulatory loops.

