BACKGROUND
interaction of non-structural protein 5a  of hepatitis c virus  with human kinases namely, casein kinase 1α  and protein kinase r  have different functional implications such as regulation of viral replication and evasion of interferon induced immune response respectively. understanding the structural and molecular basis of interactions of the viral protein with two different human kinases can be useful in developing strategies for treatment against hcv.


RESULTS
serine  <dig> of ns5a is known to be phosphorylated by human ck1α. a structural model of ns5a peptide containing phosphoacceptor residue serine  <dig> bound to ck1α has been generated using the known 3-d structures of kinase-peptide complexes. the substrate interacting residues in ck1α has been identified from the model and these are found to be conserved well in the ck <dig> family. ck1α – substrate peptide complex has also been used to understand the structural basis of association between ck1α and its other viral stress induced substrate, tumour suppressor p <dig> transactivation domain which has a crystal structure available.

interaction of ns5a with another human kinase pkr is primarily genotype specific. ns5a from genotype 1b has been shown to interact and inhibit pkr whereas ns5a from genotype 2a/3a are unable to bind and inhibit pkr efficiently. this is one of the main reasons for the varied response to interferon therapy in hcv patients across different genotypes. using pkr crystal structure, sequence alignment and evolutionary trace analysis some of the critical residues responsible for the interaction of ns5a 1b with pkr have been identified.


CONCLUSIONS
the substrate interacting residues in ck1α have been identified using the structural model of kinase - substrate peptide. the pkr interacting ns5a 1b residues have also been predicted using pkr crystal structure, ns5a sequence analysis along with known experimental results. functional significance and nature of interaction of interferon sensitivity determining region and variable region  <dig> of ns5a in different genotypes with pkr which was experimentally shown are also supported by the findings of evolutionary trace analysis. designing inhibitors to prevent this interaction could enable the hcv genotype  <dig> infected patients respond well to interferon therapy.

casein kinase 1αhepatitis c virusinterferon therapykinase-substrate complexnon-structural protein 5aprotein kinase r

