BACKGROUND
normalization of gene expression data refers to the comparison of expression values using reference standards that are consistent across all conditions of an experiment. in pcr studies, genes designated as "housekeeping genes" have been used as internal reference genes under the assumption that their expression is stable and independent of experimental conditions. however, verification of this assumption is rarely performed. here we assess the use of gene microarray analysis to facilitate selection of internal reference sequences with higher expression stability across experimental conditions than can be expected using traditional selection methods.

we recently demonstrated that relative gene expression from qrt-pcr data normalized using gapdh, alg <dig> and rpl13a expression values mirrored relative expression using quantile normalization in robust multichip analysis  on the affymetrix® genechip® rhesus macaque genome array.

having shown that qrt-pcr and affymetrix® genechip® data from the same hormone replacement therapy  study yielded concordant results, we used quantile-normalized gene microarray data to identify the most stably expressed among probe sets for prospective internal reference genes across three brain regions from the hrt study and an additional study of normally menstruating rhesus macaques . gene selection was limited to  <dig> previously published human "housekeeping" genes. twelve animals were used per study, and three brain regions were analyzed from each animal. gene expression stabilities were determined using genorm, normfinder and bestkeeper software packages.


RESULTS
sequences co-annotated for ribosomal protein s27a , and ubiquitin were among the most stably expressed under all conditions and selection criteria used for both studies. higher annotation quality on the human genechip® facilitated more targeted analysis than could be accomplished using the rhesus genechip®. in the cycle study, multiple probe sets annotated for actin, gamma  <dig>  showed high signal intensity and were among the most stably expressed.


CONCLUSIONS
using gene microarray analysis, we identified genes showing high expression stability under various sex-steroid environments in different regions of the rhesus macaque brain. use of quantile-normalized microarray gene expression values represents an improvement over traditional methods of selecting internal reference genes for pcr analysis.

