BACKGROUND
dairy cattle breeding objectives are in general similar across countries, but environment and management conditions may vary, giving rise to slightly different selection pressures applied to a given trait. this potentially leads to different selection pressures to loci across the genome that, if large enough, may give rise to differential regions with high levels of homozygosity. the objective of this study was to characterize differences and similarities in the location and frequency of homozygosity related measures of jersey dairy cows and bulls from the united states , australia  and new zealand .


RESULTS
the populations consisted of a subset of genotyped jersey cows born in us  and au  and jersey bulls progeny tested from the us , au  and nz . differences and similarities across populations were characterized using a principal component analysis  and a run of homozygosity  statistic , which counts the frequency of a single nucleotide polymorphism  being in a roh of at least  <dig> snp. regions that exhibited high frequencies of roh <dig> and those that had significantly different roh <dig> frequencies between populations were investigated for their association with milk yield traits. within sex, the pca revealed slight differentiation between the populations, with the greatest occurring between the us and nz bulls. regions with high levels of roh <dig> for all populations were detected on bta <dig> and bta <dig> while several other regions differed in roh <dig> frequency across populations, the largest number occurring for the us and nz bull contrast. in addition, multiple regions with different roh <dig> frequencies across populations were found to be associated with milk yield traits.


CONCLUSIONS
multiple regions exhibited differential roh <dig> across au, nz and us cow and bull populations, an interpretation is that locations of the genome are undergoing differential directional selection. two regions on bta <dig> and bta <dig> had high roh <dig> frequencies across all populations and will be investigated further to determine the gene undergoing directional selection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dairy cattleruns of homozygositysignature of selectionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

