BACKGROUND
the production of recombinant monoclonal antibodies in mammalian cell culture is of high priority in research and medical fields. a critical step in this process is the isolation of the antigen-binding domain sequences of antibodies possessing the desired properties. many different techniques have been described to achieve this goal, but all have shortcomings; most techniques have problems with robustness, are time-consuming and costly, or have complications in the transfer from isolation to production phase. here, we report a novel hybrifree technology for the development of monoclonal antibodies from different species that is robust, rapid, inexpensive and flexible and can be used for the subsequent production of antibodies in mammalian cell factories.


RESULTS
hybrifree technology is illustrated herein via detailed examples of isolating mouse, rabbit and chicken monoclonal antibody sequences from immunized animals. starting from crude spleen samples, antigen capturing of specific b-cells is performed initially. cdna of antibody variable domains is amplified from the captured cells and used a source material for simple and rapid restriction/ligation free cloning of expression vector library in order to produce scfv-fc or intact igg antibodies. the vectors can be directly used for screening purposes as well as for the subsequent production of the developed monoclonal antibodies in mammalian cell culture. the antibodies isolated by the method have been shown to be functional in different immunoassays, including elisa, immunofluorescence and western blot. in addition, we demonstrate that by using a modified method including a negative selection step, we can isolate specific antibodies targeting the desired epitope and eliminate antibodies directed to undesired off-targets.


CONCLUSIONS
hybrifree can be used for the reliable development of monoclonal antibodies and their subsequent production in mammalian cells. this simple protocol requires neither the culturing of b-cells nor single-cell manipulations, and only standard molecular biology laboratory equipment is needed. in principle, the method is applicable to any species for which antibody cdna sequence information is available.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
recombinant antibodiesmammalian cell based screening mammalian cell cultureprotein productionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

