BACKGROUND
nowadays, the challenge for biotechnology is to develop tools for agriculture and industry to provide plants characterized by productivity and quality that will satisfy the growing demand for different kinds of natural products. to meet the challenge, the generation and application of genetically modified plants is justified. however, the strong social resistance to genetically modified organisms and restrictive regulations in european union countries necessitated the development of a new technology for new plant types generation which uses the knowledge resulting from analysis of genetically modified plants to generate favourably altered plants while omitting the introduction of heterologous genes to their genome. four-year experiments led to the development of a technology inducing heritable epigenetic gene activation without transgenesis.


RESULTS
the method comprises the induction of changes in methylation/demethylation of the endogenous gene by the plant’s treatment with short oligodeoxynucleotides antisense to the coding region. in vitro cultured plants and f <dig> generation flax plants overproducing the β- <dig> -glucanase gene  were characterized by up-regulation of β-glucanase and chitinase genes, decreases in the methylation of ccgg sequences in the β-glucanase gene and in total dna methylation and, more importantly, reasonable resistance against fusarium infection. in addition, emo-βglu flax obtained by this technology showed similar features as those obtained by genetic engineering.


CONCLUSIONS
to our best knowledge, this is the first report on plant gene activation by treatment with oligodeoxynucleotides homologous to the coding region of the gene. apart from the evident effectiveness, the most important issue is that the emo method allows generation of favourably altered plants, whose cultivation makes the plant producer independent from the complicated procedure of obtaining an agreement on gmo release into the environment and whose products might be more easily introduced to the global market.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
flax resistancefusarium infectionepigenetically modified organismdna methylation/demethylationoligo technologyβ- <dig> -glucanaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

