BACKGROUND
the large-scale analysis of phenomic data  in microbial bioinformatics has been hampered by the lack of tools to rapidly and accurately extract phenotypic data from existing legacy text in the field of microbiology. to quickly obtain knowledge on the distribution and evolution of microbial traits, an information extraction system needed to be developed to extract phenotypic characters from large numbers of taxonomic descriptions so they can be used as input to existing phylogenetic analysis software packages.


RESULTS
we report the development and evaluation of microbial phenomics information extractor . micropie is a natural language processing application that uses a robust supervised classification algorithm  to identify characters from sentences in prokaryotic taxonomic descriptions, followed by a combination of algorithms applying linguistic rules with groups of known terms to extract characters as well as character states. the input to micropie is a set of taxonomic descriptions . the output is a taxon-by-character matrix—with taxa in the rows and a set of  <dig> pre-defined characters  in the columns. the performance of micropie was evaluated against a gold standard matrix and another student-made matrix. results show that, compared to the gold standard, micropie extracted  <dig> characters  with a relaxed f <dig> score >  <dig>  and  <dig> characters  with relaxed f <dig> scores ranging between  <dig>  and  <dig> . inclusion of a character prediction component  improved the overall performance of micropie, notably the precision. evaluated against the same gold standard, micropie performed significantly better than the undergraduate students.


CONCLUSIONS
micropie is a promising new tool for the rapid and efficient extraction of phenotypic character information from prokaryotic taxonomic descriptions. however, further development, including incorporation of ontologies, will be necessary to improve the performance of the extraction for some character types.

keywords
information extractionphenotypic data extractionprokaryotic taxonomic descriptionsmicrobial phenotypescharacter matricessupport vector machinemachine learningtext miningalgorithm evaluationnatural language processinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationdeb-1208685dbi-1147266cui hong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

