BACKGROUND
an escherichia coli strain in which recbcd has been genetically replaced by the bacteriophage λ red system engages in efficient recombination between its chromosome and linear double-stranded dna species sharing sequences with the chromosome. previous studies of this experimental system have focused on a gene replacement-type event, in which a  <dig>  kbp dsdna consisting of the cat gene and flanking lac operon sequences recombines with the e. coli chromosome to generate a chloramphenicol-resistant lac- recombinant. the dsdna was delivered into the cell as part of the chromosome of a non-replicating λ vector, from which it was released by the action of a restriction endonuclease in the infected cell. this study characterizes the genetic requirements and outcomes of a variety of additional red-promoted homologous recombination events producing lac+ recombinants.


RESULTS
a number of observations concerning recombination events between the chromosome and linear dnas were made:  formation of lac+ and lac- recombinants depended upon the same recombination functions.  high multiplicity and high chromosome copy number favored lac+ recombinant formation.  the lac+ recombinants were unstable, segregating lac- progeny.  a tetracycline-resistance marker in a site of the phage chromosome distant from cat was not frequently co-inherited with cat.  recombination between phage sequences in the linear dna and cryptic prophages in the chromosome was responsible for most of the observed lac+ recombinants. in addition, observations were made concerning recombination events between the chromosome and circular dnas:  formation of recombinants depended upon both reca and, to a lesser extent, red.  the linked tetracycline-resistance marker was frequently co-inherited in this case.


CONCLUSIONS
the lac+ recombinants arise from events in which homologous recombination between the incoming linear dna and both lac and cryptic prophage sequences in the chromosome generates a partial duplication of the bacterial chromosome. when the incoming dna species is circular rather than linear, cointegrates are the most frequent type of recombinant.

