BACKGROUND
in bacterial systems, the sequence congruence of genomic dna  and cdna obtained following reverse transcription of rna, makes gdna an automatic target for qpcr primers. this could lead to aberrant gene expression quantification. this is why a rigorous treatment of bacterial rna with dnase i is usually required to remove any traces of carryover gdna. as bacterial rna is known to be extremely labile, any procedure that affects rna yield, such as dnase i treatment, can be logically assumed to also influence detection and quantification of gene transcripts, leading to either an underestimation or no detection at all. to address such problems, we have developed a novel and versatile taqman rt-qpcr compliant anchor sequence  for quantifying bacterial gene transcripts without the need for dnase i treatment.


RESULTS
a non-genomic anchor sequence, henceforth referred to as myt <dig> was designed using a synthetic dna sequence called myic, previously shown to share no significant homology to any known accession in the genbank database. the sequence characteristic of myt <dig> was kept within the design parameters required for the taqman rt-qpcr platform. the specificity and robustness of the novel myt <dig> sequence was validated on rna extracted from the bacterium pseudomonas sp. lbum <dig>  grown under liquid culture and spiked soil conditions. two transcripts, namely hcnc and phld, were quantified from these two experimental systems. using the myt <dig> anchor, no rt-qpcr signal was detected from non-dnase i treated rna, while strong signals were obtained using conventional reverse primers and rt-qpcr, indicating the presence of carryover gdna in the rna, extracted from either liquid culture or soil. serial treatment of the rna samples with dnase i  resulted in 50-70% loss of rna which, when submitted to conventional rt-qpcr, significantly altered the transcript numbers detected when compared to the myt4-based approach.


CONCLUSIONS
implementation of the versatile approach described in this study, which can be “retrofitted” to any existing taqman rt-qpcr system, should contribute to reducing the time and lowering the costs required to perform adequate bacterial rna purification for downstream quantification of gene transcripts.

real-time quantitative pcr dnase irnaanchor primed pcrpseudomonas sppmyichcncphld

