BACKGROUND
the magnitude and longevity of synaptic activity-induced changes in synaptic efficacy is quantified by measuring evoked responses whose potentiation requires gene transcription to persist for more than 2- <dig> hours. while miniature epscs  are also increased in amplitude and/or frequency during long-term potentiation , it is not known how long such changes persist or whether gene transcription is required.


RESULTS
we use whole-cell patch clamp recordings from dissociated hippocampal cultures to characterise for the first time the persistence and transcription dependency of mepsc upregulation during synaptic potentiation. the persistence of recurrent action potential bursting in these cultures is transcription-, translation- and nmda receptor-dependent thus providing an accessible model for long-lasting plasticity. blockade of gabaa-receptors with bicuculline for  <dig> minutes induced action potential bursting in all neurons and was maintained in 50-60% of neurons for more than  <dig> hours. throughout this period, the frequency but neither the amplitude of mepscs nor whole-cell ampa currents was markedly increased. the transcription blocker actinomycin d abrogated, within  <dig> hours of burst induction, both action potential bursting and the increase in mepscs. reversible blockade of action potentials during, but not after this  <dig> hour transcription period suppressed the increase in mepsc frequency and the recovery of burst activity at a time point  <dig> hours after induction.


CONCLUSIONS
these results indicate that increased mepsc frequency persists well beyond the  <dig> hour transcription-independent phase of plasticity in this model. this long-lasting mepsc upregulation is transcription-dependent and requires ongoing action potential activity during the initial  <dig> hour period but not thereafter. thus mepsc upregulation may underlie the long term, transcription-dependent persistence of action potential bursting. this provides mechanistic insight to link gene candidates already identified by gene chip analysis to long lasting plasticity in this in vitro model.

