BACKGROUND
egf receptor variant iii  is the most common variant of the egf receptor observed in human tumors. it results from the in frame deletion of exons 2- <dig> and the generation of a novel glycine residue at the junction of exons  <dig> and  <dig>  this novel juxtaposition of amino acids within the extra-cellular domain of the egf receptor creates a tumor specific and immunogenic epitope. egfrviii expression has been seen in many tumor types including glioblastoma multiforme , breast adenocarcinoma, non-small cell lung carcinoma, ovarian adenocarcinoma and prostate cancer, but has been rarely observed in normal tissue. because this variant is tumor specific and highly immunogenic, it can be used for both a diagnostic marker as well as a target for immunotherapy. unfortunately many of the monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies directed against egfrviii have cross reactivity to wild type egfr or other non-specific proteins. furthermore, a monoclonal antibody to egfrviii is not readily available to the scientific community.


RESULTS
in this study, we have developed a recombinant antibody that is specific for egfrviii, has little cross reactivity for the wild type receptor, and which can be easily produced. we initially designed a recombinant antibody with two anti-egfrviii single chain fv's linked together and a human igg <dig> fc component. to enhance the specificity of this antibody for egfrviii, we mutated tyrosine h <dig> of the cdrh <dig> domain and tyrosine h <dig> of the cdrh <dig> domain to phenylalanine for both the anti-egfrviii sequence inserts. this mutated recombinant antibody, called rabdmviii, specifically detects egfrviii expression in egfrviii expressing cell lines as well as in egfrviii expressing gbm primary tissue by western blot, immunohistochemistry  and immunofluorescence  and facs analysis. it does not recognize wild type egfr in any of these assays. the affinity of this antibody for egfrviii peptide is  <dig>  ×  <dig> m- <dig> as determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay .


CONCLUSIONS
this recombinant antibody thus holds great potential to be used as a research reagent and diagnostic tool in research laboratories and clinics because of its high quality, easy viability and unique versatility. this antibody is also a strong candidate to be investigated for further in vivo therapeutic studies.

