BACKGROUND
genes and signalling pathways involved in pluripotency have been studied extensively in mouse and human pre-implantation embryos and embryonic stem  cells. the unsuccessful attempts to generate es cell lines from other species including cattle suggests that other genes and pathways are involved in maintaining pluripotency in these species. to investigate which genes are involved in bovine pluripotency, expression profiles were generated from morula, blastocyst, trophectoderm and inner cell mass  samples using microarray analysis. as mapk inhibition can increase the nanog/gata <dig> ratio in the inner cell mass, additionally blastocysts were cultured in the presence of a mapk inhibitor and changes in gene expression in the inner cell mass were analysed.


RESULTS
between morula and blastocyst  <dig>  genes were differentially expressed and the largest differences were found in blastocyst up-regulated genes. gene ontology  analysis shows lipid metabolic process as the term most enriched with genes expressed at higher levels in blastocysts. genes with higher expression levels in morulae were enriched in the rna processing go term. of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes comparing icm and te, the expression of nanog, sox <dig> and pou5f <dig> was increased in the icm confirming their evolutionary preserved role in pluripotency. several genes implicated to be involved in differentiation or fate determination were also expressed at higher levels in the icm. genes expressed at higher levels in the icm were enriched in the rna splicing and regulation of gene expression go term. although nanog expression was elevated upon mapk inhibition, sox <dig> and pou5f <dig> expression showed little increase. expression of other genes in the mapk pathway including dusp <dig> and spry <dig>  or influenced by mapk inhibition such as ifnt, was down-regulated.


CONCLUSIONS
the data obtained from the microarray studies provide further insight in gene expression during bovine embryonic development. they show an expression profile in pluripotent cells that indicates a pluripotent, epiblast-like state. the inability to culture icm cells as stem cells in the presence of an inhibitor of mapk activity together with the reported data indicates that mapk inhibition alone is not sufficient to maintain a pluripotent character in bovine cells.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pluripotencycattlemorulablastocysticmtrophectodermnanogmapkissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

