BACKGROUND
apoptosis is a common and essential aspect of development. it is particularly prevalent in the central nervous system and during remodelling processes such as formation of the digits and in amphibian metamorphosis. apoptosis, which is dependent upon a balance between pro- and anti-apoptotic factors, also enables the embryo to rid itself of cells damaged by gamma irradiation. in this study, the roles of the anti-apoptotic factor bcl-xl in protecting cells from apoptosis were examined in xenopus laevis embryos using transgenesis to overexpress the xr <dig> gene, which encodes bcl-xl. the effects on developmental, thyroid hormone-induced and γ-radiation-induced apoptosis in embryos were examined in these transgenic animals.


RESULTS
apoptosis was abrogated in xr <dig> transgenic embryos. however, the transgene did not prevent the apoptotic response of tadpoles to thyroid hormone during metamorphosis. post-metamorphic xr <dig> frogs were reared to sexual maturity, thus allowing us to produce second-generation embryos and enabling us to distinguish between the maternal and zygotic contributions of bcl-xl to the γ-radiation apoptotic response. wild-type embryos irradiated before the mid-blastula transition  underwent normal cell division until reaching the mbt, after which they underwent massive, catastrophic apoptosis. over-expression of bcl-xl derived from xr <dig> females, but not males, provided partial protection from apoptosis. maternal expression of xr <dig> was also sufficient to abrogate apoptosis triggered by post-mbt γ-radiation. tolerance to post-mbt γ-radiation from zygotically-derived xr <dig> was acquired gradually after the mbt in spite of abundant xr <dig> protein synthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
our data suggest that bcl-xl is an effective counterbalance to proapoptotic factors during embryonic development but has no apparent effect on the thyroid hormone-induced apoptosis that occurs during metamorphosis. furthermore, post-mbt apoptosis triggered by irradiation before the mbt could only be restrained by maternal expression of bcl-xl. although maternal expression of xr <dig> was sufficient to abrogate apoptosis triggered by post-mbt γ-radiation, radiation tolerance from zygotically-derived xr <dig> was acquired gradually, indicating that synthesis of xr <dig> protein is not sufficient to prevent apoptosis. thus, repression of radiation-induced apoptosis by overexpression of bcl-xl during embryonic development depends upon the timing of its expression and post-translational events that enable the protein to become effective.

