BACKGROUND
recent discoveries on bacterial transcriptomes gave evidence that small rnas  have important regulatory roles in prokaryotic cells. modern high-throughput sequencing approaches  enable the most detailed view on transcriptomes offering an unmatched comprehensiveness and single-base resolution. whole transcriptome data obtained by rna-seq can be used to detect and characterize all transcript species, including small rnas. here, we describe an rna-seq approach for comprehensive detection and characterization of small rnas from corynebacterium glutamicum, an actinobacterium of high industrial relevance and model organism for medically important corynebacterianeae, such as c. diphtheriae and mycobacterium tuberculosis.


RESULTS
in our rna-seq approach, total rna from c. glutamicum atcc  <dig> was prepared from cultures grown in minimal medium at exponential growth or challenged by physical  or by chemical stresses  at this time point. total rna samples were pooled and sequencing libraries were prepared from the isolated small rna fraction. high throughput short read sequencing and mapping yielded over  <dig> srna genes. by determining their 5′- and 3′-ends and inspection of their locations, these potential srna genes were classified into utrs of mrnas , cis-antisense srnas , and trans-encoded srnas . for  <dig> of trans-encoded srnas significant sequence and secondary structure conservation was found by a computational approach using a whole genome alignment with the closely related species c. efficiens ys- <dig> and c. diphtheriae nctc  <dig>  three selected trans-encoded srnas were characterized by northern blot analysis and stress-specific transcript patterns were found.


CONCLUSIONS
the study showed comparable numbers of srnas known from genome-wide surveys in other bacteria. in detail, our results give deep insight into the comprehensive equipment of srnas in c. glutamicum and provide a sound basis for further studies concerning the functions of these srnas.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacterianon-coding rnahigh-throughput sequencingrna regulationissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013

