BACKGROUND
citrus species constitute one of the major tree fruit crops of the subtropical regions with great economic importance. however, their peculiar reproductive characteristics, low genetic diversity and the long-term nature of tree breeding mostly impair citrus variety improvement. in woody plants, genomic science holds promise of improvements and in the citrus genera the development of genomic tools may be crucial for further crop improvements. in this work we report the characterization of three bac libraries from clementine , one of the most relevant citrus fresh fruit market cultivars, and the analyses of  <dig>  bac end sequences. clementine is a diploid plant with an estimated haploid genome size of  <dig> mb and 2n =  <dig> chromosomes, which makes feasible the use of genomics tools to boost genetic improvement.


RESULTS
three genomic bac libraries of citrus clementina were constructed through ecori, mboi and hindiii digestions and  <dig>  clones, representing an estimated genomic coverage of  <dig>  haploid genome-equivalents, were picked. bac end sequencing  of  <dig>  clones produced  <dig>  mb of genomic sequence that allowed the identification of the repetitive fraction  and estimation of gene content  of this species. bes analyses identified  <dig>  ssrs and  <dig>  putative snps. comparative genomic studies showed that citrus gene homology and microsyntheny with populus trichocarpa was rather higher than with arabidopsis thaliana, a species phylogenetically closer to citrus.


CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we report the characterization of three bac libraries from c. clementina, and a new set of genomic resources that may be useful for isolation of genes underlying economically important traits, physical mapping and eventually crop improvement in citrus species. in addition, bac end sequencing has provided a first insight on the basic structure and organization of the citrus genome and has yielded valuable molecular markers for genetic mapping and cloning of genes of agricultural interest. paired end sequences also may be very helpful for whole-genome sequencing programs.

