BACKGROUND

caenorhabditis elegans is a powerful model organism for probing many biological processes including host-pathogen interactions with bacteria and fungi. the recent identification of nematode viruses that naturally infect c. elegans and caenorhabditis briggsae provides a unique opportunity to define host-virus interactions in these model hosts.


RESULTS
we analyzed the transcriptional response of pathogen infected c. elegans and c. briggsae by rna-seq. we identified a total of  <dig> differentially expressed genes  in c. elegans following orsay virus infection. the degs of known function were enriched for ubiquitin ligase related genes; however, the majority of the genes were of unknown function. interestingly, many degs that responded to orsay virus infection were similar to those induced by nematocida parisii infection, which is a natural microsporidia pathogen of c. elegans that like orsay virus infects intestinal cells. furthermore, comparison of the orsay virus degs in c. elegans to santeuil virus degs in c. briggsae identified  <dig> c. elegans genes whose orthologs were likewise differentially expressed in c. briggsae, thereby defining an evolutionarily conserved response to viral infection.


CONCLUSIONS
the two different species c. elegans and c. briggsae, which diverged ~ <dig> million years ago, share a common set of transcriptionally responsive genes to viral infection. furthermore, a subset of these genes were also differentially expressed following infection by a eukaryotic pathogen, n. parisii, suggesting that these genes may constitute a broader pan-microbial response to infection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
host-virus interactionorsay virussanteuil virusn. parisiic. elegansc. briggsaepathogen infectiontranscriptional profilehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthai097865wang david issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

