BACKGROUND
the major medicinal alkaloids isolated from uncaria rhynchophylla  capsules are rhynchophylline  and isorhynchophylline . extracts containing these terpene indole alkaloids  can inhibit the formation and destabilize preformed fibrils of amyloid β protein , and have been shown to improve the cognitive function of mice with alzheimer-like symptoms. the biosynthetic pathways of rin and irn are largely unknown.


RESULTS
in this study, rna-sequencing of pooled uncaria capsules rna samples taken at three developmental stages that accumulate different amount of rin and irn was performed. more than  <dig> million high-quality reads from a cdna library were generated and de novo assembled. sequences for all of the known enzymes involved in tias synthesis were identified. additionally,  <dig> cytochrome p <dig> ,  <dig> methyltransferase and  <dig> isomerase genes were identified, that are potential candidates for enzymes involved in rin and irn synthesis. digital gene expression profile  analysis was performed on the three capsule developmental stages, and based on genes possessing expression profiles consistent with rin and irn levels; four cyp450s, three methyltransferases and three isomerases were identified as the candidates most likely to be involved in the later steps of rin and irn biosynthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
a combination of de novo transcriptome assembly and dge analysis was shown to be a powerful method for identifying genes encoding enzymes potentially involved in the biosynthesis of important secondary metabolites in a non-model plant. the transcriptome data from this study provides an important resource for understanding the formation of major bioactive constituents in the capsule extract from uncaria, and provides information that may aid in metabolic engineering to increase yields of these important alkaloids.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomedgeuncaria rhynchophyllarhynchophyllineisorhynchophyllineterpene indole alkaloid biosynthesisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

