BACKGROUND
nerve growth factor  is known not only as a major factor for neuronal plasticity but also as a pain stimulator. although there have been several trials with ngf for its application in the regeneration or protection of the nervous system, the pain induced by ngf remains a challenge to be overcome. in this study, the pain induced by ngf gene therapy was evaluated.


RESULTS
vehicle or recombinant dog ngf plasmid was administered into the intrathecal space of dogs. twenty-four hours after the vehicle or ngf plasmid inoculation, dogs were subcutaneously treated with 150 mg/kg pyridoxine every day for 7 days. for pain assessment, physical examination and electrophysiological recording were performed. only in the vehicle-treated group, weight loss occurred, while ngf plasmid inoculation significantly improved this physical abnormalities. in the vehicle-treated group, electrophysiological recordings showed that h-reflex disappeared at 24 h after the last pyridoxine treatment. however, in the ngf plasmid inoculated group, the h-reflex were normal. in the results of immunohistochemistry, the ngf plasmid administration efficiently expressed in the dorsal root ganglia and significantly increased the pyridoxine-induced reduction of calcitonin gene-related peptide  immunoreactive neurons, but not in substance p immunoreactive neurons, in the dorsal root ganglia.


CONCLUSIONS
given these results, we reason that ngf gene therapy in pyridoxine induced neuropathic dogs does not induce neuropathic pain with this dosage, even with increasing the expression of cgrp.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
calcitonin gene-related peptidedogh reflexnerve growth factorpyridoxineneuropathyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003725national research foundation of koreanrf-2014r1a1a1004339nrf-2013r1a1a2059364hwang in koo chung jin-young issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

