BACKGROUND
quantification of the metabolic network of an organism offers insights into possible ways of developing mutant strain for better productivity of an extracellular metabolite. the first step in this quantification is the enumeration of stoichiometries of all reactions occurring in a metabolic network. the structural details of the network in combination with experimentally observed accumulation rates of external metabolites can yield flux distribution at steady state. one such methodology for quantification is the use of elementary modes, which are minimal set of enzymes connecting external metabolites. here, we have used a linear objective function subject to elementary modes as constraint to determine the fluxes in the metabolic network of corynebacterium glutamicum. the feasible phenotypic space was evaluated at various combinations of oxygen and ammonia uptake rates.


RESULTS
quantification of the fluxes of the elementary modes in the metabolism of c. glutamicum was formulated as linear programming. the analysis demonstrated that the solution was dependent on the criteria of objective function when less than four accumulation rates of the external metabolites were considered. the analysis yielded feasible ranges of fluxes of elementary modes that satisfy the experimental accumulation rates. in c. glutamicum, the elementary modes relating to biomass synthesis through glycolysis and tca cycle were predominantly operational in the initial growth phase. at a later time, the elementary modes contributing to lysine synthesis became active. the oxygen and ammonia uptake rates were shown to be bounded in the phenotypic space due to the stoichiometric constraint of the elementary modes.


CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated the use of elementary modes and the linear programming to quantify a metabolic network. we have used the methodology to quantify the network of c. glutamicum, which evaluates the set of operational elementary modes at different phases of fermentation. the methodology was also used to determine the feasible solution space for a given set of substrate uptake rates under specific optimization criteria. such an approach can be used to determine the optimality of the accumulation rates of any metabolite in a given network.

