BACKGROUND
the identity of flower organs is specified by various mikc mads-box transcription factors which act in a combinatorial manner. tm <dig> is a mads-box gene that was isolated from the floral meristem of a tomato mutant more than twenty years ago, but is still poorly known from a functional point of view in spite of being present in both angiosperms and gymnosperms, with some species harbouring more than one copy of the gene. this study reports a characterization of tm <dig> that was carried out in transgenic tomato plants with altered expression of the gene.


RESULTS
tomato plants over-expressing either tm <dig> or a chimeric repressor form of the gene  were prepared. in the tm <dig> up-regulated plants it was possible to observe anomalous stamens with poorly viable pollen and altered expression of several floral identity genes, among them b-, c- and e-function ones, while no apparent morphological modifications were visible in the other whorls. oblong ovaries and fruits, that were also parthenocarpic, were obtained in the plants expressing the tm8:srdx repressor gene. such ovaries showed modified expression of various carpel-related genes. no apparent modifications could be seen in the other flower whorls. the latter plants had also epinastic leaves and malformed flower abscission zones. by using yeast two hybrid assays it was possible to show that tm <dig> was able to interact in yeast with macrocalix.


CONCLUSIONS
the impact of the ectopically altered tm <dig> expression on the reproductive structures suggests that this gene plays some role in the development of the tomato flower. macrocalyx, a putative a-function mads-box gene, was expressed in all the four whorls of fully developed flowers, and showed quantitative variations that were opposite to those of tm <dig> in the anomalous stamens and ovaries. since the tm <dig> protein interacted in vitro only with the a-function mads-box protein macrocalyx, it seems that for the correct differentiation of the tomato reproductive structures possible interactions between tm <dig> and macrocalyx proteins might be important.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mads-box genessolanum lycopersicontm <dig> genetm <dig> protein interactionstomato flower developmenttwo-hybrid assaysissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

