BACKGROUND
biological data that are well-organized by an ontology, such as gene ontology, enables high-throughput availability of the semantic web. it can also be used to facilitate high throughput classification of biomedical information. however, to our knowledge, no evaluation has been published on automating classifications of human diseases genes using gene ontology. in this study, we evaluate automated classifications of well-defined human disease genes using their gene ontology annotations and compared them to a gold standard. this gold standard was independently conceived by valle's research group, and contains  <dig> human disease genes organized in  <dig> categories of protein function.


RESULTS
two automated methods were applied to investigate the classification of human disease genes into independently pre-defined categories of protein function. one method used the structure of gene ontology by pre-selecting  <dig> gene ontology terms assigned to  <dig> protein function categories. the second method was based on the similarity of human disease genes clustered according to the information-theoretic distance of their gene ontology annotations. compared to the categorization of human disease genes found in the gold standard, our automated methods can achieve an overall 56% and 47% precision with 62% and 71% recall respectively. however, approximately 15% of the studied human disease genes remain without go annotations.


CONCLUSIONS
automated methods can recapitulate a significant portion of classification of the human disease genes. the method using information-theoretic distance performs slightly better on the precision with some loss in recall. for some protein function categories, such as 'hormone' and 'transcription factor', the automated methods perform particularly well, achieving precision and recall levels above 75%. in summary, this study demonstrates that for semantic webs, methods to automatically classify or analyze a majority of human disease genes require significant progress in both the gene ontology annotations and particularly in the utilization of these annotations.

