BACKGROUND
serine/threonine kinases  have been found in an increasing number of prokaryotes, showing important roles in signal transduction that supplement the well known role of two-component system. cyanobacteria are photoautotrophic prokaryotes able to grow in a wide range of ecological environments, and their signal transduction systems are important in adaptation to the environment. sequence information from several cyanobacterial genomes offers a unique opportunity to conduct a comprehensive comparative analysis of this kinase family. in this study, we extracted information regarding ser/thr kinases from  <dig> species of sequenced cyanobacteria and investigated their diversity, conservation, domain structure, and evolution.


RESULTS
 <dig> putative stk homologues were identified. stks are absent in four prochlorococcus strains and one marine synechococcus strain and abundant in filamentous nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria. motifs and invariant amino acids typical in eukaryotic stks were conserved well in these proteins, and six more cyanobacteria- or bacteria-specific conserved residues were found. these stk proteins were classified into three major families according to their domain structures. fourteen types and a total of  <dig> additional domains were identified, some of which are reported to participate in the recognition of signals or substrates. cyanobacterial stks show rather complicated phylogenetic relationships that correspond poorly with phylogenies based on 16s rrna and those based on additional domains.


CONCLUSIONS
the number of stk genes in different cyanobacteria is the result of the genome size, ecophysiology, and physiological properties of the organism. similar conserved motifs and amino acids indicate that cyanobacterial stks make use of a similar catalytic mechanism as eukaryotic stks. gene gain-and-loss is significant during stk evolution, along with domain shuffling and insertion. this study has established an overall framework of sequence-structure-function interactions for the stk gene family, which may facilitate further studies of the role of stks in various organisms.

