BACKGROUND
rice blast disease is one of the most serious and recurrent problems in rice-growing regions worldwide. most resistance genes were identified by linkage mapping using genetic populations. we extensively examined  <dig> rice blast strains and a further genome-wide association study based on genotyping  <dig>  million single nucleotide polymorphism variants across  <dig> diverse indica accessions.


RESULTS
totally, thirty associated loci were identified. the strongest signal  was located within the gene os11g <dig>  one of the rice pia-blast resistance gene. another association signal  was detected around the qtl pif. our study identified the gene os11g <dig>  a disease resistance protein containing nucleotide binding site-leucine rich repeat domain, as the main candidate gene of pif. in order to explore the potential mechanism underlying the blast resistance, we further examined a locus in chromosome  <dig>  which was associated with ch <dig> . the genes, os12g <dig> and os12g <dig>  both described as kinase-like domain containing protein, were presumed to be required for the full function of this locus. furthermore, we found some association on chromosome  <dig>  in which it has not been reported any loci associated with rice blast resistance. in addition, we identified novel functional candidate genes, which might participate in the resistance regulation.


CONCLUSIONS
this work provides the basis of further study of the potential function of these candidate genes. a subset of true associations would be weakly associated with outcome in any given gwas; therefore, large-scale replication is necessary to confirm our results. future research will focus on validating the effects of these candidate genes and their functional variants using genetic transformation and transferred dna insertion mutant screens, to verify that these genes engender resistance to blast disease in rice.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
blast diseasecandidate genegenome-wide association studyoryza sativa lr proteinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

