BACKGROUND
the initiation of translation via cellular internal ribosome entry sites plays an important role in the stress response and certain physiological conditions in which canonical cap-dependent translation initiation is compromised. currently, only a limited number of these regulatory elements have been experimentally identified. notably, cellular internal ribosome entry sites lack conservation of both the primary sequence and mrna secondary structure, rendering their identification difficult. despite their biological importance, the currently available computational strategies to predict them have had limited success. we developed a bioinformatic method based on a support vector machine for the prediction of internal ribosome entry sites in fungi using the 5’-utr sequences of  <dig> non-redundant fungal organisms. additionally, we performed a comparative analysis and characterization of the functional relationships among the gene products predicted to be translated by this cap-independent mechanism.


RESULTS
using our method, we predicted  <dig>  internal ribosome entry sites in  <dig> non-redundant fungal organisms. some orthologous groups were enriched with our positive predictions. this is the case of the hsp <dig> chaperone family, which remarkably has two verified internal ribosome entry sites, one in humans and the other in flies. a second example is the orthologous group of the eif4g repression protein sbp1p, which has two homologous genes known to be translated by this cap-independent mechanism, one in mice and the other in yeast. these examples emphasize the wide conservation of these regulatory elements as a result of selective pressure. in addition, we performed a protein-protein interaction network characterization of the gene products of our positive predictions using saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model, which revealed a highly connected and modular topology, suggesting a functional association. a remarkable example of this functional association is our prediction of internal ribosome entry sites elements in three components of the rna polymerase ii mediator complex.


CONCLUSIONS
we developed a method for the prediction of cellular internal ribosome entry sites that may guide experimental and bioinformatic analyses to increase our understanding of protein translation regulation. our analysis suggests that fungi show evolutionary conservation and functional association of proteins translated by this cap-independent mechanism.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
iresmrnatranslationcomparative genomicsfungisvmprotein-protein interaction networksstress responsehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003141consejo nacional de ciencia y tecnología 235817merino enrique issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

