BACKGROUND
transcript profiling of differentiating secondary xylem has allowed us to draw a general picture of the genes involved in wood formation. however, our knowledge is still limited about the regulatory mechanisms that coordinate and modulate the different pathways providing substrates during xylogenesis. the development of compression wood in conifers constitutes an exceptional model for these studies. although differential expression of a few genes in differentiating compression wood compared to normal or opposite wood has been reported, the broad range of features that distinguish this reaction wood suggest that the expression of a larger set of genes would be modified.


RESULTS
by combining the construction of different cdna libraries with microarray analyses we have identified a total of  <dig> genes in maritime pine  that change in expression during differentiation of compression wood . samples from different provenances collected in different years and geographic locations were integrated into the analyses to mitigate the effects of multiple sources of variability. this strategy allowed us to define a group of genes that are consistently associated with compression wood formation. correlating with the deposition of a thicker secondary cell wall that characterizes compression wood development, the expression of a number of genes involved in synthesis of cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin and lignans was up-regulated. further analysis of a set of these genes involved in s-adenosylmethionine metabolism, ammonium recycling, and lignin and lignans biosynthesis showed changes in expression levels in parallel to the levels of lignin accumulation in cells undergoing xylogenesis in vivo and in vitro.


CONCLUSIONS
the comparative transcriptomic analysis reported here have revealed a broad spectrum of coordinated transcriptional modulation of genes involved in biosynthesis of different cell wall polymers associated with within-tree variations in pine wood structure and composition. in particular, we demonstrate the coordinated modulation at transcriptional level of a gene set involved in s-adenosylmethionine synthesis and ammonium assimilation with increased demand for coniferyl alcohol for lignin and lignan synthesis, enabling a better understanding of the metabolic requirements in cells undergoing lignification.

