BACKGROUND
hemorrhagic diseases from ebolavirus and marburgvirus  infections can be dangerous to humans because of high fatality rates and a lack of effective treatments or vaccine. although there is evidence that wild mammals are infected by filoviruses, the biology of host-filovirus systems is notoriously poorly understood. specifically, identifying potential reservoir species with the expected long-term coevolutionary history of filovirus infections has been intractable. integrated elements of filoviruses could indicate a coevolutionary history with a mammalian reservoir, but integration of nonretroviral rna viruses is thought to be nonexistent or rare for mammalian viruses  that lack reverse transcriptase and replication inside the nucleus. here, we provide direct evidence of integrated filovirus-like elements in mammalian genomes by sequencing across host-virus gene boundaries and carrying out phylogenetic analyses. further we test for an association between candidate reservoir status and the integration of filoviral elements and assess the previous age estimate for filoviruses of less than  <dig>  years.


RESULTS
phylogenetic and sequencing evidence from gene boundaries was consistent with integration of filoviruses in mammalian genomes. we detected integrated filovirus-like elements in the genomes of bats, rodents, shrews, tenrecs and marsupials. moreover, some filovirus-like elements were transcribed and the detected mammalian elements were homologous to a fragment of the filovirus genome whose expression is known to interfere with the assembly of ebolavirus. the phylogenetic evidence strongly indicated that the direction of transfer was from virus to mammal. eutherians other than bats, rodents, and insectivores  were significantly underrepresented in the taxa with detected integrated filovirus-like elements. the existence of orthologous filovirus-like elements shared among mammalian genera whose divergence dates have been estimated suggests that filoviruses are at least tens of millions of years old.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings indicate that filovirus infections have been recorded as paleoviral elements in the genomes of small mammals despite extranuclear replication and a requirement for cooption of reverse transcriptase. our results show that the mammal-filovirus association is ancient and has resulted in candidates for functional gene products .

