BACKGROUND
the f-box genes constitute one of the largest gene families in plants involved in degradation of cellular proteins. f-box proteins can recognize a wide array of substrates and regulate many important biological processes such as embryogenesis, floral development, plant growth and development, biotic and abiotic stress, hormonal responses and senescence, among others. however, little is known about the f-box genes in the important legume crop, chickpea. the available draft genome sequence of chickpea allowed us to conduct a genome-wide survey of the f-box gene family in chickpea.


RESULTS
a total of 285 f-box genes were identified in chickpea which were classified based on their c-terminal domain structures into  <dig> subfamilies. thirteen putative novel motifs were also identified in f-box proteins with no known functional domain at their c-termini. the f-box genes were physically mapped on the  <dig> chickpea chromosomes and duplication events were investigated which revealed that the f-box gene family expanded largely due to tandem duplications. phylogenetic analysis classified the chickpea f-box genes into  <dig> clusters. also, maximum syntenic relationship was observed with soybean followed by medicago truncatula, lotus japonicus and arabidopsis. digital expression analysis of f-box genes in various chickpea tissues as well as under abiotic stress conditions utilizing the available chickpea transcriptome data revealed differential expression patterns with several f-box genes specifically expressing in each tissue, few of which were validated by using quantitative real-time pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
the genome-wide analysis of chickpea f-box genes provides new opportunities for characterization of candidate f-box genes and elucidation of their function in growth, development and stress responses for utilization in chickpea improvement.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chickpeaf-box genesgenome-wideexpression profilesstressissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

