BACKGROUND
human clinical studies and mouse models clearly demonstrate that cytomegalovirus  disrupts normal organ and tissue development. although cmv is one of the most common causes of major birth defects in humans, little is presently known about the mechanism underlying cmv-induced congenital malformations. our prior studies have demonstrated that cmv infection of first branchial arch derivatives  induced severely abnormal phenotypes and that cmv has a particular tropism for neural crest-derived mesenchyme . since early embryos are barely susceptible to cmv infection, and the extant evidence suggests that the differentiation program needs to be well underway for embryonic tissues to be susceptible to viral infection and viral-induced pathology, the aim of this study was to determine if first branchial arch ncm cells are susceptible to mcmv infection prior to differentiation of ncm derivatives.


RESULTS
e <dig> mouse mandibular processes  were infected with mouse cmv  for up to  <dig> days in vitro. mcmv infection of undifferentiated embryonic mouse mans induced micrognathia consequent to decreased meckel's cartilage chondrogenesis and mandibular osteogenesis. specifically, mcmv infection resulted in aberrant stromal cellularity, a smaller, misshapen meckel's cartilage, and mandibular bone and condylar dysmorphogenesis. analysis of viral distribution indicates that mcmv primarily infects ncm cells and derivatives. initial localization studies indicate that mcmv infection changed the cell-specific expression of fn, nf-κb <dig>  rela, relb, and shh and smad <dig> proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that mcmv dysregulation of key signaling pathways in primarily ncm cells and their derivatives severely disrupts mandibular morphogenesis and skeletogenesis. the pathogenesis appears to be centered around the canonical and noncanonical nf-κb pathways, and there is unusual juxtaposition of abnormal stromal cells and surrounding matrix. moreover, since it is critically important that signaling molecules are expressed in appropriate cell populations during development, the aberrant localization of components of relevant signaling pathways may reveal the pathogenic mechanism underlying mandibular malformations.

