BACKGROUND
dna processing chain a  is a dna binding protein which is ubiquitous in bacteria, and is required for dna transformation to various extents among bacterial species. however, the interaction of dpra with competence and recombination proteins is poorly understood. therefore, the proteomes of whole neisseria meningitidis  wildtype and dpra mutant cells were compared. such a comparative proteomic analysis increases our understanding of the interactions of dpra with other nm components and may elucidate its potential role beyond dna processing in transformation.


RESULTS
using label-free quantitative proteomics, a total of  <dig> unique nm proteins were identified, out of which  <dig> were quantified as differentially abundant  in the dpra null mutant. proteins involved in homologous recombination , pilus biogenesis , cell division, including core energy metabolism, and response to oxidative stress were downregulated in the nm dpra null mutant. the mass spectrometry data are available via proteomexchange with identifier pxd <dig>  immunoblotting and co-immunoprecipitation were employed to validate the association of dpra with pilg. the analysis revealed reduced amounts of pilg in the dpra null mutant and reduced amounts of dpra in the nm pilg null mutant. moreover, a number of pilus biogenesis proteins were shown to interact with dpra and /or pilg.


CONCLUSIONS
dpra interacts with proteins essential for nm dna recombination in transformation, pilus biogenesis, and other functions associated with the inner membrane. inverse downregulation of nm dpra and pilg expression in the corresponding mutants indicates a link between dna processing and pilus biogenesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
neisseria meningitidisdna processingpilus biogenesisdprapilgproteomicsmass spectrometryhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100005416norges forskningsråd220901234506tonjum tone http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006095helse sør-Øst rhf2014050tonjum tone issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

