BACKGROUND
the giant freshwater prawn, macrobrachium rosenbergii, is a decapod crustacean that is commercially important as a food source. farming of commercial crustaceans requires an efficient management strategy because the animals are easily subjected to stress and diseases during the culture. autophagy, a stress response process, is well-documented and conserved in most animals, yet it is poorly studied in crustaceans.


RESULTS
in this study, we have performed an in silico search for transcripts encoding autophagy-related  proteins within various tissue transcriptomes of m. rosenbergii. basic local alignment search tool  search using previously known atg proteins as queries revealed  <dig> transcripts encoding homologous m. rosenbergii atg proteins. among these atg proteins, we selected commonly used autophagy markers, including beclin  <dig>  vacuolar protein sorting   <dig>  microtubule-associated proteins 1a/1b light chain 3b , p62/sequestosome  <dig> , and lysosomal-associated membrane protein  <dig>  for further sequence analyses using comparative alignment and protein structural prediction. we found that crustacean autophagy marker proteins contain conserved motifs typical of other animal atg proteins. western blotting using commercial antibodies raised against human atg marker proteins indicated their presence in various m. rosenbergii tissues, while immunohistochemistry localized atg marker proteins within ovarian tissue, specifically late stage oocytes.


CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates that the molecular components of autophagic process are conserved in crustaceans, which is comparable to autophagic process in mammals. furthermore, it provides a foundation for further studies of autophagy in crustaceans that may lead to more understanding of the reproduction- and stress-related autophagy, which will enable the efficient aquaculture practices.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
autophagycrustaceanstranscriptomenervous systemovaryautophagy markersthailand research fund -office of higher education commission -mahidol university  distinguished research professor grantohec-mu trf-rgj ph.d. scholarshipsarc grantissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

