BACKGROUND
insertion sequences  are small transposable elements, commonly found in bacterial genomes. identifying the location of is in bacterial genomes can be useful for a variety of purposes including epidemiological tracking and predicting antibiotic resistance. however is are commonly present in multiple copies in a single genome, which complicates genome assembly and the identification of is insertion sites. here we present ismapper, a mapping-based tool for identification of the site and orientation of is insertions in bacterial genomes, directly from paired-end short read data.


RESULTS
ismapper was validated using three types of short read data:  simulated reads from a variety of species,  illumina reads from  <dig> isolates for which finished genome sequences were available for comparison, and  illumina reads from  <dig> acinetobacter baumannii isolates for which predicted is locations were tested using pcr. a total of  <dig> genomes, including  <dig> species and  <dig> distinct is, were used for validation. ismapper correctly identified 97 % of known is insertions in the analysis of simulated reads, and 98 % in real illumina reads. subsampling of real illumina reads to lower depths indicated ismapper was able to correctly detect insertions for average genome-wide read depths >20x, although read depths >50x were required to obtain confident calls that were highly-supported by evidence from reads. all isaba <dig> insertions identified by ismapper in the a. baumannii genomes were confirmed by pcr. in each a. baumannii genome, ismapper successfully identified an is insertion upstream of the ampc beta-lactamase that could explain phenotypic resistance to third-generation cephalosporins. the utility of ismapper was further demonstrated by profiling genome-wide is <dig> insertions in  <dig> publicly available mycobacterium tuberculosis genomes, revealing lineage-specific insertions and multiple insertion hotspots.


CONCLUSIONS
ismapper provides a rapid and robust method for identifying is insertion sites directly from short read data, with a high degree of accuracy demonstrated across a wide range of bacteria.

keywords
insertion sequence bacteriagenomicsshort read analysistuberculosisantimicrobial resistanceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

