BACKGROUND
the floral transition plays a vital role in the life of ornamental plants. despite progress in model plants, the molecular mechanisms of flowering regulation remain unknown in perennial plants. rosa chinensis ‘old blush’ is a unique plant that can flower continuously year-round. in this study, gene expression profiles associated with the flowering transition were comprehensively analyzed during floral transition in the rose.


RESULTS
according to the transcriptomic profiles,  <dig>  unigenes and  <dig>  differentially expressed genes  were identified, among which  <dig> unigenes were involved in the circadian clock, sugar metabolism, hormone, and autonomous pathways. a hypothetical model for the regulation of floral transition was proposed in which the candidate genes function synergistically the floral transition process. hormone contents and biosynthesis and metabolism genes fluctuated during the rose floral transition process. gibberellins  inhibited rose floral transition, the content of gas gradually decreased and ga2ox and scl <dig> were upregulated from vegetative  meristem to floral meristem . auxin plays an affirmative part in mediating floral transition, auxin content and auxin-related gene expression levels were gradually upregulated during the floral transition of the rose. however, aba content and aba signal genes were gradually downregulated, suggesting that aba passively regulates the rose floral transition by participating in sugar signaling. furthermore, sugar content and sugar metabolism genes increased during floral transition in the rose, which may be a further florigenic signal that activates floral transition. additionally, fri, fy, drm <dig>  elip, cop <dig>  co, and col <dig> are involved in the circadian clock and autonomous pathway, respectively, and they play a positively activating role in regulating floral transition. overall, physiological changes associated with genes involved in the circadian clock or autonomous pathway collectively regulated the rose floral transition.


CONCLUSIONS
our results summarize a valuable collective of gene expression profiles characterizing the rose floral transition. the degs are candidates for functional analyses of genes affecting the floral transition in the rose, which is a precious resource that reveals the molecular mechanism of mediating floral transition in other perennial plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
floral transitioncircadian clocksugar signalinghormone signalingrecurrent floweringdifferentially expressed genesthe 12th five years key programs for science and technology development of china, special fund for beijing common construction project.2013bad01b <dig>  2012bad01b07guo xuelian issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

