BACKGROUND
muscle ageing contributes to both loss of functional autonomy and increased morbidity. muscle atrophy accelerates after  <dig> years of age, but the mechanisms involved are complex and likely result from the alteration of a variety of interrelated functions. in order to better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying muscle chronological ageing in human, we have undertaken a top-down differential proteomic approach to identify novel biomarkers after the fifth decade of age.


RESULTS
muscle samples were compared between adult  and old  post-menopausal women. in addition to total muscle extracts, low-ionic strength extracts were investigated to remove high abundance myofibrillar proteins and improve the detection of low abundance proteins. two-dimensional gel electrophoreses with overlapping ipgs were used to improve the separation of muscle proteins. overall,  <dig> protein spots were matched between all individuals,  <dig> were differentially expressed and identified by mass spectrometry, and they corresponded to  <dig> different proteins. our results suggested important modifications in cytosolic, mitochondrial and lipid energy metabolism, which may relate to dysfunctions in old muscle force generation. a fraction of the differentially expressed proteins were linked to the sarcomere and cytoskeleton , which may account for alterations in contractile properties. in line with muscle contraction, we also identified proteins related to calcium signal transduction . muscle ageing was further characterized by the differential regulation of several proteins implicated in cytoprotection , ion homeostasis  and detoxification . notably, many of the differentially expressed proteins were central for proteostasis, including heat shock proteins and proteins involved in proteolysis .


CONCLUSIONS
this study describes the most extensive proteomic analysis of muscle ageing in humans, and identified  <dig> new potential biomarkers. none of them were previously recognized as differentially expressed in old muscles, and each may represent a novel starting point to elucidate the mechanisms of muscle chronological ageing in humans.

keywords
humanskeletal muscleageingsarcopeniaproteomicsbiomarkersissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

