BACKGROUND
the species of t. harzianum are well known for their biocontrol activity against plant pathogens. however, few studies have been conducted to further our understanding of its role as a biological control agent against s. sclerotiorum, a pathogen involved in several crop diseases around the world. in this study, we have used rna-seq and quantitative real-time pcr  techniques in order to explore changes in t. harzianum gene expression during growth on cell wall of s. sclerotiorum  or glucose. rt-qpcr was also used to examine genes potentially involved in biocontrol, during confrontation between t. harzianum and s. sclerotiorum.


RESULTS
data obtained from six rna-seq libraries were aligned onto the t. harzianum cbs  <dig>  reference genome and compared after annotation using the blast2go suite. a total of  <dig> differentially expressed genes were found in mycelia grown for  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> h under the two different conditions: supplemented with glucose or sscw. functional annotation of these genes identified diverse biological processes and molecular functions required during t. harzianum growth on sscw or glucose. we identified various genes of biotechnological value encoding proteins with functions such as transporters, hydrolytic activity, adherence, appressorium development and pathogenesis. to validate the expression profile, rt-qpcr was performed using  <dig> randomly chosen genes. rt-qpcr expression profiles were in complete agreement with the rna-seq data for  <dig> of the genes evaluated. the other three showed differences at one or two growth times. during the confrontation assay, some genes were up-regulated during and after contact, as shown in the presence of sscw which is commonly used as a model to mimic this interaction.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study is the first initiative to use rna-seq for identification of differentially expressed genes in t. harzianum strain tr <dig>  in response to the phytopathogenic fungus s. sclerotiorum. it provides insights into the mechanisms of gene expression involved in mycoparasitism of t. harzianum against s.sclerotiorum. the rna-seq data presented will facilitate improvement of the annotation of gene models in the draft t. harzianum genome and provide important information regarding the transcriptome during this interaction.

t. harzianums. sclerotiorumrna-seqgene expressionmycoparasitism

