BACKGROUND
the sensitivity of optical coherence tomography  images to identify retinal tissue morphology characterized by early neural loss from normal healthy eyes is tested by calculating structural information and fractal dimension. oct data from  <dig> healthy eyes and  <dig> eyes with type  <dig> diabetes mellitus with mild diabetic retinopathy  on biomicroscopy was analyzed using a custom-built algorithm  to measure locally the intraretinal layer thickness. a power spectrum method was used to calculate the fractal dimension in intraretinal regions of interest identified in the images. anova followed by newman-keuls post-hoc analyses were used to test for differences between pathological and normal groups. a modified p value of < <dig>  was considered statistically significant. receiver operating characteristic  curves were constructed to describe the ability of each parameter to discriminate between eyes of pathological patients and normal healthy eyes.


RESULTS
fractal dimension was higher for all the layers  in mdr eyes compared to normal healthy eyes. when comparing mdr with normal healthy eyes, the highest auroc values estimated for the fractal dimension were observed for gcl + ipl and inl. the maximum discrimination value for fractal dimension of  <dig>   for the gcl + ipl complex was obtained at a fd ≤  <dig>  . moreover, the highest auroc values estimated for the thickness measurements were observed for the opl, gcl + ipl and os. particularly, when comparing mdr eyes with control healthy eyes, we found that the fractal dimension of the gcl + ipl complex was significantly better at diagnosing early dr, compared to the standard thickness measurement.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that the gcl + ipl complex, opl and os are more susceptible to initial damage when comparing mdr with control healthy eyes. fractal analysis provided a better sensitivity, offering a potential diagnostic predictor for detecting early neurodegeneration in the retina.

keywords
optical coherence tomographyfractal analysisfractal dimensionwavelet algorithmdiabetic retinopathyophthalmologyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

