BACKGROUND
previously, drug-based synchronization procedures were used for characterizing the cell cycle dependent transcriptional program. however, these synchronization methods result in growth imbalance and alteration of the cell cycle machinery. dna content-based fluorescence activated cell sorting  is able to sort the different cell cycle phases without perturbing the cell cycle. mirnas are key transcriptional regulators of the cell cycle, however, their expression dynamics during cell cycle has not been explored.

methods
following an optimized facs, a complex initiative of high throughput platforms  were performed to study gene and mirna expression profiles of cell cycle sorted human cells originating from different tissues. validation of high throughput data was performed using quantitative real time pcr. protein expression was detected by western blot. complex statistics and pathway analysis were also applied.


RESULTS
beyond confirming the previously described cell cycle transcriptional program, cell cycle dependently expressed genes showed a higher expression independently from the cell cycle phase and a lower amplitude of dynamic changes in cancer cells as compared to untransformed fibroblasts. contrary to mrna changes, mirna expression was stable throughout the cell cycle.


CONCLUSIONS
cell cycle sorting is a synchronization-free method for the proper analysis of cell cycle dynamics. altered dynamic expression of universal cell cycle genes in cancer cells reflects the transformed cell cycle machinery. stable mirna expression during cell cycle progression may suggest that dynamical mirna-dependent regulation may be of less importance in short term regulations during the cell cycle.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fluorescence-activated cell sorting cell cycledynamic expressiondna stainingmirnahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003825magyar tudományos akadémia lendület granttechnology innovation fund, national developmental agencyktia-aik-2012-12-1-0010rácz károly http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003549országos tudományos kutatási alapprogramok pd100648issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

