BACKGROUND
salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar virchow has been recognized as a significant health burden in asia, australia and europe. in addition to its global distribution, s. virchow is clinically significant due to the frequency at which it causes invasive infections and its association with outbreaks arising from food-borne transmission. here, we examine the genome of an invasive isolate of s. virchow svq <dig>  from an outbreak in southeast queensland, australia. in addition to identifying new potential genotyping targets that could be used for discriminating between s. virchow strains in outbreak scenarios, we also aimed to carry out a comprehensive comparative analysis of the s. virchow genomes.


RESULTS
genome comparisons between s. virchow svq <dig> and s. virchow sl <dig>  a previously published strain, identified a high degree of genomic similarity between the two strains with fewer than  <dig> single nucleotide differences. clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeats  regions were identified as a highly variable region that could be used to discriminate between s. virchow isolates. we amplified and sequenced the crispr regions of fifteen s. virchow isolates collected from seven different outbreaks across australia. we observed three allelic types of the crispr region from these isolates based on the presence/absence of the spacers and were able to discriminate s. virchow phage type  <dig> isolates originating from different outbreaks. a comparison with  <dig> published salmonella genomes found that the s. virchow svq <dig> genome encodes  <dig> previously described salmonella pathogenicity islands , as well as additional genomic islands including a remnant integrative conjugative element that is distinct from spi- <dig>  in addition, the s. virchow genome possesses a novel prophage that encodes the type iii secretion system effector protein sope, a key salmonella virulence factor. the prophage shares very little similarity to the sope prophages found in other salmonella serovars suggesting an independent acquisition of sope.


CONCLUSIONS
the availability of this genome will serve as a genome template and facilitate further studies on understanding the virulence and global distribution of the s. virchow serovar, as well as the development of genotyping methods for outbreak investigations.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

