BACKGROUND
histopathological examinations of brains from healthy pigs have revealed localised vacuolar changes, predominantly in the rostral colliculus, that are similar to the neuropil vacuolation featured in the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies and have been described in pigs challenged parenterally with the agent causing bovine spongiform encephalopathy . feedstuff containing bse-contaminated meat and bone meal  may have been fed to pigs prior to the ban of mammalian mbm in feed of farmed livestock in the united kingdom in  <dig>  but there is no evidence of the natural occurrence of a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy  in the domestic pig. furthermore, experimental transmission of bse to pigs by the oral route has been unsuccessful. a study was conducted to investigate whether the localised vacuolar changes in the porcine brain were associated with a transmissible aetiology and therefore biologically significant. two groups of ten pigs were inoculated parenterally with vacuolated rostral colliculus from healthy pigs either born before  <dig> or born after  <dig>  controls included ten pigs similarly inoculated with rostral colliculus from new zealand-derived pigs and nine pigs inoculated with a bovine bse brain homogenate.


RESULTS
none of the pigs inoculated with rostral colliculus developed a tse-like neurological disease up to five years post inoculation when the study was terminated, and disease-associated prion protein, prpd, was not detected in the brains of these pigs. by contrast, eight of nine bse-inoculated pigs developed neurological signs, two of which had detectable prpd by postmortem tests. no significant histopathological changes were detected to account for the clinical signs in the prpd-negative, bse-inoculated pigs.


CONCLUSIONS
the findings in this study suggest that vacuolation in the porcine rostral colliculus is not caused by a transmissible agent and is probably a clinically insignificant change. the presence of neurological signs in pigs inoculated with bse without detectable prpd raises the possibility that the bse agent may produce a prion disease in pigs that remains undetected by the current postmortem tests.

