BACKGROUND
sclerotinia sclerotiorum is a necrotrophic fungus that is pathogenic to many plants. genomic analysis of its revealed transposable element expansion that has strongly influenced the evolutionary trajectory of several species. transposons from the tc1-mariner superfamily are thought to be ubiquitous components of fungal genomes and are generally found in low copy numbers with large numbers of deleterious mutations in their transposase coding sequence.


RESULTS
this study shows that the genome of s. sclerotiorum has a large number of copies of tc1-mariner transposons, and in silico analysis shows evidence that they were recently active. this finding was confirmed by expressed sequence tag  analysis. fourteen new tc1-mariner transposon families that were distributed throughout the genome were identified, and in some cases, due to the excision/retention of introns, different transcripts were observed for the same family, which might be the result of an efficient strategy to circumvent mutations that generate premature stop codons in the rna sequence. in addition, the presence of these introns shows that the transposase protein has a flexible coding sequence and, consequently, conformation. no evidence for rip-like gene silencing mechanisms, which are commonly found in fungi, was found in the identified tc1-mariner elements, and analysis of the genomic insertion sites of these elements showed that they were widely distributed throughout the genome with some copies located near the 3′ regions of genes. in particular, est analysis demonstrated that one of these copies was co-expressed with a gene, which showed the potential for these elements to undergo exaptation.


CONCLUSIONS
fourteen novel tc1-mariner families were characterized. some families had evidence of introns, which might or might not be excised depending on the family or element in question, and this finding demonstrates a possible strategy for overcoming possible mutations that generate premature stop codons in a rna sequence. tc1-mariner elements likely play an important role in the structure and evolution of the s. sclerotiorum genome.

keywords
transposonfungusgenomeintronsripissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

