BACKGROUND
the growing ubiquity of metabolomic techniques has facilitated high frequency time-course data collection for an increasing number of applications. while the concentration trends of individual metabolites can be modeled with common curve fitting techniques, a more accurate representation of the data needs to consider effects that act on more than one metabolite in a given sample. to this end, we present a simple algorithm that uses nonparametric smoothing carried out on all observed metabolites at once to identify and correct systematic error from dilution effects. in addition, we develop a simulation of metabolite concentration time-course trends to supplement available data and explore algorithm performance. although we focus on nuclear magnetic resonance  analysis in the context of cell culture, a number of possible extensions are discussed.


RESULTS
realistic metabolic data was successfully simulated using a 4-step process. starting with a set of metabolite concentration time-courses from a metabolomic experiment, each time-course was classified as either increasing, decreasing, concave, or approximately constant. trend shapes were simulated from generic functions corresponding to each classification. the resulting shapes were then scaled to simulated compound concentrations. finally, the scaled trends were perturbed using a combination of random and systematic errors. to detect systematic errors, a nonparametric fit was applied to each trend and percent deviations calculated at every timepoint. systematic errors could be identified at time-points where the median percent deviation exceeded a threshold value, determined by the choice of smoothing model and the number of observed trends. regardless of model, increasing the number of observations over a time-course resulted in more accurate error estimates, although the improvement was not particularly large between  <dig> and  <dig> samples per trend. the presented algorithm was able to identify systematic errors as small as  <dig>  % under a wide range of conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
both the simulation framework and error correction method represent examples of time-course analysis that can be applied to further developments in 1h-nmr methodology and the more general application of quantitative metabolomics.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nmrmetabolomicstime-coursecell culturequantificationsystematic errorstochastic simulationinternal standarddilutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

