BACKGROUND
buchnera aphidicola is an obligate symbiotic bacterium, associated with most of the aphididae, whose genome has drastically shrunk during intracellular evolution. gene regulation in buchnera has been a matter of controversy in recent years as the combination of genomic information with the experimental results has been contradictory, refuting or arguing in favour of a functional and responsive transcription regulation in buchnera.

the goal of this study was to describe the gene transcription regulation capabilities of buchnera based on the inventory of cis- and trans-regulators encoded in the genomes of five strains from different aphids , as well as on the characterisation of some intrinsic structural properties of the dna molecule in these bacteria.


RESULTS
interaction graph analysis shows that gene neighbourhoods are conserved between e. coli and buchnera in structures called transcriptons, interactons and metabolons, indicating that selective pressures have acted on the evolution of transcriptional, protein-protein interaction and metabolic networks in buchnera. the transcriptional regulatory network in buchnera is composed of a few general dna-topological regulators , with the quasi-absence of any specific ones . the relative positioning of regulatory genes along the chromosome of buchnera seems to have conserved its ancestral state, despite the genome erosion. sigma- <dig> promoters with canonical thermodynamic sequence profiles were detected upstream of about 94% of the cds of buchnera in the different aphids. based on stress-induced duplex destabilization  measurements, unstable σ <dig> promoters were found specifically associated with the regulator and transporter genes.


CONCLUSIONS
this genomic analysis provides supporting evidence of a selection of functional regulatory structures and it has enabled us to propose hypotheses concerning possible links between these regulatory elements and the dna-topology  in the regulation of gene expression in the shrunken genome of buchnera.

buchnera aphidicolagenome reductiontranscription regulationdna-topologynucleoid associated proteins 

