BACKGROUND
antibody responses against anopheles salivary proteins can indicate individual exposure to bites of malaria vectors. the extent to which these salivary proteins are species-specific is not entirely resolved. thus, a better knowledge of the diversity among salivary protein repertoires from various malaria vector species is necessary to select relevant genus-, subgenus- and/or species-specific salivary antigens. such antigens could be used for quantitative  and qualitative  immunological evaluation of malaria vectors/host contact. in this study, salivary gland protein repertoires  from several anopheles species were compared using in silico analysis and proteomics. the antigenic diversity of salivary gland proteins among different anopheles species was also examined.


RESULTS
in silico analysis of secreted salivary gland protein sequences retrieved from an ncbinr database of six anopheles species belonging to the cellia subgenus  and nyssorhynchus subgenus  displayed a higher degree of similarity compared to salivary proteins from closely related anopheles species. additionally, computational hierarchical clustering allowed identification of genus-, subgenus- and species-specific salivary proteins. proteomic and immunoblot analyses performed on salivary gland extracts from four anopheles species  indicated that heterogeneity of the salivary proteome and antigenic proteins was lower among closely related anopheline species and increased with phylogenetic distance.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first report on the diversity of the salivary protein repertoire among species from the anopheles genus at the protein level. this work demonstrates that a molecular diversity is exhibited among salivary proteins from closely related species despite their common pharmacological activities. the involvement of these proteins as antigenic candidates for genus-, subgenus- or species-specific immunological evaluation of individual exposure to anopheles bites is discussed.

anophelessalivary proteinssequence alignmentbiomarkersmalaria vectorsprotein diversity

