BACKGROUND
soybean  is a photoperiod-sensitive and self-pollinated species. days to flowering  and maturity , duration of flowering-to-maturity  and plant height  are crucial for soybean adaptability and yield. to dissect the genetic architecture of these agronomically important traits, a population consisting of  <dig> early maturity soybean germplasm accessions was genotyped with the illumina infinium soysnp50k beadchip and phenotyped in multiple environments. a genome-wide association study  was conducted using a mixed linear model that involves both relative kinship and population structure.


RESULTS
the linkage disequilibrium  decayed slowly in soybean, and a substantial difference in ld pattern was observed between euchromatic and heterochromatic regions. a total of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> loci for dtf, dtm, dftm and ph were detected via gwas, respectively. the dt <dig> gene was identified in the locus strongly associated with both dtm and ph. ten candidate genes homologous to arabidopsis flowering genes were identified near the peak single nucleotide polymorphisms  associated with dtf. four of them encode mads-domain containing proteins. additionally, a pectin lyase-like gene was also identified in a major-effect locus for ph where ld decayed rapidly.


CONCLUSIONS
this study identified multiple new loci and refined chromosomal regions of known loci associated with dtf, dtm, dftm and/or ph in soybean. it demonstrates that gwas is powerful in dissecting complex traits and identifying candidate genes although ld decayed slowly in soybean. the loci and trait-associated snps identified in this study can be used for soybean genetic improvement, especially the major-effect loci associated with ph could be used to improve soybean yield potential. the candidate genes may serve as promising targets for studies of molecular mechanisms underlying the related traits in soybean.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genetic architecturegenetic improvementgwasquantitative trait locussingle nucleotide polymorphismsoybean issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

