BACKGROUND
rubber tree  is the primarily commercial source of natural rubber in the world. latex regeneration and duration of latex flow after tapping are the two factors that determine rubber yield of rubber tree, and exhibit a huge variation between rubber tree clones catas8- <dig> and pr <dig> 


RESULTS
to dissect the molecular mechanism for the regulation of latex regeneration and duration of latex flow, we sequenced and comparatively analyzed latex of rubber tree clone catas8- <dig> and pr <dig> at transriptome level. more than  <dig> million clean reads were generated in each pool and  <dig>  all-unigenes were totally assembled. a total of  <dig>  unigenes with differential expression patterns were detected between catas8- <dig> and pr <dig>  functional analysis showed that genes related to mass of categories were differentially enriched between the two clones. expression pattern of genes which were involved in latex regeneration and duration of latex flow upon successive tapping was analyzed by quantitative pcr. several genes related to rubber biosynthesis, cellulose and lignin biosynthesis and rubber particle aggregation were differentially expressed between catas8- <dig> and pr <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first report about probing latex regeneration and duration of latex flow by comparative transcriptome analysis. among all the suggested factors, it is more important that the level of endogenous jasmonates, carbohydrate metabolism, hydroxymethylglutaryl-coa reductase  and hevea rubber transferase  in mevalonate  parthway for latex regeneration while the level of endogenous ethylene , lignin content of laticifer cell wall, antioxidants and glucanases for the duration of latex flow. these data will provide new cues for understanding the molecular mechanism for the regulation of latex regeneration and duration of latex flow in rubber tree.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hevea brasiliensis muell. argrna-seqtranscriptomelatex regenerationduration of latex flowissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

