BACKGROUND
tir1-like proteins are f-box auxin receptors. auxin binding to the f-box receptor proteins promotes the formation of scftir <dig> ubiquitin ligase complex that targets the auxin repressors, aux/iaas, for degradation via the ubiquitin/26s proteasome pathway. the release of auxin response factors  from their aux/iaa partners allows arfs to mediate auxin-responsive changes in downstream gene transcription. in an attempt to understand the potential role of auxin during fruit development, a plum auxin receptor, psltir <dig>  has previously been characterized at the cellular, biochemical and molecular levels, but the biological significance of this protein is still lacking. in the present study, tomato  was used as a model to investigate the phenotypic and molecular changes associated with the overexpression of psltir <dig> 


RESULTS
the findings of the present study highlighted the critical role of psltir <dig> as positive regulator of auxin-signalling in coordinating the development of leaves and fruits. this was manifested by the entire leaf morphology of transgenic tomato plants compared to the wild-type compound leaf patterning. moreover, transgenic plants produced parthenocarpic fruits, a characteristic property of auxin hypersensitivity. the autocatalytic ethylene production associated with the ripening of climacteric fruits was not significantly altered in transgenic tomato fruits. nevertheless, the fruit shelf-life characteristics were affected by transgene presence, mainly through enhancing fruit softening rate. the short shelf-life of transgenic tomatoes was associated with dramatic upregulation of several genes encoding proteins involved in cell-wall degradation, which determine fruit softening and subsequent fruit shelf-life.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study sheds light into the involvement of psltir <dig> in regulating leaf morphology, fruit development and fruit softening-associated ripening, but not autocatalytic ethylene production. the results demonstrate that auxin accelerates fruit softening independently of ethylene action and this is probably mediated through the upregulation of many cell-wall metabolism genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
auxin receptorsauxin/ethylene cross-talkcell-wall metabolismfruit-setfruit firmnessplant developmentreproductive growthshelf-lifeontario tender fruit producers marketing boardearly researcher awardhttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000094ontario ministry of agriculture, food and rural affairs issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

