BACKGROUND
as global climate change progresses, the southern ocean surrounding antarctica is poised to undergo potentially rapid and substantial changes in temperature and pco <dig>  to survive in this challenging environment, the highly cold adapted endemic fauna of these waters must demonstrate sufficient plasticity to accommodate these changing conditions or face inexorable decline. previous studies of notothenioids have focused upon the short-term response to heat stress; and more recently the longer-term physiological response to the combined stress of increasing temperatures and pco <dig>  this inquiry explores the transcriptomic response of trematomus bernacchii to increased temperatures and pco <dig> at  <dig>   <dig> and 56 days, in an attempt to discern the innate plasticity of t. bernacchii available to cope with a changing southern ocean.


RESULTS
differential gene expression analysis supported previous research in that t. bernacchii exhibits no inducible heat shock response to stress conditions. however, t. bernacchii did demonstrate a strong stress response to the multi-stressor condition in the form of metabolic shifts, dna damage repair, immune system processes, and activation of apoptotic pathways combined with negative regulation of cell proliferation. this response declined in magnitude over time, but aspects of this response remained detectable throughout the acclimation period.


CONCLUSIONS
when exposed to the multi-stressor condition, t. bernacchii demonstrates a cellular stress response that persists for a minimum of 7 days before returning to near basal levels of expression at longer acclimation times. however, subtle changes in expression persist in fish acclimated for 56 days that may significantly affect the fitness t. bernacchii over time.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ocean acidificationthermal stressrna-seqnotothenioidgene expressionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundation plr-1040495place sean p. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundation plr-1447291place sean p. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

