BACKGROUND
in continuing our research into the new family of bifunctional restriction endonucleases , we describe the cloning of the tsoirm gene. currently, the family includes six thermostable enzymes: taqii, tth111ii, tthhb27i, tspgwi, tspdti, tsoi, isolated from various thermus sp. and two thermolabile enzymes: rpai and cchii, isolated from mesophilic bacteria rhodopseudomonas palustris and chlorobium chlorochromatii, respectively. the enzymes have several properties in common. they are large proteins , coded by fused genes, with the rease and methyltransferase  in a single polypeptide, where both activities are affected by s-adenosylmethionine . they recognize similar asymmetric cognate sites and cleave at a distance of 11/ <dig> nt from the recognition site. thus far, we have cloned and characterised taqii, tth111ii, tthhb27i, tspgwi and tspdti.


RESULTS
tsoi rease, which originate from thermophilic thermus scotoductus rfl <dig> , was cloned in escherichia coli  using two rounds of biochemical selection of the t. scotoductus genomic library for the tsoi methylation phenotype. dna sequencing of restriction-resistant clones revealed the common open reading frame  of  <dig> bp, coding for a large polypeptide of  <dig> aminoacid  residues, which exhibited a high level of similarity to tth111ii . the orf was pcr-amplified, subcloned into a pet <dig> derivative under the control of a t <dig> promoter and was subjected to the third round of biochemical selection in order to isolate error-free clones. induction experiments resulted in synthesis of an app.  <dig> kda protein, exhibiting tsoi-specific dna cleavage. also, the wild-type  protein was purified and reaction optima were determined.


CONCLUSIONS
previously we identified and cloned the thermus family rm genes using a specially developed method based on partial proteolysis of thermostable reases. in the case of tsoi the classic biochemical selection method was successful, probably because of the substantially lower optimal reaction temperature of tsoi . that allowed for sufficient mtase activity in vivo in recombinant e. coli. interestingly, tsoi originates from bacteria with a high optimum growth temperature of 67°c, which indicates that not all bacterial enzymes match an organism’s thermophilic nature, and yet remain functional cell components. besides basic research advances, the cloning and characterisation of the new prototype rease from the thermus sp. family enzymes is also of practical importance in gene manipulation technology, as it extends the range of available dna cleavage specificities.

