BACKGROUND
to overcome antibiotic resistance in biofilms, enzymes aimed at biofilm dispersal are under investigation. in the present study, applicability of an aeromonas punctata derived depolymerase capable of degrading the capsular polysaccharide  of klebsiella pneumoniae, in disrupting its biofilm and increasing gentamicin efficacy against biofilm was investigated.


RESULTS
intact biofilm of k. pneumoniae was recalcitrant to gentamicin due to lack of antibiotic penetration. on the other hand, gentamicin could not act on disrupted biofilm cells due to their presence in clusters. however, when depolymerase  was used in combination with gentamicin , dispersal of cps matrix by enzyme facilitated gentamicin penetration across biofilm. this resulted in significant reduction  in bacterial count in intact and disrupted biofilms. reduction in cps after treatment with depolymerase was confirmed by confocal microscopy and enzyme linked lectinosorbent assay. furthermore, to substantiate our study, the efficacy of bacterial depolymerase was compared with a phage borne depolymerase possessing similar application against k. pneumoniae. although both were used at same concentration i.e.  <dig> units/ml, but a higher efficacy of bacterial depolymerase particularly against older biofilms was visibly clear over its phage counterpart. this could be explained due to high substrate affinity  and high turnover number  of the bacterial depolymerase  over the phage derived one .


CONCLUSIONS
overall the study indicated that, the a. punctata derived depolymerase possesses antibiofilm potential and improves gentamicin efficacy against k. pneumoniae. moreover, it can serve as a potential substitute to phage borne depolymerases for treating biofilms formed by k. pneumoniae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
anti-biofilm enzymebacterial depolymerasephage depolymeraseenzyme kineticsgentamicinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

