BACKGROUND
leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases  comprise the largest group within the receptor-like kinase  superfamily in plants. this gene family plays critical and diverse roles in plant growth, development and stress response. although the lrr-rlk families in arabidopsis and rice have been previously analyzed, no comprehensive studies have been performed on this gene family in tree species.


RESULTS
in this work,  <dig> lrr-rlk genes were retrieved from the populus trichocarpa genome and further grouped into  <dig> subfamilies based on their structural and sequence similarities. approximately 82%  of the ptlrr-rlk genes are located in segmental duplication blocks indicating the role of duplication process in the expansion of this gene family. the conservation and variation in motif composition and intron/exon arrangement among ptlrr-rlk subfamilies were analyzed to provide additional support for their phylogenetic relationship and more importantly to indicate the potential divergence in their functions. expression profiling of ptlrr-rlks showed that they were differentially expressed in different organs and tissues and some ptlrr-rlks were specifically expressed in meristem tissues, which indicated their potential involvement in tissue development and differentiation. for most atlrr-rlks with defined functions, populus homologues exhibiting similar expression patterns could be identified, which might indicate the functional conservation during evolution. among  <dig> types of environmental cues analyzed by the genome-wide microarray data, ptlrr-rlks showed specific responses to shoot organogenesis, wounding, low ammonium feeding, hypoxia and seasonal dormancy, but not to drought, re-watering after drought, flooding, alcl <dig> treatment and bacteria or fungi treatments.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the first comprehensive genomic analysis of the populus lrr-rlk gene family. segmental duplication contributes significantly to the expansion of this gene family. populus and arabidopsis lrr-rlk homologues not only share similar genetic structures but also exhibit comparable expression patterns which point to the possible functional conservation of these lrr-rlks in two model systems. transcriptome profiling provides the first insight into the functional divergence among ptlrr-rlk gene subfamilies and suggests that they might take important roles in growth and adaptation of tree species.

populus trichocarpaleucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase phylogenetic analysismotif elicitationexpression profiling

