BACKGROUND
in the presence of sufficient iron, the escherichia coli protein fur  represses genes controlled by the fur box, a consensus sequence near or within promoters of target genes. de-repression of fur-controlled genes occurs upon iron deprivation. in the e. coli chromosome, there is a bidirectional intercistronic promoter region with two non-overlapping fur boxes. this region controls fur-regulated expression of entcebah in the clockwise direction and fepb in the anticlockwise direction.


RESULTS
we cloned the e. coli bidirectional fepb/entc promoter region into low-copy-number plasmid backbones  along with downstream sequences encoding epitope tags and a multiple cloning site  compatible with the bacterial adenylate cyclase two-hybrid  system. the vector pfcf <dig> allows for iron-controlled expression of flag-tagged proteins, whereas the pfbh <dig> vector allows for iron-controlled expression of ha-tagged proteins. we showed that e. coli knockout strains transformed with pfcf1-enta, pfcf1-ente and pfbh1-entb express corresponding proteins with appropriate epitope tags when grown under iron restriction. furthermore, transformants exhibited positive chrome azurol s  assay signals under iron deprivation, indicating that the transformants were functional for siderophore biosynthesis. western blotting and growth studies in rich and iron-depleted media demonstrated that protein expression from these plasmids was under iron control. finally, we produced the vector pfcf <dig>  a pfcf <dig> derivative in which a kanamycin resistance  gene was engineered in the direction opposite of the mcs. the enta orf was then subcloned into the pfcf <dig> mcs. bidirectional protein expression in an iron-deprived pfcf2-enta transformant was confirmed using antibiotic selection, cas assays and growth studies.


CONCLUSIONS
the vectors pfcf <dig>  pfcf <dig>  and pfbh <dig> have been shown to use the fepb/entc promoter region to control bidirectional in trans expression of epitope-tagged proteins in iron-depleted transformants. in the presence of intracellular iron, protein expression from these constructs was abrogated due to fur repression. the compatibility of the pfcf <dig> and pfbh <dig> backbones allows for iron-controlled expression of multiple epitope-tagged proteins from a single co-transformant.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ferric uptake regulatorprotein expressionbidirectional promoterbacterial two-hybridcas assayhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canada341983pawelek peter d. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

