BACKGROUND
the gram-negative bacterium photorhabdus asymbiotica  has been recovered from human infections in both north america and australia. recently, pa has been shown to have a nematode vector that can also infect insects, like its sister species the insect pathogen p. luminescens . to understand the relationship between pathogenicity to insects and humans in photorhabdus we have sequenced the complete genome of pa strain atcc <dig> from north america. this strain  was isolated in  <dig> from the blood of an  <dig> year old female patient with endocarditis, in maryland, usa. here we compare the complete genome of pa atcc <dig> with that of the previously sequenced insect pathogen p. luminescens strain tt <dig> which was isolated from its entomopathogenic nematode vector collected from soil in trinidad and tobago.


RESULTS
we found that the human pathogen pa had a smaller genome  than that of the insect pathogen pl  but that each pathogen carries approximately one megabase of dna that is unique to each strain. the reduced size of the pa genome is associated with a smaller diversity in insecticidal genes such as those encoding the toxin complexes , makes caterpillars floppy  toxins and the photorhabdus virulence cassettes . the pa genome, however, also shows the addition of a plasmid related to pmt <dig> from yersinia pestis and several novel pathogenicity islands including a novel type three secretion system  encoding island. together these data suggest that pa may show virulence against man via the acquisition of the pmt1-like plasmid and specific effectors, such as sopb, that promote its persistence inside human macrophages. interestingly the loss of insecticidal genes in pa is not reflected by a loss of pathogenicity towards insects.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that north american isolates of pa have acquired virulence against man via the acquisition of a plasmid and specific virulence factors with similarity to those shown to play roles in pathogenicity against humans in other bacteria.

