BACKGROUND
the ppt23a family of plasmids appears to be indigenous to the plant pathogen pseudomonas syringae and these plasmids are widely distributed and widely transferred among pathovars of p. syringae and related species. ppt23a-family plasmids  are sources of accessory genes for their hosts that can include genes important for virulence and epiphytic colonization of plant leaf surfaces. the occurrence of repeated sequences including duplicated insertion sequences on pfps has made obtaining closed plasmid genome sequences difficult. therefore, our objective was to obtain complete genome sequences from pfps from divergent p. syringae pathovars and also from strains of p. syringae pv. syringae isolated from different hosts.


RESULTS
the eight plasmids sequenced ranged in length from  <dig>  to  <dig>  kb and encoded from  <dig> to  <dig> annotated orfs. virulence genes including type iii secretion system effectors were encoded on two plasmids, and one of these, ppt0893- <dig> from p. syringae pv. tabaci, encoded a wide variety of putative virulence determinants. the pfps from p. syringae pv. syringae mostly encoded genes of importance to ecological fitness including the rulab determinant conferring tolerance to ultraviolet radiation. heavy metal resistance genes encoding resistance to copper and arsenic were also present in a few plasmids. the discovery of part of the chromosomal genomic island gi <dig> from p. syringae pv. syringae b728a in two pfps from two p. syringae pv. syringae hosts is further evidence of past intergenetic transfers between plasmid and chromosomal dna. phylogenetic analyses also revealed new subgroups of the ppt23a plasmid family and confirmed that plasmid phylogeny is incongruent with p. syringae pathovar or host of isolation. in addition, conserved genes among seven sequenced plasmids within the same phylogenetic group were limited to plasmid-specific functions including maintenance and transfer functions.


CONCLUSIONS
our sequence analysis further revealed that pfps from p. syringae encode suites of accessory genes that are selected at species , pathovar , and population levels . the conservation of type iv secretion systems encoding conjugation functions also presumably contributes to the distribution of these plasmids within p. syringae populations.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
copper resistancerulabhopbd1plasmid phylogenyp. syringaegenomic islandcice-junta de andaluciaproyecto de excelenciap07-agr-02471; p12-agr-1473cazorla francisco m. michigan state university agbioresearch issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

