BACKGROUND
post-transcriptional methylation of rna cytosine residues to 5-methylcytosine  is an important modification that regulates rna metabolism and occurs in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. yet, to date, no transcriptome-wide identification of m5c sites has been undertaken in plants. plants provide a unique comparative system for investigating the origin and evolution of m5c as they contain three different genomes, the nucleus, mitochondria and chloroplast. here we use bisulfite conversion of rna combined with high-throughput iilumina sequencing  to identify single-nucleotide resolution of m5c sites in non-coding ribosomal rnas and transfer rnas of all three sub-cellular transcriptomes across six diverse species that included, the single-celled algae nannochloropsis oculata, the macro algae caulerpa taxifolia and multi-cellular higher plants arabidopsis thaliana, brassica rapa, triticum durum and ginkgo biloba.


RESULTS
using the plant model arabidopsis thaliana, we identified a total of  <dig> highly methylated m5c sites in predicted structural positions of nuclear trnas and  <dig> m5c sites in rrnas from nuclear, chloroplast and mitochondrial transcriptomes. both the nucleotide position and percent methylation of trnas and rrnas m5c sites were conserved across all species analysed, from single celled algae n. oculata to multicellular plants. interestingly the mitochondrial and chloroplast encoded trnas were devoid of m5c in a. thaliana and this is generally conserved across plantae. this suggests independent evolution of organelle methylation in animals and plants, as animal mitochondrial trnas have m5c sites. here we characterize  <dig> members of the rna 5-methylcytosine family in arabidopsis and extend the functional characterization of trdmt <dig> and nop2a/oli <dig>  we demonstrate that nuclear trna methylation requires two evolutionarily conserved methyltransferases, trdmt <dig> and trm4b. trdmt <dig> trm4b double mutants are hypersensitive to the antibiotic hygromycin b, demonstrating the function of trna methylation in regulating translation. additionally we demonstrate that nuclear large subunit 25s rrna methylation requires the conserved rna methyltransferase nsun <dig>  our results also suggest functional redundancy of at least two of the nop <dig> paralogs in arabidopsis.


CONCLUSIONS
our data demonstrates widespread occurrence and conservation of non-coding rna methylation in the kingdom plantae, suggesting important and highly conserved roles of this post-transcriptional modification.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna 5-methylcytosinenon-coding rnaribosomal rna transfer rna arabidopsis thalianatrdmt1dnmt2trm4nop2nsun5issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

