BACKGROUND
the twin problem of shortage in fossil fuel and increase in environmental pollution can be partly addressed by blending of ethanol with transport fuel. increasing the ethanol production for this purpose without affecting the food security of the countries would require the use of cellulosic plant materials as substrate. clostridium thermocellum is an anaerobic thermophilic bacterium with cellulolytic property and the ability to produce ethanol. but its application as biocatalyst for ethanol production is limited because pyruvate ferredoxin oxidoreductase, which diverts pyruvate to ethanol production pathway, has low affinity to the substrate. therefore, the present study was undertaken to genetically modify c. thermocellum for enhancing its ethanol production capacity by transferring pyruvate carboxylase  and alcohol dehydrogenase  genes of the homoethanol pathway from zymomonas mobilis.


RESULTS
the pdc and adh genes from z. mobilis were cloned in pnw33n, and transformed to clostridium thermocellum dsm  <dig> by electroporation to generate recombinant cth-pdc, cth-adh and cth-pdc-adh strains that carried heterologous pdc, adh, and both genes, respectively. the plasmids were stably maintained in the recombinant strains. though both pdc and adh were functional in c. thermocellum, the presence of adh severely limited the growth of the recombinant strains, irrespective of the presence or absence of the pdc gene. the recombinant cth-pdc strain showed two-fold increase in pyruvate carboxylase activity and ethanol production when compared with the wild type strain.


CONCLUSIONS
pyruvate decarboxylase gene of the homoethanol pathway from z mobilis was functional in recombinant c. thermocellum strain and enhanced its ability to produced ethanol. strain improvement and bioprocess optimizations may further increase the ethanol production from this recombinant strain.

keywords
clostridium thermocellumhomoethanol pathwayzymomonas mobilispdcadhindian genetics congress  <dig> kattankulathur, india 4- <dig> march  <dig> http://www.srmuniv.ac.in/igc2015issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

