BACKGROUND
an important variability of contractile and metabolic properties between muscles has been highlighted. in the literature, the majority of studies on beef sensorial quality concerns m. longissimus thoracis. m. rectus abdominis  is easy to sample without huge carcass depreciation and may appear as an alternative to m. longissimus thoracis for fast and routine physicochemical analysis. it was considered interesting to assess the muscle fibres of m. rectus abdominis in comparison with m. longissimus thoracis  and m. triceps brachii  on the basis of metabolic and contractile properties, area and myosin heavy chain isoforms  proportions. immuno-histochemical, histochemical, histological and enzymological techniques were used. this research concerned two populations of charolais cattle: ra was compared to tb in a population of  <dig> steers while ra was compared to lt in a population of  <dig> heifers.


RESULTS
ra muscle had higher mean fibre areas  than the two other muscles. in ra muscle, the slow-oxidative fibres were the largest  and the fast-glycolytic the smallest . the reverse was observed in tb muscle . in ra muscle, the distinction between fast-oxidative-glycolytic and fast-glycolytic fibres appeared difficult or impossible to establish, unlike in the other muscles. consequently the classification based on atpase and sdh activities seemed inappropriate, since the fog fibres presented rather low sdh activity in this muscle in comparison to the other muscles of the carcass. ra muscle had a higher proportion of i fibres than tb and lt muscles, balanced by a lower proportion either of iix fibres  or of iia fibres . however, both oxidative and glycolytic enzyme activities were lower in ra than in tb muscle, although the ldh/icdh ratio was higher in ra muscle . oxidative enzyme activities were higher in ra than in lt muscle, whereas glycolytic enzyme activity was lower. in ra muscle, contractile and metabolic properties appeared to be less well-correlated than in the two other muscles.


CONCLUSIONS
ra muscle has some particularities in comparison to the lt and tb muscles, especially concerning the unusual large cross-section surface of so fibres and the very low oxidative activity of intermediate iia fibres.

