BACKGROUND
necrosis of alveolar macrophages following mycobacterium tuberculosis infection has been demonstrated to play a vital role in the pathogenesis of tuberculosis. our previous study demonstrated that wnt/β-catenin signaling was able to promote mycobacteria-infected cell apoptosis by a caspase-dependent pathway. however, the functionality of this signaling in the necrosis of macrophage following mycobacterial infection remains largely unknown.

methods
murine macrophage raw <dig>  cells were infected with bacillus calmette-guerin  in the presence of wnt/β-catenin signaling. the necrotic cell death was determined by cytometric assay and electronic microscopy; the productions of reactive oxygen species  and reduced glutathione  were measured by a cytometric analysis and an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, respectively; and the activity of poly  polymerase  <dig> /apoptosis inhibition factor  signaling was examined by an immunoblotting assay.


RESULTS
the bcg can induce raw <dig>  macrophage cells necrosis in a dose- and time-dependent manner along with an accumulation of reactive oxygen species . intriguingly, an enhancement of wnt/β-catenin signaling shows an ability to reduce the mycobacteria-induced macrophage necrosis. mechanistically, the activation of wnt/β-catenin signaling is capable of inhibiting the necrotic cell death in bcg-infected raw <dig>  cells through a mechanism by which the wnt signaling scavenges intracellular ros accumulation and increases cellular gsh concentration. in addition, immunoblotting analysis further reveals that wnt/β-catenin signaling is capable of inhibiting the ros-mediated cell necrosis in part through a parp-1/aif- dependent pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
an activation of wnt/β-catenin signaling can inhibit bcg-induced macrophage necrosis by increasing the production of gsh and scavenging ros in part through a mechanism of repression of parp-1/aif signaling pathway. this finding may thus provide an insight into the underlying mechanism of alveolar macrophage cell death in response to mycobacterial infection.

keywords
wnt/β-catenin signalingalveolar macrophagescell deathnecrosismycobacterial infectionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

