BACKGROUND
g- protein coupled receptors  comprise the largest group of eukaryotic cell surface receptors with great pharmacological interest. a broad range of native ligands interact and activate gpcrs, leading to signal transduction within cells. most of these responses are mediated through the interaction of gpcrs with heterotrimeric gtp-binding proteins . due to the information explosion in biological sequence databases, the development of software algorithms that could predict properties of gpcrs is important. experimental data reported in the literature suggest that heterotrimeric g-proteins interact with parts of the activated receptor at the transmembrane helix-intracellular loop interface. utilizing this information and membrane topology information, we have developed an intensive exploratory approach to generate a refined library of statistical models  that predict the coupling preference of gpcrs to heterotrimeric g-proteins. the method predicts the coupling preferences of gpcrs to gs, gi/o and gq/ <dig>  but not g12/ <dig> subfamilies.


RESULTS
using a dataset of  <dig> gpcr sequences of known coupling preference to g-proteins and adopting a five-fold cross-validation procedure, the method yielded an  <dig> % correct classification rate. in a validation set comprised of all receptor sequences that are species homologues to gpcrs with known coupling preferences, excluding the sequences used to train the models, our method yields a correct classification rate of  <dig> %. furthermore, promiscuous coupling properties were correctly predicted for  <dig> of the  <dig> gpcrs that are known to interact with more than one subfamily of g-proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
our method demonstrates high correct classification rate. unlike previously published methods performing the same task, it does not require any transmembrane topology prediction in a preceding step. a web-server for the prediction of gpcrs coupling specificity to g-proteins available for non-commercial users is located at .

