BACKGROUND
allopatric divergence across lineages can lead to post-zygotic reproductive isolation upon secondary contact and disrupt coevolution between mitochondrial and nuclear genomes, promoting emergence of genetic incompatibilities. a previous fst scan on the transcriptome of the baltic clam macoma balthica highlighted several genes potentially involved in mito-nuclear incompatibilities . as proteins involved in the mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation  chain are prone to mnis and can contribute to the maintenance of genetic barriers, the mitochondrial genomes of six ma. balthica individuals spanning two secondary contact zones were sequenced using the illumina miseq plateform.


RESULTS
the mitogenome has an approximate length of  <dig>  bp and encodes  <dig> protein-coding genes,  <dig> rrnas and  <dig> trnas, all located on the same strand. atp <dig>  a gene long reported as rare in bivalves, was detected. it encodes  <dig> amino acids and is putatively expressed and functional. a large unassigned region was identified between rrns and trnamet and could likely correspond to the control region. replacement and synonymous mutations were mapped on the inferred secondary structure of all protein-coding genes of the oxpho chain. the atp <dig> and atp <dig> genes were characterized by background levels of replacement mutations, relative to synonymous mutations. however, most nad genes  were characterized by an elevated proportion of replacement mutations.


CONCLUSIONS
six nearly complete mitochondrial genomes were successfully assembled and annotated, providing the necessary roadmap to study mnis at oxpho loci. few replacement mutations were mapped on mitochondrial-encoded atp synthase subunits, which is in contrast with previous data on nuclear-encoded subunits. conversely, the high population divergence and the prevalence of non-synonymous mutations at nad genes are congruent with previous observations from the nuclear transcriptome. this further suggest that mnis between subunits of complex i of the oxpho chain, coding for nadh dehydrogenase, may play a role in maintaining barriers to gene flow in ma. balthica.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nadh dehydrogenaseatp synthasenext-generation sequencingoxpho chainpositive selectioninter-specific hybridizationhybrid zoneissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

