BACKGROUND
the function and structure of protein translocons at the outer and inner envelope membrane of chloroplasts  are a subject of intensive research. one of the proteins that have been ascribed to the tic complex is tic <dig>  this protein was proposed as a redox sensor protein and may possibly act as a regulator during the translocation process. tic <dig> is a bimodular protein that comprises an n-terminal module, responsible for binding to pyridine nucleotides, and a c-terminal module which serves as a docking site for ferredoxin-nad-oxido-reductase . this work focuses on evolutionary analysis of the tic62-nad-related protein family, derived from the comparison of all available sequences, and discusses the structure of tic <dig> 


RESULTS
whereas the n-terminal module of tic <dig> is highly conserved among all oxyphototrophs, the c-terminal region  is only found in vascular plants. phylogenetic analyses classify four tic62-nad-related protein subfamilies in land plants, closely related to members from cyanobacteria and green sulphur bacteria. although most of the tic62-nad-related eukaryotic proteins are localized in the chloroplast, one subgroup consists of proteins without a predicted transit peptide. the n-terminal module of tic <dig> contains the structurally conserved rossman fold and probably belongs to the extended family of short-chain dehydrogenases-reductases. key residues involved in nadp-binding and residues that may attach the protein to the inner envelope membrane of chloroplasts or to the tic complex are proposed.


CONCLUSIONS
the tic62-nad-related proteins are of ancient origin since they are not only found in cyanobacteria but also in green sulphur bacteria. the fnr-binding module at the c-terminal region of the tic <dig> proteins is probably a recent acquisition in vascular plants, with no sequence similarity to any other known motifs. the presence of the fnr-binding domain in vascular plants might be essential for the function of the protein as a tic component and/or for its regulation.

