BACKGROUND
a number of bacterial species are capable of growing in various life history modes that enable their survival and persistence in both planktonic free-living stages as well as in biofilm communities. mechanisms contributing to either planktonic cell or biofilm persistence and survival can be carefully delineated using multiple differential techniques . in this study, we present both proteomic and metabolomic analyses of vibrio fischeri biofilms, demonstrating the potential for combined differential studies for elucidating life-history switches important for establishing the mutualism through biofilm formation and host colonization.

methods
the study used a metabolomics/proteomics or “meta-proteomics” approach, referring to the combined protein and metabolic data analysis that bridges the gap between phenotypic changes  with genotypic changes . our methods used protein shotgun construction, followed by liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry  detection and quantification for both free-living and biofilm forming v. fischeri.


RESULTS
we present a time-resolved picture of approximately  <dig> proteins  and  <dig> metabolites that are present during the transition from planktonic growth to community biofilm formation. proteins involved in stress response, dna repair damage, and transport appeared to be highly expressed during the biofilm state. in addition, metabolites detected in biofilms correspond to components of the exopolysaccharide  matrix . alterations in metabolic enzymes were paralleled by more pronounced changes in concentration of intermediates from the glycolysis pathway as well as several amino acids.


CONCLUSIONS
this combined analysis of both types of information  has provided a more complete picture of the biochemical processes of biofilm formation and what determines the switch between the two life history strategies. the reported findings have broad implications for vibrio biofilm ecology, and mechanisms for successful survival in the host and environment.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
v. fischerisymbiosisbiofilmsplanktonicmass spectrometryliquid chromatographymetabolomicsproteomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

