BACKGROUND
despite effective antiretroviral therapy , hiv-infected patients exhibit systemic inflammation, early onset of age-related diseases, and features of immunosenescence. the role of inflammation in the development of age-related diseases is widely recognized. however, the role of immunosenescence is not well established. studying immunosenescence in hiv-infection could give insight into its role in ageing processes. in this cross-sectional study, we aimed to investigate whether art-treated hiv-infected patients exhibit immunosenescence; and whether immunosenescence is associated with age-related processes of inflammation, metabolism, adipose tissue, and muscle. t cell immunosenescence and exhaustion were assessed by flow cytometry analysis of cd8+ cells from  <dig> art-treated hiv-infected patients  and ten controls using markers of differentiation: cd27/cd28; maturation: cd27/cd45ra; senescence: killer cell lectin-like receptor g <dig> ; and exhaustion: programmed death- <dig> . relationships between cd8+ t cell immunosenescence, exhaustion, and age-related processes were assessed using linear regressions.


RESULTS
hiv-infection was strongly associated with more highly differentiated and mature cd8+ t cell phenotypes. pd- <dig> and klrg <dig> expression did not differ between hiv+ and controls, but depended on differentiation and maturation stages of the cells. cd8+ t cell maturation was associated with age. klrg <dig> expression was associated with age, metabolic syndrome, visceral adipose tissue, and high muscle mass. pd- <dig> expression was not associated with age-related parameters.


CONCLUSIONS
hiv-infection strongly affected cd8+ t cell differentiation and maturation, whereas age-related processes were only weakly associated with immune parameters. our findings suggest that, in contrast to inflammation, immunosenescence appears to be highly dependent on hiv-infection and is only to a small extent associated with age-related parameters in well-treated hiv-infection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
immunosenescenceageinghivpd-1klrg1issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

