BACKGROUND
low-molecular-weight glutenin subunits , encoded by glu- <dig> complex loci in hexaploid wheat, play important roles in the processing quality of wheat flour. to date, the molecular characteristics and effects on dough quality of individual glu- <dig> alleles and their encoding proteins have been poorly studied. we used a glu-a <dig> deletion line of the chinese spring  wheat variety to conduct the first comprehensive study on the molecular characteristics and functional properties of the lmw-gs allele glu-a3a.


RESULTS
the glu-a3a allele at the glu-a <dig> locus in cs and its deletion in cs-n were identified and characterized by proteome and molecular marker methods. the deletion of glu-a3a had no significant influence on plant morphological and yield traits, but significantly reduced the dough strength and breadmaking quality compared to cs. the complete sequence of the glu-a3a allele was cloned and characterized, which was found to encode a b-subunit with longer repetitive domains and an increased number of α-helices. the glu-a3a-encoded b-subunit showed a higher expression level and accumulation rate during grain development. these characteristics of the glu-a3a allele could contribute to achieving superior gluten quality and demonstrate its potential application to wheat quality improvement. furthermore, an allele-specific polymerase chain reaction  marker for the glu-a3a allele was developed and validated using different bread wheat cultivars, including near-isogenic lines  and recombinant inbred lines , which could be used as an effective molecular marker for gluten quality improvement through marker-assisted selection.


CONCLUSIONS
this work demonstrated that the lmw-gs allele glu-a3a encodes a specific lmw-i type b-subunit that significantly affects wheat dough strength and breadmaking quality. the glu-a3a-encoded b-subunit has a long repetitive domain and more α-helix structures as well as a higher expression level and accumulation rate during grain development, which could facilitate the formation of wheat with a stronger dough structure and superior breadmaking quality.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
wheatglu-a3amolecular cloningdough strengthbreadmaking qualityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

