BACKGROUND
oocytes and early embryos contain minute amounts of dna, rna and proteins, making the study of early mammalian development highly challenging. the study of the embryo epigenome, in particular the dna methylome, has been made accessible thanks to the possibility of amplifying specific sequences according to their initial methylation status. this paper describes a novel platform dedicated to the genome-wide study of bovine dna methylation, including a complete pipeline for data analysis and visualization. the platform allows processing and integrating of dna methylome and transcriptome data from the same sample. procedures were optimized for genome-wide analysis of 10 ng of dna . bovine sperm and blastocysts were compared as a test of platform capability.


RESULTS
the hypermethylation of bovine sperm dna compared to the embryo genome was confirmed. differentially methylated regions were distributed across various classes of bovine sperm genomic feature including primarily promoter, intronic and exonic regions, non-cpg-island regions  and cpg islands with low-to-intermediate cpg density. the blastocyst genome bore more methylation marks than sperm dna only in cpg islands with high cpg density. long-terminal-repeat retrotransposons , line and sine were more methylated in sperm dna, as were low-complexity repetitive elements in blastocysts.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first early embryo compatible genome-wide epigenetics platform for bovine. such platforms should improve the study of the potential epigenetic risks of assisted reproductive technologies , the establishment sequence of embryonic cell lines and potential deviations in both gene expression and dna methylation capable of having long-term impact.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
epigenomedna methylationbovine embryomethylome and transcriptome parallel analysisanalysis pipelinecpg enrichmentrepetitive elementsepigenome-wide association studyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

