BACKGROUND
the enzyme cellobiose dehydrogenase  can be used to oxidize lactose to lactobionic acid. as sclerotium rolfsii is known to be a good producer of cdh, the aim of this paper was to simplify its production and secondly to systematically study its purification aiming for a high yield. two preservation methods  and the influence of several protectants were investigated.


RESULTS
production of cellobiose dehydrogenase was optimized leading to a more simplified medium composition. purification of the enzyme was evaluated by determining breakthrough profiles on different ion exchange  and hydrophobic interaction  materials with regard to buffer composition. highest purification with an acceptable loss during the capture step using iex was obtained with a q sepharose xl medium and a  <dig> mm sodium acetate buffer at ph  <dig> . subsequent purification using hydrophobic interaction chromatography was done at  <dig>  m ammonium sulfate concentration. purification was moderate, yielding a specific activity of  <dig>  u/mg . however, as could be shown in a preliminary experiment, purity of the obtained enzyme solution was sufficient for its intended use to oxidize lactose to lactobionic acid. various sugars and sugar alcohols were investigated to study their protective effect during lyophilisation and freezing at -20°c. glucose and lactulose could be identified to have a high lyoprotective effect while loss of enzyme activity was high  when using no additives.


CONCLUSIONS
by simplifying the cultivation medium of sclerotium rolfsii, the costs of cellobiose dehydrogenase production could be reduced. simultaneously, cdh production was increased by 21%. the production of lactobionic acid from lactose is possible using partially purified and unpurified enzyme. storage at -20°c using 50%  glycerol was considered to be most suited for preservation of the enzyme.

keywords
cellobiose dehydrogenasecdhsclerotium rolfsiienzyme purificationlyophilisationcryoprotectionlactobionic acidissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

