BACKGROUND
with the completion of the human genome sequence the functional analysis and characterization of the encoded proteins has become the next urging challenge in the post-genome era. the lack of comprehensive orfeome resources has thus far hampered systematic applications by protein gain-of-function analysis. gene and orf coverage with full-length orf clones thus needs to be extended. in combination with a unique and versatile cloning system, these will provide the tools for genome-wide systematic functional analyses, to achieve a deeper insight into complex biological processes.


RESULTS
here we describe the generation of a full-orf clone resource of human genes applying the gateway cloning technology . a pipeline for efficient cloning and sequencing was developed and a sample tracking database was implemented to streamline the clone production process targeting more than  <dig>  different orfs. in addition, a robust cloning strategy was established, permitting the simultaneous generation of two clone variants that contain a particular orf with as well as without a stop codon by the implementation of only one additional working step into the cloning procedure. up to  <dig> % of the targeted orfs were successfully amplified by pcr and more than  <dig> % of the amplicons successfully cloned.


CONCLUSIONS
the german cdna consortium orfeome resource currently consists of more than  <dig>  sequence-verified entry clones representing orfs, cloned with and without stop codon, for about  <dig>  different gene loci.  <dig> splice variants were cloned representing  <dig> of these genes. the entry clones have been used to generate over  <dig>  different expression constructs, providing the basis for functional profiling applications. as a member of the recently formed international orfeome collaboration we substantially contribute to generating and providing a whole genome human orfeome collection in a unique cloning system that is made freely available in the community.

