BACKGROUND
in wine grape production, management practices have been adopted to optimize grape and wine quality attributes by producing, or screening for, berries of smaller size. fruit size and composition are influenced by numerous factors that include both internal  and external  factors. combined physiological, biochemical, and transcriptome analyses were performed to improve our current understanding of metabolic and transcriptional pathways related to berry ripening and composition in berries of different sizes.


RESULTS
the comparison of berry physiology between small and large berries throughout development  revealed significant differences in firmness, the rate of softening, and sugar accumulation at specific developmental stages. small berries had significantly higher skin to berry weight ratio, lower number of seeds per berry, and higher anthocyanin concentration compared to large berries. rna-sequencing analyses of berry skins at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> daa revealed a total of  <dig> differentially expressed genes between small and large berries. abscisic acid, auxin, and ethylene hormone pathway genes were differentially modulated between berry sizes. fatty acid degradation and stilbenoid pathway genes were upregulated at  <dig> daa while cell wall degrading and modification genes were downregulated at  <dig> daa in small compared to large berries. in the late ripening stage, concerted upregulation of the general phenylpropanoid and stilbenoid pathway genes and downregulation of flavonoid pathway genes were observed in skins of small compared to large berries. cis-regulatory element analysis of differentially expressed hormone, fruit texture, flavor, and aroma genes revealed an enrichment of specific regulatory motifs related to bzip, bhlh, ap2/erf, nac, myb, and mads-box transcription factors.


CONCLUSIONS
the study demonstrates that physiological and compositional differences between berries of different sizes parallel transcriptome changes that involve fruit texture, flavor, and aroma pathways. these results suggest that, in addition to direct effects brought about by differences in size, key aspects involved in the regulation of ripening likely contribute to different quality profiles between small and large berries.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aromacell wallflavonoidgrapevinehormonepromoterqualityrna-seqsecondary metabolismtranscriptomicshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000233genome british columbia10r1883810r18838http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canada10r23082issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

