BACKGROUND
embryogenesis is a highly conserved, canalized process, and variation in the duration of embryogenesis , i.e., time from egg lay to hatching, has a potentially profound effect on the outcome of within- and between-species competition. there is both intra- and inter-specific variation in this trait, which may provide important fuel for evolutionary processes, particularly adaptation. however, while genetic variation underlying simpler morphological traits, or with large phenotypic effects is well described in the literature, less is known about the underlying genetics of traits, such as doe, partly due to a lack of tools with which to study them.


RESULTS
here, we establish a novel microscope-based assay to survey genetic variation for the duration of embryogenesis . first, to establish the potential importance of doe in competitive fitness, we performed a set of experiments where we experimentally manipulated the time until hatching, and show that short hatching times result in priority effect in the form of improved larval competitive ability. we then use our assay to measure doe for  <dig> strains from the drosophila genetic reference panel . our assay greatly simplifies the measurement of doe, making it possible to precisely quantify this trait for  <dig>  individual embryos . we find extensive genetic variation in doe, with a 15 % difference in rate between the slowest and fastest strains measured, and 89 % of phenotypic variation due to dgrp strain. using sequence information from the dgrp, we perform a genome-wide association study, which suggests that some well-known developmental genes affect the speed of embryonic development.


CONCLUSIONS
we showed that the duration of embryogenesis  can be efficiently and precisely measured in drosophila, and that the dgrp strains show remarkable variation in doe. a genome-wide analysis suggests that some well-known developmental genes are potentially associated with doe. further functional assays, or transcriptomic analysis of embryos from the dgrp, can validate the role of our candidates in early developmental processes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rate of developmentembryogenesisdrosophiladgrpgenetic variationgwashttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002428austrian science fundp27048betancourt andrea j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

