BACKGROUND
although the overwhelming majority of genes found in angiosperms are members of gene families, and both gene- and genome-duplication are pervasive forces in plant genomes, some genes are sufficiently distinct from all other genes in a genome that they can be operationally defined as 'single copy'. using the gene clustering algorithm mcl-tribe, we have identified a set of  <dig> single copy genes that are shared single copy genes in the genomes of arabidopsis thaliana, populus trichocarpa, vitis vinifera and oryza sativa. to characterize these genes, we have performed a number of analyses examining go annotations, coding sequence length, number of exons, number of domains, presence in distant lineages, such as selaginella and physcomitrella, and phylogenetic analysis to estimate copy number in other seed plants and to demonstrate their phylogenetic utility. we then provide examples of how these genes may be used in phylogenetic analyses to reconstruct organismal history, both by using extant coverage in est databases for seed plants and de novo amplification via rt-pcr in the family brassicaceae.


RESULTS
there are  <dig> single copy nuclear genes shared in arabidopsis, populus, vitis and oryza . the majority of these genes are also present in the selaginella and physcomitrella genomes. public est sets for  <dig> species suggest that most of these genes are present across a diverse collection of seed plants, and appear to exist as single or very low copy genes, though exceptions are seen in recently polyploid taxa and in lineages where there is significant evidence for a shared large-scale duplication event. genes encoding proteins localized in organelles are more commonly single copy than expected by chance, but the evolutionary forces responsible for this bias are unknown.

regardless of the evolutionary mechanisms responsible for the large number of shared single copy genes in diverse flowering plant lineages, these genes are valuable for phylogenetic and comparative analyses. eighteen of the apvo ssc single copy genes were amplified in the brassicaceae using rt-pcr and directly sequenced. alignments of these sequences provide improved resolution of brassicaceae phylogeny compared to recent studies using plastid and its sequences. an analysis of sequences from  <dig> apvo ssc genes from  <dig> species of seed plants, derived mainly from public est databases, yielded a phylogeny that was largely congruent with prior hypotheses based on multiple plastid sequences. whereas single gene phylogenies that rely on est sequences have limited bootstrap support as the result of limited sequence information, concatenated alignments result in phylogenetic trees with strong bootstrap support for already established relationships. overall, these single copy nuclear genes are promising markers for phylogenetics, and contain a greater proportion of phylogenetically-informative sites than commonly used protein-coding sequences from the plastid or mitochondrial genomes.


CONCLUSIONS
putatively orthologous, shared single copy nuclear genes provide a vast source of new evidence for plant phylogenetics, genome mapping, and other applications, as well as a substantial class of genes for which functional characterization is needed. preliminary evidence indicates that many of the shared single copy nuclear genes identified in this study may be well suited as markers for addressing phylogenetic hypotheses at a variety of taxonomic levels.

