BACKGROUND
the prairie vole  is a premier animal model for understanding the genetic and neurological basis of social behaviors. unlike other biomedical models, prairie voles display a rich repertoire of social behaviors including the formation of long-term pair bonds and biparental care. however, due to a lack of genomic resources for this species, studies have been limited to a handful of candidate genes. to provide a substrate for future development of genomic resources for this unique model organism, we report the construction and characterization of a bacterial artificial chromosome  library from a single male prairie vole and a prairie vole-mouse  comparative cytogenetic map.


RESULTS
we constructed a prairie vole bac library  consisting of  <dig>  recombinant clones with an average insert size of  <dig> kb. hybridization-based screening of the gridded library at  <dig> loci established that the library has an average depth of coverage of ~10×. to obtain a small-scale sampling of the prairie vole genome, we generated  <dig> bac end-sequences totaling ~ <dig>  mb. one-third of these bac-end sequences could be mapped to unique locations in the mouse genome, thereby anchoring  <dig> prairie vole bac clones to an orthologous position in the mouse genome. fluorescence in situ hybridization  mapping of  <dig> prairie vole clones with bac-end sequences mapping to orthologous positions in the mouse genome was used to develop a first-generation genome-wide prairie vole-mouse comparative cytogenetic map. while conserved synteny was observed between this pair of rodent genomes, rearrangements between the prairie vole and mouse genomes were detected, including a minimum of five inversions and  <dig> inter-chromosomal rearrangements.


CONCLUSIONS
the construction of the prairie vole bac library and the vole-mouse comparative cytogenetic map represent the first genome-wide modern genomic resources developed for this species. the bac library will support future genomic, genetic and molecular characterization of this genome and species, and the isolation of clones of high interest to the vole research community will allow for immediate characterization of the regulatory and coding sequences of genes known to play important roles in social behaviors. in addition, these resources provide an excellent platform for future higher resolution cytogenetic mapping and full genome sequencing.

