BACKGROUND
as a means of biologically controlling mikania micrantha h.b.k. in yunnan, china, the influence of sweet potato  on its reproductive characteristics was studied. the trial utilized a de wit replacement series incorporating six ratios of sweet potato and m. micrantha plants in 25 m <dig> plots over 2 years.


RESULTS
budding of m. micrantha occurred at the end of september; flowering and fruiting occurred from october to february. flowering phenology of m. micrantha was delayed , duration of flowering and fruiting was reduced  and duration of bud formation was increased  with increasing proportions of sweet potato. reproductive allocation, reproductive investment and reproductive index of m. micrantha were significantly reduced  with increasing sweet potato densities. apidae bees, and calliphoridae or syrphidae flies were the most abundant visitors to m. micrantha flowers. overall flower visits decreased  as sweet potato increased. thus the mechanism by which sweet potato suppressed sexual reproduction in m. micrantha was essentially two-fold: causing a delay in flowering phenology and reducing pollinator visits. the number, biomass, length, set rate, germination rate, and 1000-grain dry weight of m. micrantha seeds were suppressed  by sweet potato competition. with proportional increases in sweet potato, sexual and asexual seedling populations of m. micrantha were significantly reduced . the mortality of both seedling types increased  with proportional increases in sweet potato.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that sweet potato significantly suppresses the reproductive ability of the invasive species m. micrantha, and is a promising alternative to traditional biological control and other methods of control. planting sweet potato in conjunction with other control methods could provide a comprehensive strategy for managing m. micrantha. the scenario of controlling m. micrantha by utilizing a crop with a similar growth form may provide a useful model for similar management strategies in other systems.

keywords
biological controlmikania micranthasweet potatocompetitionflowering and fruiting phenologyreproductive suppressionyunnan provincial key fund program2010cc002zhang fudou middle-aged and young academic leader training foundation of yunnan province2014hb039shen shicai international science & technology cooperation program of yunnan provincial science and technology department2014ia009zhang fudou issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

