BACKGROUND
methyl jasmonate  has been successfully used as an effective elicitor to enhance production of taxol and other taxanes in cultured taxus cells. however the mechanism of meja-mediated taxane biosynthesis remains unclear. genomic information for species in the genus taxus is currently unavailable. therefore, information about the transcriptome of taxus cells and specifically, description of changes in gene expression in response to meja, is needed for the better exploration of the biological mechanisms of meja-mediated taxane biosynthesis.


RESULTS
in this research, the transcriptome profiles of t. chinensis cells at  <dig> hours  after meja treatment and of mock-treated cells  were analyzed by “rna-seq” to investigate the transcriptional alterations of taxus cell in response to meja elicitation. more than  <dig> million reads  of cdna from both samples were generated, and  <dig>  unigenes were found. there were  <dig>  genes found to be expressed differentially between the two timepoints, including all of the known jasmonate  biosynthesis/ja signaling pathway genes and taxol-related genes. the qrt-pcr results showed that the expression profiles of  <dig> randomly selected degs and  <dig> taxol biosynthesis genes were found to be consistent with the rna-seq data. meja appeared to stimulate a large number of genes involved in several relevant functional categories, such as plant hormone biosynthesis and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. additionally, many genes encoding transcription factors were shown to respond to meja elicitation.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of a transcriptome analysis suggest that exogenous application of meja could induce ja biosynthesis/ja signaling pathway/defence responses, activate a series of transcription factors, as well as increase expression of genes in the terpenoid biosynthesis pathway responsible for taxol synthesis. this comprehensive description of gene expression information could greatly facilitate our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of meja-mediated taxane biosynthesis in taxus cells.

