BACKGROUND
increasingly, biologists and biochemists use computational tools to design experiments to probe the function of proteins and/or to engineer them for a variety of different purposes. the most effective strategies rely on the knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of the protein of interest. however it is often the case that an experimental structure is not available and that models of different quality are used instead. on the other hand, the relationship between the quality of a model and its appropriate use is not easy to derive in general, and so far it has been analyzed in detail only for specific application.


RESULTS
this paper describes a database and related software tools that allow testing of a given structure based method on models of a protein representing different levels of accuracy. the comparison of the results of a computational experiment on the experimental structure and on a set of its decoy models will allow developers and users to assess which is the specific threshold of accuracy required to perform the task effectively.


CONCLUSIONS
the modeldb server automatically builds decoy models of different accuracy for a given protein of known structure and provides a set of useful tools for their analysis. pre-computed data for a non-redundant set of deposited protein structures are available for analysis and download in the modeldb database.

implementation, availability and requirements
project name: a resource for benchmarking the usefulness of protein structure models. project home page: http://bl <dig> caspur.it/model-db/model-db_web/modindex.php.

operating system: platform independent. programming language: perl-bioperl ; mysql, perl dbi and dbd modules ; php, javascript, jmol scripting . other requirements: java runtime environment v <dig>  or later, perl, bioperl, cpan modules, hhsearch, modeller, lga, ncbi blast package, dssp, speedfill  and psaia. license: free. any restrictions to use by non-academics: no.

protein structure predictiondecoy databasecomparative modelingmodeldb

