BACKGROUND
due to the functional importance of intrinsically disordered proteins or protein regions, prediction of intrinsic protein disorder from amino acid sequence has become an area of active research as witnessed in the 6th experiment on critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction . since the initial work by romero et al. , our group has developed several predictors optimized for long disordered regions  with prediction accuracy exceeding 85%. however, these predictors are less successful on short disordered regions . a probable cause is a length-dependent amino acid compositions and sequence properties of disordered regions.


RESULTS
we proposed two new predictor models, vsl2-m <dig> and vsl2-m <dig>  to address this length-dependency problem in prediction of intrinsic protein disorder. these two predictors are similar to the original vsl <dig> predictor used in the casp <dig> experiment. in both models, two specialized predictors were first built and optimized for short  and long disordered regions , respectively. a meta predictor was then trained to integrate the specialized predictors into the final predictor model. as the 10-fold cross-validation results showed, the vsl <dig> predictors achieved well-balanced prediction accuracies of 81% on both short and long disordered regions. comparisons over the vsl <dig> training dataset via 10-fold cross-validation and a blind-test set of unrelated recent pdb chains indicated that vsl <dig> predictors were significantly more accurate than several existing predictors of intrinsic protein disorder.


CONCLUSIONS
the vsl <dig> predictors are applicable to disordered regions of any length and can accurately identify the short disordered regions that are often misclassified by our previous disorder predictors. the success of the vsl <dig> predictors further confirmed the previously observed differences in amino acid compositions and sequence properties between short and long disordered regions, and justified our approaches for modelling short and long disordered regions separately. the vsl <dig> predictors are freely accessible for non-commercial use at

