BACKGROUND
recent studies have shown that the crosstalk between microrna  sponges plays an important role in human cancers. however, the co-regulation roles of mirna sponges in protein-protein interactions  are still unknown.


RESULTS
in this study, we propose a multi-step method called mirscoppi to infer mirna sponge co-regulation of ppis. we focus on investigating breast cancer  related mirna sponge co-regulation, by integrating heterogeneous data, including mirna, long non-coding rna  and messenger rna  expression data, experimentally validated mirna-target interactions, ppis and lncrna-target interactions, and the list of breast cancer genes. we find that the inferred brca-related mirscoppi network is highly connected and scale free. the top 10% hub genes in the brca-related mirscoppi network have potential biological implications in breast cancer. by utilizing a graph clustering method, we discover  <dig> brca-related mirscoppi modules. through pathway enrichment analysis of the modules, we find that several modules are significantly enriched in pathways associated with breast cancer. moreover,  <dig> modules have good performance in classifying breast tumor and normal samples, and can act as module signatures for prognostication. by using putative computationally predicted mirna-target interactions, we have consistent results with those obtained using experimentally validated mirna-target interactions, indicating that mirscoppi is robust in inferring mirna sponge co-regulation of ppis in human breast cancer.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, the results demonstrate that mirscoppi is a promising tool for inferring brca-related mirna sponge co-regulation of ppis and it can help with the understanding of the co-regulation roles of mirna sponges on the ppis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mirna spongecernamirna sponge co-regulationlncrnaprotein-protein interactionbreast cancerapplied basic research foundation of science and technology of yunnan province2013fd038zhang junpeng http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000925national health and medical research council1123042le thuc duy australian research council discoverydp140103617li jiuyong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

