BACKGROUND
as sequencing costs are being lowered continuously, rna-seq has gradually been adopted as the first choice for comparative transcriptome studies with bacteria. unlike microarrays, rna-seq can directly detect cdna derived from mrna transcripts at a single nucleotide resolution. not only does this allow researchers to determine the absolute expression level of genes, but it also conveys information about transcript structure. few automatic software tools have yet been established to investigate large-scale rna-seq data for bacterial transcript structure analysis.


RESULTS
in this study,  <dig> directional rna-seq libraries from salmonella serovar typhimurium  14028s were examined for potential relationships between read mapping patterns and transcript structure. we developed an empirical method, combined with statistical tests, to automatically detect key transcript features, including transcriptional start sites , transcriptional termination sites  and operon organization. using our method, we obtained  <dig>  tsss and  <dig>  ttss for  <dig> and  <dig> different genes, respectively. identification of tsss facilitated further discrimination of  <dig> putative sigma  <dig> regulons and  <dig> potential sigma  <dig> regulons. combining the tsss and ttss with intergenic distance and co-expression information, we comprehensively annotated the operon organization in s. typhimurium 14028s.


CONCLUSIONS
our results show that directional rna-seq can be used to detect transcriptional borders at an acceptable resolution of ±10- <dig> nucleotides. technical limitations of the rna-seq procedure may prevent single nucleotide resolution. the automatic transcript border detection methods, statistical models and operon organization pipeline that we have described could be widely applied to rna-seq studies in other bacteria. furthermore, the tsss, ttss, operons, promoters and unstranslated regions that we have defined for s. typhimurium 14028s may constitute valuable resources that can be used for comparative analyses with other salmonella serotypes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

