BACKGROUND
gene duplication is a genetic mutation that creates functionally redundant gene copies that are initially relieved from selective pressures and may adapt themselves to new functions with time. the levels of gene duplication may vary from small-scale duplication  to whole genome duplication . studies with yeast revealed ample differences between these duplicates: yeast wgd pairs were functionally more similar, less divergent in subcellular localization and contained a lesser proportion of essential genes. in this study, we explored the differences in evolutionary genomic properties of human ssd and wgd genes, with the identifiable human duplicates coming from the two rounds of whole genome duplication occurred early in vertebrate evolution.


RESULTS
we observed that these two groups of duplicates were also dissimilar in terms of their evolutionary and genomic properties. but interestingly, this is not like the same observed in yeast. the human wgds were found to be functionally less similar, diverge more in subcellular level and contain a higher proportion of essential genes than the ssds, all of which are opposite from yeast. additionally, we explored that human wgds were more divergent in their gene expression profile, have higher multifunctionality and are more often associated with disease, and are evolutionarily more conserved than human ssds.


CONCLUSIONS
our study suggests that human wgd duplicates are more divergent and entails the adaptation of wgds to novel and important functions that consequently lead to their evolutionary conservation in the course of evolution.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
small-scale duplicationwhole-genome duplicationfunctional divergencegene essentialitydisease genesprotein multifunctionalityevolutionary ratehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001501university grants commissionf.2-8/2002acharya debarun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

