BACKGROUND
african swine fever  is a viral infectious disease of domestic and wild suids of all breeds and ages, causing a wide range of hemorrhagic syndromes and frequently characterized by high mortality. the disease is endemic in sub-saharan africa and sardinia. since  <dig>  it has also been present in different countries of eastern europe, where control measures have not been effective so far. the continued spread poses a serious threat to the swine industry worldwide. in the absence of vaccine, early detection of infected animals is of paramount importance for control of the outbreak, to prevent the transmission of the virus to healthy animals and subsequent spreading of the disease. current laboratory diagnosis is mainly based on virological methods  and serodiagnosis.


RESULTS
in the present work, a lateral flow assay  for antigen detection has been developed and evaluated. the test is based on the use of a mab against vp <dig> protein of asfv, the major viral capsid protein and highly immunogenic. first experiments using vp <dig> viral and recombinant protein or inactivated culture virus showed promising results with a sensitivity similar to that of a commercially available antigen-elisa. moreover, these strips were tested with blood from experimentally infected pigs and field animals and the results compared with those of pcr and antigen-elisa. for the experimentally infected samples, there was an excellent correlation between the lfa and the elisa, while the pcr always showed to be more sensitive . the lfa was demonstrated to be positive for animals with circulating virus levels exceeding  <dig> hau. with the field samples, once again, the pcr detected more positives than either the antigen-elisa or lfa, although here the number of positive samples scored by the lfa exceeded the values obtained with the antigen-elisa, showing 60 % positivity vs 48 % for the elisa. for the two groups of sera, the specificity was close to 100 % indicating that hardly any false positive samples were found.


CONCLUSIONS
the newly developed lfa allows rapid and reliable detection of asfv, at field and laboratory level, providing a new useful tool for control programs and in situations where laboratory support and skilled personnel are limited.

keywords
african swine fever viruslateral flow assaydiagnosisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

