BACKGROUND
lipids are a class of molecules that play an important role in cellular structure and metabolism in all cell types. in the last few decades, it has been reported that long-chain fatty acids  are involved in several biological functions from transcriptional regulation to physiological processes. several fatty acids have been both positively and negatively implicated in different biological processes in skeletal muscle and other tissues. to gain insight into biological processes associated with fatty acid content in skeletal muscle, the aim of the present study was to identify differentially expressed genes  and functional pathways related to gene expression regulation associated with fa content in cattle.


RESULTS
skeletal muscle transcriptome analysis of  <dig> nellore steers revealed no differentially expressed genes  for samples with extreme values for linoleic acid  or stearic acid , and only a few degs for eicosapentaenoic acid , docosahexaenoic acid  and palmitic acid , while large numbers of degs were associated with oleic acid  and conjugated linoleic acid cis <dig> trans <dig> . functional annotation and functional enrichment from oa degs identified important genes, canonical pathways and upstream regulators such as scd, plin <dig>  ucp <dig>  cpt <dig>  cpt1b, oxidative phosphorylation mitochondrial dysfunction, ppargc1a, and foxo <dig>  two important genes associated with lipid metabolism, gene expression and cancer were identified as degs between animals with high and low cla-c9t <dig>  specifically, epidermal growth factor receptor  and rnps.


CONCLUSIONS
only two out of seven classes of molecules of fa studied were associated with large changes in the expression profile of skeletal muscle. oa and cla-c9t <dig> content had significant effects on the expression level of genes related to important biological processes associated with oxidative phosphorylation, and cell growth, survival, and migration. these results contribute to our understanding of how some fas modulate metabolism and may have protective health function.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lipidsrna-seqbos indicusglobal oxidative metabolismhuman healthfapesp2014/22884-02012/23638-8embrapamacroprograma  <dig>  01/2005issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

