BACKGROUND
detailed and systematic understanding of the biological effects of millions of available compounds on living cells is a significant challenge. as most compounds impact multiple targets and pathways, traditional methods for analyzing structure-function relationships are not comprehensive enough. therefore more advanced integrative models are needed for predicting biological effects elicited by specific chemical features. as a step towards creating such computational links we developed a data-driven chemical systems biology approach to comprehensively study the relationship of  <dig> structural 3d-descriptors  of  <dig> drugs with the microarray gene expression responses  they elicited in three cancer cell lines. the analysis covering  <dig> genes was based on data from the connectivity map. we decomposed the biological response profiles into components, each linked to a characteristic chemical descriptor profile.


RESULTS
integrated analysis of both the chemical and biological space was more informative than either dataset alone in predicting drug similarity as measured by shared protein targets. we identified ten major components that link distinct volsurf chemical features across multiple compounds to specific cellular responses. for example, component  <dig>  strongly linked to dna damage response, while component  <dig>  was associated with metabolic stress. individual structural and biological features were often linked to one cell line only, such as leukemia cells  specifically responding to cardiac glycosides.


CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our approach identified several novel links between specific chemical structure properties and distinct biological responses in cells incubated with these drugs. importantly, the analysis focused on chemical-biological properties that emerge across multiple drugs. the decoding of such systematic relationships is necessary to build better models of drug effects, including unanticipated types of molecular properties having strong biological effects.

