BACKGROUND
dna elimination is developmentally programmed in a wide variety of eukaryotes, including unicellular ciliates, and leads to the generation of distinct germline and somatic genomes. the ciliate paramecium tetraurelia harbors two types of nuclei with different functions and genome structures. the transcriptionally inactive micronucleus contains the complete germline genome, while the somatic macronucleus contains a reduced genome streamlined for gene expression. during development of the somatic macronucleus, the germline genome undergoes massive and reproducible dna elimination events. availability of both the somatic and germline genomes is essential to examine the genome changes that occur during programmed dna elimination and ultimately decipher the mechanisms underlying the specific removal of germline-limited sequences.


RESULTS
we developed a novel experimental approach that uses flow cell imaging and flow cytometry to sort subpopulations of nuclei to high purity. we sorted vegetative micronuclei and macronuclei during development of p. tetraurelia. we validated the method by flow cell imaging and by high throughput dna sequencing. our work establishes the proof of principle that developing somatic macronuclei can be sorted from a complex biological sample to high purity based on their size, shape and dna content. this method enabled us to sequence, for the first time, the germline dna from pure micronuclei and to identify novel transposable elements. sequencing the germline dna confirms that the pgm domesticated transposase is required for the excision of all ~ <dig>  internal eliminated sequences. comparison of the germline dna and unrearranged dna obtained from pgm-silenced cells reveals that the latter does not provide a faithful representation of the germline genome.


CONCLUSIONS
we developed a flow cytometry-based method to purify p. tetraurelia nuclei to high purity and provided quality control with flow cell imaging and high throughput dna sequencing. we identified  <dig> germline transposable elements including the first paramecium retrotransposons. this approach paves the way to sequence the germline genomes of p. aurelia sibling species for future comparative genomic studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
flow cytometrynon-ltr retrotransposonsitm dna transposonsprogrammed dna eliminationhigh throughput sequencinginvestissements d’aveniranr-10-labx- <dig> memolife; anr-11-idex-0001- <dig> psl research universitymeyer eric cnrshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001665agence nationale de la rechercheanr-14-ce10–0005– <dig> ‘piggypack’anr-14-ce10–0005– <dig> ‘piggypack’sperling linda duharcourt sandra fondation de l'avenir pour la recherche médicale appliquée equipe frm deq20150331763meyer eric labex ‘‘who am i?’’ anr-11-labx-0071_whoami ; anr-11-idex-0005-02duharcourt sandra comité d’ile de france de la ligue nationale contre le cancerrs16/75-27duharcourt sandra fondation de la recherche médicaleequipe frm deq20160334868duharcourt sandra issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

