BACKGROUND
it has become a very important and full of challenge task to predict bacterial protein subcellular locations using computational methods. although there exist a lot of prediction methods for bacterial proteins, the majority of these methods can only deal with single-location proteins. but unfortunately many multi-location proteins are located in the bacterial cells. moreover, multi-location proteins have special biological functions capable of helping the development of new drugs. so it is necessary to develop new computational methods for accurately predicting subcellular locations of multi-location bacterial proteins.


RESULTS
in this article, two efficient multi-label predictors, gpos-ecc-mploc and gneg-ecc-mploc, are developed to predict the subcellular locations of multi-label gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial proteins respectively. the two multi-label predictors construct the go vectors by using the go terms of homologous proteins of query proteins and then adopt a powerful multi-label ensemble classifier to make the final multi-label prediction. the two multi-label predictors have the following advantages:  they improve the prediction performance of multi-label proteins by taking the correlations among different labels into account;  they ensemble multiple cc classifiers and further generate better prediction results by ensemble learning; and  they construct the go vectors by using the frequency of occurrences of go terms in the typical homologous set instead of using 0/ <dig> values. experimental results show that gpos-ecc-mploc and gneg-ecc-mploc can efficiently predict the subcellular locations of multi-label gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial proteins respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
gpos-ecc-mploc and gneg-ecc-mploc can efficiently improve prediction accuracy of subcellular localization of multi-location gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial proteins respectively. the online web servers for gpos-ecc-mploc and gneg-ecc-mploc predictors are freely accessible at http://biomed.zzuli.edu.cn/bioinfo/gpos-ecc-mploc/ and http://biomed.zzuli.edu.cn/bioinfo/gneg-ecc-mploc/ respectively.

multi-location proteinssubcellular localizationgene ontologymulti-label classifier ensemble2- <dig> november  <dig> ieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine  belfast, uk

