BACKGROUND
in the alpha subclass of proteobacteria iron homeostasis is controlled by diverse iron responsive regulators. caulobacter crescentus, an important freshwater α-proteobacterium, uses the ferric uptake repressor  for such purpose. however, the impact of the iron availability on the c. crescentus transcriptome and an overall perspective of the regulatory networks involved remain unknown.


RESULTS
in this work we report the identification of iron-responsive and fur-regulated genes in c. crescentus using microarray-based global transcriptional analyses. we identified  <dig> genes that were strongly upregulated both by mutation of fur and by iron limitation condition. among them, there are genes involved in iron uptake , riboflavin biosynthesis and genes encoding hypothetical proteins. most of these genes are associated with predicted fur binding sites, implicating them as direct targets of fur-mediated repression. these data were validated by β-galactosidase and emsa assays for two operons encoding putative transporters. the role of fur as a positive regulator is also evident, given that  <dig> genes were downregulated both by mutation of fur and under low-iron condition. as expected, this group includes many genes involved in energy metabolism, mostly iron-using enzymes. surprisingly, included in this group are also tonb-dependent receptors genes and the genes fixk, fixt and ftrb encoding an oxygen signaling network required for growth during hypoxia. bioinformatics analyses suggest that positive regulation by fur is mainly indirect. in addition to the fur modulon, iron limitation altered expression of  <dig> more genes, including induction of genes involved in fe-s cluster assembly, oxidative stress and heat shock response, as well as repression of genes implicated in amino acid metabolism, chemotaxis and motility.


CONCLUSIONS
using a global transcriptional approach, we determined the c. crescentus iron stimulon. many but not all of iron responsive genes were directly or indirectly controlled by fur. the iron limitation stimulon overlaps with other regulatory systems, such as the rpoh and fixk regulons. altogether, our results showed that adaptation of c. crescentus to iron limitation not only involves increasing the transcription of iron-acquisition systems and decreasing the production of iron-using proteins, but also includes novel genes and regulatory mechanisms.

caulobacter crescentusiron stimulonfur regulontranscriptomeiron homeostasistonb-dependent receptor

