BACKGROUND
crop plants such as rice, maize and sorghum play economically-important roles as main sources of food, fuel, and animal feed. however, current genome annotations of crop plants still suffer false-positive predictions; a more comprehensive registry of alternative splicing  events is also in demand. comparative genomics of crop plants is largely unexplored.


RESULTS
we performed a large-scale comparative analysis  of the expressed sequence tag  library from nine grass plants against three crop genomes  and identified  <dig>  previously-unannotated exons  in the three crops. we validated 81% of the tested exons by rt-pcr-sequencing, supporting the effectiveness of our in silico strategy. evolutionary analysis reveals that the novel exons, comparing with their flanking annotated ones, are generally under weaker selection pressure at the protein level, but under stronger pressure at the rna level, suggesting that most of the novel exons also represent novel alternatively spliced variants . however, we also observed the consistency of evolutionary rates between certain novel exons and their flanking exons, which provided further evidence of their co-occurrence in the transcripts, suggesting that previously-annotated isoforms might be subject to erroneous predictions. our validation showed that 54% of the tested genes expressed the newly-identified isoforms that contained the novel exons, rather than the previously-annotated isoforms that excluded them. the consistent results were steadily observed across cultivated  and wild  rice species, asserting the necessity of our curation of the crop genome annotations. our comparative analyses also inferred the common ancestral transcriptome of grass plants and gain- and loss-of-asv events.


CONCLUSIONS
we have reannotated the rice, maize, and sorghum genomes, and showed that evolutionary rates might serve as an indicator for determining whether the identified exons were alternatively spliced. this study not only presents an effective in silico strategy for the improvement of plant annotations, but also provides further insights into the role of as events in the evolution and domestication of crop plants. exonfinder and the novel exons/asvs identified are publicly accessible at http://exonfinder.sourceforge.net/.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
crop plantsalternative splicingplant transcriptome evolutionevolutionary ratecomparative genomicsbioinformaticsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

