BACKGROUND
genetic markers are widely used to understand the biology and population dynamics of disease vectors, but often markers are limited in the resolution they provide. in particular, the delineation of population structure, fine scale movement and patterns of relatedness are often obscured unless numerous markers are available. to address this issue in the major arbovirus vector, the yellow fever mosquito , we used double digest restriction-site associated dna  sequencing for the discovery of genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms . we aimed to characterize the new snp set and to test the resolution against previously described microsatellite markers in detecting broad and fine-scale genetic patterns in ae. aegypti.


RESULTS
we developed bioinformatics tools that support the customization of restriction enzyme-based protocols for snp discovery. we showed that our approach for rad library construction achieves unbiased genome representation that reflects true evolutionary processes. in ae. aegypti samples from three continents we identified more than  <dig>  putative snps. they were widely distributed across the three ae. aegypti chromosomes, with  <dig> % found in intergenic regions and  <dig> % in exons of over  <dig>  genes. pattern of their imputed effects in orfs and utrs were consistent with those found in a recent transcriptome study. we demonstrated that individual mosquitoes from indonesia, australia, vietnam and brazil can be assigned with a very high degree of confidence to their region of origin using a large snp panel. we also showed that familial relatedness of samples from a  <dig>  km <dig> area could be confidently established with a subset of snps.


CONCLUSIONS
using a cost-effective customized rad sequencing approach supported by our bioinformatics tools, we characterized over  <dig>  snps in field samples of the dengue fever mosquito ae. aegypti. the variants were annotated and positioned onto the three ae. aegypti chromosomes. the new snp set provided much greater resolution in detecting population structure and estimating fine-scale relatedness than a set of polymorphic microsatellites. rad-based markers demonstrate great potential to advance our understanding of mosquito population processes, critical for implementing new control measures against this major disease vector.

aedes aegyptirestriction-site associated dna sequencingin silico genome digestionfastq file demultiplexinggenome-wide single nucleotide polymorphismsmosquito population genomics

