BACKGROUND
the visual system is important for animals for mate choice, food acquisition, and predator avoidance. animals possessing a visual system can sense particular wavelengths of light emanating from objects and their surroundings and perceive their environments by processing information contained in these visual perceptions of light. visual perception in individuals varies with the absorption spectra of visual pigments and the expression levels of opsin genes, which may be altered according to the light environments. however, which light environments and the mechanism by which they change opsin expression profiles and whether these changes in opsin gene expression can affect light sensitivities are largely unknown. this study determined whether the light environment during growth induced plastic changes in opsin gene expression and behavioral sensitivity to particular wavelengths of light in guppies .


RESULTS
individuals grown under orange light exhibited a higher expression of long wavelength-sensitive  opsin genes and a higher sensitivity to 600-nm light than those grown under green light. in addition, we confirmed that variations in the expression levels of lws opsin genes were related to the behavioral sensitivities to long wavelengths of light.


CONCLUSIONS
the light environment during the growth stage alters the expression levels of lws opsin genes and behavioral sensitivities to long wavelengths of light in guppies. the plastically enhanced sensitivity to background light due to changes in opsin gene expression can enhance the detection and visibility of predators and foods, thereby affecting survival. moreover, changes in sensitivities to orange light may lead to changes in the discrimination of orange/red colors of male guppies and might alter female preferences for male color patterns.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
opsincolor visionlight environmentsexual signalssensory drivehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of science2137000715h04419kawata masakado issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

