BACKGROUND
phyto-remedies for diabetic control are popular among patients with type ii diabetes mellitus , in addition to other diabetic control measures. a number of plant species are known to possess diabetic control properties. costus pictus d. don is popularly known as “insulin plant” in southern india whose leaves have been reported to increase insulin pools in blood plasma. next generation sequencing is employed as a powerful tool for identifying molecular signatures in the transcriptome related to physiological functions of plant tissues. we sequenced the leaf transcriptome of c. pictus using illumina reversible dye terminator sequencing technology and used combination of bioinformatics tools for identifying transcripts related to anti-diabetic properties of c. pictus.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  transcripts were identified, of which  <dig> % transcripts could be annotated. we identified transcripts related to pathways of bixin biosynthesis and geraniol and geranial biosynthesis as major transcripts from the class of isoprenoid secondary metabolites and validated the presence of putative norbixin methyltransferase, a precursor of bixin. the transcripts encoding these terpenoids are known to be peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor  agonists and anti-glycation agents. sequential extraction and high performance liquid chromatography  confirmed the presence of bixin in c. pictus methanolic extracts. another significant transcript identified in relation to anti-diabetic, anti-obesity and immuno-modulation is of abscisic acid biosynthetic pathway. we also report many other transcripts for the biosynthesis of antitumor, anti-oxidant and antimicrobial metabolites of c. pictus leaves.


CONCLUSIONS
solid molecular signatures  for the anti-diabetic properties of c. pictus leaves and vital clues related to the other phytochemical functions like antitumor, anti-oxidant, immuno-modulatory, anti-microbial and anti-malarial properties through the secondary metabolite pathway annotations are reported. the data provided will be of immense help to researchers working in the treatment of dm using herbal therapies.

rna-seqnext generation sequencing de novo assemblyabscisic acid costus pictusdiabetes mellitusbixinmolecular signatureppar agonisthigh performance liquid chromatography 

