BACKGROUND
the highly aggressive pathogenic fungus ophiostoma novo-ulmi continues to be a serious threat to the american elm  in north america. extensive studies have been conducted in north america to understand the mechanisms of virulence of this introduced pathogen and its evolving population structure, with a view to identifying potential strategies for the control of dutch elm disease. as part of a larger study to examine the genomes of economically important ophiostoma spp. and the genetic basis of virulence, we have constructed an expressed sequence tag  library using total rna extracted from the yeast-like growth phase of o. novo-ulmi .


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  readable est sequences were annotated by determining their closest matches to known or theoretical sequences in public databases by blastx analysis. searches matched  <dig>  sequences to entries found in genbank, including  <dig>  matches with known proteins and  <dig> matches with unknown  proteins. known proteins included a collection of  <dig> unique transcripts which were categorized to obtain a functional profile of the transcriptome and to evaluate physiological function. these assignments yielded  <dig> primary functional categories , the largest including metabolism , sub-cellular localization , protein synthesis , transcription , biogenesis of cellular components , cellular transport, facilitation and routes , classification unresolved , cell rescue, defence and virulence  and the unclassified category, or known sequences of unknown metabolic function . a list of specific transcripts of interest was compiled to initiate an evaluation of their impact upon strain virulence in subsequent studies.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first large-scale study of the o. novo-ulmi transcriptome. the expression profile obtained from the yeast-like growth phase of this species will facilitate a multigenic approach to gene expression studies to assess their role in the determination of pathogenicity for this species. the identification and evaluation of gene targets in such studies will be a prerequisite to the development of biological control strategies for this pathogen.

