BACKGROUND
bitter acids  are prenylated polyketides synthesized in lupulin glands of the hop plant  which are important contributors to the bitter flavour and stability of beer. bitter acids are formed from acyl-coa precursors derived from branched-chain amino acid  degradation and c <dig> prenyl diphosphates from the methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate  pathway. we used rna sequencing  to obtain the transcriptomes of isolated lupulin glands, cones with glands removed and leaves from high α-acid hop cultivars, and analyzed these datasets for genes involved in bitter acid biosynthesis including the supply of major precursors. we also measured the levels of bcaas, acyl-coa intermediates, and bitter acids in glands, cones and leaves.


RESULTS
transcripts encoding all the enzymes of bcaa metabolism were significantly more abundant in lupulin glands, indicating that bcaa biosynthesis and subsequent degradation occurs in these specialized cells. branched-chain acyl-coas and bitter acids were present at higher levels in glands compared with leaves and cones. rna-seq analysis showed the gland-specific expression of the mep pathway, enzymes of sucrose degradation and several transcription factors that may regulate bitter acid biosynthesis in glands. two branched-chain aminotransferase  enzymes, hlbcat <dig> and hlbcat <dig>  were abundant, with gene expression quantification by rna-seq and qrt-pcr indicating that hlbcat <dig> was specific to glands while hlbcat <dig> was present in glands, cones and leaves. recombinant hlbcat <dig> and hlbcat <dig> catalyzed forward  and reverse  reactions with similar kinetic parameters. hlbcat <dig> is targeted to mitochondria where it likely plays a role in bcaa catabolism. hlbcat <dig> is a plastidial enzyme likely involved in bcaa biosynthesis. phylogenetic analysis of the hop bcats and those from other plants showed that they group into distinct biosynthetic  and catabolic  clades.


CONCLUSIONS
our analysis of the hop transcriptome significantly expands the genomic resources available for this agriculturally-important crop. this study provides evidence for the lupulin gland-specific biosynthesis of bcaas and prenyl diphosphates to provide precursors for the production of bitter acids. the biosynthetic pathway leading to bcaas in lupulin glands involves the plastidial enzyme, hlbcat <dig>  the mitochondrial enzyme hlbcat <dig> degrades bcaas as the first step in the catabolic pathway leading to branched chain-acyl-coas.

