BACKGROUND
rigorous study of mitochondrial functions and cell biology in the budding yeast, saccharomyces cerevisiae has advanced our understanding of mitochondrial genetics. this yeast is now a powerful model for population genetics, owing to large genetic diversity and highly structured populations among wild isolates. comparative mitochondrial genomic analyses between yeast species have revealed broad evolutionary changes in genome organization and architecture. a fine-scale view of recent evolutionary changes within s. cerevisiae has not been possible due to low numbers of complete mitochondrial sequences.


RESULTS
to address challenges of sequencing at-rich and repetitive mitochondrial dnas , we sequenced two divergent s. cerevisiae mtdnas using a single-molecule sequencing platform . using de novo assemblies, we generated highly accurate complete mtdna sequences. these mtdna sequences were compared with  <dig> additional mtdna sequences gathered from various published collections. phylogenies based on mitochondrial coding sequences and intron profiles revealed that intraspecific diversity in mitochondrial genomes generally recapitulated the population structure of nuclear genomes. analysis of intergenic sequence indicated a recent expansion of mobile elements in certain populations. additionally, our analyses revealed that certain populations lacked introns previously believed conserved throughout the species, as well as the presence of introns never before reported in s. cerevisiae.


CONCLUSIONS
our results revealed that the extensive variation in s. cerevisiae mtdnas is often population specific, thus offering a window into the recent evolutionary processes shaping these genomes. in addition, we offer an effective strategy for sequencing these challenging at-rich mitochondrial genomes for small scale projects.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial genomemtdnafungal geneticsmitochondrial geneticsintronmobile elementssingle-molecule sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

