BACKGROUND
neurotransmitter signaling systems play crucial roles in multiple physiological and behavioral processes in insects. genome wide analyses of de novo transcriptome sequencing and gene specific expression profiling provide rich resources for studying neurotransmitter signaling pathways. the rice striped stem borer, chilo suppressalis is a destructive rice pest in china and other asian countries. the characterization of genes involved in neurotransmitter biosynthesis and transport could identify potential targets for disruption of the neurochemical communication and for crop protection.


RESULTS
here we report de novo sequencing of the c. suppressalis central nervous system transcriptome, identification and expression profiles of genes putatively involved in neurotransmitter biosynthesis, packaging, and recycling/degradation. a total of  <dig>  unigenes were obtained from the transcriptome analysis. among these unigenes, we have identified  <dig> unigenes , which encode  <dig> enzymes and  <dig> transporters putatively associated with biogenic aminergic signaling, acetylcholinergic signaling, glutamatergic signaling and gabaergic signaling. rt-pcr and qrt-pcr results indicated that  <dig> enzymes were highly expressed in the central nervous system and all the transporters were expressed at significantly high levels in the central nervous system. in addition, the transcript abundances of enzymes and transporters in the central nervous system were validated by qrt-pcr. the high expression levels of these genes suggest their important roles in the central nervous system.


CONCLUSIONS
our study identified genes potentially involved in neurotransmitter biosynthesis and transport in c. suppressalis and these genes could serve as targets to interfere with neurotransmitter production. this study presents an opportunity for the development of specific and environmentally safe insecticides for pest control.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomecentral nervous systemneurotransmitter signalingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

