BACKGROUND
members of the pine family , especially species of spruce  and pine , dominate many of the world's temperate and boreal forests. these conifer forests are of critical importance for global ecosystem stability and biodiversity. they also provide the majority of the world's wood and fiber supply and serve as a renewable resource for other industrial biomaterials. in contrast to angiosperms, functional and comparative genomics research on conifers, or other gymnosperms, is limited by the lack of a relevant reference genome sequence. sequence-finished full-length cdnas and large collections of expressed sequence tags  are essential for gene discovery, functional genomics, and for future efforts of conifer genome annotation.


RESULTS
as part of a conifer genomics program to characterize defense against insects and adaptation to local environments, and to discover genes for the production of biomaterials, we developed  <dig> standard, normalized or full-length enriched cdna libraries from sitka spruce , white spruce , and interior spruce . we sequenced and analyzed  <dig>  3'- or 5'-end ests from these libraries, and developed a resource of  <dig>  high-quality sequence-finished flcdnas from sitka spruce. clustering and assembly of  <dig>  3'-end ests resulted in  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons, representing  <dig>  putative unique transcripts . the  <dig>  flcdnas were all obtained from a single sitka spruce genotype and represent  <dig>  puts.


CONCLUSIONS
this paper provides detailed annotation and quality assessment of a large est and flcdna resource for spruce. the  <dig>  sitka spruce flcdnas represent the third largest sequence-verified flcdna resource for any plant species, behind only rice  and arabidopsis , and the only substantial flcdna resource for a gymnosperm. our emphasis on capturing flcdnas and ests from cdna libraries representing herbivore-, wound- or elicitor-treated induced spruce tissues, along with incorporating normalization to capture rare transcripts, resulted in a rich resource for functional genomics and proteomics studies. sequence comparisons against five plant genomes and the non-redundant genbank protein database revealed that a substantial number of spruce transcripts have no obvious similarity to known angiosperm gene sequences. opportunities for future applications of the sequence and clone resources for comparative and functional genomics are discussed.

