BACKGROUND
expression microarrays are increasingly used to obtain large scale transcriptomic information on a wide range of biological samples. nevertheless, there is still much debate on the best ways to process data, to design experiments and analyse the output. furthermore, many of the more sophisticated mathematical approaches to data analysis in the literature remain inaccessible to much of the biological research community. in this study we examine ways of extracting and analysing a large data set obtained using the agilent long oligonucleotide transcriptomics platform, applied to a set of human macrophage and dendritic cell samples.


RESULTS
we describe and validate a series of data extraction, transformation and normalisation steps which are implemented via a new r function. analysis of replicate normalised reference data demonstrate that intrarray variability is small , while interarray variability from replicate array measurements has a standard deviation  of around  <dig>  log <dig> units . the common practise of working with ratios of cy5/cy <dig> signal offers little further improvement in terms of reducing error. comparison to expression data obtained using arabidopsis samples demonstrates that the large number of genes in each sample showing a low level of transcription reflect the real complexity of the cellular transcriptome. multidimensional scaling is used to show that the processed data identifies an underlying structure which reflect some of the key biological variables which define the data set. this structure is robust, allowing reliable comparison of samples collected over a number of years and collected by a variety of operators.


CONCLUSIONS
this study outlines a robust and easily implemented pipeline for extracting, transforming normalising and visualising transcriptomic array data from agilent expression platform. the analysis is used to obtain quantitative estimates of the sd arising from experimental  intra- and interarray variability, and for a lower threshold for determining whether an individual gene is expressed. the study provides a reliable basis for further more extensive studies of the systems biology of eukaryotic cells.

