BACKGROUND
toxic shock syndrome  is caused by an overwhelming host-mediated response to bacterial superantigens produced mainly by staphylococcus aureus and streptococcus pyogenes. tss is characterized by aberrant activation of t cells and excessive release of pro-inflammatory cytokines ultimately resulting in capillary leak, septic shock, multiple organ dysfunction and high mortality rates. no therapeutic or vaccine has been approved by the u.s. food and drug administration for tss, and novel therapeutic strategies to improve clinical outcome are needed. mesenchymal stromal  cells  are stromal cells capable of self-renewal and differentiation. moreover, mscs have immunomodulatory properties, including profound effects on activities of t cells and macrophages in specific contexts. based on the critical role of host-derived immune mediators in tss, we hypothesized that mscs could modulate the host-derived proinflammatory response triggered by staphylococcal enterotoxin b  and improve survival in experimental tss.

methods
effects of mscs on proinflammatory cytokines in peripheral blood were measured in wild-type c57bl/ <dig> mice injected with  <dig> μg of seb. effects of mscs on survival were monitored in fatal experimental tss induced by consecutive doses of d-galactosamine  and seb  in hla-dr <dig> transgenic mice.


RESULTS
despite significantly decreasing serum levels of il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf induced by seb in wild-type mice, human mscs failed to improve survival in experimental tss in hla-dr <dig> transgenic mice. similarly, a previously described downstream mediator of human mscs, tnf-stimulated gene  <dig> , did not significantly improve survival in experimental tss. furthermore, murine mscs, whether unstimulated or pre-treated with ifnγ, failed to improve survival in experimental tss.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that the immunomodulatory effects of mscs are insufficient to rescue mice from experimental tss, and that mediators other than il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf are likely to play critical mechanistic roles in the pathogenesis of experimental tss.

