BACKGROUND
heterokont algae, together with cryptophytes, haptophytes and some alveolates, possess red-algal derived plastids. the chromalveolate hypothesis proposes that the red-algal derived plastids of all four groups have a monophyletic origin resulting from a single secondary endosymbiotic event. however, due to incongruence between nuclear and plastid phylogenies, this controversial hypothesis remains under debate. large-scale genomic analyses have shown to be a powerful tool for phylogenetic reconstruction but insufficient sequence data have been available for red-algal derived plastid genomes.


RESULTS
the chloroplast genomes of two brown algae, ectocarpus siliculosus and fucus vesiculosus, have been fully sequenced. these species represent two distinct orders of the phaeophyceae, which is a major group within the heterokont lineage. the sizes of the circular plastid genomes are  <dig>  and  <dig>  base pairs, respectively, the size difference being due principally to the presence of longer inverted repeat and intergenic regions in e. siliculosus. gene contents of the two plastids are similar with 139- <dig> protein-coding genes, 28- <dig> trna genes, and  <dig> ribosomal rna genes. the two genomes also exhibit very similar rearrangements compared to other sequenced plastid genomes. the trna-leu gene of e. siliculosus lacks an intron, in contrast to the f. vesiculosus and other heterokont plastid homologues, suggesting its recent loss in the ectocarpales. most of the brown algal plastid genes are shared with other red-algal derived plastid genomes, but a few are absent from raphidophyte or diatom plastid genomes. one of these regions is most similar to an apicomplexan nuclear sequence. the phylogenetic relationship between heterokonts, cryptophytes and haptophytes  plastids was investigated using several datasets of concatenated proteins from two cyanobacterial genomes and  <dig> plastid genomes, including most of the available red algal and chromist plastid genomes.


CONCLUSIONS
the phylogenetic studies using concatenated plastid proteins still do not resolve the question of the monophyly of all chromist plastids. however, these results support both the monophyly of heterokont plastids and that of cryptophyte and haptophyte plastids, in agreement with nuclear phylogenies.

