BACKGROUND
next generation sequencing  has revolutionized the analysis of natural and man-made microbial communities by using universal primers for bacteria in a pcr based approach targeting the 16s rrna gene. in our study we narrowed primer specificity to a single, monophyletic genus because for many questions in microbiology only a specific part of the whole microbiome is of interest. we have chosen the genus legionella, comprising more than  <dig> pathogenic species, due to its high relevance for water-based respiratory infections.

methods
a new ngs-based approach was designed by sequencing 16s rrna gene amplicons specific for the genus legionella using the illumina miseq technology. this approach was validated and applied to a set of representative freshwater samples.


RESULTS
our results revealed that the generated libraries presented a low average raw error rate per base ; and substantiated the use of high-fidelity enzymes, such as kapa hifi, for increased sequence accuracy and quality. the approach also showed high in situ specificity  and very good repeatability. only in samples in which the gammabacterial clade sar <dig> was present more than 1% non-legionella sequences were observed. next-generation sequencing read counts did not reveal considerable amplification/sequencing biases and showed a sensitive as well as precise quantification of l. pneumophila along a dilution range using a spiked-in, certified genome standard. the genome standard and a mock community consisting of six different legionella species demonstrated that the developed ngs approach was quantitative and specific at the level of individual species, including l. pneumophila. the sensitivity of our genus-specific approach was at least one order of magnitude higher compared to the universal ngs approach. comparison of quantification by real-time pcr showed consistency with the ngs data. overall, our ngs approach can determine the quantitative abundances of legionella species, i. e. the complete legionella microbiome, without the need for species-specific primers.


CONCLUSIONS
the developed ngs approach provides a new molecular surveillance tool to monitor all legionella species in qualitative and quantitative terms if a spiked-in genome standard is used to calibrate the method. overall, the genus-specific ngs approach opens up a new avenue to massive parallel diagnostics in a quantitative, specific and sensitive way.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
molecular diagnosticsdrinking watercooling towerpathogen profilingpatho-microbiomehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftho-930/5-1/2http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004963seventh framework programme311846issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

