BACKGROUND
corynebacterium glutamicum, a gram-positive bacterium of the class actinobacteria, is an industrially relevant producer of amino acids. several methods for the targeted genetic manipulation of this organism and rational strain improvement have been developed. an efficient transposon mutagenesis system for the completely sequenced type strain atcc  <dig> would significantly advance functional genome analysis in this bacterium.


RESULTS
a comprehensive transposon mutant library comprising  <dig>  independent clones was constructed by electrotransformation of the restriction-deficient derivative of strain atcc  <dig>  c. glutamicum res <dig>  with an is6100-containing non-replicative plasmid. transposon mutants had stable cointegrates between the transposon vector and the chromosome. altogether  <dig> transposon integration sites have been determined by sequencing of the chromosomal inserts, revealing that each integration occurred at a different locus. statistical target site analyses revealed an apparent absence of a target site preference. from the library, auxotrophic mutants were obtained with a frequency of  <dig> %. by auxanography analyses nearly two thirds of the auxotrophs were further characterized, including mutants with single, double and alternative nutritional requirements. in most cases the nutritional requirement observed could be correlated to the annotation of the mutated gene involved in the biosynthesis of an amino acid, a nucleotide or a vitamin. one notable exception was a clone mutagenized by transposition into the gene cg <dig>  which exhibited an auxotrophy for histidine. the protein sequence deduced from cg <dig> showed high sequence similarities to inositol-1-monophosphatases . subsequent genetic deletion of cg <dig> delivered the same histidine-auxotrophic phenotype. genetic complementation of the mutants as well as supplementation by histidinol suggests that cg <dig> encodes the hitherto unknown essential l-histidinol-phosphate phosphatase  in c. glutamicum. the cg <dig> gene, renamed hisn, and its encoded enzyme have putative orthologs in almost all actinobacteria, including mycobacteria and streptomycetes.


CONCLUSIONS
the absence of regional and sequence preferences of is6100-transposition demonstrate that the established system is suitable for efficient genome-scale random mutagenesis in the sequenced type strain c.glutamicum atcc  <dig>  the identification of the hisn gene encoding histidinol-phosphate phosphatase in c. glutamicum closed the last gap in histidine synthesis in the actinobacteria. the system might be a valuable genetic tool also in other bacteria due to the broad host-spectrum of is <dig> 

