BACKGROUND
leaf rust, which is caused by the fungus hemileia vastatrix , is a devastating disease that affects coffee plants . disadvantages that are associated with currently developed phytoprotection approaches have recently led to the search for alternative strategies. these include genetic manipulations that constitutively activate disease resistance signaling pathways. however, molecular actors of such pathways still remain unknown in c. arabica. in this study, we have isolated and characterized the coffee ndr <dig> gene, whose arabidopsis ortholog is a well-known master regulator of the hypersensitive response that is dependent on coiled-coil type r-proteins.


RESULTS
two highly homologous cdnas coding for putative ndr <dig> proteins were identified and cloned from leaves of coffee plants. one of the candidate coding sequences was then expressed in the arabidopsis knock-out null mutant ndr1- <dig>  upon a challenge with a specific strain of the bacterium pseudomonas syringae , analysis of both macroscopic symptoms and in planta microbial growth showed that the coffee cdna was able to restore the resistance phenotype in the mutant genetic background. thus, the cdna was dubbed candr1a . finally, biochemical and microscopy data were obtained that strongly suggest the mechanistic conservation of the ndr1-driven function within coffee and arabidopsis plants. using a transient expression system, it was indeed shown that the candr1a protein, like its arabidopsis counterpart, is localized to the plasma membrane, where it is possibly tethered by means of a gpi anchor.


CONCLUSIONS
our data provide molecular and genetic evidence for the identification of a novel functional ndr <dig> homolog in plants. as a key regulator initiating hypersensitive signalling pathways, candr <dig> gene might be target of choice for manipulating the coffee innate immune system and achieving broad spectrum resistance to pathogens. given the potential conservation of ndr1-dependent defense mechanisms between arabidopsis and coffee plants, our work also suggests new ways to isolate the as-yet-unidentified r-gene responsible for resistance to h. vastatrix.

