BACKGROUND
for satisfactory salmonella control, good biosecurity along the pork production chain is crucial, although additional control measures on-farm need to be considered. this study evaluated the effect of two potential control measures against the spread of salmonella typhimurium via a transmission experiment with  <dig> piglets : two groups were orally vaccinated with  <dig> -  <dig> colony forming units /2 ml of a new attenuated salmonella typhimurium vaccine ‘salmoporc-∆rfaj’ with diva capacities  ; the feed of one group was additionally supplemented with coated calcium-butyrate salt. two weeks post vaccination, four pigs per group were orally challenged with 107 cfu/2 ml of a salmonella typhimurium strain 112910a. both groups were compared with a positive  and negative  control group. until six weeks post challenge, blood, individual faecal and finally tissue samples were examined. adjusted transmission ratios ‘ra’ were estimated, based on the challenge strain isolation from faecal and/or tissue samples.


RESULTS
in both intervention groups, ra values were lower compared to the positive control group, although these differences were not significant. in the combination group diva vaccine + coated butyrate, less non-challenged contact animals excreted salmonella and less tissue samples were found salmonella-positive in all pigs, when compared to the positive control group . seroconversion was detected in none of the vaccinated animals before challenge, when using a commercial lipopolysaccharide  elisa targeting only salmonella o-antigens, deleted in this vaccine. this was in contrast with an in-house whole-cell elisa testing for various salmonella antigens, in which salmonella-specific antibodies were found pre-challenge in the serum of the vaccinated pigs.


CONCLUSIONS
both interventions showed a limited, non-significant reduction of salmonella transmission between piglets. they may have applications towards salmonella control and surveillance. firstly, the number of salmonella excreting contact pigs was significantly lower in the group where vaccination was combined with coated calcium-butyrate salt in the feed; secondly, the new vaccine confirmed its diva capacity. therefore, these interventions merit further research with larger sample sizes, to optimize their use for salmonella programmes.

salmonella typhimuriumpigdiva vaccinecoated calcium-butyrate salttransmission

