BACKGROUND
archaea share with bacteria the ability to bias their movement towards more favorable locations, a process known as taxis. two molecular systems drive this process: the motility apparatus and the chemotaxis signal transduction system. the first consists of the flagellum, the flagellar motor, and its switch, which allows cells to reverse the rotation of flagella. the second targets the flagellar motor switch in order to modulate the switching frequency in response to external stimuli. while the signal transduction system is conserved throughout archaea and bacteria, the archaeal flagellar apparatus is different from the bacterial one. the proteins constituting the flagellar motor and its switch in archaea have not yet been identified, and the connection between the bacterial-like chemotaxis signal transduction system and the archaeal motility apparatus is unknown.


RESULTS
using protein-protein interaction analysis, we have identified three proteins in halobacterium salinarum that interact with the chemotaxis  proteins chey, ched, and chec <dig>  as well as the flagella accessory  proteins flace and flad. two of the proteins belong to the protein family duf <dig>  the third is a heat_pbs family protein. in-frame deletion strains for all three proteins were generated and analyzed as follows: a) photophobic responses were measured by a computer-based cell tracking system b) flagellar rotational bias was determined by dark-field microscopy, and c) chemotactic behavior was analyzed by a swarm plate assay. strains deleted for the heat_pbs protein or one of the duf <dig> proteins proved unable to switch the direction of flagellar rotation. in these mutants, flagella rotate only clockwise, resulting in exclusively forward swimming cells that are unable to respond to tactic signals. deletion of the second duf <dig> protein had only minimal effects. heat_pbs proteins could be identified in the chemotaxis gene regions of all motile haloarchaea sequenced so far, but not in those of other archaeal species. genes coding for duf <dig> proteins, however, were found to be integral parts of chemotaxis gene regions across the archaeal domain, and they were not detected in other genomic context.


CONCLUSIONS
altogether, these results demonstrate that, in the archaeal domain, previously unrecognized archaea-specific che proteins are essential for relaying taxis signaling to the flagellar apparatus.

