BACKGROUND
citrus shoot tips abscise at an anatomically distinct abscission zone  that separates the top part of the shoots into basal and apical portions . cell separation occurs only at the az, which suggests its cells have distinctive molecular regulation. although several studies have looked into the morphological aspects of self-pruning process, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unknown.


RESULTS
in this study, the hallmarks of programmed cell death  were identified by tunel experiments, transmission electron microscopy  and histochemical staining for reactive oxygen species  during self-pruning of the spring shoots in sweet orange. our results indicated that pcd occurred systematically and progressively and may play an important role in the control of self-pruning of citrus. microarray analysis was used to examine transcriptome changes at three stages of self-pruning, and  <dig>  differentially expressed genes were identified. some genes were related to pcd, while others were associated with cell wall biosynthesis or metabolism. these results strongly suggest that abscission layers activate both catabolic and anabolic wall modification pathways during the self-pruning process. in addition, a strong correlation was observed between self-pruning and the expression of hormone-related genes. self-pruning plays an important role in citrus floral bud initiation. therefore, several key flowering homologs of arabidopsis and tomato shoot apical meristem  activity genes were investigated in sweet orange by real-time pcr and in situ hybridization, and the results indicated that these genes were preferentially expressed in sam as well as axillary meristem.


CONCLUSIONS
based on these findings, a model for sweet orange spring shoot self-pruning is proposed, which will enable us to better understand the mechanism of self-pruning and abscission.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
abscission zonecitrusmicroarrayprogrammed cell deathself-pruningshoot tipsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

