BACKGROUND
host cell autophagy is implicated in the control of intracellular pathogen. escherichia coli  is the most common organism caused single-germ enterobacterial peritonitis during peritoneal dialysis. in this study, we investigated autophagy of peritoneal mesothelial cells and its role in defense against e.coli.


RESULTS
autophagy in human peritoneal mesothelial cell line  was induced by lipopolysaccharide  in a dose-dependent and time-dependent way, which was demonstrated by increased expression of beclin- <dig> and light chain  <dig> -ii, the accumulation of punctate green fluorescent protein-lc <dig>  and a higher number of monodansylcadaverine-labeled autophagic vacuoles. after incubation of hmrsv <dig> cells with e.coli following lps stimulation, both the intracellular bactericidal activity and the co-localization of e.coli  with autophagosomes were enhanced. conversely, blockade of autophagy with 3-methyladenine, wortmannin or beclin- <dig> small-interfering rna  led to a significant reduction in autophagy-associated protein expression, attenuation of intracellular bactericidal activity, and reduced co-localization of e.coli with monodansylcadaverine-labeled autophagosomes. in addition, treatment of hmrsv <dig> cells with lps caused a dose-dependent and time-dependent increase in toll-like receptor  <dig>  expression. both knockdown of tlr <dig> with sirna and pharmacological inhibition of tlr <dig> with polymyxin b significantly decreased lps-induced autophagy. furthermore, tlr <dig> sirna attenuated remarkably lps-induced intracellular bactericidal activity.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings demonstrated for the first time that lps-induced autophagy in peritoneal mesothelial cells could enhance the intracellular bactericidal activity and the co-localization of e.coli with autophagosomes. the activation of tlr <dig> signaling was involved in this process. these results indicate that lps-induced autophagy may be a cell-autonomous defense mechanism triggered in peritoneal mesothelial cells in response to e.coli infection.

autophagyescherichia colicell defenselipopolysaccharide toll-like receptors peritoneal mesothelial cell

