BACKGROUND
magnaporthaceae, a family of ascomycetes, includes three fungi of great economic importance that cause disease in cereal and turf grasses: magnaporthe oryzae , gaeumannomyces graminis var. tritici , and magnaporthe poae . recently, the sequenced and assembled genomes for these three fungi were reported. here, the genomes were compared for orthologous genes in order to identified genes that are unique to the magnaporthaceae family of fungi. in addition, ortholog clustering was used to identify a core proteome for the magnaporthaceae, which was examined for diversifying and purifying selection and evidence of two-speed genome evolution.


RESULTS
a genome-scale comparative study was conducted across  <dig> fungal genomes to identify clusters of orthologous genes unique to the three magnaporthaceae species as well as species specific genes. we found  <dig> clusters that were unique to the magnaporthaceae family of fungi with  <dig> of those containing genes from all three species. gene clusters involved in metabolic and enzymatic activities were highly represented in the magnaporthaceae specific clusters. also highly represented in the magnaporthaceae specific clusters as well as in the species specific genes were transcriptional regulators. in addition, we examined the relationship between gene evolution and distance to repetitive elements found in the genome. no correlations between diversifying or purifying selection and distance to repetitive elements or an increased rate of evolution in secreted and small secreted proteins were observed.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, these data show that at the genome level, there is no evidence to suggest multi-speed genome evolution or that proximity to repetitive elements play a role in diversification of genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
magnaporthaceaemagnaporthegaeumannomycestwo-speed genomezig zag modelcomparative genomicscazymestranscription factorsdiversifying selectionpurifying selectionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000009foundation for the national institutes of health5t32-ai052080-09okagaki laura h. http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007703north carolina state universityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

