BACKGROUND
small rnas  have emerged as important regulatory molecules and have been studied in several bacteria. however, to date, there have been no whole-transcriptome studies on srnas in any of the soft rot enterobacteriaceae  group of pathogens. although the main ecological niches for these pathogens are plants, a significant part of their life cycle is undertaken outside their host within adverse soil environment. however, the mechanisms of sre adaptation to this harsh nutrient-deficient environment are poorly understood.


RESULTS
in the study reported herein, by using strand-specific rna-seq analysis and in silico srna predictions, we describe the srna pool of pectobacterium atrosepticum and reveal numerous srna candidates, including those that are induced during starvation-activated stress responses. consequently, strand-specific rna-seq enabled detection of  <dig> srnas and srna candidates under starvation conditions;  <dig> of these srnas were predicted for this bacterium in silico. functional annotations were computationally assigned to  <dig> srnas. the expression of srnas in p. atrosepticum was compared under growth-promoting and starvation conditions:  <dig> srnas were differentially expressed with  <dig> srnas up-regulated under nutrient-deficient conditions. conservation analysis using blast showed that most of the identified srnas are conserved within the sre. subsequently, we identified  <dig> novel srnas within the p. atrosepticum genome.


CONCLUSIONS
since many of the identified srnas are starvation-induced, the results of our study suggests that srnas play key roles in bacterial adaptive response. finally, this work provides a basis for future experimental characterization and validation of srnas in plant pathogens.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
small rnasstrand-specific rna-seqpectobacterium atrosepticumin silico predictiontranscriptomeriboswitches5′ utr3′ utrissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

