BACKGROUND
micrornas  are a set of small non-coding rnas serving as important negative gene regulators. in animals, mirnas turn down protein translation by binding to the 3' utr regions of target genes with imperfect complementary pairing. the identification of microrna targets has become one of the major challenges of mirna research. bioinformatics investigations on mirna target have resulted in a number of target prediction tools. although these tools are capable of predicting hundreds of targets for a given mirna, many of them suffer from high false positive rates, indicating the need for a post-processing filter for the predicted targets. once trained with experimentally validated true and false targets, machine learning methods appear to be ideal approaches to distinguish the true targets from the false ones.


RESULTS
we present a mirna target filtering system named mirtif . the system is a support vector machine  classifier trained with  <dig> positive and  <dig> negative mirna:target interaction pairs, all experimentally validated. each mirna:target interaction pair is divided into a seed and a non-seed region. the encoded feature vector contains various k-gram frequencies in the seed, the non-seed and the entire regions. informative features are selected based on their discriminating abilities. prediction accuracies are assessed using 10-fold cross-validation experiments. our system achieves auc  of  <dig> , sensitivity of  <dig> %, and specificity of  <dig> %. more importantly, the system correctly predicts majority of the false positive mirna:target interactions . the possibility of over-fitting due to the relatively small negative sample set has also been investigated using a set of non-validated and randomly selected targets .


CONCLUSIONS
mirtif is designed as a post-processing filter that takes mirna:target interactions predicted by other target prediction softwares such as targetscans, pictar and miranda as inputs, and determines how likely the given interaction is a real or a pseudo one. mirtif can be accessed from .

20– <dig> october  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  seventh international conference on bioinformatics  taipei, taiwan

