BACKGROUND
pyropia haitanensis is an economically important mariculture crop in china and is also valuable in life science research. however, the lack of genetic information of this organism hinders the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of specific traits. thus, high-throughput sequencing is needed to generate a number of transcriptome sequences to be used for gene discovery and molecular marker development.


RESULTS
in this study, high-throughput sequencing was used to analyze the global transcriptome of p. haitanensis. approximately  <dig> million 90 bp paired-end reads were generated using an illumina hiseq  <dig>  de novo assembly with paired-end information yielded  <dig>  unigenes with an average length of 645 bp. based on sequence similarity searches with known proteins, a total of  <dig>   genes were identified. of these annotated unigenes,  <dig>  and  <dig>  unigenes were assigned to gene ontology and clusters of orthologous groups, respectively. searching against the kegg database indicated that  <dig>   unigenes mapped to  <dig> kegg pathways. among the carbon fixation pathways, almost all the essential genes related to the c3- and c4-pathways for p. haitanensis were discovered. significantly different expression levels of three key genes  in different lifecycle stages of p. haitanensis indicated that the carbon fixation pathway in the conchocelis and thallus were different, and the c4-like pathway might play important roles in the conchocelis stage. in addition,  <dig>  cssrs loci were identified in the unigenes. among them, trinucleotide ssrs were the dominant repeat motif  and gcc/ccg motifs were the most common repeats . high quality primers to  <dig> loci were designed and  <dig> primer pairs were randomly evaluated in six strains of p. haitanensis. eighty-seven primer pairs successfully yielded amplicons.


CONCLUSIONS
this study generated a large number of putative p. haitanensis transcript sequences, which can be used for novel gene discovery and gene expression profiling analyses under different physiological conditions. a number of the cssr markers identified can be used for molecular markers and will facilitate marker assisted selection in p. haitanensis breeding. these sequences and markers will provide valuable resources for further p. haitanensis studies.

pyropia haitanensistranscriptomecarbon fixation pathwaycssr markers

