BACKGROUND
methane emissions by methanogen from livestock ruminants have significantly contributed to the agricultural greenhouse gas effect. it is worthwhile to compare methanogen from “energy-saving” animal  and normal animal  in order to investigate the link between methanogen structure and low methane production.


RESULTS
diversity of methanogens from the yak and cattle rumen was investigated by analysis of 16s rrna gene sequences from rumen digesta samples from four yaks  and four cattle  from the qinghai-tibetan plateau area . overall, a total of  <dig> clones  were examined and assigned to  <dig> operational taxonomic units  using mothur, based upon a 98% species-level identity criterion. forty-six otus were unique to the yak clone library and  <dig> otus were unique to the cattle clone library, while  <dig> otus were found in both libraries. of the  <dig> otus,  <dig> putative new species were identified. sequences belonging to the thermoplasmatales-affiliated linage c  were found to dominate in both libraries, accounting for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the sequences from the yak and cattle clone libraries, respectively. sequences belonging to the methanobacteriales represented the second largest clade in both libraries. however, methanobrevibacter wolinii  was only found in the cattle library. the number of clones from the order methanomicrobiales was greater in cattle than in the yak clone library. although the shannon index value indicated similar diversity between the two libraries, the libshuff analysis indicated that the methanogen community structure of the yak was significantly different than those from cattle.


CONCLUSIONS
this study revealed for the first time the molecular diversity of methanogen community in yaks and cattle in qinghai-tibetan plateau area in china. from the analysis, we conclude that yaks have a unique rumen microbial ecosystem that is significantly different from that of cattle, this may also help to explain why yak produce less methane than cattle.

