BACKGROUND
the mitogen-activated protein kinases  have been shown to participate in a wide array of cellular functions. a role for some mapks  has been documented in response to certain physiological stimuli, such as ischemia, visceral pain and electroconvulsive shock. we recently demonstrated that restraint stress activates the erk mapk pathway, but not c-jun-n-terminal kinase/stress-activated protein kinase  or p38mapk, in several rat brain regions. in the present study, we investigated the effects of a different stressor, acute forced swim stress, on the phosphorylation  state of these mapks in the hippocampus, neocortex, prefrontal cortex, amygdala and striatum. in addition, effects on the phosphorylation state of the upstream activators of the mapks, their respective mapk kinases , were determined. finally, because the erk pathway can activate c-amp response element  binding  protein, and swim stress has recently been reported to enhance creb phosphorylation, changes in p-creb were also examined.


RESULTS
a single  <dig> min session of forced swimming increased p-erk <dig> levels 2–3-fold in the neocortex, prefrontal cortex and striatum, but not in the hippocampus or amygdala. p-jnk levels  were increased in all brain regions about 2–5-fold, whereas p-p38mapk levels remained essentially unchanged. surprisingly, levels of the phosphorylated mapkks, p-mek1/ <dig> and p-mkk <dig>  were increased in all five brain regions, and much more dramatically . consistent with the lack of forced swim on phosphorylation of p38mapk, there appeared to be no change in levels of its activator, p-mkk3/ <dig>  p-creb was increased in all but cortical  areas.


CONCLUSIONS
swim stress specifically and markedly enhanced the phosphorylation of the mapkks p-mek1/ <dig> and p-mkk <dig> in all brain regions tested without apparent alteration in the phosphorylation of p-mkk3/ <dig>  curiously, phosphorylation of their cognate substrates  was increased to a much more modest extent, and in some brain regions was not altered. similarly, there was a region-specific discrepancy between erk and creb phosphorylation. possible explanations for these findings and comparison with the effects of restraint stress will be discussed.

