BACKGROUND
haptophytes are widely and abundantly distributed in both marine and freshwater ecosystems. few genomic analyses of representatives within this taxon have been reported, despite their early evolutionary origins and their prominent role in global carbon fixation.


RESULTS
the complete mitochondrial and chloroplast genome sequences of the haptophyte chrysochromulina tobin  provide insight into the architecture and gene content of haptophyte organellar genomes. the mitochondrial genome  encodes  <dig> protein coding genes and contains a complex,  <dig> kb tandem repeat region. similar to other haptophytes and rhodophytes, but not cryptophytes or stramenopiles, the mitochondrial genome has lost the nad <dig>  nad <dig> and nad <dig> genes. the ~ <dig> kb chloroplast genome encodes  <dig> protein coding genes, including ycf <dig> which has strong structural homology to nadp-binding nitrate transcriptional regulators; a divergent ‘chey-like’ two-component response regulator  and tic/toc  membrane transporters. notably, a zinc finger domain has been identified in the rpl <dig> ribosomal protein gene of all chloroplasts sequenced to date with the exception of haptophytes and cryptophytes - algae that have gained  an alternative rpl <dig> lacking the zinc finger motif. the two c. tobin chloroplast ribosomal rna operon spacer regions differ in trna content. additionally, each ribosomal operon contains multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms  - a pattern observed in rhodophytes and cryptophytes, but few stramenopiles. analysis of small  chloroplast encoded tandem and inverted repeats in c. tobin and  <dig> other algal chloroplast genomes show that repeat type, size and location are correlated with gene identity and taxonomic clade.


CONCLUSIONS
the chrysochromulina tobin organellar genomes provide new insight into organellar function and evolution. these are the first organellar genomes to be determined for the prymnesiales, a taxon that is present in both oceanic and freshwater systems and represents major primary photosynthetic producers and contributors to global ecosystem stability.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
haptophyteschloroplast genomemitochondrial genomerepeat structurerepeat functionchrysochromulinaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

