BACKGROUND
what kind of neural computation is actually performed by the primary visual cortex and how is this represented mathematically at the system level? it is an important problem in the visual information processing, but has not been well answered. in this paper, according to our understanding of retinal organization and parallel multi-channel topographical mapping between retina and primary visual cortex v <dig>  we divide an image into orthogonal and orderly array of image primitives , in which each patch will evoke activities of simple cells in v <dig>  from viewpoint of information processing, this activated process, essentially, involves optimal detection and optimal matching of receptive fields of simple cells with features contained in image patches. for the reconstruction of the visual image in the visual cortex v <dig> based on the principle of minimum mean squares error, it is natural to use the inner product expression in neural computation, which then is transformed into matrix form.


RESULTS
the inner product is carried out by using kronecker product between patches and function architecture  in localized and oriented neural computing. compared with fourier transform, the mathematical description of kronecker product is simple and intuitive, so is the algorithm more suitable for neural computation of visual cortex v <dig>  results of computer simulation based on two-dimensional gabor pyramid wavelets show that the theoretical analysis and the proposed model are reasonable.


CONCLUSIONS
our results are:

 <dig>  the neural computation of the retinal image in cortex v <dig> can be expressed to kronecker product operation and its matrix form, this algorithm is implemented by the inner operation between retinal image primitives and primary visual cortex's column. it has simple, efficient and robust features, which is, therefore, such a neural algorithm, which can be completed by biological vision.

 <dig>  it is more suitable that the function of cortical column in cortex v <dig> is considered as the basic unit of visual image processing , rather than a set of tiled array filter. fourier transformation is replaced with kronecker product, which greatly reduces the computational complexity. the neurobiological basis of this idea is that a visual image can be represented as a linear combination of orderly orthogonal primitive image containing some local feature. in the visual pathway, the image patches are topographically mapped onto cortex v <dig> through parallel multi-channels and then are processed independently by functional columns. clearly, the above new perspective has some reference significance to exploring the neural mechanisms on the human visual information processing.

