BACKGROUND
α-l-fucosidases are enzymes involved in metabolism of α-l-fucosylated molecules, compounds with a fundamental role in different life essential processes including immune response, fertilization and development, but also in some serious pathological events. according to the cazy database, these enzymes belong to families  <dig> and  <dig>  some of them are also reported to be able to catalyze transglycosylation reactions, during which α-l-fucosylated molecules, representing compounds of interest especially for pharmaceutical industry, are formed.

methods
activity-based screening of a genomic library was used to isolate the gene encoding a novel α-l-fucosidase. the enzyme was expressed in e.coli and affinity chromatography was used for purification of his-tagged α-l-fucosidase. standard activity assay was used for enzyme characterization. thin layer chromatography and mass spectrometry were used for transglycosylation reactions evaluation.


RESULTS
using a genomic library of paenibacillus thiaminolyticus, constructed in e.coli dh5α cells, nucleotide sequence of a new α-l-fucosidase isoenzyme was determined and submitted to the embl database . however, no similarity with enzymes from cazy database families  <dig> and  <dig> was detected. this enzyme was produced in form of histidine-tagged protein in e.coli bl <dig>  cells and purified by metaloaffinity chromatography. hydrolytic and transglycosylation abilities of α-l-fucosidase iso <dig> were tested using different acceptor molecules.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, new enzyme α-l-fucosidase iso <dig> originating from paenibacillus thiaminolyticus was described and prepared in recombinant form and its hydrolytic and transglycosylation properties were characterized. as a very low amino acid sequence similarity with known α-l-fucosidases was found, following study could be important for different biochemical disciplines involving molecular modelling.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
α-l-fucosidasepaenibacillus thiaminolyticustransglycosylationcarbohydrate active enzymesglycosidaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

