BACKGROUND
glutamine synthetase  catalyzes the first step of nitrogen assimilation in plant cell. the main gs are classified as cytosolic gs <dig> and plastidial gs <dig>  of which the functionality is variable according to the nitrogen sources, organs and developmental stages. in maize  one gene for gs <dig> and five genes for gs <dig> subunits are known, but their roles in root metabolism are not yet well defined. in this work, proteomic and biochemical approaches have been used to study root gs enzymes and nitrogen assimilation in maize plants re-supplied with nitrate, ammonium or both.


RESULTS
the plant metabolic status highlighted the relevance of root system in maize nitrogen assimilation during both nitrate and ammonium nutrition. the analysis of root proteomes allowed a study to be made of the accumulation and phosphorylation of six gs proteins. three forms of gs <dig> were identified, among which only the phosphorylated one showed an accumulation trend consistent with plastidial gs activity. nitrogen availabilities enabled increments in root total gs synthetase activity, associated with different gs <dig> isoforms according to the nitrogen sources. nitrate nutrition induced the specific accumulation of gs1- <dig> while ammonium led to up-accumulation of both gs1- <dig> and gs1- <dig>  highlighting co-participation. moreover, the changes in thermal sensitivity of root gs transferase activity suggested differential rearrangements of the native enzyme. the amino acid accumulation and composition in roots, xylem sap and leaves deeply changed in response to mineral sources. glutamine showed the prevalent changes in all nitrogen nutritions. besides, the ammonium nutrition was associated with an accumulation of asparagine and reducing sugars and a drop in glutamic acid level, significantly alleviated by the co-provision with nitrate.


CONCLUSIONS
this work provides new information about the multifaceted regulation of the gs enzyme in maize roots, indicating the involvement of specific isoenzymes/isoforms, post-translational events and biochemical factors. for the first time, the proteomic approach allowed to discriminate the individual contribution of the gs <dig> isoforms, highlighting the participation of gs1- <dig> in nitrate metabolism. moreover, the results give new insights about the influence of amino acid metabolism in plant c/n balance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
amino acidsammoniumglutamine synthetasemaizenitraterootsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

