BACKGROUND
adaptive radiation within fishes of the coregonus lavaretus complex has created numerous morphs, posing significant challenges for taxonomy and conservation priorities. the highly endangered north sea houting  has been considered a separate species from european lake whitefish  due to morphological divergence and adaptation to oceanic salinities. however, its evolutionary and taxonomic status is controversial. we analysed microsatellite dna polymorphism in nine populations from the jutland peninsula and the baltic sea, representing nsh  and elw . the objectives were to: 1) analyse postglacial recolonization of whitefish in the region; 2) assess the evolutionary distinctiveness of nsh, and 3) apply several approaches for defining conservation units towards setting conservation priorities for nsh.


RESULTS
bayesian cluster analyses of genetic differentiation identified four major groups, corresponding to nsh and three groups of elw . estimates of historical migration rates indicated recolonization in a north-eastern direction, suggesting that all except the baltic sea population predominantly represent postglacial recolonization via the ancient elbe river. contemporary gene flow has not occurred between nsh and elw, with a divergence time within the last  <dig>  years suggested from coalescence methods. nsh showed interbreeding with elw when brought into contact by stocking. thus, reproductive isolation of nsh was not absolute, although possible interbreeding beyond the f <dig> level could not be resolved.


CONCLUSIONS
fishes of the c. lavaretus complex in the jutland peninsula originate from the same recolonization event. nsh has evolved recently and its species status may be questioned due to incomplete reproductive isolation from elw, but it was shown to merit consideration as an independent conservation unit. yet, application of several approaches for defining conservation units generated mixed outcomes regarding its conservation priority. within the total species complex, it remains one among many recently evolved unique forms. its uniqueness and high conservation priority is more evident at a local geographical scale, where conservation efforts will also benefit populations of a number of other endangered species.

