BACKGROUND
the muscle fiber number and fiber composition of muscle is largely determined during prenatal development. in order to discover genes that are involved in determining adult muscle phenotypes, we studied the gene expression profile of developing fetal bovine longissimus muscle from animals with two different genetic backgrounds using a bovine cdna microarray. fetal longissimus muscle was sampled at  <dig> stages of myogenesis and muscle maturation: primary myogenesis , secondary myogenesis , as well as beginning  and final stages  of functional differentiation of muscle fibers. all fetuses and newborns  were from hereford dams and crossed with either wagyu  or piedmontese  sires, genotypes that vary markedly in muscle and compositional characteristics later in postnatal life.


RESULTS
we obtained expression profiles of three individuals for each time point and genotype to allow comparisons across time and between sire breeds. quantitative reverse transcription-pcr analysis of rna from developing longissimus muscle was able to validate the differential expression patterns observed for a selection of differentially expressed genes, with one exception. we detected large-scale changes in temporal gene expression between the four developmental stages in genes coding for extracellular matrix and for muscle fiber structural and metabolic proteins. fstl <dig> and igfbp <dig> were two genes implicated in growth and differentiation that showed developmentally regulated expression levels in fetal muscle. an abundantly expressed gene with no functional annotation was found to be developmentally regulated in the same manner as muscle structural proteins. we also observed differences in gene expression profiles between the two different sire breeds. wagyu-sired calves showed higher expression of fatty acid binding protein  <dig>  rna at birth. the developing longissimus muscle of fetuses carrying the piedmontese mutation shows an emphasis on glycolytic muscle biochemistry and a large-scale up-regulation of the translational machinery at birth. we also document evidence for timing differences in differentiation events between the two breeds.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, these findings provide a detailed description of molecular events accompanying skeletal muscle differentiation in the bovine, as well as gene expression differences that may underpin the phenotype differences between the two breeds. in addition, this study has highlighted a non-coding rna, which is abundantly expressed and developmentally regulated in bovine fetal muscle.

