BACKGROUND
the syrian golden hamster  has been used as a model to study infections caused by a number of human pathogens. studies of immunopathogenesis in hamster infection models are challenging because of the limited availability of reagents needed to define cellular and molecular determinants.


RESULTS
we sequenced a hamster cdna library and developed a first-generation custom cdna microarray that included  <dig> unique cdnas enriched for immune response genes. we used this microarray to interrogate the hamster spleen response to leishmania donovani, an intracellular protozoan that causes visceral leishmaniasis. the hamster model of visceral leishmaniasis is of particular interest because it recapitulates clinical and immunopathological features of human disease, including cachexia, massive splenomegaly, pancytopenia, immunosuppression, and ultimately death. in the microarray a differentially expressed transcript was identified as having at least a 2-fold change in expression between uninfected and infected groups and a false discovery rate of <5%. following a relatively silent early phase of infection , there was dramatic upregulation of inflammatory and immune-related genes in the spleen . the differentially expressed transcripts included genes involved in inflammation, immunity, and immune cell trafficking. of particular interest there was concomitant upregulation of the ifn-γ and interleukin - <dig> signaling pathways, with increased expression of a battery of ifn-γ- and il-4-responsive genes. the latter included genes characteristic of alternatively activated macrophages.


CONCLUSIONS
transcriptional profiling was accomplished in the syrian golden hamster, for which a fully annotated genome is not available. in the hamster model of visceral leishmaniasis, a robust and functional ifn-γ response did not restrain parasite load and progression of disease. this supports the accumulating evidence that macrophages are ineffectively activated to kill the parasite. the concomitant expression of il-4/il- <dig> and their downstream target genes, some of which were characteristic of alternative macrophage activation, are likely to contribute to this. further dissection of mechanisms that lead to polarization of macrophages toward a permissive state is needed to fully understand the pathogenesis of visceral leishmaniasis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hamsterleishmania donovanivisceral leishmaniasistranscriptional profilingmicroarrayinterferon-gammainterleukin-4issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

