BACKGROUND
tumor angiogenesis is a highly regulated process involving intercellular communication as well as the interactions of multiple downstream signal transduction pathways. disrupting one or even a few angiogenesis pathways is often insufficient to achieve sustained therapeutic benefits due to the complexity of angiogenesis. targeting multiple angiogenic pathways has been increasingly recognized as a viable strategy. however, translation of the polypharmacology of a given compound to its antiangiogenic efficacy remains a major technical challenge. developing a global functional association network among angiogenesis-related genes is much needed to facilitate holistic understanding of angiogenesis and to aid the development of more effective anti-angiogenesis therapeutics.


RESULTS
we constructed a comprehensive gene functional association network or interactome by transcript profiling an in vitro angiogenesis model, in which human umbilical vein endothelial cells  formed capillary structures when co-cultured with normal human dermal fibroblasts . huvec competence and nhdf supportiveness of cord formation were found to be highly cell-passage dependent. an enrichment test of biological processes  of differentially expressed genes  revealed that angiogenesis related bp categories significantly changed with cell passages. built upon  <dig> degs identified from two microarray studies, the resulting interactome captured  <dig> functional gene associations and displayed characteristics of a scale-free network. the interactome includes the involvement of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in angiogenesis. we developed a network walking algorithm to extract connectivity information from the interactome and applied it to simulate the level of network perturbation by three multi-targeted anti-angiogenic kinase inhibitors. simulated network perturbation correlated with observed anti-angiogenesis activity in a cord formation bioassay.


CONCLUSIONS
we established a comprehensive gene functional association network to model in vitro angiogenesis regulation. the present study provided a proof-of-concept pilot of applying network perturbation analysis to drug phenotypic activity assessment.

