BACKGROUND
several archaeal species from the order sulfolobales are interesting from the biotechnological point of view due to their biomining capacities. within this group, the genus acidianus contains four biomining species , but none of these have their genome sequenced. to get insights into the genetic potential and metabolic pathways involved in the biomining activity of this group, we sequenced the genome of acidianus copahuensis ale <dig> strain, a novel thermoacidophilic crenarchaeon  isolated from the volcanic geothermal area of copahue at neuquén province in argentina. previous experimental characterization of a. copahuensis revealed a high biomining potential, exhibited as high oxidation activity of sulfur and sulfur compounds, ferrous iron and sulfide minerals . this strain is also autotrophic and tolerant to heavy metals, thus, it can grow under adverse conditions for most forms of life with a low nutrient demand, conditions that are commonly found in mining environments.


RESULTS
in this work we analyzed the genome of acidianus copahuensis and describe the genetic pathways involved in biomining processes. we identified the enzymes that are most likely involved in growth on sulfur and ferrous iron oxidation as well as those involved in autotrophic carbon fixation. we also found that a. copahuensis genome gathers different features that are only present in particular lineages or species from the order sulfolobales, some of which are involved in biomining. we found that although most of its genes  were found in at least one other sulfolobales species, it is not specifically closer to any particular species . although almost one fifth of a. copahuensis proteins are not found in any other sulfolobales species, most of them corresponded to hypothetical proteins from uncharacterized metabolisms.


CONCLUSIONS
in this work we identified the genes responsible for the biomining metabolisms that we have previously observed experimentally. we provide a landscape of the metabolic potentials of this strain in the context of sulfolobales and propose various pathways and cellular processes not yet fully understood that can use a. copahuensis as an experimental model to further understand the fascinating biology of thermoacidophilic biomining archaea.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
acidianus copahuensisthermoacidophilic archaeabiomining geneshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003074agencia nacional de promoción científica y tecnológicapict  <dig> 0630donati edgardo issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

