BACKGROUND
the development of the secondary palate has been a main topic in craniofacial research, as its failure results in cleft palate, one of the most common birth defects in human. nevertheless, palatal rugae , which are transversal ridges developing on the secondary palate, received little attention. however, rugae could be useful as landmarks to monitor anterior/posterior  palatal growth, and they provide a simple model of mesenchymal-epithelial structures arranged in a serial pattern.


RESULTS
we first determined in which order the nine mouse rugae appear during development. our results revealed a reiterative process, which is coupled with a/p growth of palatal shelves, and by which rugae  <dig> to 7b are sequentially interposed, in the increasing distance between the second most anterior ruga, ruga  <dig>  and the two most posterior rugae, rugae  <dig> and  <dig>  we characterized the steps of ruga interposition in detail, showing that a new ruga forms from an active zone of high proliferation rate, next to the last formed ruga. then, by analyzing the polymorphism of wild type and edata mutant mice, we suggest that activation-inhibition mechanisms may be involved in positioning new rugae, like for other skin appendages. finally, we show that the ruga in front of which new rugae form, i.e. ruga  <dig> in mouse, coincides with an a/p gene expression boundary in the palatal shelves . this coincidence is significant, since we also found it in hamster, despite differences in the adult ruga pattern of these two species.


CONCLUSIONS
we showed that palatal rugae are sequentially added to the growing palate, in an interposition process that appears to be dependent on activation-inhibition mechanisms and reveals a new developmental boundary in the growing palate. further studies on rugae may help to shed light on both the development and evolution of structures arranged in regular patterns. moreover, rugae will undoubtedly be powerful tools to further study the anteroposterior regionalization of the growing palate.

