BACKGROUND
an ion mobility  spectrometer coupled with a multi-capillary column  measures volatile organic compounds  in the air or in exhaled breath. this technique is utilized in several biotechnological and medical applications. each peak in an mcc/im measurement represents a certain compound, which may be known or unknown. for clustering and classification of measurements, the raw data matrix must be reduced to a set of peaks. each peak is described by its coordinates  and shape . this fundamental step is referred to as peak extraction. it is the basis for identifying discriminating peaks, and hence putative biomarkers, between two classes of measurements, such as a healthy control group and a group of patients with a confirmed disease. current state-of-the-art peak extraction methods require human interaction, such as hand-picking approximate peak locations, assisted by a visualization of the data matrix. in a high-throughput context, however, it is preferable to have robust methods for fully automated peak extraction.


RESULTS
we introduce peax, a modular framework for automated peak extraction. the framework consists of several steps in a pipeline architecture. each step performs a specific sub-task and can be instantiated by different methods implemented as modules. we provide open-source software for the framework and several modules for each step. additionally, an interface that allows easy extension by a new module is provided. combining the modules in all reasonable ways leads to a large number of peak extraction methods. we evaluate all combinations using intrinsic error measures and by comparing the resulting peak sets with an expert-picked one.


CONCLUSIONS
our software peax is able to automatically extract peaks from mcc/im measurements within a few seconds. the automatically obtained results keep up with the results provided by current state-of-the-art peak extraction methods. this opens a high-throughput context for the mcc/im application field. our software is available at http://www.rahmannlab.de/research/ims.

ion mobility spectrometrypeak detectionsignal processingautomated pipeline

