BACKGROUND
colour and shape polymorphisms are important features of many species and may allow individuals to exploit a wider array of habitats, including through behavioural differences among morphs. in addition, differences among individuals in behaviour and morphology may reflect different strategies, for example utilising different approaches to camouflage. hippolyte obliquimanus is a small shrimp species inhabiting different shallow-water vegetated habitats. populations comprise two main morphs: homogeneous shrimp of variable colour  and transparent individuals with coloured stripes . these morphs follow different distribution patterns between their main algal habitats; the brown weed sargassum furcatum and the pink-red weed galaxaura marginata. in this study, we first investigated morph-specific colour change and habitat selection, as mechanisms underlying camouflage and spatial distribution patterns in nature. then, we examined habitat fidelity, mobility, and morphological traits, further indicating patterns of habitat use.


RESULTS
h shrimp are capable of changing colour in just a few days towards their algal background, achieving better concealment in the more marginal, and less preferred, red weed habitat. furthermore, laboratory trials showed that habitat fidelity is higher for h shrimp, whereas swimming activity is higher for the st morph, aligned to morphological evidence indicating these two morphs comprise a more benthic  and a more pelagic  life-style, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
results suggest that h shrimp utilise a camouflage strategy specialised to a limited number of backgrounds at any one time, whereas st individuals comprise a phenotype with more generalist camouflage  linked to a more generalist background utilisation. the coexistence within a population of distinct morphotypes with apparently alternative strategies of habitat use and camouflage may reflect differential responses to substantial seasonal changes in macroalgal cover. our findings also demonstrate how colour change, behaviour, morphology, and background use all interact in achieving camouflage.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
camouflage strategycaridean shrimppolymorphismgeometric morphometricscolour changehabitat uselife-styleshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001807fundação de amparo à pesquisa do estado de são paulo2012/17003-02015/22258-5duarte rafael c. stevens martin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

