BACKGROUND
insect mitochondrial genomes  are the most extensively used genetic marker for evolutionary and population genetics studies of insects. the pentatomoidea superfamily is economically important and the largest superfamily within pentatomomorpha with over  <dig>  species. to better understand the diversity and evolution of pentatomoid species, we sequenced and annotated the mitogenomes of eurydema gebleri and rubiconia intermedia, and present the first comparative analysis of the  <dig> pentatomoid mitogenomes that have been sequenced to date.


RESULTS
we obtained the complete mitogenome of eurydema gebleri  and a nearly complete mitogenome of rubiconia intermedia . our results show that gene content, gene arrangement, base composition, codon usage, and mitochondrial transcription termination factor sequences are highly conserved in pentatomoid species, especially for species in the same family. evolutionary rate analyses of protein-coding genes reveal that the highest and lowest rates are found in atp <dig> and cox <dig> and distinctive evolutionary patterns are significantly correlated with the g + c content of genes. we inferred the secondary structures for two rrna genes for eleven pentatomoid species, and identify some conserved motifs of rna structures in pentatomidea. all trna genes in pentatomoid mitogenomes have a canonical cloverleaf secondary structure, except for two trnas  which appear to lack the dihydrouridine arm. regions that are a + t-rich have several distinct characteristics , and have potential as species or population level molecular markers. phylogenetic analyses based on mitogenomic data strongly support the monophyly of pentatomoidea, and the estimated phylogenetic relationships are: )))).


CONCLUSIONS
this comparative mitogenomic analysis sheds light on the architecture and evolution of mitogenomes in the superfamily pentatomoidea. mitogenomes can be effectively used to resolve phylogenetic relationships of pentatomomorphan insects at various taxonomic levels. sequencing more mitogenomes at various taxonomic levels, particularly from closely related species, will improve the annotation accuracy of mitochondrial genes, as well as greatly enhance our understanding of mitogenomic evolution and phylogenetic relationships in pentatomoids.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

