BACKGROUND
inbreeding is often associated with a decrease in offspring fitness . moreover, it is generally assumed that the negative effects of inbreeding are exacerbated in stressful environments. this g × e interaction has been explored in many taxa under different environmental conditions. these studies usually manipulate environmental conditions either in adulthood or throughout an individual’s entire life. far fewer studies have tested how stressful environments only experienced during development subsequently influence the effects of inbreeding on adult traits.


RESULTS
we experimentally manipulated the diet  of inbred and outbred juvenile eastern mosquitofish  for three weeks  to test whether experiencing a presumably stressful environment early in life influences their subsequent growth and adult phenotypes. the control diet was a standard laboratory food regime, while fish on the low food diet received less than 25 % of this amount of food. unexpectedly, despite a large sample size  and a quantified 23 % reduction in genome-wide heterozygosity in inbred offspring from matings between full-siblings , neither inbreeding nor its interaction with early diet affected growth trajectories, juvenile survival or adult size. individuals did not mitigate a poor start in life by showing ‘compensatory growth’ , but they showed ‘catch-up growth’ by delaying maturation. there was, however, no effect of inbreeding on the extent of catch-up growth.


CONCLUSIONS
there were no detectable effects of inbreeding on growth or adult size, even on a low food diet that should elevate inbreeding depression. thus, the long-term costs of inbreeding due to lower male reproductive success we have shown in another study appear to be unrelated to inbreeding depression for adult male size or the growth rates that are reported in the current study.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fitnessfood stresscatch-up growthgrowth ratesmosquitofishhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000923australian research councildp160100285jennions michael d. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

