BACKGROUND
classical cadherins are a metazoan-specific family of homophilic cell-cell adhesion molecules that regulate morphogenesis. type i and type iv cadherins in this family function at adherens junctions in the major epithelial tissues of vertebrates and insects, respectively, but they have distinct, relatively simple domain organizations that are thought to have evolved by independent reductive changes from an ancestral type iii cadherin, which is larger than derived paralogs and has a complicated domain organization. although both type iii and type iv cadherins have been identified in hexapods and branchiopods, the process by which the type iv cadherin evolved is still largely unclear.


RESULTS
through an analysis of arthropod genome sequences, we found that the only classical cadherin encoded in chelicerate genomes was the type iii cadherin and that the two type iii cadherin genes found in the spider parasteatoda tepidariorum genome exhibited a complex yet ancestral exon-intron organization in arthropods. genomic and transcriptomic data from branchiopod, copepod, isopod, amphipod, and decapod crustaceans led us to redefine the type iv cadherin category, which we separated into type iva and type ivb, which displayed a similar domain organization, except type ivb cadherins have a larger number of extracellular cadherin  domains than do type iva cadherins . we also showed that type iva cadherin genes occurred in the hexapod, branchiopod, and copepod genomes whereas only type ivb cadherin genes were present in malacostracans. furthermore, comparative characterization of the type ivb cadherins suggested that the presence of two extra ec domains in their n-terminal regions represented primitive characteristics. in addition, we identified an evolutionary loss of two highly conserved cysteine residues among the type iva cadherins of insects.


CONCLUSIONS
we provide a genomic perspective of the evolution of classical cadherins among bilaterians, with a focus on the arthropoda, and suggest that following the divergence of early arthropods, the precursor of the insect type iv cadherin evolved through stepwise reductive changes from the ancestral type iii state. in addition, the complementary distributions of polarized genomic characters related to type iva/ivb cadherins may have implications for our interpretations of pancrustacean phylogeny.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cadherincell adhesionadherens junctionarthropodcheliceratecrustaceaninsectgenomeevolutionphylogenyjapan society for the promotion of science  grants-in-aid for scientific research 23370095oda hiroki japan society for the promotion of science  grants-in-aid for scientific research 15k07139oda hiroki japan society for the promotion of science  grants-in-aid for scientific research 24870035akiyama-oda yasuko japan society for the promotion of science  grants-in-aid for scientific research 26440130akiyama-oda yasuko issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

