BACKGROUND
mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis  causes paratuberculosis in animals and is suspected of causing crohn's disease in humans. characterization of strains led to classify paratuberculosis isolates in two main types, cattle type strains, found affecting all host species, and sheep type strains, reported affecting mainly sheep. in order to get a better understanding of the epidemiology of paratuberculosis a large set of map isolates obtained from different species over the last  <dig> years have been characterized. five-hundred and twenty isolates from different hosts  and origins had been cultured and typed by is <dig> restriction-endonuclease-analysis. two-hundred and sixty-nine isolates were further characterized by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis  using snabi and spei endonucleases. differences in strain isolation upon various media conditions were also studied.


RESULTS
all bovines,  <dig> and 26% of spanish sheep and goats, respectively, and the deer and wild boar studied, carried is1311-cattle type strains. is1311-sheep type encompassed 96% and 74% of spanish sheep and goats, and all three portuguese sheep. thirty-seven distinct multiplex pfge profiles were found, giving  <dig> novel profiles. profiles 2- <dig> and 1- <dig> accounted for the 85% of cattle isolates. ten distinct profiles were detected in spanish sheep, none of them with an incidence higher than 25%. profile 16- <dig>  and another three profiles were identified in spanish caprine cultures. the hierarchical analysis, clustered all profiles found in cattle, "wild" hosts and some small ruminants within the same group. the other group included  <dig> profiles only found in spanish sheep and goats, including spanish pigmented profiles. differences in growth requirements associated with isolate genotype were observed.


CONCLUSIONS
cattle in spain are infected with cattle type strains, while sheep and goats are mainly infected with sheep type strains. although 7h <dig> broth based culture media seem to broadly cover the growth requirements of most map strains, the use of various solid media is recommended to reduce any recovery biases. high genetic homogeneity of isolates from cattle, and heterogeneity of those from sheep and goats have been detected.

