BACKGROUND
whole cells are usually employed for biocatalytic reduction reactions to ensure efficient coenzyme regeneration and to avoid problems with enzyme purification and stability. the efficiency of whole cell-catalyzed bioreduction is frequently restricted by pronounced toxicity of substrate and/or product to the microbial cells and in many instances the use of two-phase reaction systems can solve such problems. therefore, we developed new, biphasic reaction systems with biocompatible water-immiscible ionic liquids  as alternatives to conventional organic solvents, in order to improve the asymmetric reduction of 4--3-butyn-2-one  to -4--3-butyn-2-ol {-tmsbol}, a key intermediate for synthesis of 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors, using immobilized candida parapsilosis cctcc m <dig> cells as the biocatalyst.


RESULTS
various ils exerted significant but different effects on the bioreduction. of all the tested water-immiscible ils, the best results were observed with 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate , which exhibited not only good biocompatibility with the cells but also excellent solvent properties for the toxic substrate and product, thus markedly improving the efficiency of the bioreduction and the operational stability of the cells as compared to the il-free aqueous system. 2-propanol was shown to be the most suitable co-substrate for coenzyme regeneration, and it was found that the optimum volume ratio of buffer to c4mim·pf <dig>  substrate concentration, buffer ph, 2-propanol concentration and reaction temperature were 4/ <dig> ,  <dig> mm,  <dig> ,  <dig> mm and 30°c, respectively. under these optimized conditions, the maximum yield and the product e.e. wer  <dig> % and >99%, respectively, which are much higher than the corresponding values previously reported. the efficient whole-cell biocatalytic process was shown to be feasible on a 250-ml scale.


CONCLUSIONS
the whole cell-catalyzed asymmetric reduction of tmsb to -tmsbol can be substantially improved by using a c4mim·pf6/buffer biphasic system instead of a single-phase aqueous system and the resulting biocatalytic process appears to be effective and competitive on a preparative scale.

