BACKGROUND
in practice, some drugs produce a number of negative biological effects that can mitigate their effectiveness as a remedy. to address this issue, several studies have been performed for the prediction of drug-induced toxicity from gene-expression data, and a significant amount of work has been done on predicting limited drug-induced symptoms or single-organ toxicity. since drugs often lead to some injuries in several organs like liver or kidney, however, it would be very useful to forecast the drug-induced injuries for multiple organs. therefore, in this work, our aim was to develop a multi-organ toxicity prediction model using an integrative model of gene-expression data.


RESULTS
to train our integrative model, we used  <dig> in-vivo samples of gene-expression profiles exposed to one of  <dig> drugs related to  <dig> distinct physiological changes divided between liver and kidney . specifically, we used the gene-expression profiles to learn an ensemble classifier for each of  <dig> pathology prediction models. subsequently, these classifiers were combined with weights to generate an integrative model for each pathological finding. the integrative model outputs the likeliness of presenting the trained pathology in a given test sample of gene-expression profile, called an integrative prediction score . for the evaluation of an integrative model, we estimated the prediction performance with the k-fold cross-validation. our results demonstrate that the proposed integrative model is superior to individual pathology prediction models in predicting multi-organ drug-induced toxicities over all the targeted pathological findings. on average, the auc of the integrative models was 88% while the auc of individual pathology prediction models was 68%.


CONCLUSIONS
not only does this integrative model produce comparable prediction performance to existing approaches, but also it produces very stable performance overall. in addition, our approach is easily expandable to a variety of other multi-organ toxicology applications.

 <dig> july- <dig> august  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  thirteenth international conference on bioinformatics  sydney, australia

