BACKGROUND
short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases  form one of the largest and oldest nad dependent oxidoreductase families. despite a conserved ‘rossmann-fold’ structure, members of the sdr superfamily exhibit low sequence similarities, which constituted a bottleneck in terms of identification. recent classification methods, relying on hidden-markov models , improved identification and enabled the construction of a nomenclature. however, functional annotations of plant sdrs remain scarce.


RESULTS
wide-scale analyses were performed on ten plant genomes. the combination of hidden markov model  based analyses and similarity searches led to the construction of an exhaustive inventory of plant sdr. 
with  <dig> to  <dig> members found in each analysed genome, the inventory confirmed the over-representation of 
sdrs in plants compared to animals, fungi and prokaryotes. the plant sdrs were first classified into three major types — ‘classical’, ‘extended’ and ‘divergent’ — but a minority  could not be classified into these general types . in a second step, we could categorize the vast majority of land plant sdrs into a set of  <dig> families. out of these  <dig> families,  <dig> appeared early during evolution since they are commonly found through all the green lineage. yet, some sdr families — tropinone reductase-like proteins , ‘aba2-like’-nad dehydrogenase , ‘salutaridine/menthone-reductase-like’ proteins , ‘dihydroflavonol 4-reductase’-like proteins  and ‘isoflavone-reductase-like’  proteins — have undergone significant functional diversification within vascular plants since they diverged from bryophytes. interestingly, these diversified families are either involved in the secondary metabolism routes  or participate in developmental processes , 
in opposition to sdr families involved in primary metabolism which are poorly diversified.


CONCLUSIONS
the application of hmms to plant genomes enabled us to identify  <dig> families that encompass all angiosperms  sdrs, each family being sufficiently conserved to enable simpler analyses based only on overall sequence similarity. the multiplicity of sdrs in plant kingdom is mainly explained by the diversification of large families involved in different secondary metabolism pathways, suggesting that the chemical diversification that accompanied the emergence of vascular plants acted as a driving force for sdr evolution.

short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase sdr nomenclature initiativehidden markov modelmultigenic familyplant

