BACKGROUND
sequencing of the genome of propionibacterium acnes produced a catalogue of genes many of which enable this organism to colonise skin and survive exposure to the elements. despite this platform, there was little understanding of the gene regulation that gives rise to an organism that has a major impact on human health and wellbeing and causes infections beyond the skin. to address this situation, we have undertaken a genome–wide study of gene regulation using a combination of improved differential and global rna-sequencing and an analytical approach that takes into account the inherent noise within the data.


RESULTS
we have produced nucleotide-resolution transcriptome maps that identify and differentiate sites of transcription initiation from sites of stable rna processing and mrna cleavage. moreover, analysis of these maps provides strong evidence for ‘pervasive’ transcription and shows that contrary to initial indications it is not biased towards the production of antisense rnas. in addition, the maps reveal an extensive array of riboswitches, leaderless mrnas and small non-protein-coding rnas alongside vegetative promoters and post-transcriptional events, which includes unusual trna processing. the identification of such features will inform models of complex gene regulation, as illustrated here for ribonucleotide reductases and a potential quorum-sensing, two-component system.


CONCLUSIONS
the approach described here, which is transferable to any bacterial species, has produced a step increase in whole-cell knowledge of gene regulation in p. acnes. continued expansion of our maps to include transcription associated with different growth conditions and genetic backgrounds will provide a new platform from which to computationally model the gene expression that determines the physiology of p. acnes and its role in human disease.

pervasive transcriptionleaderless mrnasmall non-protein-coding rnasrna degradation and processingpromoters and regulatory elementstranscriptional landscapedifferential and global rna-seq

