BACKGROUND
the adage from shakespeare, "troubles, not as single spies, but in battalions come," holds true for nicotiana attenuata, which is commonly attacked by both pathogens  and herbivores  in its native habitats. defense responses targeted against the pathogens can directly or indirectly influence the responses against the herbivores. nadefensin is an effective induced defense gene against the bacterial pathogen pseudomonas syringae pv tomato , which is also elicited by attack from m. sexta larvae, but whether this defense protein influences m. sexta's growth and whether m. sexta-induced nadefensin directly or indirectly influences pst dc <dig> resistance are unknown.


RESULTS
m. sexta larvae consumed less on wt and on nadefensin-silenced n. attenuata plants that had previously been infected with pst dc <dig> than on uninfected plants. wt plants infected with pst dc <dig> showed enhanced resistance to pst dc <dig> and decreased leaf consumption by m. sexta larvae, but larval mass gain was unaffected. pst dc3000-infected nadefensin-silenced plants were less resistant to subsequent pst dc <dig> challenge, and on these plants, m. sexta larvae consumed less and gained less mass. wt and nadefensin-silenced plants previously damaged by m. sexta larvae were better able to resist subsequent pst dc <dig> challenges than were undamaged plants.


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate that na-defensin directly mediates defense against pst dc <dig> and indirectly against m. sexta in n. attenuata. in plants that were previously infected with pst dc <dig>  the altered leaf chemistry in pst dc3000-resistant wt plants and pst dc3000-susceptible nadefensin-silenced plants differentially reduced m. sexta's leaf consumption and mass gain. in plants that were previously damaged by m. sexta, the combined effect of the altered host plant chemistry and a broad spectrum of anti-herbivore induced metabolomic responses was more effective than nadefensin alone in resisting pst dc <dig> 

