BACKGROUND
lead, a serious threat for raptors, can hamper the success of their conservation. this study reports on experience with accidental lead intoxication and responses to chelation therapy in captive cinereous  and egyptian  vultures.


RESULTS
soil contamination by lead-based paint sanded off the steel aviary resulted in poisoning of eight cinereous and two egyptian vultures. a male egyptian vulture developed signs of apathy, polydipsia, polyuria, regurgitation, and stupor, and died on the next day. liver, kidney and blood lead concentrations were  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  μg/g, respectively. laboratory analyses confirmed severe liver and kidney damage and anaemia. blood pb levels of pb-exposed cinereous vultures were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μg/g shortly after intoxication, decreased to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μg/g without any therapy in a month and to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μg/g one month after cana2edta administration. eight months later, blood lead levels decreased to close to the background of the control group. blood parameters of healthy pb-non-exposed cinereous vultures were compared with those of the exposed group prior to and after chelation therapy. iron levels in the lead-exposed pre-treatment birds significantly decreased after chelation. haematocrit levels in pb-exposed birds were significantly lower than those of the controls and improved one month after chelation. creatine kinase was higher in pre-treatment birds than in the controls but normalised after therapy. alkaline phosphatase increased after chelation. a marked increase in the level of lipid peroxidation measured as thiobarbituric acid reactive species was demonstrated in birds both prior to and after chelation. the ferric reducing antioxidant power was significantly lower in pre-treatment vultures and returned to normal following chelation therapy. blood metallothionein levels in lead-exposed birds were higher than in controls. reduced glutathione dropped after cana2edta therapy, while oxidised glutathione was significantly lower in both pre- and post-treatment birds. a chick in an egg produced by a cinereous vulture female two months after lead toxicosis died on day  <dig> of artificial incubation. lead concentrations in foetal tissues were consistent with levels causing avian mortality.


CONCLUSIONS
the reported blood parameters and reproduction impairment in captive birds may have implications for professionals dealing with lead exposure in wild birds.

aegypius monachusneophron percnopterusplumbismhaematologybiochemistryoxidative stressreproduction impairmenttreatment

