BACKGROUND
whole genome sequencing  of cryptosporidium spp. has previously relied on propagation of the parasite in animals to generate enough oocysts from which to extract dna of sufficient quantity and purity for analysis. we have developed and validated a method for preparation of genomic cryptosporidium dna suitable for wgs directly from human stool samples and used it to generate  <dig> high-quality whole cryptosporidium genome assemblies. our method uses a combination of salt flotation, immunomagnetic separation , and surface sterilisation of oocysts prior to dna extraction, with subsequent use of the transposome-based nextera xt kit to generate libraries for sequencing on illumina platforms. ims was found to be superior to caesium chloride density centrifugation for purification of oocysts from small volume stool samples and for reducing levels of contaminant dna.


RESULTS
the ims-based method was used initially to sequence whole genomes of cryptosporidium hominis gp <dig> subtype iba10g <dig> and cryptosporidium parvum gp <dig> subtype iiaa19g1r <dig> from small amounts of stool left over from diagnostic testing of clinical cases of cryptosporidiosis. the c. parvum isolate was sequenced to a mean depth of  <dig> x with reads covering 100 % of the bases of the c. parvum iowa ii reference genome , while the c. hominis isolate was sequenced to a mean depth of  <dig> x with reads covering 98 % of the bases of the c. hominis tu <dig> v <dig> reference genome .

the method was then applied to a further  <dig> stools, successfully generating another eight new whole genome sequences, of which two were c. hominis  and six c. parvum , demonstrating the utility of this method to sequence cryptosporidium genomes directly from clinical samples. this development is especially important as it reduces the requirement to propagate cryptosporidium oocysts in animal models prior to genome sequencing.


CONCLUSIONS
this represents the first report of high-quality whole genome sequencing of cryptosporidium isolates prepared directly from human stool samples.

keywords
whole genome sequencingilluminanextera xtcryptosporidiumstoolimmunomagnetic separationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

