BACKGROUND
bacterial non-coding rnas act by base-pairing as regulatory elements in crucial biological processes. we performed the identification of trans-encoded small rnas  from the genomes of mycoplama hyopneumoniae, mycoplasma flocculare and mycoplasma hyorhinis, which are mycoplasma species that have been identified in the porcine respiratory system.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> putative srnas were predicted in m. hyopneumoniae, m. flocculare and m. hyorhinis, respectively. a comparative genomic analysis revealed the presence of species or lineage specific srna candidates. furthermore, the expression profile of some m. hyopneumoniae srnas was determined by a reverse transcription amplification approach, in three different culture conditions. all tested srnas were transcribed in at least one condition. a detailed investigation revealed a differential expression profile for two m. hyopneumoniae srnas in response to oxidative and heat shock stress conditions, suggesting that their expression is influenced by environmental signals. moreover, we analyzed srna-mrna hybrids and accessed putative target genes for the novel srna candidates. the majority of the srnas showed interaction with multiple target genes, some of which could be linked to pathogenesis and cell homeostasis activity.


CONCLUSIONS
this study contributes to our knowledge of mycoplasma srnas and their response to environmental changes. furthermore, the mrna target prediction provides a perspective for the characterization and comprehension of the function of the srna regulatory mechanisms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mycoplasma hyopneumoniaemycoplasma floccularemycoplasma hyorhinissmall rnasporcine respiratory system6th solbio international conference  <dig>  soibio 2016riviera maya, mexico 22- <dig> april  <dig> http://www.soibio.org/en/icmexico2016issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

