BACKGROUND
the central role of the somatotrophic axis in animal post-natal growth, development and fertility is well established. therefore, the identification of genetic variants affecting quantitative traits within this axis is an attractive goal. however, large sample numbers are a pre-requisite for the identification of genetic variants underlying complex traits and although technologies are improving rapidly, high-throughput sequencing of large numbers of complete individual genomes remains prohibitively expensive. therefore using a pooled dna approach coupled with target enrichment and high-throughput sequencing, the aim of this study was to identify polymorphisms and estimate allele frequency differences across  <dig> candidate genes of the somatotrophic axis, in  <dig> holstein-friesian dairy bulls divided into two groups divergent for genetic merit for fertility.


RESULTS
in total,  <dig>  snps and  <dig> indels were identified during the resequencing of the  <dig> candidate genes. nineteen percent  of variants were located within 5' and 3' utrs. seventy-two percent  were intronic and 9%  were exonic, including  <dig> indels and  <dig> snps resulting in non-synonymous substitutions . significant  mean allele frequency differentials between the low and high fertility groups were observed for  <dig> snps . allele frequencies for  <dig> of the snps were also determined by genotyping the  <dig> individual animals . no significant differences  were observed between the two methods for any of the  <dig> snps across both pools .


CONCLUSIONS
the results of the current study support previous findings of the use of dna sample pooling and high-throughput sequencing as a viable strategy for polymorphism discovery and allele frequency estimation. using this approach we have characterised the genetic variation within genes of the somatotrophic axis and related pathways, central to mammalian post-natal growth and development and subsequent lactogenesis and fertility. we have identified a large number of variants segregating at significantly different frequencies between cattle groups divergent for calving interval plausibly harbouring causative variants contributing to heritable variation. to our knowledge, this is the first report describing sequencing of targeted genomic regions in any livestock species using groups with divergent phenotypes for an economically important trait.

