BACKGROUND
metarhizium anisopliae is an entomopathogenic fungus used in the biological control of some agricultural insect pests, and efforts are underway to use this fungus in the control of insect-borne human diseases. a large repertoire of proteins must be secreted by m. anisopliae to cope with the various available nutrients as this fungus switches through different lifestyles, i.e., from a saprophytic, to an infectious, to a plant endophytic stage. to further evaluate the predicted secretome of m. anisopliae, we employed genomic and transcriptomic analyses, coupled with phylogenomic analysis, focusing on the identification and characterization of secreted proteins.


RESULTS
we determined the m. anisopliae e <dig> genome sequence and compared this sequence to other entomopathogenic fungi genomes. a robust pipeline was generated to evaluate the predicted secretomes of m. anisopliae and  <dig> other filamentous fungi, leading to the identification of a core of secreted proteins. transcriptomic analysis using the tick rhipicephalus microplus cuticle as an infection model during two periods of infection  allowed the identification of several differentially expressed genes. this analysis concluded that a large proportion of the predicted secretome coding genes contained altered transcript levels in the conditions analyzed in this study. in addition, some specific secreted proteins from metarhizium have an evolutionary history similar to orthologs found in beauveria/cordyceps. this similarity suggests that a set of secreted proteins has evolved to participate in entomopathogenicity.


CONCLUSIONS
the data presented represents an important step to the characterization of the role of secreted proteins in the virulence and pathogenicity of m. anisopliae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genome sequenceentomopathogenic fungisecretomephylogenomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

