BACKGROUND
pedigree genotype datasets are used for analysing genetic inheritance and to map genetic markers and traits. such datasets consist of hundreds of related animals genotyped for thousands of genetic markers and invariably contain multiple errors in both the pedigree structure and in the associated individual genotype data. these errors manifest as apparent inheritance inconsistencies in the pedigree, and invalidate analyses of marker inheritance patterns across the dataset. cleaning raw datasets of bad data points  requires expert exploration of the patterns of exposed inconsistencies in the context of the inheritance pedigree. in order to assist this process we are developing viper , a software tool that integrates an inheritance-checking algorithm with a novel space-efficient pedigree visualisation, so that reported inheritance inconsistencies are overlaid on an interactive, navigable representation of the pedigree structure.

methods and 
RESULTS
this paper describes an evaluation of how viper displays the different scales and types of dataset that occur experimentally, with a description of how viper's display interface and functionality meet the challenges presented by such data. we examine a range of possible error types found in real and simulated pedigree genotype datasets, demonstrating how these errors are exposed and explored using the viper interface and we evaluate the utility and usability of the interface to the domain expert.

evaluation was performed as a two stage process with the assistance of domain experts . the initial evaluation drove the iterative implementation of further features in the software prototype, as required by the users, prior to a final functional evaluation of the pedigree display for exploring the various error types, data scales and structures.


CONCLUSIONS
the viper display was shown to effectively expose the range of errors found in experimental genotyped pedigrees, allowing users to explore the underlying causes of reported inheritance inconsistencies. this interface will provide the basis for a full data cleaning tool that will allow the user to remove isolated bad data points, and reversibly test the effect of removing suspect genotypes and pedigree relationships.

23- <dig> october  <dig> 1st ieee symposium on biological data visualization  providence, ri, usa

