BACKGROUND
salt tolerance in grapevine is associated with chloride  exclusion from shoots; the rate-limiting step being the passage of cl− between the root symplast and xylem apoplast. despite an understanding of the physiological mechanism of cl− exclusion in grapevine, the molecular identity of membrane proteins that control this process have remained elusive. to elucidate candidate genes likely to control cl− exclusion, we compared the root transcriptomes of three vitis spp. with contrasting shoot cl− exclusion capacities using a custom microarray.


RESULTS
when challenged with 50 mm cl−, transcriptional changes of genotypes  <dig> ruggeri , k51- <dig>  and cabernet sauvignon  differed. the magnitude of salt-induced transcriptional changes in roots correlated with the amount of cl− accumulated in shoots. abiotic-stress responsive transcripts  were induced in  <dig> ruggeri, respiratory transcripts were repressed in cabernet sauvignon, and the expression of hypersensitive response and ros scavenging transcripts was altered in k51- <dig>  despite these differences, no obvious cl− transporters were identified. however, under control conditions where differences in shoot cl− exclusion between rootstocks were still significant, genes encoding putative ion channels slah <dig>  almt <dig> and putative kinases snrk <dig>  and cpks were differentially expressed between rootstocks, as were members of the nrt <dig> , and clc families.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that transcriptional events contributing to the cl− exclusion mechanism in grapevine are not stress-inducible, but constitutively different between contrasting varieties. we have identified individual genes from large families known to have members with roles in anion transport in other plants, as likely candidates for controlling anion homeostasis and cl− exclusion in vitis species. we propose these genes as priority candidates for functional characterisation to determine their role in chloride transport in grapevine and other plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aba signallingacacaxmrnasalt overly sensitive woody perennialissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

