BACKGROUND
harnessing vast amounts of genomic data in phylogenetic context stemming from massive sequencing of multiple closely related genomes requires new tools and approaches. we present a tool for the genome-wide analysis of frequencies and patterns of amino acid substitutions in multiple alignments of genes’ coding regions, and a database of amino acid substitutions in the phylogeny of  <dig> drosophila genomes. we illustrate the use of these resources to address three types of evolutionary genomics questions: about fluxes in amino acid composition in proteins, about asymmetries in amino acid substitutions and about patterns of molecular evolution in duplicated genes.


RESULTS
we demonstrate that amino acid composition of drosophila proteins underwent a significant shift over the last  <dig> million years encompassed by the studied phylogeny, with less common amino acids  increasing in frequency and more common ones  becoming less frequent. these fluxes are strongly correlated with polarity of source and destination amino acids, resulting in overall systematic decrease of mean polarity of amino acids found in drosophila proteins. frequency and radicality of amino acid substitutions are higher in paralogs than in orthologous single-copy genes and are higher in gene families with paralogs than in gene families without surviving duplications. rate and radicality of substitutions, as expected, are negatively correlated with overall level and uniformity of gene expression. however, these correlations are not observed for substitutions occurring in duplicated genes, indicating a different selective constraint on the evolution of paralogous sequences. clades resulting from duplications show a marked asymmetry in rate and radicality of amino acid substitutions, possibly a signal of widespread neofunctionalization. these patterns differ among protein families of different functionality, with genes coding for rna-binding proteins differing from most other functional groups in terms of amino acid substitution patterns in duplicated and single-copy genes.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that deep phylogenetic analysis of amino acid substitutions can reveal interesting genome-wide patterns. amino acid composition of drosophilid proteins is shaped by fluxes similar to those previously observed in prokaryotic, yeast and mammalian genomes, indicating globally present patterns. increased frequency and radicality of amino acid substitutions in duplicated genes and the presence of asymmetry of these parameters between paralogous clades indicate widespread neofunctionalization among paralogs as the mechanism of duplication retention.

26– <dig> september  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  ninth international conference on bioinformatics  tokyo, japan

