BACKGROUND
effective management and treatment of cancer continues to be complicated by the rapid evolution and resulting heterogeneity of tumors. phylogenetic study of cell populations in single tumors provides a way to delineate intra-tumoral heterogeneity and identify robust features of evolutionary processes. the introduction of single-cell sequencing has shown great promise for advancing single-tumor phylogenetics; however, the volume and high noise in these data present challenges for inference, especially with regard to chromosome abnormalities that typically dominate tumor evolution. here, we investigate a strategy to use such data to track differences in tumor cell genomic content during progression.


RESULTS
we propose a reference-free approach to mining single-cell genome sequence reads to allow predictive classification of tumors into heterogeneous cell types and reconstruct models of their evolution. the approach extracts k-mer counts from single-cell tumor genomic dna sequences, and uses differences in normalized k-mer frequencies as a proxy for overall evolutionary distance between distinct cells. the approach computationally simplifies deriving phylogenetic markers, which normally relies on first aligning sequence reads to a reference genome and then processing the data to extract meaningful progression markers for constructing phylogenetic trees. the approach also provides a way to bypass some of the challenges that massive genome rearrangement typical of tumor genomes presents for reference-based methods. we illustrate the method on a publicly available breast tumor single-cell sequencing dataset.


CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated a computational approach for learning tumor progression from single cell sequencing data using k-mer counts. k-mer features classify tumor cells by stage of progression with high accuracy. phylogenies built from these k-mer spectrum distance matrices yield splits that are statistically significant when tested for their ability to partition cells at different stages of cancer.

tumor evolutiontumor phylogenyk-mersingle-cell sequencing2- <dig> june  <dig> fourth ieee international conference on computational advances in bio and medical sciences  miami beach, fl, usa

