BACKGROUND
molecular studies in social mammals rarely compare the inferences gained from genetic analyses with field information, especially in the context of dispersal. in this study, we used genetic data to elucidate sex-specific dispersal dynamics in the virunga massif mountain gorilla population , a primate species characterized by routine male and female dispersal from stable mixed-sex social groups. specifically, we conducted spatial genetic structure analyses for each sex and linked our genetically-based observations with some key demographic and behavioural data from this population.


RESULTS
to investigate the spatial genetic structure of mountain gorillas, we analysed the genotypes of  <dig> mature individuals at  <dig> microsatellite loci by means of isolation-by-distance and spatial autocorrelation analyses. although not all males and females disperse, female gorillas displayed an isolation-by-distance pattern among groups and a signal of dispersal at short distances from their natal group based on spatial autocorrelation analyses. in contrast, male genotypes were not correlated with spatial distance, thus suggesting a larger mean dispersal distance for males as compared to females. both within sex and mixed-sex pairs were on average genetically more related within groups than among groups.


CONCLUSIONS
our study provides evidence for an intersexual difference in dispersal distance in the mountain gorilla. overall, it stresses the importance of investigating spatial genetic structure patterns on a sex-specific basis to better understand the dispersal dynamics of the species under investigation. it is currently poorly understood why some male and female gorillas disperse while others remain in the natal group. our results on average relatedness within and across groups confirm that groups often contain close relatives. while inbreeding avoidance may play a role in driving female dispersal, we note that more detailed dyadic genetic analyses are needed to shed light on the role of inbreeding avoidance as an ultimate cause of female dispersal in mountain gorillas.

dispersalinbreeding avoidancemicrosatellitemountain gorillaphilopatrysocial mammalspatial genetic structure

