BACKGROUND
the stimulatory effect of co <dig> on ethylene evolution in plants is known, but the extent to which ethylene controls photosynthesis is not clear. studies on the effects of ethylene on co <dig> metabolism have shown conflicting results. increase or inhibition of photosynthesis by ethylene has been reported. to understand the physiological processes responsible for ethylene-mediated changes in photosynthesis, stomatal and mesophyll effects on photosynthesis and ethylene biosynthesis in response to ethephon treatment in mustard  cultivars differing in photosynthetic capacity were studied.


RESULTS
the effects of ethephon on photosynthetic rate , stomatal conductance , carbonic anhydrase  activity, 1-aminocyclopropane carboxylic acid synthase  activity and ethylene evolution were similar in both the cultivars. increasing ethephon concentration up to  <dig>  mm increased pn, gs and ca maximally, whereas  <dig>  mm ethephon proved inhibitory. acs activity and ethylene evolution increased with increasing concentrations of ethephon. the corresponding changes in gs and ca activity suggest that the changes in photosynthesis in response to ethephon were triggered by altered stomatal and mesophyll processes. stomatal conductance changed in parallel with changes in mesophyll photosynthetic properties. in both the cultivars acs activity and ethylene increased up to  <dig>  mm ethephon, but  <dig>  mm ethephon caused maximum effects on photosynthetic parameters.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that ethephon affects foliar gas exchange responses. the changes in photosynthesis in response to ethephon were due to stomatal and mesophyll effects. the changes in gs were a response maintaining stable intercellular co <dig> concentration  under the given treatment in both the cultivars. also, the high photosynthetic capacity cultivar, varuna responded less to ethephon than the low photosynthetic capacity cultivar, rh <dig>  the photosynthetic capacity of rh <dig> increased with the increase in ethylene evolution due to  <dig>  mm ethephon application.

