BACKGROUND
knowledge on population structure and genetic diversity in vegetable crops is essential for association mapping studies and genomic selection. genotyping by sequencing  represents an innovative method for large scale snp detection and genotyping of genetic resources. herein we used the gbs approach for the genome-wide identification of snps in a collection of capsicum spp. accessions and for the assessment of the level of genetic diversity in a subset of  <dig> cultivated pepper  genotypes.


RESULTS
gbs analysis generated a total of  <dig> , <dig> master tags, of which  <dig> % uniquely aligned to the reference genome cm <dig>  a total of  <dig>  snp markers were identified, of which  <dig>  were in c. annuum accessions. in order to explore the genetic diversity of c. annuum and to select a minimal core set representing most of the total genetic variation with minimum redundancy, a subset of  <dig> c. annuum accessions were analysed using  <dig>  high quality snps. based on bayesian and hierarchical clustering it was possible to divide the collection into three clusters. cluster i had the majority of varieties and landraces mainly from southern and northern italy, and from eastern europe, whereas clusters ii and iii comprised accessions of different geographical origins. considering the genome-wide genetic variation among the accessions included in cluster i, a second round of bayesian  and hierarchical  clustering was performed. these analysis showed that genotypes were grouped not only based on geographical origin, but also on fruit-related features.


CONCLUSIONS
gbs data has proven useful to assess the genetic diversity in a collection of c. annuum accessions. the high number of snp markers, uniformly distributed on the  <dig> chromosomes, allowed the accessions to be distinguished according to geographical origin and fruit-related features. snp markers and information on population structure developed in this study will undoubtedly support genome-wide association mapping studies and marker-assisted selection programs.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genotyping by sequencingpepperpopulation structuresingle nucleotide polymorphismissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

