BACKGROUND
abyssal microorganisms have evolved particular features that enable them to grow in their extreme habitat. genes belonging to specific functional categories are known to be particularly susceptible to high-pressure; therefore, they should show some evidence of positive selection. to verify this hypothesis we computed the amino acid substitution rates between two deep-sea microorganisms, photobacterium profundum ss <dig> and shewanella benthica kt <dig>  and their respective shallow water relatives.


RESULTS
a statistical analysis of all the orthologs, led to the identification of positive selected  genes, which were then used to evaluate adaptation strategies. we were able to establish "motility" and "transport" as two classes significantly enriched with ps genes. the prevalence of transporters led us to analyze variable amino acids  by mapping them according to their membrane topology, the results showed a higher frequency of substitutions in the extra-cellular compartment. a similar analysis was performed on soluble proteins, mapping the ps sites on the 3d structure, revealing a prevalence of substitutions on the protein surface. finally, the presence of some flagellar proteins in the vibrionaceae ps list confirms the importance of bacterial motility as a ss <dig> specific adaptation strategy.


CONCLUSIONS
the approach presented in this paper is suitable for identifying molecular adaptations to particular environmental conditions. the statistical method takes into account differences in the ratio between non-synonymous to synonymous substitutions, thus allowing the detection of the genes that underwent positive selection. we found that positive selection in deep-sea adapted bacteria targets a wide range of functions, for example solute transport, protein translocation, dna synthesis and motility. from these data clearly emerges an involvement of the transport and metabolism processes in the deep-sea adaptation strategy of both bathytypes considered, whereas the adaptation of other biological processes seems to be specific to either one or the other. an important role is hypothesized for five ps genes belonging to the transport category that had been previously identified as differentially expressed in microarray experiments. strikingly, structural mapping of ps sites performed independently on membrane and soluble proteins revealed that residues under positive selection tend to occur in specific protein regions.

