BACKGROUND
the salmon louse , an ectoparasitic copepod with a complex life cycle causes significant losses in salmon aquaculture. pesticide treatments against the parasite raise environmental concerns and their efficacy is gradually decreasing. improvement of fish resistance to lice, through biological control methods, needs better understanding of the protective mechanisms. we used a  <dig> k oligonucleotide microarray and rt-qpcr to examine the time-course of immune gene expression changes in salmon skin, spleen, and head kidney during the first  <dig> days after challenge, which encompassed the copepod and chalimus stages of lice development.


RESULTS
large scale and highly complex transcriptome responses were found already one day after infection . many genes showed bi-phasic expression profiles with abrupt changes between  <dig> and  <dig> dpi ; the greatest fluctuations  were seen in a large group of secretory splenic proteases with unknown roles. rapid sensing was witnessed with induction of genes involved in innate immunity including lectins and enzymes of eicosanoid metabolism in skin and acute phase proteins in spleen. transient  increase of t-cell receptor alpha, cd4- <dig>  and possible regulators of lymphocyte differentiation suggested recruitment of t-cells of unidentified lineage to the skin. after  <dig> dpi the magnitude of transcriptomic responses decreased markedly in skin. up-regulation of matrix metalloproteinases in all studied organs suggested establishment of a chronic inflammatory status. up-regulation of putative lymphocyte g0/g <dig> switch proteins in spleen at  <dig> dpi, immunoglobulins at  <dig> dpi; and increase of igm and igt transcripts in skin indicated an onset of adaptive humoral immune responses, whereas mhci appeared to be down-regulated.


CONCLUSIONS
atlantic salmon develops rapid local and systemic reactions to l. salmonis, which, however, do not result in substantial level of protection. the dramatic changes observed after  <dig> dpi can be associated with metamorphosis of copepod, immune modulation by the parasite, or transition from innate to adaptive immune responses.

