BACKGROUND
the diversification of organisms with a parasitic lifestyle is often tightly linked to the evolution of their host associations. if a tight host association exists, closely related species tend to attack closely related hosts; host associations are less stable if associations are determined by more plastic traits like parasitoid searching and oviposition behaviour. the pupal-parasitoids of the genus ichneumon attack a variety of macrolepidopteran hosts. they are either monophagous or polyphagous, and therefore offer a promissing system to investigate the evolution of host associations. ichneumon was previously divided into two groups based on general body shape; however, a stout shape has been suggested as an adaptation to buried host pupation sites, and might thus not represent a reliable phylogenetic character.


RESULTS
we here reconstruct the first molecular phylogeny of the genus ichneumon using two mitochondrial  and one nuclear marker . the resulting phylogeny only supports monophyly of ichneumon when ichneumon lugens gravenhorst,  <dig>  and ichneumon deliratorius linnaeus,  <dig>  are included. neither parasitoid species that attack hosts belonging to one family nor those attacking butterflies  form monophyletic clades. ancestral state reconstructions suggest multiple transitions between searching for hosts above versus below ground and between a stout versus elongated body shape. a model assuming correlated evolution between the two characters was preferred over independent evolution of host-searching niche and body shape.


CONCLUSIONS
host relations, both in terms of phylogeny and ecology, evolved at a high pace in the genus ichneumon. numerous switches between hosts of different lepidopteran families have occurred, a pattern that seems to be the rule among idiobiont parasitoids. a stout body and antennal shape in the parasitoid female is confirmed as an ecological adaptation to host pupation sites below ground and has evolved convergently several times. morphological characters that might be involved in adaptation to hosts should be avoided as diagnostic characters for phylogeny and classification, as they can be expected to show high levels of homoplasy.

idiobiontsparasitoid waspphylogenyhomoplasyhost relations

