BACKGROUND
the feline genome is valuable to the veterinary and model organism genomics communities because the cat is an obligate carnivore and a model for endangered felids. the initial public release of the felis catus genome assembly provided a framework for investigating the genomic basis of feline biology. however, the entire set of protein coding genes has not been elucidated.


RESULTS
we identified and characterized  <dig> protein coding feline sequences, of which  <dig> map to public sequences and  <dig> are novel. these sequences have been deposited into ncbi's genbank database and complement public genomic resources by providing additional protein coding sequences that fill in some of the gaps in the feline genome assembly. through functional and comparative genomic analyses, we gained an understanding of the role of these sequences in feline development, nutrition and health. specifically, we identified  <dig> orthologs of human genes associated with mendelian disorders. we detected negative selection within sequences with gene ontology annotations associated with intracellular trafficking, cytoskeleton and muscle functions. we detected relatively less negative selection on protein sequences encoding extracellular networks, apoptotic pathways and mitochondrial gene ontology annotations. additionally, we characterized feline cdna sequences that have mouse orthologs associated with clinical, nutritional and developmental phenotypes. together, this analysis provides an overview of the value of our cdna sequences and enhances our understanding of how the feline genome is similar to, and different from other mammalian genomes.


CONCLUSIONS
the cdna sequences reported here expand existing feline genomic resources by providing high-quality sequences annotated with comparative genomic information providing functional, clinical, nutritional and orthologous gene information.

felinebioinformaticscomparative genomicscdnaannotationgene ontologyomimortholognutritionphenotype

