BACKGROUND
metabolic flux analysis  based on isotope labeling experiments  is a widely established tool for determining fluxes in metabolic pathways. isotope labeling networks  contain all essential information required to describe the flow of labeled material in an ile. whereas recent experimental progress paves the way for high-throughput mfa, large network investigations and exact statistical methods, these developments are still limited by the poor performance of computational routines used for the evaluation and design of iles. in this context, the global analysis of iln topology turns out to be a clue for realizing large speedup factors in all required computational procedures.


RESULTS
with a strong focus on the speedup of algorithms the topology of ilns is investigated using graph theoretic concepts and algorithms. a rigorous determination of all cyclic and isomorphic subnetworks, accompanied by the global analysis of iln connectivity is performed. particularly, it is proven that ilns always brake up into a large number of small strongly connected components  and, moreover, there are natural isomorphisms between many of these sccs. all presented techniques are universal, i.e. they do not require special assumptions on the network structure, bidirectionality of fluxes, measurement configuration, or label input. the general results are exemplified with a practically relevant metabolic network which describes the central metabolism of e. coli comprising  <dig> isotopomer pools.


CONCLUSIONS
exploiting the topological features of ilns leads to a significant speedup of all universal algorithms for ile evaluation. it is proven in theory and exemplified with the e. coli example that a speedup factor of about  <dig> compared to standard algorithms is achieved. this widely opens the door for new high performance algorithms suitable for high throughput applications and large ilns. moreover, for the first time the global topological analysis of ilns allows to comprehensively describe and understand the general patterns of label flow in complex networks. this is an invaluable tool for the structural design of new experiments and the interpretation of measured data.

