BACKGROUND
characterizing large genomic variants is essential to expanding the research and clinical applications of genome sequencing. while multiple data types and methods are available to detect these structural variants , they remain less characterized than smaller variants because of sv diversity, complexity, and size. these challenges are exacerbated by the experimental and computational demands of sv analysis. here, we characterize the sv content of a personal genome with parliament, a publicly available consensus sv-calling infrastructure that merges multiple data types and sv detection methods.


RESULTS
we demonstrate parliament’s efficacy via integrated analyses of data from whole-genome array comparative genomic hybridization, short-read next-generation sequencing, long-read , long-insert , and whole-genome architecture  data from the personal genome of a single subject . from this genome, parliament identified  <dig>  genomic loci between 100 bp and  <dig> mbp that are inconsistent with the hg <dig> reference assembly. of these loci,  <dig>  are supported as putative svs by hybrid local assembly, long-read pacbio data, or multi-source heuristics. these svs span  <dig> mbp of the reference genome  and include  <dig>  events identified only with long-read data. the hs <dig> data and complete parliament infrastructure, including a bam-to-sv workflow, are available on the cloud-based service dnanexus.


CONCLUSIONS
hs <dig> sv analysis reveals the limits and advantages of multiple sequencing technologies, specifically the impact of long-read sv discovery. with the full parliament infrastructure, the hs <dig> data constitute a public resource for novel sv discovery, software calibration, and personal genome structural variation analysis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
structural variationlong-read sequencingsv softwareissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

