BACKGROUND
an emerging cavefish model, the cyprinid genus sinocyclocheilus, is endemic to the massive southwestern karst area adjacent to the qinghai-tibetan plateau of china. in order to understand whether orogeny influenced the evolution of these species, and how genomes change under isolation, especially in subterranean habitats, we performed whole-genome sequencing and comparative analyses of three species in this genus, s. grahami, s. rhinocerous and s. anshuiensis. these species are surface-dwelling, semi-cave-dwelling and cave-restricted, respectively.


RESULTS
the assembled genome sizes of s. grahami, s. rhinocerous and s. anshuiensis are  <dig>  gb,  <dig>  gb and  <dig>  gb, respectively. divergence time and population history analyses of these species reveal that their speciation and population dynamics are correlated with the different stages of uplifting of the qinghai-tibetan plateau. we carried out comparative analyses of these genomes and found that many genetic changes, such as gene loss , pseudogenes , mutations , deletions  and down-regulation , are possibly associated with the regressive features , and that some gene expansion  may point to the constructive features  which evolved in these cave fishes.


CONCLUSIONS
as the first report on cavefish genomes among distinct species in sinocyclocheilus, our work provides not only insights into genetic mechanisms of cave adaptation, but also represents a fundamental resource for a better understanding of cavefish biology.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cavefishgenomeadaptationevolutionqinghai-tibetan plateausinocyclocheilusjoint project by yunnan provincial science and technology department & yunnan provincial environmental protection departmentyang junxing grant for the lake dianchi freshwater biodiversity restoration projectyang junxing shenzhen key lab of marine genomicsshi qiong guangdong provincial key lab of molecular breeding in marine economic animalsshi qiong china  <dig> projectshi qiong yunnan special program for bgi-yunnancheng le cultivation of backup young and middle-aged academic technology leaders in yunnan provincecheng le issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

