BACKGROUND
leptospirosis is a re-emerging bacterial zoonosis caused by spirochetes of the genus leptospira. severe disease has been reported in dogs in europe despite vaccination with bivalent leptospira vaccines. recently, a tetravalent canine leptospira vaccine  was licenced in europe. the goal of this study was to investigate clinical signs, microscopic agglutination test  titres, haematology, blood biochemistry, cardiac  troponin i levels and echocardiography before and after vaccination with this tetravalent vaccine. forty-eight healthy dogs were prospectively enrolled and vaccinated twice, 3–4 weeks apart . before vaccination  and 16–31 days after the second vaccination , mat , haematology , blood biochemistry  and ctroponin i measurements  were performed, and mat was repeated 347–413 days after the second vaccination . echocardiography was performed before the first and second vaccination .


RESULTS
mild and transient clinical signs within 5 days following the first and second vaccination occurred in 23% and 10% of the dogs, respectively. before the first vaccination , all dogs showed negative mat titres for the tested serovars except for canicola . at t <dig>  positive mat titres to the serovars canicola , australis , grippotyphosa , bratislava , autumnalis , copenhageni , pomona , pyrogenes  and icterohaemorrhagiae  were found. median to high titres  were most common to the serovar canicola  and less common to the serovars australis , grippotyphosa , bratislava , autumnalis , pyrogenes  and pomona . at t <dig>  positive mat titres  were found in 2–18% of the dogs to serovars of the vaccine serogroups and in 2–18% of the dogs to the non-vaccine serovars pomona, autumnalis, pyrogenes and ballum. haematology, blood biochemistry, ctroponin i levels and echocardiography results did not change significantly following vaccination.


CONCLUSIONS
clinical signs following vaccination with nobivac® l <dig> were transient and mild in all cases. seroconversion differed considerably among individual dogs and among the vaccine serogroups.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nobivac® lepto 6leptospiratetravalent vaccinevaccinationseroconversionmicroscopic agglutination testadverse eventsforschungskredit, university of zurichfk-53210-01-01spiri andrea m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

