BACKGROUND
cotton , as the world’s most utilized textile fibre source, is an important, economically valuable crop worldwide. understanding the genomic variation of tetraploid cotton species is important for exploitation of the excellent characteristics of wild cotton and for improving the diversity of cotton in breeding. however, the discovery of dna polymorphisms in tetraploid cotton genomes has lagged behind other important crops.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> , <dig> reads,  <dig>  specific length amplified fragment  tags and  <dig>  high-quality dna polymorphisms were identified using specific length amplified fragment sequencing , including  <dig>  snps and  <dig>  indels between the reference genome  and the five tetraploid cotton species. intriguingly, gene ontology  enrichment analysis revealed that a number of significant terms were related to reproduction in g. barbadense acc. 3– <dig>  based on the new data sets, we reconstructed phylogenetic trees that showed a high concordance to the phylogeny of diploid and polyploid cottons. a large amount of interspecific genetic variations were identified, and some of them were validated by the single-strand conformation polymorphism  method, which will be applied in introgression genetics and breeding with g. hirsutum cv. emian <dig> as the receptor and the other species as donors.


CONCLUSIONS
using slaf-seq, a large number of dna polymorphisms were identified. the comprehensive analysis of dna polymorphisms provided invaluable insights into the different tetraploid cotton species. more importantly, the identification of numerous interspecific genetic variations provides the basis and is very practical for future introgression breeding. the results presented herein provide a valuable genomic resource for new insights into the genetics and breeding of cotton.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tetraploid cottonslaf-seqsingle-nucleotide polymorphismsinsertions/deletionsphylogenythe genetically modified organisms breeding major project of china2016zx08009lin zhongxu issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

