BACKGROUND
tubular shaped mammalian cells in response to dehydration have not been previously reported. this may be due to the invisibility of these cells in aqueous solution, and because sugars and salts added to the cell culture for manipulation of the osmotic conditions inhibit transformation of normal cells into tubular shaped structures.


RESULTS
we report the transformation of normal spherical mammalian cells into tubular shaped structures in response to stress. we have termed these transformed structures 'straw cells' which we have associated with a variety of human tissue types, including fresh, post mortem and frozen lung, liver, skin, and heart. we have also documented the presence of straw cells in bovine brain and prostate tissues of mice. the number of straw cells in heart, lung tissues, and collapsed straw cells in urine increases with the age of the mammal. straw cells were also reproduced in vitro from human cancer cells  and mouse stem cells  by dehydrating cultured cells. the tubular center of the straw cells is much smaller than the original cell; houses condensed organelles and have filamentous extensions that are covered with microscopic hair-like structures and circular openings. when rehydrated, the filaments uptake water rapidly. the straw cell walls, have a range of  <dig> nm to  <dig> nm and are composed of sulfated-glucose polymers and glycosylated acidic proteins. the transformation from normal cell to straw cells takes  <dig> to  <dig> hr in open-air. this process is characterized by an increase in metabolic activity. when rehydrated, the straw cells regain their normal spherical shape and begin to divide in  <dig> to  <dig> days. like various types of microbial spores, straw cells are resistant to harsh environmental conditions such as uv-c radiation.


CONCLUSIONS
straw cells are specialized cellular structures and not artifacts from spontaneous polymerization, which are generated in response to stress conditions, like dehydration. the disintegrative, mobile, disruptive and ubiquitous nature of straw cells makes this a possible physiological process that may be involved in human health, longevity, and various types of diseases such as cancer.

