BACKGROUND
chip-seq is widely used to detect genomic segments bound by transcription factors , either directly at dna binding sites  or indirectly via other proteins. currently, there are many software tools implementing different approaches to identify tfbss within chip-seq peaks. however, their use for the interpretation of chip-seq data is usually complicated by the absence of direct experimental verification, making it difficult both to set a threshold to avoid recognition of too many false-positive bss, and to compare the actual performance of different models.


RESULTS
using chip-seq data for foxa <dig> binding loci in mouse adult liver and human hepg <dig> cells we compared foxa binding-site predictions for four computational models of two fundamental classes: pattern matching based on existing training set of experimentally confirmed tfbss  and de novo motif discovery . to properly select prediction thresholds for the models, we experimentally evaluated affinity of  <dig> predicted foxa bss using emsa that allows safely distinguishing sequences able to bind tf. as a result we identified thousands of reliable foxa bss within chip-seq loci from mouse liver and human hepg <dig> cells. it was found that the performance of conventional position weight matrix  models was inferior with the highest false positive rate. on the contrary, the best recognition efficiency was achieved by the combination of sitega & dichipmunk/chipmunk models, properly identifying foxa bss in up to 90% of loci for both mouse and human chip-seq datasets.


CONCLUSIONS
the experimental study of tf binding to oligonucleotides corresponding to predicted sites increases the reliability of computational methods for tfbs-recognition in chip-seq data analysis. regarding chip-seq data interpretation, basic pwms have inferior tfbs recognition quality compared to the more sophisticated sitega and de novo motif discovery methods. a combination of models from different principles allowed identification of proper tfbss.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chip-seqemsatranscription factor binding sitesfoxasitegapwmtranscription factor binding modeldinucleotide frequenciesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

