BACKGROUND
the specific productivity of cultivation processes can be optimized, amongst others, by using genetic engineering of strains, choice of suitable host/vector systems or process optimization . a further possibility is to reduce biomass buildup in favor of an enhanced product formation, e.g. by limiting secondary substrates in the medium, such as phosphate. however, with conventional techniques , it is very tedious to establish optimal conditions for cell growth and protein expression, as the start of protein expression  and the degree of phosphate limitation have to be determined in numerous concerted, manually conducted experiments.


RESULTS
we investigated the effect of different induction times and a concurrent phosphate limitation on the specific productivity of the t <dig> expression system e.coli bl <dig> prhothi-2-ecfbfp, which produces the model fluorescence protein ecfbfp upon induction. therefore, specific online-monitoring tools for small scale cultivations  as well as a novel cultivation platform  were used for rapid process optimization. the ramos system monitored the oxygen transfer rate in shake flasks, whereas the biolector device allowed to monitor microbial growth and the production of ecfbfp in microtiter plates. the robo-lector is a combination of a biolector and a pipetting robot and can conduct high-throughput experiments fully automated. by using these tools, it was possible to determine the optimal induction time and to increase the specific productivity for ecfbfp from 22%  to 31% of total protein content of the e.coli cells via a phosphate limitation.


CONCLUSIONS
the results revealed that a phosphate limitation at the right induction time was suitable to redirect the available cellular resources during cultivation to protein expression rather than in biomass production. to our knowledge, such an effect was shown for the first time for an iptg-inducible expression system. finally, this finding and the utilization of the introduced high-throughput experimentation approach could help to find new targets to further enhance the production capacity of recombinant e.coli-strains.

