BACKGROUND
silene latifolia represents one of the best-studied plant sex chromosome systems. a new approach using rna-seq data has recently identified hundreds of new sex-linked genes in this species. however, this approach is expected to miss genes that are either not expressed or are expressed at low levels in the tissue used for rna-seq. therefore other independent approaches are needed to discover such sex-linked genes.


RESULTS
here we used  <dig> well-characterized s. latifolia sex-linked genes and their homologs in silene vulgaris, a species without sex chromosomes, to screen bac libraries of both species. we isolated and sequenced 4 mb of bac clones of s. latifolia x and y and s. vulgaris genomic regions, which yielded  <dig> new sex-linked genes . we assembled sequences that we believe represent the tip of the xq arm. these sequences are clearly not pseudoautosomal, so we infer that the s. latifolia x has a single pseudoautosomal region  on the xp arm. the estimated mean gene density in x bacs is  <dig>  times lower than that in s. vulgaris bacs, agreeing with the genome size difference between these species. gene density was estimated to be extremely low in the y bac clones. we compared our bac-located genes with the sex-linked genes identified in previous rna-seq studies, and found that about half of them  were not identified as sex-linked in previous rna-seq studies. we compiled a set of ~ <dig> validated x/y genes and x-hemizygous genes  from the literature, and used these genes to show that x-hemizygous genes have a higher probability of being undetected by the rna-seq approach, compared with x/y genes; we used this to estimate that about 30 % of our bac-located genes must be x-hemizygous. the estimate is similar when we use bac-located genes that have s. vulgaris homologs, which excludes genes that were gained by the x chromosome.


CONCLUSIONS
our bac sequencing identified  <dig> new sex-linked genes, and our analysis of these bac-located genes, in combination with rna-seq data suggests that gene losses from the s. latifolia y chromosome could be as high as 30 %, higher than previous estimates of 10-20 %.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
sex chromosomessex-linked genesplantbacrna-seqgene lossy degenerationsilene latifoliasilene vulgarisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

