BACKGROUND
the giant panda  is a critically endangered species endemic to china. microsatellites have been preferred as the most popular molecular markers and proven effective in estimating population size, paternity test, genetic diversity for the critically endangered species. the availability of the giant panda complete genome sequences provided the opportunity to carry out genome-wide scans for all types of microsatellites markers, which now opens the way for the analysis and development of microsatellites in giant panda.


RESULTS
by screening the whole genome sequence of giant panda in silico mining, we identified microsatellites in the genome of giant panda and analyzed their frequency and distribution in different genomic regions. based on our search criteria, a repertoire of  <dig>  ssrs was detected, with mono-nucleotides being the most abundant. ssrs were found in all genomic regions and were more abundant in non-coding regions than coding regions. a total of  <dig> primer pairs were designed to screen for polymorphic microsatellites using the selected tetranucleotide microsatellite sequences. the  <dig> novel polymorphic tetranucleotide microsatellite loci were discovered based on genotyping blood dna from  <dig> captive giant pandas in this study. finally, a total of  <dig> markers, which showed good polymorphism, stability, and repetition in faecal samples, were used to establish the novel microsatellite marker system for giant panda. meanwhile, a genotyping database for chengdu captive giant pandas  were set up using this standardized system. what’s more, a universal individual identification method was established and the genetic diversity were analysed in this study as the applications of this marker system.


CONCLUSIONS
the microsatellite abundance and diversity were characterized in giant panda genomes. a total of  <dig>  tetranucleotide microsatellites were identified and  <dig> of them were discovered as the polymorphic and stable loci. the individual identification method and the genetic diversity analysis method in this study provided adequate material for the future study of giant panda.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ailuropoda melanoleucagenome sequencetetranucleotide microsatellitemarker systemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

