BACKGROUND
lampreys are extant representatives of the jawless vertebrate lineage that diverged from jawed vertebrates around  <dig> million years ago. lamprey genomes contain information crucial for understanding the evolution of gene families in vertebrates. the atp-binding cassette  gene family is found from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. the recent availability of two lamprey draft genomes from sea lamprey petromyzon marinus and japanese lamprey lethenteron japonicum presents an opportunity to infer early evolutionary events of abc genes in vertebrates.


RESULTS
we conducted a genome-wide survey of the abc gene family in two lamprey draft genomes. a total of  <dig> abc transporters were identified and classified into seven subfamilies; namely seven abca genes,  <dig> abcb genes,  <dig> abcc genes, three abcd genes, one abce gene, three abcf genes, and three abcg genes. the abca subfamily has expanded from three genes in sea squirts, seven and nine in lampreys and zebrafish, to  <dig> and  <dig> in human and mouse. conversely, the multiple copies of abcb1-, abcg1-, and abcg2-like genes found in sea squirts have contracted in the other species examined. abcb <dig> and abcb <dig> seem to be new additions in gnathostomes , which coincides with the emergence of the gnathostome-specific adaptive immune system. all the genes in the abcd, abce and abcf subfamilies were conserved and had undergone limited duplication and loss events. in the sea lamprey transcriptomes, the abce and abcf gene subfamilies were ubiquitously and highly expressed in all tissues while the members in other gene subfamilies were differentially expressed.


CONCLUSIONS
thirteen more lamprey abc transporter genes were identified in this study compared with a previous study. by concatenating the same gene sequences from the two lampreys, more full length sequences were obtained, which significantly improved both the assignment of gene names and the phylogenetic trees compared with a previous analysis using partial sequences. the abc gene subfamilies in chordates have undergone obvious expansion or contraction. the abca subfamily showed the highest gene expansion rate during chordate evolution. the evolution of abc transporters in lampreys requires further evaluation because the present results are based on a draft genome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
abc transporterevolutionchordateslampreysrna-seqgene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

