BACKGROUND
tuberculosis is an infectious bacterial disease in humans caused primarily by mycobacterium tuberculosis, and infects one-third of the world's total population. mycobacterium bovis bacillus calmette-guérin  vaccine has been widely used to prevent tuberculosis worldwide since  <dig>  membrane proteins play important roles in various cellular processes, and the protein-protein interactions involved in these processes may provide further information about molecular organization and cellular pathways. however, membrane proteins are notoriously under-represented by traditional two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  and little is known about mycobacterial membrane and membrane-associated protein complexes. here we investigated m. bovis bcg by an alternative proteomic strategy coupling blue native page to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry  to characterize potential protein-protein interactions in membrane fractions.


RESULTS
using this approach, we analyzed native molecular composition of protein complexes in bcg membrane fractions. as a result,  <dig> proteins , which were organized in  <dig> different gel bands, were unambiguous identified. the proteins identified have been experimentally confirmed using 2-d sds page. we identified mmpl <dig> and four neighboring proteins that were involved in lipid transport complexes, and all subunits of atp synthase complex in their monomeric states. two phenolpthiocerol synthases and three arabinosyltransferases belonging to individual operons were obtained in different gel bands. furthermore, two giant multifunctional enzymes, pks <dig> and pks <dig>  and four mycobacterial hsp family members were determined. additionally, seven ribosomal proteins involved in polyribosome complex and two subunits of the succinate dehydrogenase complex were also found. notablely, some proteins with high hydrophobicity or multiple transmembrane helixes were identified well in our work.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we utilized lc-ms/ms in combination with blue native page to characterize modular components of multiprotein complexes in bcg membrane fractions. the results demonstrated that the proteomic strategy was a reliable and reproducible tool for analysis of bcg multiprotein complexes. the identification in our study may provide some evidence for further study of bcg protein interaction.

