BACKGROUND
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity  is greatly enhanced by the absence of the core fucose of oligosaccharides attached to the fc, and is closely related to the clinical efficacy of anticancer activity in humans in vivo. unfortunately, all licensed therapeutic antibodies and almost all currently-developed therapeutic antibodies are heavily fucosylated and fail to optimize adcc, which leads to a large dose requirement at a very high cost for the administration of antibody therapy to cancer patients. in this study, we explored the possibility of converting already-established antibody-producing cells to cells that produce antibodies fully lacking core fucosylation in order to facilitate the rapid development of next-generation therapeutic antibodies.


RESULTS
firstly, loss-of-function analyses using small interfering rnas  against the three key genes involved in oligosaccharide fucose modification, i.e. α <dig> -fucosyltransferase , gdp-mannose  <dig> -dehydratase , and gdp-fucose transporter , revealed that single-gene knockdown of each target was insufficient to completely defucosylate the products in antibody-producing cells, even though the most effective sirna  was employed. interestingly, beyond our expectations, synergistic effects of fut <dig> and gmd sirnas on the reduction in fucosylation were observed, but not when these were used in combination with gft sirna. secondly, we successfully developed an effective short hairpin sirna tandem expression vector that facilitated the double knockdown of fut <dig> and gmd, and we converted antibody-producing chinese hamster ovary  cells to fully non-fucosylated antibody producers within two months, and with high converting frequency. finally, the stable manufacture of fully non-fucosylated antibodies with enhanced adcc was confirmed using the converted cells in serum-free fed-batch culture.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that fut <dig> and gmd collaborate synergistically in the process of intracellular oligosaccharide fucosylation. we also demonstrated that double knockdown of fut <dig> and gmd in antibody-producing cells could serve as a new strategy for producing next-generation therapeutic antibodies fully lacking core fucosylation and with enhanced adcc. this approach offers tremendous cost- and time-sparing advantages for the development of next-generation therapeutic antibodies.

