BACKGROUND
contamination of the environment with bioactive chemicals has emerged as a potential public health risk. these substances that may cause distress or disease in humans can be found in air, water and food supplies. an open question is whether these chemicals transform into potentially more active or toxic derivatives via xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes expressed in the body. we present a new prediction tool, which we call proximal  for identifying possible transformation products of xenobiotic chemicals in the liver. using reaction data from drugbank and kegg, proximal builds look-up tables that catalog the sites and types of structural modifications performed by phase i and phase ii enzymes. given a compound of interest, proximal searches for substructures that match the sites cataloged in the look-up tables, applies the corresponding modifications to generate a panel of possible transformation products, and ranks the products based on the activity and abundance of the enzymes involved.


RESULTS
proximal generates transformations that are specific for the chemical of interest by analyzing the chemical’s substructures. we evaluate the accuracy of proximal’s predictions through case studies on two environmental chemicals with suspected endocrine disrupting activity, bisphenol a  and 4-chlorobiphenyl . comparisons with published reports confirm  <dig> out of  <dig> and  <dig> out of  <dig> of the predicted derivatives for bpa and pcb <dig>  respectively. we also compare biotransformation predictions generated by proximal with those generated by meteor and metaprint2d-react, two other prediction tools.


CONCLUSIONS
proximal can predict transformations of chemicals that contain substructures recognizable by human liver enzymes. it also has the ability to rank the predicted metabolites based on the activity and abundance of enzymes involved in xenobiotic transformation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
xenobiotic metabolismenvironmental chemicalmolecular substructurephase i and phase ii enzymesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

