BACKGROUND
staphylococcal toxicity and antibiotic resistance  have been menacing public health. although vancomycin-resistant staphylococcus aureus  is currently not as widespread as methicillin-resistant s. aureus , genome evolution of mrsa into vrsa, including strains engineered within the same patient under anti-staphylococcal therapy, may build up to future public health concern. to further complicate diagnosis, infection control and anti-microbial chemotherapy, non-sterile sites such as the nares and the skin could contain both s. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci , either of which could harbour meca the gene driving staphylococcal methicillin-resistance and required for mrsa-vrsa evolution.


RESULTS
a new heptaplex pcr assay has been developed which simultaneously detects seven markers for: i) eubacteria , ii) staphylococcus genus , iii) staphylococcus aureus , iv) cons , v) panton-valentine leukocidin , vi) methicillin resistance , and vii) vancomycin resistance . following successful validation using  <dig> reference bacterial strains, applicability to analyse clinical samples was evaluated by direct amplification in spiked blood cultures  which returned 100 % specificity, negative and positive predictive values. the new assay has lod of  <dig> x <dig> cfu/ml for the 16s rrna marker and  <dig> x <dig> cfu/ml for six other markers and completes cycling in less than one hour.


CONCLUSIONS
the speed, sensitivity , npv  and ppv  suggest the new heptaplex pcr assay could be easily integrated into a routine diagnostic microbiology workflow. detection of the cns marker allows for unique identification of cons in mono-microbial and in poly-microbial samples containing mixtures of cons and s. aureus without recourse to the conventional elimination approach which is ambiguous. in addition to the sa-cons differential diagnostic essence of the new assay, inclusion of vana primers will allow microbiology laboratories to stay ahead of the emerging mrsa-vrsa evolution. to the best of our knowledge, the new heptaplex pcr assay is the most multiplexed among similar pcr-based assays for simultaneous detection of staar.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
differential diagnosistuf gene polymorphismmixed infectiontherapy-refractoryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

