BACKGROUND
classical bacteriological characteristics of salmonella enterica indicate that the members of this species are unable to utilize lactose as a carbon source. however, lactose-fermenting  strains of several salmonella serovars have been isolated from different foodborne outbreaks as well as different geographical regions worldwide. in the present study, we sequenced the genomes of  <dig> lac + s. enterica isolates and characterized the lac region, comparing it to the lac region in other enteric bacterial species.


RESULTS
genetic analysis of the lac operons in the s. enterica genomes revealed that they all contain intact laci, lacz, and lacy genes. however, laca was truncated in all of the s. enterica subsp. enterica isolates, encoding a  <dig> amino acid peptide rather than the full length  <dig> amino acid laca protein. molecular analyses of the  <dig> isolates revealed that the lac operon resided on a plasmid in some strains and in others was integrated into the bacterial chromosome. in most cases, an insertion sequence flanked at least one end of the operon. interestingly, the s. enterica montevideo and s. enterica senftenberg isolates were found to harbor a plasmid with a high degree of sequence similarity to a plasmid from klebsiella pneumoniae strain nk <dig> that also harbors the lac operon. in addition, two s. enterica tennessee isolates carried two copies of the lac operon. phylogenetic analysis based on lacizy gene sequences determines distinct clusters, and reveals a greater correlation between lacizy sequence and flanking organization than with either bacterial species or genomic location.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the lac region is highly mobile among enterobacteriaceae and demonstrate that the lac + s. enterica subsp. enterica serovars acquired the lac region through parallel events. the acquisition of the lac operon by several s. enterica serovars may be indicative of environmental adaptation by these bacteria.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

