BACKGROUND
our current understanding of the evolutionary history of boreal and arctic-alpine plants in their southern range in asia remains relatively poor. using three cpdna non-coding regions and nine nuclear microsatellite  loci, we examine the phylogeographic pattern in a broad geographic sampling of the boreal plant hippuris vulgaris to infer its dispersal and diversification in china. in addition, the species distributions at the last glacial maximum  and at present were predicted using ecological niche modeling .


RESULTS
the cpdna results revealed two distinct lineages, a and b. a is restricted to northeast china; b is distributed in northwest china, the qinghai-tibet plateau  and north and northeast  china; and a and b diverged ca.  <dig>  ma. the nssr data revealed two genetic clusters corresponding to the two cpdna lineages and nonreciprocal hybridization with lineage a as the maternal lineage in northeast china. cluster b further divided into three subclusters: i, mainly in nne china and the northeastern border of the qtp; ii, in northwest china and the qtp; and iii, on the qtp. enm predicted a marked range shift on the qtp at the lgm, retreating from the platform to the northeast and southeast edges.


CONCLUSIONS
hippuris vulgaris probably diverged into lineages a and b in high latitudes and then immigrated into northeast china and northwest china, respectively. lineage a persisted and diversified in northeast china. lineage b reached the qtp during the mid-pleistocene, diversified in that region due to the influence of climatic oscillations, migrated into northeast china and subsequently hybridized with lineage a. our findings give empirical evidence that boreal plants display complex evolutionary history in their southern range in asia and provide new insights into the evolution of boreal and arctic-alpine plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
boreal plantschinachloroplast dnaecological niche modelinghippuris vulgarismicrosatellitesphylogeographyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3127026530930011yu dan xu xinwei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

