BACKGROUND
while tumor necrosis factor alpha  inhibitors  and other biologics are very effective against autoimmune diseases, they can also cause infectious diseases. therefore, it is important to clarify whether the tnfi sometimes used to treat patients with rheumatoid arthritis  complicated with human t-lymphotropic virus type-i  infection have the unintended side effect of promoting htlv-i proliferation.

methods
we used the htlv-i-infected cell line hct- <dig>  derived from spinal fluid cells of a patient with htlv-i associated myelopathy, to evaluate the production of cytokines and chemokines, tnf-α receptor , the expression of htlv-i associated genes, the htlv-i proviral load , the expression of htlv-i structural protein, and apoptosis. we used jurkat cells as a control.


RESULTS
supernatants of hct- <dig> showed time-dependent elevations of il- <dig>  rantes and icam- <dig>  hct- <dig> supernatants treated with infliximab, adalimumab, etanercept , golimumab and certolizumab pegol showed no significant differences in the levels of these molecules compared to the control. neither tnfr <dig> nor tnfr <dig> expression was altered by any tnfi treatment, relative to phosphate-buffered saline  treatment, with the exception that tnfr <dig> was significantly decreased and internalized in hct- <dig> cells by etn treatment. the htlv-i associated genes tax and hbz and the pvl levels were not significantly changed. immunofluorescence staining of hct- <dig> for an htlv-i-associated protein, gag, was also not significantly different between any of the tnfi treatments and the pbs treatment. dna ladders as an index of apoptosis were not detected. apoptotic cells were not increased by the addition of any tnfi.


CONCLUSIONS
in vitro, tnfi did not affect the cytokine profiles, expression of associated genes and proteins, proviral load or apoptosis of hct- <dig> cells. the results suggested that tnfi treatment of ra patients complicated with htlv-i might have no effect on htlv-i infection.

keywords
htlv-itnf-α inhibitorcytokinechemokineproviral loadthe ministry of health, labour and welfare of japan.issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

