BACKGROUND
bacterial pneumonia in goats is usually caused by mannheimia haemolytica and pasteurella multocida. another important infection disease in lactating goats is intramammary infection producing mastitis, usually associated with coagulase-negative staphylococcus spp. however, treatment of bacterial pneumonia in goats not affected by mastitis problems should be restricted to antimicrobials with scant penetration to milk in order to avoid long withdrawal times. ceftiofur is a third-generation cephalosporin antimicrobial with activity against various gram-positive and gram-negative, aerobic and anaerobic bacteria encountered by domestic animals. the objectives of the present study were to establish the serum concentration–time profile for ceftiofur in lactating goats after intravenous, subcutaneous and a sc-long-acting ceftiofur formulation; to determine ceftiofur penetration into milk; to determine in vitro and ex vivo activity of ceftiofur establishing mic, mbc, mpc and time-kill profiles against field strains of m. haemolytica and finally to calculate the main surrogate markers of efficacy.


RESULTS
the pharmacokinetics studies revealed an optimal pk properties for the sc-la formulation tested. ceftiofur was well absorbed following sc and sc-la administration, with absolute bioavailabilities  of  <dig>  and  <dig>  %, respectively. after ceftiofur analysis from milk samples, no concentrations were found at any sampling time. the mic, mbc and mpc data of ceftiofur against five m. haemolytica strains isolated from goats affected by pneumonia were tested showing excelent sensitivity of ceftiofur against this pathogen. for pk-pd analysis, ratios were calculated suggesting a high level of bacterial kill against the five strains of m. haemolytica tested.


CONCLUSIONS
the systemic ceftiofur exposure achieved in lactating goats following iv, sc and especially with the sc-la administration is consistent with the predicted pk-pd ratios needed for a positive therapeutic outcome for m. haemolytica. subcutaneous administration of the long-acting formulation showed safety and tolerance for all the animals used. ceftiofur concentrations exceeded the mic and mbc for up to 72 h and mpc for up 32 h in serum. thus, this drug could be effective in treating infectious diseases of goats caused by m. haemolytica at a dose of 6 mg/kg with the sc-la formulation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ceftiofurpharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamiclong-acting formulationlactating goatshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007801fundación séneca11850/pi/09cárceles-rodríguez carlos m. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004837ministerio de ciencia e innovaciónagl2008-04430ganfernández-varón emilio issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

