BACKGROUND
modulation of protein activity by phosphorylation through kinases and subsequent de-phosphorylation by phosphatases is one of the most prominent cellular control mechanisms. thus, identification of kinase substrates is pivotal for the understanding of many – if not all – molecular biological processes. equally, the possibility to deliberately tune kinase activity is of great value to analyze the biological process controlled by a particular kinase.


RESULTS
here we have applied a chemical genetic approach and generated an analog-sensitive version of cdka; <dig>  the central cell-cycle regulator in arabidopsis and homolog of the yeast cdc2/cdc <dig> kinases. this variant could largely rescue a cdka; <dig> mutant and is biochemically active, albeit less than the wild type. applying bulky kinase inhibitors allowed the reduction of kinase activity in an organismic context in vivo and the modulation of plant growth. to isolate cdk substrates, we have adopted a two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis strategy, and searched for proteins that showed mobility changes in fluorescently labeled extracts from plants expressing the analog-sensitive version of cdka; <dig> with and without adding a bulky atp variant. a pilot set of five proteins involved in a range of different processes could be confirmed in independent kinase assays to be phosphorylated by cdka; <dig> approving the applicability of the here-developed method to identify substrates.


CONCLUSIONS
the here presented generation of an analog-sensitive cdka; <dig> version is functional and represent a novel tool to modulate kinase activity in vivo and identify kinase substrates. our here performed pilot screen led to the identification of cdk targets that link cell proliferation control to sugar metabolism, proline proteolysis, and glucosinolate production providing a hint how cell proliferation and growth are integrated with plant development and physiology.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
kinasesubstratephosphorylationcell cyclemitosisarabidopsishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000781european research councilseeds for liveschnittger arp issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

