BACKGROUND
anaerobic rather than aerobic fermentation is preferred for conversion of biomass derived sugars to high value redox-neutral and reduced commodities. this will likely result in a higher yield of substrate to product conversion and decrease production cost since substrate often accounts for a significant portion of the overall cost. to this goal, metabolic pathway engineering has been used to optimize substrate carbon flow to target products. this approach works well for the production of redox neutral products such as lactic acid from redox neutral sugars using the reducing power nadh  generated from glycolysis . nevertheless, greater than two nadh per glucose catabolized is needed for the production of reduced products  from redox neutral sugars by anaerobic fermentation.


RESULTS
the escherichia coli strain ai <dig>  Δadhe Δptsg Δpdhr::pflbp6-), previously engineered for reduction of xylose to xylitol using reducing power  of glucose catabolism, was further engineered by 1) deleting xylab operon  to prevent xylose from entering the pentose phosphate pathway; 2) anaerobically expressing the sdhcdab-sucabcd operon  to enable an anaerobically functional tricarboxcylic acid cycle with a theoretical  <dig> nadh equivalent per glucose catabolized. these reducing equivalents can be oxidized by synthetic respiration via xylose reduction, producing xylitol. the resulting strain, ai <dig> , achieved a 96 % xylose to xylitol conversion, with a yield of  <dig> xylitol per glucose catabolized  = 6). this represents a 33 % improvement in xylose to xylitol conversion, and a 63 % increase in xylitol yield per glucose catabolized over that achieved by ai <dig> .


CONCLUSIONS
increasing reducing power  output per glucose catabolized was achieved by anaerobic expression of both the pdh operon  and the sdhcdab-sucabcd operon, resulting in a strain capable of generating  <dig> nadh equivalent per glucose under anaerobic condition. the new e. coli strain ai <dig>  achieved an actual 96 % conversion of xylose to xylitol , and  <dig> xylitol  per glucose catabolized . this strategy can be used to engineer microbial strains for the production of other reduced products from redox neutral sugars using glucose as a source of reducing power.

keywords
e. colinadh outputreducing powersdhcdab-sucabcd operonsynthetic respirationiowa energy center g5a64055zhou shengde issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

