BACKGROUND
vibrio anguillarum is the causative agent of vibriosis in fish. several extracellular proteins secreted by v. anguillarum have been shown to contribute to virulence. while two hemolysin gene clusters, vah1-plp and rtxachbde, have been previously identified and described, the activities of the protein encoded by the plp gene were not known. here we describe the biochemical activities of the plp-encoded protein and its role in pathogenesis.


RESULTS
the plp gene, one of the components in vah <dig> cluster, encodes a 416-amino-acid protein , which has homology to lipolytic enzymes containing the catalytic site amino acid signature sgnh. hemolytic activity of the plp mutant increased 2-3-fold on sheep blood agar indicating that plp represses vah1; however, hemolytic activity of the plp mutant decreased by 2-3-fold on fish blood agar suggesting that plp has different effects against erythrocytes from different species. his6-tagged recombinant plp protein  was over-expressed in e. coli. purified and re-folded active rplp exhibited phospholipase a <dig> activity against phosphatidylcholine and no activity against phosphatidylserine, phosphatidylethanolamine, or sphingomyelin. characterization of rplp revealed broad optimal activities at ph 5– <dig> and at temperatures of 30-64°c. divalent cations and metal chelators did not affect activity of rplp. we also demonstrated that plp was secreted using thin layer chromatography and immunoblot analysis. additionally, rplp had strong hemolytic activity towards rainbow trout erythrocytes, but not to sheep erythrocytes suggesting that rplp is optimized for lysis of phosphatidylcholine-rich fish erythrocytes. further, only the loss of the plp gene had a significant effect on hemolytic activity of culture supernatant on fish erythrocytes, while the loss of rtxa and/or vah <dig> had little effect. however, v. anguillarum strains with mutations in plp or in plp and vah <dig> exhibited no significant reduction in virulence compared to the wild type strain when used to infect rainbow trout.


CONCLUSIONS
the plp gene of v. anguillarum encoding a phospholipase with a <dig> activity is specific for phosphatidylcholine and, therefore, able to lyse fish erythrocytes, but not sheep erythrocytes. mutation of plp does not affect the virulence of v. anguillarum in rainbow trout.

vibrio anguillarumvbriosisphospholipasehemolysisvirulence

