BACKGROUND
microorganisms produce cell-wall-degrading enzymes as part of their strategies for plant invasion/nutrition. among these, pectin lyases  catalyze the depolymerization of esterified pectin by a β-elimination mechanism. pnls are grouped together with pectate lyases  in family  <dig> of the polysaccharide lyases, as they share a conserved structure in a parallel β-helix. the best-characterized fungal pectin lyases are obtained from saprophytic/opportunistic fungi in the genera aspergillus and penicillium and from some pathogens such as colletotrichum gloeosporioides.

the organism used in the present study, colletotrichum lindemuthianum, is a phytopathogenic fungus that can be subdivided into different physiological races with different capacities to infect its host, phaseolus vulgaris. these include the non-pathogenic and pathogenic strains known as races  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.


RESULTS
here we report the isolation and sequence analysis of the clpnl <dig> gene, which encodes the pectin lyase  <dig> of c. lindemuthianum, and its expression in pathogenic and non-pathogenic races of c. lindemuthianum grown on different carbon sources. in addition, we performed a phylogenetic analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence of clpnl <dig> based on reported sequences of pnls from other sources and compared the three-dimensional structure of clpnl <dig>  as predicted by homology modeling, with those of other organisms. both analyses revealed an early separation of bacterial pectin lyases from those found in fungi and oomycetes. furthermore, two groups could be distinguished among the enzymes from fungi and oomycetes: one comprising enzymes from mostly saprophytic/opportunistic fungi and the other formed mainly by enzymes from pathogenic fungi and oomycetes. clpnl <dig> was found in the latter group and was grouped together with the pectin lyase from c. gloeosporioides.


CONCLUSIONS
the clpnl <dig> gene of c. lindemuthianum shares the characteristic elements of genes coding for pectin lyases. a time-course analysis revealed significant differences between the two fungal races in terms of the expression of clpnl <dig> encoding for pectin lyase  <dig>  according to the results, pectin lyases from bacteria and fungi separated early during evolution. likewise, the enzymes from fungi and oomycetes diverged in accordance with their differing lifestyles. it is possible that the diversity and nature of the assimilatory carbon substrates processed by these organisms played a determinant role in this phenomenon.

