BACKGROUND
salmonella paratyphi c, like s. typhi, is adapted to humans and causes typhoid fever. previously we reported different genome structures between two strains of s. paratyphi c, which suggests that s. paratyphi c might have a plastic genome . as many but not all host-adapted salmonella pathogens have large genomic insertions as well as the supposedly resultant genomic rearrangements, bacterial genome plasticity presents an extraordinary evolutionary phenomenon. events contributing to genomic plasticity, especially large insertions, may be associated with the formation of particular salmonella pathogens.


RESULTS
we constructed a high resolution genome map in s. paratyphi c strain rks <dig> and located four insertions totaling  <dig> kb  and seven deletions totaling  <dig> kb relative to s. typhimurium lt <dig>  two rearrangements were revealed, including an inversion of  <dig> kb covering the ter region and the translocation of the  <dig> kb i-ceui f fragment. the  <dig> wild type strains analyzed in this study exhibited diverse genome structures, mostly as a result of recombination between rrn genes. in at least two cases, the rearrangements involved recombination between genomic sites other than the rrn genes, possibly homologous genes in prophages. two strains had a  <dig> kb deletion between rrla and rrlb, which is a highly conservative region and no deletion has been reported in this region in any other salmonella lineages.


CONCLUSIONS
s. paratyphi c has diverse genome structures among different isolates, possibly as a result of large genomic insertions, e.g., spi <dig>  although the salmonella typhoid agents may not be more closely related among them than each of them to other salmonella lineages, they may have evolved in similar ways, i.e., acquiring typhoid-associated genes followed by genome structure rearrangements. comparison of multiple salmonella typhoid agents at both single sequenced genome and population levels will facilitate the studies on the evolutionary process of typhoid pathogenesis, especially the identification of typhoid-associated genes.

