BACKGROUND
a major concern in conservation genetics is to maintain the genetic diversity of populations. genetic variation in livestock species is threatened by the progressive marginalisation of local breeds in benefit of high-output pigs worldwide. we used high-density snp and re-sequencing data to assess genetic diversity of local pig breeds from europe. in addition, we re-sequenced pigs from commercial breeds to identify potential candidate mutations responsible for phenotypic divergence among these groups of breeds.


RESULTS
our results point out some local breeds with low genetic diversity, whose genome shows a high proportion of regions of homozygosis  and that harbour a large number of potentially damaging mutations. we also observed a high correlation between genetic diversity estimates using high-density snp data and next generation sequencing data . the study of non-synonymous snps that were fixed in commercial breeds and also in any local breed, but with different allele, revealed  <dig> non-synonymous snps affecting  <dig> genes. candidate mutations that may underlie differences in the adaptation to the environment were exemplified by the genes azgp <dig> and tas2r <dig>  we also observed that highly productive breeds may have lost advantageous genotypes within genes involve in immune response – e.g. il12rb <dig> and stab1–, probably as a result of strong artificial in the intensive production systems in pig.


CONCLUSIONS
the high correlation between genetic diversity computed with the 60k snp and whole genome re-sequence data indicates that the porcine 60k snp beadchip provides reliable estimates of genomic diversity in european pig populations despite the expected bias. moreover, this analysis gave insights for strategies to the genetic characterization of local breeds. the comparison between re-sequenced local pigs and re-sequenced commercial pigs made it possible to report candidate mutations to be responsible for phenotypic divergence among those groups of breeds. this study highlights the importance of low input breeds as a valuable genetic reservoir for the pig production industry. however, the high levels of rohs, inbreeding and potentially damaging mutations emphasize the importance of the genetic characterization of local breeds to preserve their genomic variability.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

