BACKGROUND
the recent advent of murine leukaemia virus -based replication-competent retroviral  vector technology has provided exciting new tools for gene delivery, albeit the advances in vector efficiency which have been realized are also accompanied by a set of fresh challenges. the expression of additional transgene sequences, for example, increases the length of the viral genome, which can lead to reductions in replication efficiency and in turn to vector genome instability. this necessitates efforts to analyse the rate and mechanism of recombinant emergence during the replication of such vectors to provide data which should contribute to improvements in rcr vector design.


RESULTS
in this study, we have performed detailed molecular analyses on packaged vector genomes and proviral dna following propagation of mlv-based rcr vectors both in cell culture and in pre-formed subcutaneous tumours in vivo. the effects of strain of mlv, transgene position and host cell type on the rate of emergence of vector recombinants were quantitatively analysed by applying real-time pcr and real-time rt-pcr assays. individual mutants were further characterized by pcr, and nucleotide sequence and structural motifs associated with these mutants were determined by sequencing. our data indicate that virus strain, vector design and host cell influence the rate of emergence of predominating vector mutants, but not the underlying recombination mechanisms in vitro. in contrast, however, differences in the rna secondary structural motifs associated with sequenced mutants emerging in cell culture and in solid tumours in vivo were observed.


CONCLUSIONS
our data provide further evidence that mlv-based rcr vectors based on the moloney strain of mlv and containing the transgene cassette in the 3' utr region are superior to those based on akv-mlv and/or containing the transgene cassette in the u <dig> region of the ltr. the observed discrepancies between the data obtained in solid tumours in vivo and our own and previously published data from infected cells in vitro demonstrates the importance of evaluating vectors designed for use in cancer gene therapy in vivo as well as in vitro.

