BACKGROUND
secondary sexual traits and mating preferences may evolve in part because the offspring of attractive males inherit attractiveness and other genetically correlated traits such as fecundity and viability. a problem regarding these indirect genetic mechanisms is how sufficient genetic variation in the traits subject to sexual selection is maintained within a population. here we explored the additive genetic correlations between carotenoid-based male ornament colouration, female fecundity and juvenile survival rate in the three-spined stickleback  to test the possibility that attractiveness genes reduce important fitness components in the bearers not expressing the sexual trait.


RESULTS
male sexual attractiveness  as well as female fecundity and juvenile viability showed heritable variations in the three-spined stickleback. thus, females can gain indirect benefits by mating with an attractive male. there was a strong positive genetic correlation between female fecundity and juvenile viability. however, red sexual signal of male sticklebacks was negatively genetically correlated with juvenile survival, suggesting genetic conflict between attractiveness and viability. there was no significant correlation between attractiveness of brothers and fecundity of sisters, suggesting no intra-locus sexual conflict.


CONCLUSIONS
the negative effects of mating with a colourful male on offspring viability may contribute to maintaining the heritable variation under strong directional sexual selection. the strength of indirect sexual selection may be weaker than previously thought due to the hidden genetic conflicts.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
antagonistic pleiotropyanimal modelcarotenoidgenetic correlationgood genessexual conflictsexual traitsurvivalhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003329ministerio de economía y competitividadcgl2012-40229-c02-02cgl2014-60291-jinkim sin-yeon velando alberto xunta de galicia2012/305issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

