BACKGROUND
small nucleolar rnas are required for posttranscriptional processing and modification of ribosomal, spliceosomal and messenger rnas. their presence in both eukaryotes and archaea indicates that snornas are evolutionarily ancient. the location of some snornas within the introns of ribosomal protein genes has been suggested to belie an rna world origin, with the exons of the earliest protein-coding genes having evolved around snornas after the advent of templated protein synthesis. alternatively, this intronic location may reflect more recent selection for coexpression of snornas and ribosomal components, ensuring rrna modification by snornas during ribosome synthesis. to gain insight into the evolutionary origins of this genetic organization, we examined the antiquity of snorna families and the stability of their genomic location across  <dig> eukaryote genomes.


RESULTS
we report that dozens of snorna families are traceable to the last eukaryotic common ancestor , but find only weak similarities between the oldest eukaryotic snornas and archaeal snorna-like genes. moreover, many of these leca snornas are located within the introns of host genes independently traceable to the leca. comparative genomic analyses reveal the intronic location of leca snornas is not ancestral however, suggesting the pattern we observe is the result of ongoing intragenomic mobility. analysis of human transcriptome data indicates that the primary requirement for hosting intronic snornas is a broad expression profile. consistent with ongoing mobility across broadly-expressed genes, we report a case of recent migration of a non-leca snorna from the intron of a ubiquitously expressed non-leca host gene into the introns of two leca genes during the evolution of primates.


CONCLUSIONS
our analyses show that snornas were a well-established family of rnas at the time when eukaryotes began to diversify. while many are intronic, this association is not evolutionarily stable across the eukaryote tree; ongoing intragenomic mobility has erased signal of their ancestral gene organization, and neither introns-first nor evolved co-expression adequately explain our results. we therefore present a third model — constrained drift — whereby individual snornas are intragenomically mobile and may occupy any genomic location from which expression satisfies phenotype.

snornalast eukaryotic common ancestorintronretrotranspositionintrons-firstconstrained drift

