BACKGROUND
the dna base composition is well known to be highly variable among organisms. bio-physic studies on the effect of the gc increments on the dna structure have shown that gc-richer dna sequences are more bendable. the result was the keystone of the hypothesis proposing the metabolic rate as the major force driving the gc content variability, since an increased resistance to the torsion stress is mainly required during the transcription process to avoid dna breakage. hence, the aim of the present work is to test if both salinity and migration, suggested to affect the metabolic rate of teleostean fishes, affect the average genomic gc content as well. moreover, since the gill surface has been reported to be a major morphological expression of metabolic rate, this parameter was also analyzed in the light of the above hypothesis.


RESULTS
teleosts living in different environments  and with different lifestyles  were analyzed studying three variables: routine metabolic rate, gill area and genomic gc-content, none of them showing a phylogenetic signal among fish species. routine metabolic rate, specific gill area and average genomic gc were higher in seawater than freshwater species. the same trend was observed comparing migratory versus non-migratory species. crossing salinity and lifestyle, the active migratory species living in seawater show coincidentally the highest routine metabolic rate, the highest specific gill area and the highest average genomic gc content.


CONCLUSIONS
the results clearly highlight that environmental factors  and lifestyle  affect not only the physiology , and the morphology  of teleosts, but also basic genome feature , thus opening to an interesting liaison among the three variables in the light of the metabolic rate hypothesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gc contentroutine metabolic rategill areamigrationfreshwaterseawatergene expressionszn a. dohrn phd fellowshipissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

