BACKGROUND
a well known example of oscillatory phenomena is the transient oscillations of glycolytic intermediates in saccharomyces cerevisiae, their regulation being predominantly investigated by mathematical modeling. to our knowledge there has not been a genetic approach to elucidate the regulatory role of the different enzymes of the glycolytic pathway.


RESULTS
we report that the laboratory strain by <dig> could also be used to investigate this oscillatory phenomenon, which traditionally has been studied using s. cerevisiae x <dig>  this has enabled us to employ existing isogenic deletion mutants and dissect the roles of isoforms, or subunits of key glycolytic enzymes in glycolytic oscillations. we demonstrate that deletion of tdh <dig> but not tdh <dig> and tdh <dig>  abolishes nadh oscillations. while deletion of each of the hexokinase  encoding genes  leads to oscillations that are longer lasting with lower amplitude, the effect of hxk <dig> deletion on the duration of the oscillations is stronger than that of hxk <dig>  most importantly our results show that the presence of beta  but not that of alpha subunits  of the hetero-octameric enzyme phosphofructokinase  is necessary to achieve these oscillations. furthermore, we report that the camp-mediated pka pathway  modulates the activity of glycoytic enzymes thus affecting oscillations. deletion of both pde <dig>  and ira <dig>  abolished glycolytic oscillations.


CONCLUSIONS
the genetic approach to characterising the glycolytic oscillations in yeast has demonstrated differential roles of the two types of subunits of pfk, and the isoforms of gapdh and hk. furthermore, it has shown that pde <dig> and ira <dig>  encoding components of the camp pathway responsible for negative feedback regulation of pka, are required for glycolytic oscillations, suggesting an enticing link between these camp pathway components and the glycolysis pathway enzymes shown to have the greatest role in glycolytic oscillation. this study suggests that a systematic genetic approach combined with mathematical modelling can advance the study of oscillatory phenomena.

glycolytic oscillationssaccharomyces cerevisiaedeletion mutantscamp-pka signal transduction pathway

