BACKGROUND
next generation sequencing technologies have greatly advanced many research areas of the biomedical sciences through their capability to generate massive amounts of genetic information at unprecedented rates. the advent of next generation sequencing has led to the development of numerous computational tools to analyze and assemble the millions to billions of short sequencing reads produced by these technologies. while these tools filled an important gap, current approaches for storing, processing, and analyzing short read datasets generally have remained simple and lack the complexity needed to efficiently model the produced reads and assemble them correctly.


RESULTS
previously, we presented an overlap graph coarsening scheme for modeling read overlap relationships on multiple levels. most current read assembly and analysis approaches use a single graph or set of clusters to represent the relationships among a read dataset. instead, we use a series of graphs to represent the reads and their overlap relationships across a spectrum of information granularity. at each information level our algorithm is capable of generating clusters of reads from the reduced graph, forming an integrated graph modeling and clustering approach for read analysis and assembly. previously we applied our algorithm to simulated and real  <dig> datasets to assess its ability to efficiently model and cluster next generation sequencing data. in this paper we extend our algorithm to large simulated and real illumina datasets to demonstrate that our algorithm is practical for both sequencing technologies.


CONCLUSIONS
our overlap graph theoretic algorithm is able to model next generation sequencing reads at various levels of granularity through the process of graph coarsening. additionally, our model allows for efficient representation of the read overlap relationships, is scalable for large datasets, and is practical for both illumina and  <dig> sequencing technologies.

4- <dig> october  <dig> the second workshop on data mining of next-generation sequencing in conjunction with the  <dig> ieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine philadelphia, pa, usa

