BACKGROUND
spinal root avulsion induces multiple pathophysiological events consisting of altered levels of specific genes and proteins related to inflammation, apoptosis, and oxidative stress, which collectively result in the death of the affected motoneurons. recent studies have demonstrated that the gene changes involved in spinal cord injury can be regulated by micrornas, which are a class of short non-coding rna molecules that repress target mrnas post-transcriptionally. with consideration for the time course of the avulsion-induced gene expression patterns within dying motoneurons, we employed microarray analysis to determine whether and how micrornas are involved in the changes of gene expression induced by pathophysiological events in spinal cord motoneurons.


RESULTS
the expression of a total of  <dig>  mirnas in the spinal cord of adult rats was identified. unilateral root-avulsion resulted in significant alterations in mirna expression. in the ipsilateral half compared to the contralateral half of the spinal cord, on the 3rd day after the injury,  <dig> mirnas were upregulated, and  <dig> were downregulated, and on the 14th day after the injury,  <dig> mirnas were upregulated, and  <dig> were downregulated. the upregulation of mir-146b-5p and mir-31a-3p and the downregulation of mir-324-3p and mir- <dig> were observed. eleven of the mirnas, including mir-21-5p, demonstrated a sustained increase; however, only mir-466c-3p presented a sustained decrease  <dig> and 14 days after the injury. more interestingly,  <dig> of the mirnas, including mir-18a, were upregulated on the 3rd day but were downregulated on the 14th day after injury.

some of these mirnas target inflammatory-response genes in the early stage of injury, and others target neurotransmitter transport genes in the intermediate stages of injury. the altered mirna expression pattern suggests that the mapk and calcium signaling pathways are consistently involved in the injury response.


CONCLUSIONS
this analysis may facilitate the understanding of the time-specific altered expression of a large set of micrornas in the spinal cord after brachial root avulsion.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
brachial root avulsionmicrornamicroarrayinflammatory responsennosc-junatf-3calpain 2issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

