BACKGROUND
daldinia eschscholtzii is a wood-inhabiting fungus that causes wood decay under certain conditions. it has a broad host range and produces a large repertoire of potentially bioactive compounds. however, there is no extensive genome analysis on this fungal species.


RESULTS
two fungal isolates  from human specimens were identified as daldinia eschscholtzii by morphological features and its-based phylogenetic analysis. both genomes were similar in size with  <dig>  predicted genes in um  <dig>  and  <dig>  predicted genes in um  <dig> . a total of  <dig> gene families were shared among both um isolates, including gene families associated with fungus-host interactions. in the cazyme comparative analysis, both genomes were found to contain arrays of cazyme related to plant cell wall degradation. genes encoding secreted peptidases were found in the genomes, which encode for the peptidases involved in the degradation of structural proteins in plant cell wall. in addition, arrays of secondary metabolite backbone genes were identified in both genomes, indicating of their potential to produce bioactive secondary metabolites. both genomes also contained an abundance of gene encoding signaling components, with three proposed mapk cascades involved in cell wall integrity, osmoregulation, and mating/filamentation. besides genomic evidence for degrading capability, both isolates also harbored an array of genes encoding stress response proteins that are potentially significant for adaptation to living in the hostile environments.


CONCLUSIONS
our genomic studies provide further information for the biological understanding of the d. eschscholtzii and suggest that these wood-decaying fungi are also equipped for adaptation to adverse environments in the human host.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genome sequencingdaldinia eschscholtziiwood-inhabiting endophytewood-decaying fungiissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

