BACKGROUND
the surface of the human eye is covered by corneal epithelial cells  which regenerate from a small population of limbal epithelial stem cells . cell therapy with lescs is a non-penetrating treatment for preventing blindness due to lesc deficiency or dysfunction. our aim was to identify new putative molecular markers and upstream regulators in the lescs and associated molecular pathways.


RESULTS
genome-wide microarray transcriptional profiling was used to compare lescs to differentiated human cecs. ingenuity-based pathway analysis was applied to identify upstream regulators and pathways specific to lescs. elisa and flow cytometry were used to measure secreted and surface expressed proteins, respectively. more than  <dig> fold increase and decrease in expression could be found in  <dig> genes between the two cell types. a number of molecules functioning in cellular movement , proliferation , development , death and survival , and cell-to-cell signaling  were detected having top biological functions in lescs and several of these were confirmed by flow cytometric surface protein analysis. custom-selected gene groups related to stemness, differentiation, cell adhesion, cytokines and growth factors as well as angiogenesis could be analyzed. the results show that lescs play a key role not only in epithelial differentiation and tissue repair, but also in controlling angiogenesis and extracellular matrix integrity. some pro-inflammatory cytokines were found to be important in stemness-, differentiation- and angiogenesis-related biological functions: il- <dig> and il- <dig> participated in most of these biological pathways as validated by their secretion from lesc cultures.


CONCLUSIONS
the gene and molecular pathways may provide a more specific understanding of the signaling molecules associated with lescs, therefore, help better identify and use these cells in the treatment of ocular surface diseases.

limbal epithelial stem cellscorneal epithelial cellsgene arrayupstream regulatorscytokinescell adhesionangiogenesisil-6il-8

