BACKGROUND
large scale transcript analysis of human glomerular microvascular endothelial cells  has never been accomplished. we designed this study to define the transcriptome of hgmec and facilitate a better characterization of these endothelial cells with unique features. serial analysis of gene expression  was used for its unbiased approach to quantitative acquisition of transcripts.


RESULTS
we generated a hgmec sage library consisting of  <dig>  transcript tags. then taking advantage of large public databases and advanced bioinformatics we compared the hgmec sage library with a sage library of non-cultured ex vivo human glomeruli  which contained endothelial cells. the  <dig> tags common to both which would have the potential to be expressed in vivo were subsequently checked against  <dig>  tags from  <dig> non-glomerular endothelial sage libraries. this resulted in  <dig> transcript tags differentially overexpressed in hgmec compared to non-glomerular endothelia. these tags were filtered using a set of criteria: never before shown in kidney or any type of endothelial cell, absent in all nephron regions except the glomerulus, more highly expressed than statistically expected in hgmec. neurogranin, a direct target of thyroid hormone action which had been thought to be brain specific and never shown in endothelial cells before, fulfilled these criteria. its expression in glomerular endothelium in vitro and in vivo was then verified by real-time-pcr, sequencing and immunohistochemistry.


CONCLUSIONS
our results represent an extensive molecular characterization of hgmec beyond a mere database, underline the endothelial heterogeneity, and propose neurogranin as a potential link in the kidney-thyroid axis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bioinformaticsendothelial diversityglomerular endothelial cellneurograninserial analysis of gene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

