BACKGROUND
the microbiota has been shown to play an important role in the biology of insects. in recent decades, significant efforts have been made to better understand the diversity of symbiotic bacteria associated with mosquitoes and assess their influence on pathogen transmission. here, we report the bacterial composition found in field-caught aedes albopictus populations by using culture-dependent methods.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> mosquito imagos  were caught from four contrasting biotopes of madagascar and their bacterial contents were screened by plating whole body homogenates on three different culture media. from  <dig> bacterial colony types obtained, amplified ribosomal dna restriction analysis  showed they had  <dig> distinct ribotypes. sequencing and blast analysis of the 16s rdna genes responsible for each representative profile made it possible to identify  <dig> genera distributed in three major phyla. in female mosquitoes, bacterial isolates were mostly proteobacteria  followed by firmicutes  and actinobacteria . conversely, actinobacteria was the most abundant phylum in male mosquitoes  followed by proteobacteria  and firmicutes . the relative abundance and composition of isolates also varied between sampling sites, ranging from  <dig> distinct families in ankazobe to  <dig> in tsimbazaza park, and toamasina and ambohidratrimo. pantoea was the most common genus in both females and males from all sampling sites, except for ambohidratrimo. no differences in genome size were found between pantoea isolates from mosquitoes and reference strains in pulse field gel electrophoresis. however, according to the numbers and sizes of plasmids, mosquito isolates clustered into three different groups with other strains isolated from insects but distinct from isolates from the environment.


CONCLUSIONS
the recent upsurge in research into the functional role of the insect microbiota prompts the interest to better explore the role some bacteria detected here may have in the mosquito biology. future studies of culturable bacteria might decipher whether they have a biological role in the invasiveness of ae. albopictus. as a possible candidate for paratransgenesis, the predominant genus pantoea will be characterized to better understand its genetic contents and any possible influence it may have on vector competence of ae. albopictus.

culturable bacteriaasian tiger mosquitopantoeaplasmids

