BACKGROUND
the conceptual validity of kinetic gait analysis and disability outcome assessment methods has guided their use in the assessment of pain caused by osteoarthritis . no consensus on the best clinical methods for pain evaluation in canine oa exists, particularly, when evaluating treatments where a smaller treatment effect is anticipated than with pharmacological pain killers. this study thus aimed at determining the technical validity of some clinical endpoints on oa pain in dogs using the green-lipped mussel -enriched diet.

twenty-three adult dogs with clinical oa completed the prospective controlled study. all the dogs were fed a balanced diet over a 30-day control period followed by a glm-enriched diet over a 60-day period. the kinetic gait analysis parameter , electrodermal activity , and a standardized multifactorial pain questionnaire  were performed on day   <dig> , d <dig>  and d <dig> . the owners completed a client-specific outcome measures  instrument twice a week. motor activity  was continuously recorded in seven dogs using telemetered accelerometric counts. we hypothesized that these methods would produce convergent results related to diet changes. a type i error of  <dig>  was adjusted to correct for the multiplicity of the primary clinical endpoints.


RESULTS
neither the eda nor the mfq were found reliable or could be validated. changes in the pvfbw , the csom  and the ma intensity  from d <dig> to d <dig> suggested an effect of diet. only the pvfbw clearly increased after the glm-diet . the csom exhibited a negative relationship with the pvfbw  and ma duration .


CONCLUSIONS
the pvfbw exhibited the best technical validity for the characterization of the beneficial effect of a glm-enriched diet. the csom and ma appeared less responsive following a glm-diet, but these measures appeared complementary to gait analysis. apparently, the csom provides the capacity to rely on pain oa assessment influenced by both lameness quantification  and physical functioning .

psychometricsdog osteoarthritispainmetrologykineticsaccelerometrybehavioral scalesskin conductance

