BACKGROUND
competition between spermatozoa from rival males for success in fertilization  is an important selective force driving the evolution of male reproductive traits and promoting positive selection in genes related to reproductive function. positive selection has been identified in reproductive proteins showing rapid divergence at nucleotide level. other mutations, such as insertions and deletions , also occur in protein-coding sequences. these structural changes, which exist in reproductive genes and result in length variation in coded proteins, could also be subjected to positive selection and be under the influence of sperm competition. catsper <dig> is one such reproductive gene coding for a germ-line specific voltage-gated calcium channel essential for sperm motility and fertilization. positive selection appears to promote fixation of indels in the n-terminal region of catsper <dig> in mammalian species. however, it is not known which selective forces underlie these changes and their implications for sperm function.


RESULTS
we tested if length variation in the n-terminal region of catsper <dig> is influenced by sperm competition intensity in a group of closely related rodent species of the subfamily murinae. our results revealed a negative correlation between sequence length of catsper <dig> and relative testes mass, a very good proxy of sperm competition levels. since catsper <dig> is important for sperm flagellar motility, we examined if length variation in the n-terminus of catsper <dig> is linked to changes in sperm swimming velocity. we found a negative correlation between catsper <dig> length and several sperm velocity parameters.


CONCLUSIONS
altogether, our results suggest that sperm competition selects for a shortening of the intracellular region of catsper <dig> which, in turn, enhances sperm swimming velocity, an essential and adaptive trait for fertilization success.

catsper1sperm competitionindelspositive selectionsperm velocityrodents

