BACKGROUND
global warming predictions indicate that temperatures will increase by another 2-6°c by the end of this century. high temperature is a major abiotic stress limiting plant growth and productivity in many areas of the world. switchgrass  is a model herbaceous bioenergy crop, due to its rapid growth rate, reliable biomass yield, minimal requirements of water and nutrients, adaptability to grow on marginal lands and widespread distribution throughout north america. the effect of high temperature on switchgrass physiology, cell wall composition and biomass yields has been reported. however, there is void in the knowledge of the molecular responses to heat stress in switchgrass.


RESULTS
we conducted long-term heat stress treatment  in the switchgrass cultivar alamo. a significant decrease in the plant height and total biomass was evident in the heat stressed plants compared to controls. total rna from control and heat stress samples were used for transcriptome analysis with switchgrass affymetrix genechips. following normalization and pre-processing,  <dig> probesets were identified as differentially expressed using a 2-fold cutoff. of these,  <dig> probesets  were up-regulated, and  <dig> probesets  were down-regulated. differential expression of  <dig> randomly selected genes from this list was validated using rt-pcr. rice orthologs were retrieved for  <dig> % of the heat stress responsive switchgrass probesets. gene ontology  enrichment analysis using agrigo program showed that genes related to atpase regulator, chaperone binding, and protein folding was significantly up-regulated. gos associated with protein modification, transcription, phosphorus and nitrogen metabolic processes, were significantly down-regulated by heat stress.


CONCLUSIONS
plausible connections were identified between the identified gos, physiological responses and heat response phenotype observed in switchgrass plants. comparative transcriptome analysis in response to heat stress among four monocots – switchgrass, rice, wheat and maize identified  <dig> common genes, most of which were associated with protein refolding processes. these core genes will be valuable biomarkers for identifying heat sensitive plant germplasm since they are responsive to both short duration as well as chronic heat stress treatments, and are also expressed in different plant growth stages and tissue types.

switchgrassbiofuelmicroarrayheat stresstranscriptome

