BACKGROUND
administration of the n-methyl-d-aspartate  antagonist ketamine during the perinatal period can produce a variety of behavioral and neuroanatomical changes. our laboratory has reported reliable changes in learning and memory following a single dose of ketamine administered late in gestation. however, the nature of the drug-induced changes depends on the point during embryonic development when ketamine is administered. embryonic day  <dig>  rat fetuses pre-treated with ketamine  and taught a conditioned taste aversion  learn and remember the cta, whereas e <dig> fetuses do not. the current study sought to determine if long-term behavioral effects could be detected in animals that received ketamine or a saline control injection on either e <dig> or e <dig>  rat behavior was evaluated on two different measures: spontaneous locomotion and water maze learning. measurements were collected during  <dig> periods: juvenile test period  or young-adult test period .


RESULTS
water maze performance of ketamine-treated rats was similar to that of controls when tested on p <dig>  likewise, the age of the animal at the time of ketamine/saline treatment did not influence learning of the maze. however, the young-adult water maze test  revealed reliable benefits of prenatal ketamine exposure – especially during the initial re-training trial. on the first trial of the young adult test, rats treated with ketamine on e <dig> reached the hidden platform faster than any other group – including rats treated with ketamine on e <dig>  swim speeds of experimental and control rats were not significantly different. spontaneous horizontal locomotion measured during juvenile testing indicated that ketamine-treated rats were less active than controls. however, later in development, rats treated with ketamine on e <dig> were more active than rats that received the drug on e <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
these data suggest that both the day in fetal development when ketamine is administered and the timing of post-natal behavioral testing interact to influence behavioral outcomes. the data also indicate that the paradoxical age-dependent effects of early ketamine treatment on learning, previously described in fetuses and neonates, may also be detected later in young adult rats.

