BACKGROUND
burkholderia cenocepacia is a member of the burkholderia cepacia complex group of bacteria that cause infections in individuals with cystic fibrosis. b. cenocepacia isolate j <dig> has been genome sequenced and is representative of a virulent, epidemic cf strain . its genome encodes multiple antimicrobial resistance pathways and it is not known which of these is important for intrinsic or spontaneous resistance. to map these pathways, transcriptomic analysis was performed on:  strain j <dig> exposed to sub-inhibitory concentrations of antibiotics and the antibiotic potentiator chlorpromazine, and  on spontaneous mutants derived from j <dig> and with increased resistance to the antibiotics amikacin, meropenem and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. two pan-resistant et <dig> outbreak isolates recovered two decades after j <dig> were also compared to identify naturally evolved gene expression changes.


RESULTS
spontaneous resistance in b. cenocepacia involved more gene expression changes and different subsets of genes than those provoked by exposure to sub inhibitory concentrations of each antibiotic. the phenotype and altered gene expression in the resistant mutants was also stable irrespective of the presence of the priming antibiotic. both known and novel genes involved in efflux, antibiotic degradation/modification, membrane function, regulation and unknown functions were mapped. a novel role for the phenylacetic acid  degradation pathway genes was identified in relation to spontaneous resistance to meropenem and glucose was found to repress their expression. subsequently,  <dig> mm glucose was found to produce greater that 2-fold reductions in the mic of multiple antibiotics against b. cenocepacia j <dig>  mutation of an rnd multidrug efflux pump locus  and squalene-hopene cyclase gene , both upregulated after chlorpromazine exposure, confirmed their role in resistance. the recently isolated outbreak isolates had altered the expression of multiple genes which mirrored changes seen in the antibiotic resistant mutants, corroborating the strategy used to model resistance. mutation of an abc transporter gene  upregulated in both outbreak strains, confirmed its role in b. cenocepacia resistance.


CONCLUSIONS
global mapping of the genetic pathways which mediate antibiotic resistance in b. cenocepacia has revealed that they are multifactorial, identified potential therapeutic targets and also demonstrated that putative catabolite repression of genes by glucose can improve antibiotic efficacy.

