BACKGROUND
the pronuclear injection  is the simplest and widely used method to generate transgenic  mice. unfortunately, pi-based tg mice show uncertain transgene expression due to random transgene insertion in the genome, usually with multiple copies. thus, typically at least three or more tg lines are produced by injecting over  <dig> zygotes and the best line/s among them are selected through laborious screening steps. recently, we developed technologies using cre-loxp system that allow targeted insertion of single-copy transgene into a predetermined locus through pi. we termed the method as pi-based targeted transgenesis . a similar method using phic31-attp/b system was reported subsequently.


RESULTS
here, we developed an improved-pitt  method by combining cre-loxp, phic31-attp/b and flp-frt systems directly under c57bl/6n inbred strain, unlike the mixed strain used in previous reports. the targeted tg efficiency in the i-pitt typically ranged from  <dig> to 30%, with  <dig> and 62% in two of the sessions, which is by-far the best tg rate reported. furthermore, the system could generate multiple tg mice simultaneously. we demonstrate that injection of up to three different tg cassettes in a single injection session into as less as  <dig> zygotes resulted in production of all three separate tg dna containing targeted tg mice.


CONCLUSIONS
the i-pitt system offers several advantages compared to previous methods: multiplexing capability , very high efficiency of targeted-transgenesis , significantly reduces animal numbers in mouse-transgenesis and the system is developed under c57bl/6n strain, the most commonly used pure genetic background. further, the i-pitt system is freely accessible to scientific community.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transgenic mousepronuclear injection-based targeted transgenesiscre-loxpphic31-attp/bflp-frtrosa26transportation of the cauda epididymidesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

