BACKGROUND
'systems-wide' approaches such as microarray rna-profiling are ideally suited to the study of the complex overlapping responses of plants to biotic and abiotic stresses. however, commercial microarrays are only available for a limited number of plant species and development costs are so substantial as to be prohibitive for most research groups. here we evaluate the use of cross-hybridisation to affymetrix oligonucleotide genechip® microarrays to profile the response of the banana  leaf transcriptome to drought stress using a genomic dna -based probe-selection strategy to improve the efficiency of detection of differentially expressed musa transcripts.


RESULTS
following cross-hybridisation of musa gdna to the rice genechip® genome array, ~ <dig>  gene-specific probe-sets had a sufficiently high degree of homology to be retained for transcriptomic analyses. in a proof-of-concept approach, pooled rna representing a single biological replicate of control and drought stressed leaves of the musa cultivar 'cachaco' were hybridised to the affymetrix rice genome array. a total of  <dig>  musa gene homologues with a >2-fold difference in expression levels were subsequently identified. these drought-responsive transcripts included many functional classes associated with plant biotic and abiotic stress responses, as well as a range of regulatory genes known to be involved in coordinating abiotic stress responses. this latter group included members of the erf, dreb, myb, bzip and bhlh transcription factor families. fifty-two of these drought-sensitive musa transcripts were homologous to genes underlying qtls for drought and cold tolerance in rice, including in  <dig> instances qtls associated with a single underlying gene. the list of drought-responsive transcripts also included genes identified in publicly-available comparative transcriptomics experiments.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that despite the general paucity of nucleotide sequence data in musa and only distant phylogenetic relations to rice, gdna probe-based cross-hybridisation to the rice genechip® is a highly promising strategy to study complex biological responses and illustrates the potential of such strategies for gene discovery in non-model species.

