BACKGROUND
largemouth bronze gudgeon  is of economic importance in china, distributed in upstream regions of the yangtze river in china. but it has recently dramatically declined and is close to elimination. however, there is little knowing about the character of its intestinal microbiota. this study was conducted to elucidate the intestinal microbiota of wild largemouth bronze gudgeon with different body weight and gender.


RESULTS
thirty wild largemouth bronze gudgeon were measured for body length and body weight, and identified for male and female according to gonadal development, and thereafter the intestinal microbiota’s were assessed by miseq sequencing of 16s rrna genes. the results revealed that phyla proteobacteria and tenericutes were dominant in wild largemouth bronze gudgeon intestine independent of the body weight. shannon’s and inverse simpson’s diversity indexes were significant  different between male and female fish. the phylum profile in the intestine of male fish revealed that phylum proteobacteria was dominant, in contrast to female fish where five phyla tenericutes, proteobacteria, firmicutes, fusobacteria and spirochaetes were dominant. the genus profile revealed that genera shewanella and unclassified bacteria were dominant in male fish, while genus mycoplasma was dominant in female fish.


CONCLUSIONS
our results revealed that the intestinal microbial community of wild largemouth bronze gudgeon was dominated by the phyla proteobacteria and tenericutes regardless of the different body weight, but the communities are significant different between male and female fish. these results provide a theoretical basis to understand the biological mechanisms relevant to the protection of the endangered fish species.

keywords
coreius guichenotiintestinal microbiotafish genderyangtze riverspecial fund for agro-scientific research in the public interest 201203086-02yang deguo the national natural science foundation of china31502142li xuemei the foundation of china three gorges corporation jgj/ <dig> 2013yang deguo issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

