BACKGROUND
despite the limited success after decades of intensive research and development efforts, vaccination still represents the most promising strategy to significantly reduce the disease burden in malaria endemic regions. besides the ultimate goal of inducing sterile protection in vaccinated individuals, the prevention of transmission by so-called transmission blocking vaccines  is being regarded as an important feature of an efficient malaria eradication strategy. recently, plasmodium falciparum gap <dig> , a  <dig>  kda transmembrane protein that forms an essential part of the invasion machinery  multi-protein complex, has been proposed as novel potential transmission-blocking candidate. plant-based expression systems combine the advantages of eukaryotic expression with a up-scaling potential and a good product safety profile suitable for vaccine production. in this study we investigated the feasibility to use the transient plant expression to produce pfgap <dig> suitable for the induction of parasite specific inhibitory antibodies.


RESULTS
we performed the transient expression of recombinant pfgap <dig> in nicotiana benthamiana leaves using endoplasmatic reticulum  and plastid targeting. after imac-purification the protein yield and integrity was investigated by sds-page and western blot. rabbit immune igg derived by the immunization with the plastid-targeted variant of pfgap <dig> was analyzed by immune fluorescence assay  and zygote inhibition assay . pfgap <dig> could be produced in both subcellular compartments at different yields imac  purification from extract yielded up to  <dig>  μg/g recombinant protein per fresh leaf material for er-retarded and <dig>  μg/g recombinant protein per fresh leave material for plasmid targeted pfgap <dig>  respectively. igg from rabbit sera generated by immunization with the recombinant protein specifically recognized different parasite stages in immunofluorescence assay. furthermore up to  <dig> % inhibition in an in vitro zygote inhibition assay could be achieved using pfgap50-specific rabbit immune igg.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study demonstrate that the plant-produced pfgap <dig> is functional regarding the presentation of inhibitory epitopes and could be considered as component of a transmission-blocking malaria vaccine formulation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
plasmodium falciparumsexual stagegametesagroinfiltrationplant-made vaccinesplastid targetingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

