BACKGROUND
rna-seq has enabled high-throughput gene expression profiling to provide insight into the functional link between genotype and phenotype. low quantities of starting rna can be a severe hindrance for studies that aim to utilize rna-seq. to mitigate this bottleneck, whole transcriptome amplification  technologies have been developed to generate sufficient sequencing targets from minute amounts of rna. successful wta requires accurate replication of transcript abundance without the loss or distortion of specific mrnas. here, we test the efficacy of nugen’s ovation rna-seq v <dig> system, which uses linear isothermal amplification with a unique chimeric primer for amplification, using white adipose tissue from standard laboratory rats . our goal was to investigate potential biological artifacts introduced through wta approaches by establishing comparisons between matched raw and amplified rna libraries derived from biological replicates.


RESULTS
we found that 93% of expressed genes were identical between all unamplified versus matched amplified comparisons, also finding that gene density is similar across all comparisons. our sequencing experiment and downstream bioinformatic analyses using the tuxedo analysis pipeline resulted in the assembly of  <dig>  high-quality transcripts. libraries constructed from raw rna and wta samples averaged  <dig>  and  <dig>  expressed genes, respectively. although significant differentially expressed genes  were identified in all matched samples, each of these represents less than  <dig> % of all shared genes for each comparison.


CONCLUSIONS
transcriptome amplification is efficient at maintaining relative transcript frequencies with no significant bias when using this nugen linear isothermal amplification kit under ideal laboratory conditions as presented in this study. this methodology has broad applications, from clinical and diagnostic, to field-based studies when sample acquisition, or sample preservation, methods prove challenging.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqwhole transcriptome amplificationwhite adipose tissuerattus norvegicusissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

