BACKGROUND
flesh flies in the genus sarcophaga are important models for investigating endocrinology, diapause, cold hardiness, reproduction, and immunity. despite the prominence of sarcophaga flesh flies as models for insect physiology and biochemistry, and in forensic studies, little genomic or transcriptomic data are available for members of this genus. we used massively parallel pyrosequencing on the roche 454-flx platform to produce a substantial est dataset for the flesh fly sarcophaga crassipalpis. to maximize sequence diversity, we pooled rna extracted from whole bodies of all life stages and normalized the cdna pool after reverse transcription.


RESULTS
we obtained  <dig>  ests with an average read length of  <dig> bp. these reads assembled into  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons. using blast searches of the nr and nt databases we were able to identify  <dig>  unique gene elements  representing approximately  <dig>  independent transcripts. comparison of the distribution of s. crassipalpis unigenes among go biological process functional groups with that of the drosophila melanogaster transcriptome suggests that our ests are broadly representative of the flesh fly transcriptome. insertion and deletion errors in  <dig> sequencing present a serious hurdle to comparative transcriptome analysis. aided by a new approach to correcting for these errors, we performed a comparative analysis of genetic divergence across go categories among s. crassipalpis, d. melanogaster, and anopheles gambiae. the results suggest that non-synonymous substitutions occur at similar rates across categories, although genes related to response to stimuli may evolve slightly faster. in addition, we identified over  <dig> potential microsatellite loci and more than  <dig>  snps among our ests.


CONCLUSIONS
our data provides the first large-scale est-project for flesh flies, a much-needed resource for exploring this model species. in addition, we identified a large number of potential microsatellite and snp markers that could be used in population and systematic studies of s. crassipalpis and other flesh flies.

