BACKGROUND
it has been previously shown that palindromic sequences are frequently observed in proteins. however, our knowledge about their evolutionary origin and their possible importance is incomplete.


RESULTS
in this work, we tried to revisit this relatively neglected phenomenon. several questions are addressed in this work.  it is known that there is a large chance of finding a palindrome in low complexity sequences . what is the role of sequence complexity in the evolution of palindromic sequences in proteins?  do palindromes coincide with conserved protein sequences? if yes, what are the functions of these conserved segments?  in case of conserved palindromes, is it always the case that the whole conserved pattern is also symmetrical?  do palindromic protein sequences form regular secondary structures?  does sequence similarity of the two "sides" of a palindrome imply structural similarity? for the first question, we showed that the complexity of palindromic peptides is significantly lower than randomly generated palindromes. therefore, one can say that palindromes occur frequently in low complexity protein segments, without necessarily having a defined function or forming a special structure. nevertheless, this does not rule out the possibility of finding palindromes which play some roles in protein structure and function. in fact, we found several palindromes that overlap with conserved protein blocks of different functions. however, in many cases we failed to find any symmetry in the conserved regions of corresponding blocks. furthermore, to answer the last two questions, the structural characteristics of palindromes were studied. it is shown that palindromes may have a great propensity to form α-helical structures. finally, we demonstrated that the two sides of a palindrome generally do not show significant structural similarities.


CONCLUSIONS
we suggest that the puzzling abundance of palindromic sequences in proteins is mainly due to their frequent concurrence with low-complexity protein regions, rather than a global role in the protein function. in addition, palindromic sequences show a relatively high tendency to form helices, which might play an important role in the evolution of proteins that contain palindromes. moreover, reverse similarity in peptides does not necessarily imply significant structural similarity. this observation rules out the importance of palindromes for forming symmetrical structures. although palindromes frequently overlap with conserved blocks, we suggest that palindromes overlap with blocks only by coincidence, rather than being involved with a certain structural fold or protein domain.

