BACKGROUND
highly polygenic traits such as fruit weight, sugar content and acidity strongly influence the agroeconomic value of peach varieties. genomic selection  can accelerate peach yield and quality gain if predictions show higher levels of accuracy compared to phenotypic selection. the available ipsc 9k snp array v <dig> allows standardized and highly reliable genotyping, preparing the ground for gs in peach.


RESULTS
a repeatability model  for genome-enabled predictions in eleven european peach populations is presented. the analysis included  <dig> individuals derived from both commercial and non-commercial peach or peach-related accessions. considered traits were average fruit weight , sugar content  and titratable acidity . plants were genotyped with the 9k ipsc array, grown in three countries  and phenotyped for 3– <dig> years. an analysis of imputation accuracy of missing genotypic data was conducted using the software beagle, showing that two of the eleven populations were highly sensitive to increasing levels of missing data. the regression model produced, for each trait and each population, estimates of heritability  and repeatability . predictive ability was estimated in a five-fold cross validation scheme within population as the correlation of true and predicted phenotypes. results differed by populations and traits, but predictive abilities were in general high .


CONCLUSIONS
this study assessed the feasibility of genomic selection in peach for highly polygenic traits linked to yield and fruit quality. the accuracy of imputing missing genotypes was as high as 96%, and the genomic predictive ability was on average  <dig> , but could be as high as  <dig>  for fruit weight or  <dig>  for titratable acidity. the estimated repeatability may prove very useful in the management of the typical long cycles involved in peach productions. all together, these results are very promising for the application of genomic selection to peach breeding programmes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
peach genome-enabled predictionsfruit weightsugar contenttitratable aciditygenotype imputationrepeatability modelhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004963seventh framework programmefp7-265582stella alessandra issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

