BACKGROUND
alzheimer’s disease  is one of the leading genetically complex and heterogeneous disorder that is influenced by both genetic and environmental factors. the underlying risk factors remain largely unclear for this heterogeneous disorder. in recent years, high throughput methodologies, such as genome-wide linkage analysis , genome-wide association  studies, and genome-wide expression profiling , have led to the identification of several candidate genes associated with ad. however, due to lack of consistency within their findings, an integrative approach is warranted. here, we have designed a rank based gene prioritization approach involving convergent analysis of multi-dimensional data and protein-protein interaction  network modelling.


RESULTS
our approach employs integration of three different ad datasets- gwl,gwa and gwe to identify overlapping candidate genes ranked using a novel cumulative rank score  based method followed by prioritization using clusters derived from ppi network. sr for each gene is calculated by addition of rank assigned to individual gene based on either p value or score in three datasets. this analysis yielded  <dig> plausible ad genes. network modelling by creating ppi using proteins encoded by these genes and their direct interactors resulted in a layered network of  <dig> proteins. clustering of these proteins further helped us in identifying  <dig> significant clusters with  <dig> proteins  forming the central hub nodes. functional annotation of  <dig> genes revealed their role in several biological activities such as neurogenesis, regulation of map kinase activity, response to calcium ion, endocytosis paralleling the ad specific attributes. finally,  <dig> potential biochemical biomarkers were found from the overlap of 108 ad proteins with proteins from csf and plasma proteome. egfr and actb were found to be the two most significant ad risk genes.


CONCLUSIONS
with the assumption that common genetic signals obtained from different methodological platforms might serve as robust ad risk markers than candidates identified using single dimension approach, here we demonstrated an integrated genomic convergence approach for disease candidate gene prioritization from heterogeneous data sources linked to ad.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gene prioritizationprotein-protein interactionclusteringfunctional annotationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

