BACKGROUND
whilst being closely related to the model actinomycete streptomyces coelicolor a <dig>  s. lividans  <dig> differs from it in several significant and phenotypically observable ways, including antibiotic production. previous comparative gene hybridization studies investigating such differences have used low-density  pcr-based spotted arrays. here we use new experimentally optimised  <dig>  × 60-mer probe arrays to characterize in detail the genomic differences between wild-type s. lividans  <dig>  a derivative industrial strain, tk <dig>  and s. coelicolor m <dig> 


RESULTS
the high coverage and specificity  of the new microarrays used has highlighted the macroscopic genomic differences between two s. lividans strains and s. coelicolor. in a series of case studies we have validated the microarray and have identified subtle changes in genomic structure which occur in the asp-activating adenylation domains of cda non-ribosomal peptide synthetase genes which provides evidence of gene shuffling between these domains. we also identify single nucleotide sequence inter-species differences which exist in the actinorhodin biosynthetic gene cluster. as the glyoxylate bypass is non-functional in both s. lividans strains due to the absence of the gene encoding isocitrate lyase it is likely that the ethylmalonyl-coa pathway functions as the alternative mechanism for the assimilation of c <dig> compounds.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides evidence for widespread genetic recombination, rather than it being focussed at 'hotspots', suggesting that the previously proposed 'archipelago model' of genomic differences between s. coelicolor and s. lividans is unduly simplistic. the two s. lividans strains investigated differ considerably in genetic complement, with tk <dig> lacking  <dig> more genes than its wild-type parent when compared to s. coelicolor. additionally, we confirm the presence of bldb in s. lividans and deduce that s. lividans  <dig> and tk <dig>  both deficient in the glyoxylate bypass, possess an alternative metabolic mechanism for the assimilation of c <dig> compounds. given that streptomycetes generally display high genetic instability it is envisaged that these high-density arrays will find application for rapid assessment of genome content  in mutational studies of s. coelicolor and related species.

