BACKGROUND
both computational and experimental approaches have been used to determine the minimal gene set required to sustain a bacterial cell. such studies have provided clues to the minimal cellular-function set needed for life. we evaluate a minimal cellular-function set directly, instead of a geneset.


RESULTS
we estimated the essentialities of kegg pathway maps as the entities of cellular functions, based on comparative genomics and metabolic network analyses. the former examined the evolutionary conservation of each pathway map by homology searches, and detected "conserved pathway maps". the latter identified "organism-specific pathway maps" that supply compounds required for the conserved pathway maps. we defined both pathway maps as "autonomous pathway maps". among the set of autonomous pathway maps, the one that could synthesize all of the biomass components , and that was composed of a minimal number of pathway maps, was determined for each of e. coli and b. subtilis, as "minimal pathway maps". we consider that they correspond to a minimal cellular-function set. the network of minimal pathway maps, composed of  <dig> conserved pathway maps and  <dig> organism-specific pathway maps for e. coli, starts a sequence of catabolic processes from carbohydrate metabolism. the catabolized compounds are used for anabolism, thus creating materials for cell components and for genetic information processing.


CONCLUSIONS
our analyses of these pathway maps revealed that those functioning in "genetic information processing" are likely to be conserved, but those for catabolism are not, reflecting an evolutionary aspect of cellular functions. minimal pathway maps were compared with a systematic gene knockout experiment, other computational results and parasitic genomes, and showed qualitative agreement, with some reasonable exceptions due to the experimental conditions or differences of computational methods. our method provides an alternative way to explore the minimal cellular function set.

