BACKGROUND
chemosensory receptors including olfactory receptors , gustatory receptors  and ionotropic receptors  play a central role in sensing chemical signals and guiding insect behaviours, and are potential target genes in insect pest control. the cotton bollworm helicoverpa armigera is one of the most destructive pest species that can feed on over  <dig> different plant species. this diversity of host plants is likely linked to a complex chemosensory system. here we built on previous work to characterize crucial chemosensory tissues linked to environmental interactions including larval antennae, larval mouthparts and larval fat bodies, as well as male and female adult heads, male and female adult tarsi, and female abdomens.


RESULTS
using transcriptome sequencing, trinity rna-seq assemblies and extensive manual curation, we identified a total of  <dig> candidate chemosensory receptors . thirty-five of these candidates present full-length transcripts. first, we performed in silico differential expression analysis on different sequenced tissues. further, we created extensive expression profiles using reverse transcription -pcr on a variety of adult and larval stages. we found that the expression profile of harmor <dig> was limited to adult male antenna suggesting a role in mating that was further supported by a phylogenetic analysis clustering it into the pheromone receptor clade. harmor <dig> in calcium imaging analysis did not show responses to either of the two h. armigera sex pheromone components  inviting a future detailed study. in addition, we found four novel harmors  that appeared to be larvae-antennal specific. finally, our expression profiling showed that four “divergent” harmirs  were expressed in both adult and larval antennae, suggesting a functional divergence from their drosophila homologues.


CONCLUSIONS
this study explored three chemoreceptor superfamily genes using a curated transcriptomic approach coupled with extensive expression profiling and a more limited functional characterization. our results have now provided an extensive resource for investigating the chemoreceptor complement of this insect pest, and meanwhile allow for targeted experiments to identify potential molecular targets for pest control and to investigate insect-plant interactions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
helicoverpa armigeraolfactory receptorgustatory receptorionotropic receptorexpression profileissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

