BACKGROUND
at the forefront of ecosystems adversely affected by climate change, coral reefs are sensitive to anomalously high temperatures which disassociate  photosynthetic symbionts  from coral hosts and cause increasingly frequent and severe mass mortality events. susceptibility to bleaching and mortality is variable among corals, and is determined by unknown proportions of environmental history and the synergy of symbiodinium- and coral-specific properties. symbiodinium live within host tissues overlaying the coral skeleton, which increases light availability through multiple light-scattering, forming one of the most efficient biological collectors of solar radiation. light-transport in the upper ~200 μm layer of corals skeletons , has been identified as a determinant of excess light increase during bleaching and is therefore a potential determinant of the differential rate and severity of bleaching response among coral species.


RESULTS
here we experimentally demonstrate  that, under thermal stress alone or combined thermal and light stress, low-μs,m′ corals bleach at higher rate and severity than high-μs,m′ corals and the symbiodinium associated with low-μs,m′ corals experience twice the decrease in photochemical efficiency. we further modelled the light absorbed by symbiodinium due to skeletal-scattering and show that the estimated skeleton-dependent light absorbed by symbiodinium  and the temporal rate of increase in absorbed light during bleaching are several fold higher in low-μs,m′ corals.


CONCLUSIONS
while symbionts associated with low-μs,m′ corals receive less total light from the skeleton, they experience a higher rate of light increase once bleaching is initiated and absorbing bodies are lost; further precipitating the bleaching response. because microscopic skeletal light-scattering is a robust predictor of light-dependent bleaching among the corals assessed here, this work establishes μs,m′ as one of the key determinants of differential bleaching response.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
global climate changeoptical scatteringcoral bleachingphotosynthesissymbiosishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundation efri-1240416backman vadim http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationcbet-1249311backman vadim http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of health eb 003682backman vadim http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000870john d. and catherine t. macarthur foundation issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

