BACKGROUND
matrix metalloproteinases  are well-known biological targets implicated in tumour progression, homeostatic regulation, innate immunity, impaired delivery of pro-apoptotic ligands, and the release and cleavage of cell-surface receptors. with this in mind, the perception of the intimate relationships among diverse mmps could be a solid basis for accelerated learning in designing new selective mmp inhibitors. in this regard, decrypting the latent molecular reasons in order to elucidate similarity among mmps is a key challenge.


RESULTS
we describe a pairwise variant of the non-parametric chaotic map clustering  algorithm and its application to  <dig> x-ray mmp structures. in this analysis electrostatic potentials are computed and used as input for the cmc algorithm. it was shown that differences between proteins reflect genuine variation of their electrostatic potentials. in addition, the analysis has been also extended to analyze the protein primary structures and the molecular shapes of the mmp co-crystallised ligands.


CONCLUSIONS
the cmc algorithm was shown to be a valuable tool in knowledge acquisition and transfer from mmp structures. based on the variation of electrostatic potentials, cmc was successful in analysing the mmp target family landscape and different subsites. the first investigation resulted in rational figure interpretation of both domain organization as well as of substrate specificity classifications. the second made it possible to distinguish the mmp classes, demonstrating the high specificity of the s1' pocket, to detect both the occurrence of punctual mutations of ionisable residues and different side-chain conformations that likely account for induced-fit phenomena. in addition, cmc demonstrated a potential comparable to the most popular upgma  method that, at present, represents a standard clustering bioinformatics approach. interestingly, cmc and upgma resulted in closely comparable outcomes, but often cmc produced more informative and more easy interpretable dendrograms. finally, cmc was successful for standard pairwise analysis  of protein sequences and was used to convincingly explain the complementarity existing between the molecular shapes of the co-crystallised ligand molecules and the accessible mmp void volumes.

