BACKGROUND
how the pathogen clostridium difficile might survive, evolve and be transferred between reservoirs within the natural environment is poorly understood. some ribotypes are found both in clinical and environmental settings. whether these strains are distinct from each another and evolve in the specific environments is not established. the possession of a highly mobile genome has contributed to the genetic diversity and ongoing evolution of c. difficile. interpretations of genetic diversity have been limited by fragmented assemblies resulting from short-read length sequencing approaches and by a limited understanding of epigenetic regulation of diversity. to address this, single molecule real time  sequencing was used in this study as it produces high quality genome sequences, with resolution of repeat regions  and can generate data to determine methylation modifications across the sequence .


RESULTS
chromosomal rearrangements and ribosomal operon duplications were observed in both genomes. the rearrangements occurred at insertion sites within two mobile genetic elements , tn <dig> and tn <dig>  present only in the m <dig> and cd105hs <dig> genomes, respectively. the gene content of these two transposons differ considerably which could impact upon horizontal gene transfer; differences include cdss encoding methylases and a conjugative prophage only in tn <dig>  to investigate mechanisms which could affect mge transfer, the methylome, restriction modification   and the crispr/cas systems were characterised for each strain. notably, the environmental isolate, cd105hs <dig>  does not share a consensus motif for m4c methylation, but has one additional spacer  when compared to the clinical isolate m <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
these findings show key differences between the two strains in terms of their genetic capacity for mge transfer. the carriage of horizontally transferred genes appear to have genome wide effects based on two different methylation patterns. the crispr/cas system appears active although perhaps slow to evolve. data suggests that both mechanisms are functional and impact upon horizontal gene transfer and genome evolution within c. difficile.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pathogen genomessmrt sequencingmobile genetic elementsmethlyomeclostridium difficilelysogenyprophagehttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000270natural environment research councilnbaf896issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

