BACKGROUND
the leucine-responsive regulatory protein  family is a widespread family of regulatory transcription factors in prokaryotes. barr is an lrp-like transcription factor in the model archaeon sulfolobus acidocaldarius that activates the expression of a β-alanine aminotransferase gene, which is involved in β-alanine degradation. in contrast to classical lrp-like transcription factors, barr is not responsive to any of the α-amino acids but interacts specifically with β-alanine. besides the juxtaposed β-alanine aminotransferase gene, other regulatory targets of barr have not yet been identified although β-alanine is the precursor of coenzyme a and thus an important central metabolite. the aim of this study is to extend the knowledge of the dna-binding characteristics of barr and of its corresponding regulon from a local to a genome-wide perspective.


RESULTS
we characterized the genome-wide binding profile of barr using chromatin immunoprecipation combined with high-throughput sequencing . this revealed  <dig> genomic binding loci. high-enrichment binding regions were validated to interact with purified barr protein in vitro using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and almost all targets were also shown to harbour a conserved semi-palindromic binding motif. only a small subset of enriched genomic sites are located in intergenic regions at a relative short distance to a promoter, and qrt-pcr analysis demonstrated that only one additional operon is under activation of barr, namely the glutamine synthase operon. the latter is also a target of other lrp-like transcription factors. detailed inspection of the barr chip-seq profile at the β-alanine aminotransferase promoter region in combination with binding motif predictions indicate that the operator structure is more complicated than previously anticipated, consisting of multiple  operators.


CONCLUSIONS
barr has a limited regulon, and includes also glutamine synthase genes besides the previously characterized β-alanine aminotransferase. regulation of glutamine synthase is suggestive of a link between β-alanine and α-amino acid metabolism in s. acidocaldarius. furthermore, this work reveals that the barr regulon overlaps with that of other lrp-like regulators.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
β-alaninesulfolobusleucine-responsive regulatory proteintranscription regulationchip-seqhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004543china scholarship councilhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004418vrije universiteit brusselfwo-vlaanderenswedish research council621-2013-4685lindås ann-christin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

