BACKGROUND
the rapid accumulation of genomic information in databases necessitates rapid and specific algorithms for extracting biologically meaningful information. more or less complete retroviral sequences, also called proviral or endogenous retroviral sequences; ervs, constitutes at least 5% of vertebrate genomes. after infecting the host, these retroviruses have integrated in germ line cells, and have then been carried in genomes for at least several  <dig> million years. a better understanding of structure and function of these sequences can have profound biological and medical consequences.

methods
retrotector©  is a platform-independent java program for identification and characterization of proviral sequences in vertebrate genomes. the full rete requires a local installation with a mysql database. although not overly complicated, the installation may take some time. a "light" version of rete,  which does not require specific installation procedures is provided, via the world wide web.


RESULTS
rol  was implemented under the batchelor web interface . it allows both genbank accession number, file and fasta cut-and-paste admission of sequences . up to ten submissions can be done simultaneously, allowing batch analysis of <=  <dig> megabases. jobs are shown in an ip-number specific list. results are text files, and can be viewed with the program, retrotectorviewer.jar , which has the full graphical capabilities of the basic rete program. a detailed analysis of any retroviral sequences found in the submitted sequence is graphically presented, exportable in standard formats. with the current server, a complete analysis of a  <dig> megabase sequence is complete in  <dig> minutes. it is possible to mask nonretroviral repetitive sequences in the submitted sequence, using host genome specific "brooms", which increase specificity.

discussion
proviral sequences can be hard to recognize, especially if the integration occurred many million years ago. precise delineation of ltr, gag, pro, pol and env can be difficult, requiring manual work. rol is a way of simplifying these tasks.


CONCLUSIONS
rol provides  <dig>  annotation and presentation of known retroviral sequences,  <dig>  detection of proviral chains in unknown genomic sequences, with up to  <dig> mbase per submission.

18– <dig> september  <dig> european molecular biology network  conference 2008: 20th anniversary celebration martina franca, italy

