BACKGROUND
the sablefish  is an economically important species in commercial fisheries of the north pacific and an emerging species in aquaculture. aside from a handful of sequences in ncbi and a few published microsatellite markers, little is known about the genetics of this species. the development of genetic tools, including polymorphic markers and a linkage map will allow for the successful development of future broodstock and mapping of phenotypes of interest. the significant sexual dimorphism between females and males makes a genetic test for early identification of sex desirable.


RESULTS
a full mitochondrial genome is presented and the resulting phylogenetic analysis verifies the placement of the sablefish within the scorpaeniformes. nearly  <dig>  assembled transcript sequences are used to identify genes and obtain polymorphic snp and microsatellite markers.  <dig> transcribed polymorphic loci from two sablefish families produce a map of  <dig> linkage groups. the sex phenotype maps to sablefish lg <dig> of the male map. we show significant conserved synteny and conservation of gene-order between the threespine stickleback gasterosteus aculeatus and sablefish. an additional  <dig> polymorphic snp markers are identified through next-generation sequencing techniques. sex-specific markers and sequence insertions are identified immediately upstream of the gene gonadal-soma derived factor , the master sex determinant locus in the medaka species oryzias luzonensis.


CONCLUSIONS
the first genomic resources for sablefish provide a foundation for further studies. over  <dig>  transcripts are presented, and the genetic map represents, as far as we can determine, the first linkage map for a member of the scorpaeniformes. the observed level of conserved synteny and comparative mapping will allow the use of the stickleback genome in future genetic studies on sablefish and other related fish, particularly as a guide to whole-genome assembly. the identification of sex-specific insertions immediately upstream of a known master sex determinant implicates gsdf as an excellent candidate for the master sex determinant for sablefish.

sablefishblack codmicrosatellitesnplinkage mapconserved syntenythreespine sticklebacksex-specific sequencesgonadal soma-derived factor

