BACKGROUND
the establishment of c <dig> photosynthesis in maize is associated with differential accumulation of gene transcripts and proteins between bundle sheath and mesophyll photosynthetic cell types. we have physically separated photosynthetic cell types in the leaf blade to characterize differences in gene expression by microarray analysis. additional control treatments were used to account for transcriptional changes induced by cell preparation treatments. to analyse these data, we have developed a statistical model to compare gene expression values derived from multiple, partially confounded, treatment groups.


RESULTS
differential gene expression in the leaves of wild-type maize seedlings was characterized using the latest release of a maize long-oligonucleotide microarray produced by the maize array project consortium. the complete data set is available through the project web site. data is also available at the ncbi geo website, series record gse <dig>  data was analysed with and without consideration of cell preparation associated stress.


CONCLUSIONS
empirical comparison of the two analyses suggested that consideration of stress helped to reduce the false identification of stress responsive transcripts as cell-type enriched. using our model including a stress term, we identified 8% of features as differentially expressed between bundle sheath and mesophyll cell types under control of false discovery rate of 5%. an estimate of the overall proportion of differentially accumulating transcripts  suggested that as many as 18% of the genes may be differentially expressed between b and m. the analytical model presented here is generally applicable to gene expression data and demonstrates the use of statistical elimination of confounding effects such as stress in the context of microarray analysis. we discuss the implications of the high degree of differential transcript accumulation observed with regard to both the establishment and engineering of the c <dig> syndrome.

