BACKGROUND
neurotrophins and their trk and p75ntr receptors play an important role in the nervous system. to date, neurotrophins, trk and p75ntr have only been found concomitantly in deuterostomes. in protostomes, homologues to either neurotrophin, trk or p75ntr are reported but their phylogenetic relationship to deuterostome neurotrophin signaling components is unclear. drosophila has neurotrophin homologues called spätzles , some of which were recently renamed neurotrophins, but direct proof that these are deuterostome neurotrophin orthologues is lacking. trks belong to the receptor tyrosine kinase  family and among rtks, trks and rors are closest related. flies lack trks but have ror and ror-related proteins called nrks playing a neurotrophic role. mollusks have so far the most similar proteins to trks  but the exact phylogenetic relationship of mollusk trks to each other and to vertebrate trks is unknown. p75ntr belongs to the tumor necrosis factor receptor  superfamily. the divergence of the tnfr families in vertebrates has been suggested to parallel the emergence of the adaptive immune system. only one tnfr representative, the drosophila wengen, has been found in protostomes. to clarify the evolution of neurotrophin signaling components in bilateria, this work analyzes the genome of the crustacean daphnia pulex as well as new genetic data from protostomes.


RESULTS
the daphnia genome encodes a neurotrophin, p75ntr and trk orthologue together with trkl, ror, and nrk-rtks. drosophila spz <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> orthologues as well as two new groups of spz proteins  are also found in the daphnia genome. searching genbank and the genomes of capitella, helobdella and lottia reveals neurotrophin signaling components in other protostomes.


CONCLUSIONS
it appears that a neurotrophin, trk and p75ntr existed at the protostome/deuterostome split. in protostomes, a "neurotrophin superfamily" includes spzs and neurotrophins which respectively form two paralogous families. trks and trkl proteins also form closely related paralogous families within the protostomian rtks, whereby trkls are absent in deuterostomes. the finding of p75ntr in several protostomes suggests that death domain tnfr superfamily proteins appeared early in evolution.

