BACKGROUND
genetic linkage maps are important tools for many genetic applications including mapping of quantitative trait loci , identifying dna markers for fingerprinting, and map-based gene cloning. carnation  is an important ornamental flower worldwide. we previously reported a random amplified polymorphic dna -based genetic linkage map derived from dianthus capitatus ssp. andrezejowskianus and a simple sequence repeat -based genetic linkage map constructed using data from intraspecific f <dig> populations; however, the number of markers was insufficient, and so the number of linkage groups  did not coincide with the number of chromosomes . therefore, we aimed to produce a high-density genetic map to improve its usefulness for breeding purposes and genetic research.


RESULTS
we improved the ssr-based genetic linkage map using ssr markers derived from a genomic library, expression sequence tags, and rna-seq data. linkage analysis revealed that  <dig> ssr loci  could be mapped to  <dig> linkage groups  covering  <dig>  cm. comparison of five minor lgs covering less than  <dig> cm with lgs in our previous rapd-based genetic map suggested that four lgs could be integrated into two lgs by anchoring common ssr loci. consequently, the number of lgs corresponded to the number of chromosomes . we added  <dig> new ssrs, eight rapd, and two sequence-tagged site loci to refine the rapd-based genetic linkage map, which comprised  <dig> lgs consisting of  <dig> loci covering  <dig>  cm. the two maps had  <dig> ssr loci in common, and most of the positions of markers were conserved between them. we identified  <dig> loci in carnation using the two linkage maps. we also mapped qtls for two traits  and a phenotypic locus for flower-type by analyzing previously reported genotype and phenotype data.


CONCLUSIONS
the improved genetic linkage maps and ssr markers developed in this study will serve as reference genetic linkage maps for members of the genus dianthus, including carnation, and will be useful for mapping qtls associated with various traits, and for improving carnation breeding programs.

carnationdianthus caryophyllus lestlinkage mapnext-generation sequencing technology rapdstsssr

