BACKGROUND
identification of parasite genes that underlie traits such as drug resistance and host specificity is challenging using classical linkage mapping approaches. extreme qtl  methods, originally developed by rodent malaria and yeast researchers, promise to increase the power and simplify logistics of linkage mapping in experimental crosses of schistosomes , because many 1000s of progeny can be analysed, phenotyping is not required, and progeny pools rather than individuals are genotyped. we explored the utility of this method for mapping a drug resistance gene in the human parasitic fluke schistosoma mansoni.


RESULTS
we staged a genetic cross between oxamniquine sensitive and resistant parasites, then between two f <dig> progeny, to generate multiple f <dig> progeny. one group of f2s infecting hamsters was treated with oxamniquine, while a second group was left untreated. we used exome capture to reduce the size of the genome  and exomes from pooled f <dig> progeny  and the two parent parasites were sequenced to high read depth  and allele frequencies at  <dig>  variants compared. we observed dramatic enrichment of alleles from the resistant parent in a small region of chromosome  <dig> in drug-treated male and female pools . this region contains smp_ <dig> a gene encoding a sulfotransferase recently implicated in oxamniquine resistance using classical linkage mapping methods.


CONCLUSIONS
these results  demonstrate the utility of exome capture for generating reduced representation libraries in schistosoma mansoni, and  provide proof-of-principle that x-qtl methods can be successfully applied to an important human helminth. the combination of these methods will simplify linkage analysis of biomedically or biologically important traits in this parasite.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
x-qtlexome captureschistosoma mansonioxamniquine resistancengsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

