BACKGROUND
the study of protein subcellular localization  is important for elucidating protein functions involved in various cellular processes. however, determining the localization sites of a protein through wet-lab experiments can be time-consuming and labor-intensive. thus, computational approaches become highly desirable. most of the psl prediction systems are established for single-localized proteins. however, a significant number of eukaryotic proteins are known to be localized into multiple subcellular organelles. many studies have shown that proteins may simultaneously locate or move between different cellular compartments and be involved in different biological processes with different roles.


RESULTS
in this study, we propose a knowledge based method, called knowpredsite, to predict the localization site of both single-localized and multi-localized proteins. based on the local similarity, we can identify the "related sequences" for prediction. we construct a knowledge base to record the possible sequence variations for protein sequences. when predicting the localization annotation of a query protein, we search against the knowledge base and used a scoring mechanism to determine the predicted sites. we downloaded the dataset from ngloc, which consisted of ten distinct subcellular organelles from  <dig> species, and performed ten-fold cross validation experiments to evaluate knowpredsite's performance. the experiment results show that knowpredsite achieves higher prediction accuracy than ngloc and blast-hit method. for single-localized proteins, the overall accuracy of knowpredsite is  <dig> %. for multi-localized proteins, the overall accuracy of knowpredsite is  <dig> %, which is significantly higher than that of ngloc by  <dig> %. notably, half of the proteins in the dataset that cannot find any blast hit sequence above a specified threshold can still be correctly predicted by knowpredsite.


CONCLUSIONS
knowpredsite demonstrates the power of identifying related sequences in the knowledge base. the experiment results show that even though the sequence similarity is low, the local similarity is effective for prediction. experiment results show that knowpredsite is a highly accurate prediction method for both single- and multi-localized proteins. it is worth-mentioning the prediction process of knowpredsite is transparent and biologically interpretable and it shows a set of template sequences to generate the prediction result. the knowpredsite prediction server is available at http://bio-cluster.iis.sinica.edu.tw/kbloc/.

7– <dig> september  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  eighth international conference on bioinformatics  singapore

