BACKGROUND
subterranean mammals have been of great interest for evolutionary biologists because of their highly specialized traits for the life underground. owing to the convergence of morphological traits and the incongruence of molecular evidence, the phylogenetic relationships among three subfamilies myospalacinae , spalacinae  and rhizomyinae  within the family spalacidae remain unresolved. here, we performed de novo transcriptome sequencing of four rna-seq libraries prepared from brain and liver tissues of a plateau zokor  and a hoary bamboo rat , and analyzed the transcriptome sequences alongside a published transcriptome of the middle east blind mole rat . we characterize the transcriptome assemblies of the two spalacids, and recover the phylogeny of the three subfamilies using a phylogenomic approach.


RESULTS
approximately  <dig>  million clean reads from the zokor and  <dig>  million clean reads from the bamboo ratwere generated by illumina paired-end rna-seq technology. all clean reads were assembled into  <dig>   and  <dig>   unigenes, which were annotated by the public databases: the swiss-prot, trembl, ncbi non-redundant protein , ncbi nucleotide sequence , gene ontology , cluster of orthologous groups , and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes . a total of  <dig>  nuclear orthologous genes were identified in the three spalacids and mouse, which was used as an outgroup. phylogenetic analysis revealed a sister group relationship between the zokor and the bamboo rat, which is supported by the majority of gene trees inferred from individual orthologous genes, suggesting subfamily myospalacinae is more closely related to subfamily rhizomyinae. the same topology was recovered from concatenated sequences of  <dig>  nuclear genes, fourfold degenerate sites of the  <dig>  nuclear genes and concatenated sequences of  <dig> protein coding mitochondrial genes.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first report of transcriptome sequencing in zokors and bamboo rats, representing a valuable resource for future studies of comparative genomics in subterranean mammals. phylogenomic analysis provides a conclusive resolution of interrelationships of the three subfamilies within the family spalacidae, and highlights the power of phylogenomic approach to dissect the evolutionary history of rapid radiations in the tree of life.

spalacidaephylogenomicstranscriptomemitochondrial genomesubterranean rodents

