BACKGROUND
ribonuclease r  is an exoribonuclease that recognizes and degrades a wide range of rna molecules. it is a stress-induced protein shown to be important for the establishment of virulence in several pathogenic bacteria. rnase r has also been implicated in the trans-translation process. transfer-messenger rna  and smpb are the main effectors of trans-translation, an rna and protein quality control system that resolves challenges associated with stalled ribosomes on non-stop mrnas. trans-translation has also been associated with deficiencies in stress-response mechanisms and pathogenicity.


RESULTS
in this work we study the expression of rnase r in the human pathogen streptococcus pneumoniae and analyse the interplay of this enzyme with the main components of the trans-translation machinery . we show that rnase r is induced after a 37°c to 15°c temperature downshift and that its levels are dependent on smpb. on the other hand, our results revealed a strong accumulation of the smpb transcript in the absence of rnase r at 15°c. transcriptional analysis of the s. pneumoniae rnr gene demonstrated that it is co-transcribed with the flanking genes, secg and smpb. transcription of these genes is driven from a promoter upstream of secg and the transcript is processed to yield mature independent mrnas. this genetic organization seems to be a common feature of gram positive bacteria, and the biological significance of this gene cluster is further discussed.


CONCLUSIONS
this study unravels an additional contribution of rnase r to the trans-translation system by demonstrating that smpb is regulated by this exoribonuclease. rnase r in turn, is shown to be under the control of smpb. these proteins are therefore mutually dependent and cross-regulated. the data presented here shed light on the interactions between rnase r, trans-translation and cold-shock response in an important human pathogen.

rna turnoverpost-transcriptional controlquality controltranscriptional unitnon-stop rna decay

