BACKGROUND
crispr-cas systems provide adaptive immunity to mobile genetic elements in prokaryotes. in many bacteria, including e. coli, a specialized ribonucleoprotein complex called cascade enacts immunity by“ an interference reaction" between crispr encoded rna  and invader dna sequences called “protospacers”. cascade recognizes invader dna via short “protospacer adjacent motif”  sequences and crrna-dna complementarity. this triggers degradation of invader dna by cas <dig> protein and in some circumstances stimulates capture of new invader dna protospacers for incorporation into crispr as “spacers” by cas <dig> and cas <dig> proteins, thus enhancing immunity. co-expression of cascade, cas <dig> and crrna is effective at giving e. coli cells resistance to phage lysis, if a transcriptional repressor of cascade and crispr, h-ns, is inactivated . we present further genetic analyses of the regulation of crispr-cas mediated phage resistance in Δhns e. coli cells.


RESULTS
we observed that e. coli type i-e crispr-cas mediated resistance to phage λ was strongly temperature dependent, when repeating previously published experimental procedures. further genetic analyses highlighted the importance of culture conditions for controlling the extent of crispr immunity in e. coli. these data identified that expression levels of cas <dig> is an important limiting factor for successful resistance to phage. significantly, we describe the new identification that cas <dig> is also under transcriptional control by h-ns but that this is exerted only in stationary phase cells.


CONCLUSIONS
regulation of cas <dig> is responsive to phase of growth, and to growth temperature in e. coli, impacting on the efficacy of crispr-cas immunity in these experimental systems.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
crispr-cash-nspamhtpgtemperaturee. colihttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003415ministarstvo obrazovanja, znanosti i sporta119-1191196-1201university of zagreb202309unversity of zagreb202761issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

