BACKGROUND
sexual dimorphism occurs widely across the animal kingdom and has profound effects on evolutionary trajectories. here, we investigate sex-specific gene expression in ischnura elegans , a species with pronounced sexual differences including a female-limited colour polymorphism with two female-like gynochrome morphs and one male-mimicking, androchrome morph. whole-organism transcriptome profiling and sex-biased gene expression analysis was conducted on adults of both sexes  to gain insights into genes and pathways potentially associated with sexual development and sexual conflict.


RESULTS
the de novo transcriptome assembly was of high quality and completeness . we identified transcripts of several relevant pathways, including transcripts involved in sex determination, hormone biosynthesis, pigmentation and innate immune signalling. a total of  <dig>  genes were differentially expressed  between males and all females . the de genes were associated with sex-specific physiological and reproductive processes, olfaction, pigmentation , hormone  biosynthesis and innate immunity signalling pathways. comparisons between males and each female morph category showed that the gynochromes differed more from males than the androchrome morph.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study to characterize sex-biased gene expression in odonates, one of the most ancient extant insect orders. comparison between i. elegans sexes revealed expression differences in several genes related to sexual differences in behaviour and development as well as morphology. the differential expression of several olfactory genes suggests interesting sexual components in the detection of odours, pheromones and environmental volatiles. up-regulation of pigmentation pathways in females indicates a prominent role of ommochrome pigments in the formation of the genetically controlled female colour polymorphism. finally, the female-biased expression of several immunity genes suggests a stronger immune response in females, possibly related to the high levels of male mating harassment and recurrent matings in this species, both of which have been shown to injure females and expose them to sexually transmitted diseases and toxins contained in seminal fluids.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ischnura elegansodonatatranscriptomesex differencesgene expressionolfactionpigmentationinnate immunitycanmovethe carl tryggers foundation the swedish research council the crafoord foundation issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

