BACKGROUND
fission yeast schizosaccharomyces pombe and budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae are among the original model organisms in the study of the cell-division cycle. unlike budding yeast, no large-scale regulatory network has been constructed for fission yeast. it has only been partially characterized. as a result, important regulatory cascades in budding yeast have no known or complete counterpart in fission yeast.


RESULTS
by integrating genome-wide data from multiple time course cell cycle microarray experiments we reconstructed a gene regulatory network. based on the network, we discovered in addition to previously known regulatory hubs in m phase, a new putative regulatory hub in the form of the hmg box transcription factor spbc19g <dig> . further, we inferred periodic activities of several less known transcription factors over the course of the cell cycle, identified over  <dig> putative regulatory targets and detected many new phase-specific and conserved cis-regulatory motifs. in particular, we show that spbc19g <dig>  has highly significant periodic activity that peaks in early m phase, which is coordinated with the late g <dig> activity of the forkhead transcription factor fkh <dig>  finally, using an enhanced bayesian algorithm to co-cluster the expression data, we obtained  <dig> clusters of co-regulated genes 1) which constitute regulatory modules from different phases of the cell cycle, 2) whose phase order is coherent across the  <dig> time course experiments, and 3) which lead to identification of phase-specific control elements at both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels in s. pombe. in particular, the ribosome biogenesis clusters expressed in g <dig> phase reveal new, highly conserved rna motifs.


CONCLUSIONS
using a systems-level analysis of the phase-specific nature of the s. pombe cell cycle gene regulation, we have provided new testable evidence for post-transcriptional regulation in the g <dig> phase of the fission yeast cell cycle. based on this comprehensive gene regulatory network, we demonstrated how one can generate and investigate plausible hypotheses on fission yeast cell cycle regulation which can potentially be explored experimentally.

