BACKGROUND
the genechip® medicago genome array, developed for medicago truncatula, is a suitable platform for transcript profiling in tetraploid alfalfa . however, previous research involving cross-species hybridization  has shown that sequence variation between two species can bias transcript profiling by decreasing sensitivity  and the accuracy of measuring fold-differences in gene expression.


RESULTS
transcript profiling using the medicago genechip® was conducted with elongating stem  and post-elongation stem  internodes from alfalfa genotypes  <dig> and  <dig> that differ in stem cell wall concentrations of cellulose and lignin. a protocol was developed that masked probes targeting inter-species variable  regions of alfalfa transcripts. a probe signal intensity threshold was selected that optimized both sensitivity and accuracy. after masking for both isv regions and previously identified single-feature polymorphisms , the number of differentially expressed genes between the two genotypes in both es and pes internodes was approximately 2-fold greater than the number detected prior to masking. regulatory genes, including transcription factor and receptor kinase genes that may play a role in development of secondary xylem, were significantly over-represented among genes up-regulated in  <dig> pes internodes compared to  <dig> pes internodes. several cell wall-related genes were also up-regulated in genotype  <dig> pes internodes. real-time quantitative rt-pcr of differentially expressed regulatory and cell wall-related genes demonstrated increased sensitivity and accuracy after masking for both isv regions and sfps. over  <dig>  genes that were differentially expressed in es and pes internodes of genotypes  <dig> and  <dig> were mapped onto putative orthologous loci on m. truncatula chromosomes. clustering simulation analysis of the differentially expressed genes suggested co-expression of some neighbouring genes on medicago chromosomes.


CONCLUSIONS
the problems associated with transcript profiling in alfalfa stems using the medicago genechip as a csh platform were mitigated by masking probes targeting isv regions and sfps. using this masking protocol resulted in the identification of numerous candidate genes that may contribute to differences in cell wall concentration and composition of stems of two alfalfa genotypes.

