BACKGROUND
impaired reaction time in patients suffering from hypoxia during sleep, caused by sleep breathing disorders, is a well-described phenomenon. high altitude sleep is known to induce periodic breathing with central apneas and oxygen desaturations, even in perfectly healthy subjects. however, deficits in reaction time in mountaineers or workers after just some nights of hypoxia exposure are not sufficiently explored. therefore, we aimed to investigate the impact of sleep in a normobaric hypoxic environment on reaction time divided by its cognitive and motoric components. eleven healthy non acclimatized students  slept one night at a simulated altitude of 3500 m in a normobaric hypoxic room, followed by a night with polysomnography at simulated 5500 m. preexisting sleep disorders were excluded via berlin questionnaire. all subjects performed a choice reaction test  at 450 m and directly after the nights at simulated  <dig> and 5500 m.


RESULTS
we found a significant increase of cognitive reaction time with higher altitude . no changes were detected in movement time . reaction time, the combined parameter of cognitive- and motoric reaction time, didn’t change either . lower spo <dig> surprisingly correlated significantly with shorter cognitive reaction time . sleep stage distribution and arousals at 5500 m didn’t correlate with reaction time, cognitive reaction time or movement time.


CONCLUSIONS
sleep in hypoxia does not seem to affect reaction time to simple tasks. the component of cognitive reaction time is increasingly delayed whereas motoric reaction time seems not to be affected. low spo <dig> and arousals are not related to increased cognitive reaction time therefore the causality remains unclear. the fact of increased cognitive reaction time after sleep in hypoxia, considering high altitude workers and mountaineering operations with overnight stays, should be further investigated.

keywords
reaction timehypoxiacognitionsleepextreme altitudeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

