BACKGROUND
non-coding rnas , which perform diverse regulatory roles, have been found in organisms from all superkingdoms of life. however, there have been limited numbers of studies on the functions of ncrnas, especially in nonmodel organisms such as kluyveromyces marxianus that is widely used in the field of industrial biotechnology.


RESULTS
in this study, we measured changes in transcriptome at three time points during the exponential growth phase of k. marxianus by using strand-specific rna-seq. we found that approximately 60 % of the transcriptome consists of ncrnas transcribed from antisense and intergenic regions of the genome that were transcribed at lower levels than mrna. in the transcriptome, a substantial number of long antisense ncrnas  are differentially expressed and enriched in carbohydrate and energy metabolism pathways. furthermore, this enrichment is evolutionarily conserved, at least in yeast. particularly, the mode of regulation of mrna/lancrna pairs is associated with mrna transcription levels; the correlation between the pairs is positive at high mrna transcriptional levels and negative at low levels. in addition, significant induction of mrna and coverage of more than half of the mrna sequence by a lancrna strengthens the positive correlation between mrna/lancrna pairs.


CONCLUSIONS
transcriptome sequencing of k. marxianus in the exponential growth phase reveals pervasive transcription of ncrnas with evolutionarily conserved functions. studies of the mode of regulation of mrna/lancrna pairs suggest that induction of lancrna may be associated with switch-like behavior of mrna/lancrna pairs and efficient regulation of the carbohydrate and energy metabolism pathways in the exponential growth phase of k. marxianus being used in industrial applications.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
kluyveromyces marxianusnon-coding rnalong antisense ncrnarna-seqpervasive transcriptionmetabolismhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003725national research foundation of korea 2011-0031962http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003725national research foundation of koreanrf-2013r1a1a30108192014r1a1a2058322cho yoo-bok cho suhyung saitissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

