BACKGROUND
mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis  is the aetiological agent of johne’s disease or paratuberculosis and is included within the mycobacterium avium complex . map strains are of two major types often referred to as ‘sheep’ or ‘s-type’ and ‘cattle’ or ‘c-type’. with the advent of more discriminatory typing techniques it has been possible to further classify the s-type strains into two groups referred to as type i and type iii. this study was undertaken to genotype a large panel of s-type small ruminant isolates from different hosts and geographical origins and to compare them with a large panel of well documented c-type isolates to assess the genetic diversity of these strain types. methods used included mycobacterial interspersed repetitive units - variable-number tandem repeat analysis , analysis of large sequence polymorphisms by pcr , single nucleotide polymorphism  analysis of gyr genes, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis  and restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis coupled with hybridization to is <dig>  analysis.


RESULTS
the presence of lspa <dig> and absence of lspa <dig> was confirmed in all  <dig> map s-type strains analysed. snps within the gyr genes divided the s-type strains into types i and iii. twenty four pfge multiplex profiles and eleven different is900-rflp profiles were identified among the s-type isolates, some of them not previously published. both pfge and is900-rflp segregated the s-type strains into types i and iii and the results concurred with those of the gyr snp analysis. nine miru-vntr genotypes were identified in these isolates. miru-vntr analysis differentiated map strains from other members of mycobacterium avium complex, and map s-type from c-type but not type i from iii. pigmented map isolates were found of type i or iii.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the largest panel of s-type strains investigated to date. the s-type strains could be further divided into two subtypes, i and iii by some of the typing techniques . miru-vntr did not divide the strains into the subtypes i and iii but did detect genetic differences between isolates within each of the subtypes. pigmentation is not exclusively associated with type i strains.

