BACKGROUND
a large number of invertebrate models, including the snail helix, emerged as particularly suitable tools for investigating the formation of synapses and the specificity of neuronal connectivity. helix neurons can be individually identified and isolated in cell culture, showing well-conserved size, position, biophysical properties, synaptic connections, and physiological functions. although we previously showed the potential usefulness of helix polysynaptic circuits, a full characterization of synaptic connectivity and its dynamics during network development has not been performed.


RESULTS
in this paper, we systematically investigated the in vitro formation of polysynaptic circuits, among helix b <dig> and the serotonergic c <dig> neurons, from a morphological and functional point of view. since these cells are generally silent in culture, networks were chemically stimulated with either high extracellular potassium concentrations or, alternatively, serotonin. potassium induced a transient depolarization of all neurons. on the other hand, we found prolonged firing activity, selectively maintained following the first serotonin application. statistical analysis revealed no significant changes in neuronal dynamics during network development. moreover, we demonstrated that the cell-selective effect of serotonin was also responsible for short-lasting alterations in c <dig> excitability, without long-term rebounds.

estimation of the functional connections by means of cross-correlation analysis revealed that networks under elevated kcl concentrations exhibited strongly correlated signals with short latencies , typical of electrically coupled cells. conversely, neurons treated with serotonin were weakly connected with longer latencies  between the interacting neurons. finally, we clearly demonstrated that these two types of correlations  were effectively related to the presence of electrical or chemical connections, by comparing micro-electrode array  signal traces with intracellularly recorded cell pairs.


CONCLUSIONS
networks treated with either potassium or serotonin were predominantly interconnected through electrical or chemical connections, respectively. furthermore, b <dig> response and short-term increase in c <dig> excitability induced by serotonin is sufficient to trigger spontaneous activity with chemical connections, an important requisite for long-term maintenance of firing activity.

helix neuronsmicro-electrode arraysfunctional connectivitynetwork developmentdynamics

