BACKGROUND
chlamydia pecorum is the causative agent of a number of acute diseases, but most often causes persistent, subclinical infection in ruminants, swine and birds. in this study, the genome sequences of three c. pecorum strains isolated from the faeces of a sheep with inapparent enteric infection , from the synovial fluid of a sheep with polyarthritis  and from a cervical swab taken from a cow with metritis  were determined using illumina/solexa and roche  <dig> genome sequencing.


RESULTS
gene order and synteny was almost identical between c. pecorum strains and c. psittaci. differences between c. pecorum and other chlamydiae occurred at a number of loci, including the plasticity zone, which contained a mac/perforin domain protein, two copies of a > <dig> amino acid putative cytotoxin gene and four  or five  genes encoding phospholipase d. chlamydia pecorum contains an almost intact tryptophan biosynthesis operon encoding trpabcdfr and has the ability to sequester kynurenine from its host, however it lacks the genes fola, folkp and folb required for folate metabolism found in other chlamydiae. a total of  <dig> polymorphic membrane proteins were identified, belonging to six pmp families. strains possess an intact type iii secretion system composed of  <dig> structural genes and accessory proteins, however a number of putative inc effector proteins widely distributed in chlamydiae are absent from c. pecorum. two genes encoding the hypothetical protein orf <dig> and inca contain variable numbers of repeat sequences that could be associated with persistence of infection.


CONCLUSIONS
genome sequencing of three c. pecorum strains, originating from animals with different disease manifestations, has identified differences in orf <dig> and pseudogene content between strains and has identified genes and metabolic traits that may influence intracellular survival, pathogenicity and evasion of the host immune system.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chlamydia pecorumgenome sequencepolymorphic membrane proteinsplasticity zonetryptophan metabolismfolate biosynthesisclustered tandem repeatsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

