BACKGROUND
chemical hybridization agents  are often used to induce male sterility for the production of hybrid seeds. we previously discovered that monosulfuron ester sodium , an acetolactate synthase  inhibitor of the herbicide sulfonylurea family, can induce rapeseed  male sterility at approximately 1% concentration required for its herbicidal activity. to find some clues to the mechanism of mes inducing male sterility, the ultrastructural cytology observations, comparative transcriptome analysis, and physiological analysis on carbohydrate content were carried out in leaves and anthers at different developmental stages between the mes-treated and mock-treated rapeseed plants.


RESULTS
cytological analysis revealed that the plastid ultrastructure was abnormal in pollen mother cells and tapetal cells in male sterility anthers induced by mes treatment, with less material accumulation in it. however, starch granules were observed in chloroplastids of the epidermis cells in male sterility anthers. comparative transcriptome analysis identified  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts  in leaves and anthers at different developmental stages, most of these dets being localized in plastid and mitochondrion. transcripts involved in metabolism, especially in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, and cellular transport were differentially expressed. pathway visualization showed that the tightly regulated gene network for metabolism was reprogrammed to respond to mes treatment. the results of cytological observation and transcriptome analysis in the mes-treated rapeseed plants were mirrored by carbohydrate content analysis. mes treatment led to decrease in soluble sugars content in leaves and early stage buds, but increase in soluble sugars content and decrease in starch content in middle stage buds.


CONCLUSIONS
our integrative results suggested that carbohydrate and lipid metabolism were influenced by cha-mes treatment during rapeseed anther development, which might responsible for low concentration mes specifically inducing male sterility. a simple action model of cha-mes inducing male sterility in b. napus was proposed. these results will help us to understand the mechanism of mes inducing male sterility at low concentration, and might provide some potential targets for developing new male sterility inducing chas and for genetic manipulation in rapeseed breeding.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
brassica napus l.chemical hybridization agentmale sterilitymonosulfuron ester sodiumexpression profilecarbohydrate and lipid metabolismissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

