BACKGROUND
the first aim of the work was to analyze in detail the complexity of the aggregates formed upon overexpression of recombinant proteins in e. coli. a sucrose step gradient succeeded in separating aggregate subclasses of a gfp-gst fusion protein with specific biochemical and biophysical features, providing a novel approach for studying recombinant protein aggregates.


RESULTS
the total lysate separated into  <dig> different fractions whereas only the one with the lowest density was detected when the supernatant recovered after ultracentrifugation was loaded onto the sucrose gradient. the three further aggregate sub-classes were otherwise indistinctly precipitated in the pellet. the distribution of the recombinant protein among the four subclasses was strongly dependent on the dnak availability, with larger aggregates formed in dnak- mutants. the aggregation state of the gfp-gst recovered from each of the four fractions was further characterized by examining three independent biochemical parameters. all of them showed an increased complexity of the recombinant protein aggregates starting from the top of the sucrose gradient  to the bottom . these results were also confirmed by electron microscopy analysis of the macro-structure formed by the different aggregates. large fibrils were rapidly assembled when the recombinant protein was incubated in the presence of cellular extracts, but the gfp-gst fusion purified soon after lysis failed to undergo amyloidation, indicating that other cell components probably participate in the active formation of large aggregates. finally, we showed that aggregates of lower complexity are more efficiently disaggregated by a combination of molecular chaperones.


CONCLUSIONS
an additional analytical tool is now available to investigate the aggregation process and separate subclasses by their mass. it was possible to demonstrate the complexity of the aggregation pattern of a recombinant protein expressed in bacteria and to characterize biochemically the different aggregate subclasses. furthermore, we have obtained evidence that the cellular environment plays a role in the development of the aggregates and the problem of the artifact generation of aggregates has been discussed using in vitro models. finally, the possibility of separating aggregate fractions with different complexities offers new options for biotechnological strategies aimed at improving the yield of folded and active recombinant proteins.

