BACKGROUND
micrornas  have been shown to regulate the expression of a large number of genes and play key roles in many biological processes. several previous studies have quantified the inhibitory effect of a mirna indirectly by considering the expression levels of genes that are predicted to be targeted by the mirna and this approach has been shown to be robust to the choice of prediction algorithm. given a gene expression dataset, cheng et al. defined the regulatory effect score  of a mirna as the difference in the gene expression rank of targets of the mirna compared to non-targeted genes.


RESULTS
using microarray data from parent-offspring trios from the international hapmap project, we show that the re-score of most mirnas is correlated between parents and offspring and, thus, inter-individual variation in re-score has a genetic component in humans. indeed, the mean re-score across mirnas is correlated between parents and offspring, suggesting genetic differences in the overall efficiency of the mirna biogenesis pathway between individuals. to explore the genetics of this quantitative trait further, we carried out a genome-wide association study of the mean re-score separately in two hapmap populations . no genome-wide significant associations were discovered; however, a snp rs <dig>  in an intron of drosha, was significantly associated with mean re-score in the ceu population following permutation-based control for multiple testing based on all snps mapped to the canonical mirna biogenesis pathway; of  <dig> individual mirna re-scores assessed in the ceu,  <dig> were associated  with rs <dig>  the snp was also nominally significantly associated  with mean re-score in the yri population. interestingly, the same snp was associated with  <dig>  mirna expression levels in the ceu. we also show here that the expression of the targets of most mirnas is more highly correlated with global changes in mirna regulatory effect than with the expression of the mirna itself.


CONCLUSIONS
we present evidence that mirna regulatory effect is a heritable trait in humans and that a polymorphism of the drosha gene contributes to the observed inter-individual differences.

