BACKGROUND
the potential for alternative plant protein sources to replace limited marine ingredients in fish feeds is important for the future of the fish farming industry. however, plant ingredients in fish feeds contain antinutritional factors  that can promote gut inflammation  and compromise fish health. it is unknown whether enteritis induced by plant materials with notable differences in secondary metabolism is characterised by common or distinct gene expression patterns, and how using feeds with single vs mixed plant proteins may affect the gut transcriptome and fish performance. we used atlantic salmon parr to investigate the transcriptome responses of distal gut to varying dietary levels  of soy protein concentrate  and faba bean  protein concentrate  following an 8-week feeding trial. soybean meal  and fish meal  were used as positive and negative controls for enteritis, respectively. gene expression profiling was performed using a microarray platform developed and validated for atlantic salmon.


RESULTS
different plant protein materials  generated substantially different gut gene expression profiles, with relatively few transcriptomic alterations  common for all plant proteins used. when spc and bpc were simultaneously included in the diet, they induced less extensive alterations of gut transcriptome than diets with either spc or bpc singly, probably due to reduced levels of individual anfs. the mixed plant protein diets were also associated with improved body composition of fish relative to the single plant protein diets, which may provide evidence for a link between the magnitude of changes in gut transcriptome and whole-animal performance.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that gut transcriptomic profiling provides a useful tool for testing the applicability of alternative protein sources for aquaculture feeds and designing diets with reduced impact of anfs on fish health. ultimately, understanding diet-gut interactions and intestinal homeostasis in farmed fish is important to maximise performance and to ensure that aquaculture continues to be a sustainable source of food for a growing world population.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
soy protein concentratebean protein concentratesoybean mealantinutritional factorsgut inflammationenteritiswhole-animal performancemicroarraygene expressioncholesterol biosynthesis pathwayhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000396technology strategy board11974-81166martin samuel a. m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

