BACKGROUND
this study evaluated tyrosine kinase receptor  expression and activation in canine pulmonary adenocarcinoma  biospecimens. as histological similarities exist between human and cpac, we hypothesized that cpacs will have increased tkr mrna and protein expression as well as tkr phosphorylation. the molecular profile of cpac has not been well characterized making the selection of therapeutic targets that would potentially have relevant biological activity impossible. therefore, the objectives of this study were to define tkr expression and their phosphorylation state in cpac as well as to evaluate the tumors for the presence of potential epidermal growth factor receptor  tyrosine kinase activating mutations in exons 18– <dig>  immunohistochemistry  for tkr expression was performed using a tissue microarray  constructed from twelve canine tumors and companion normal lung samples. staining intensities of the ihc were quantified by a veterinary pathologist as well as by two different digitalized algorithm image analyses software programs. an antibody array was used to evaluate tkr phosphorylation of the tumor relative to the tkr phosphorylation of normal tissues with the resulting spot intensities quantified using array analysis software. each egfr exon pcr product from all of the tumors and non-affected lung tissues were sequenced using sequencing chemistry and the sequencing reactions were run on automated sequencer. sequence alignments were made to the national center for biotechnology information canine egfr reference sequence.


RESULTS
the pro-angiogenic growth factor receptor, pdgfrα, had increased cpac tumor mrna, protein expression and phosphorylation when compared to the normal lung tissue biospecimens. similar to human pulmonary adenocarcinoma, significant increases in cpac tumor mrna expression and receptor phosphorylation of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase  tyrosine receptor were present when compared to the corresponding normal lung tissue. the egfr mrna, protein expression and phosphorylation were not increased compared to the normal lung and no activating mutations were identified in exons 18– <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
canine pulmonary adenocarcinoma tkrs are detected at both the mrna and protein levels and are activated. further investigation into the contribution of tkr activation in cpac tumorigenesis is warranted.

canineepidermal growth factor receptorlung cancerplatelet-derived growth factor receptortyrosine kinase receptors

