BACKGROUND
deoxyribonucleic acid  vaccines are used for experimental immunotherapy of equine melanoma. the injection of complexed linear dna encoding interleukin -12/il- <dig> induced partial tumour remission in a clinical study including  <dig> grey horses. to date, the detailed mechanism of the anti-tumour effect of this treatment is unknown.


RESULTS
in the present study, the clinical and cellular responses of  <dig> healthy horses were monitored over 72 h after simultaneous intradermal and intramuscular application of equine il-12/il- <dig> dna  or comparative substances .

although the strongest effect was observed in horses treated with expressing dna, horses in all groups treated with dna showed systemic responses. in these horses treated with dna, rectal temperatures were elevated after treatment and serum amyloid a increased. total leukocyte and neutrophil counts increased, while lymphocyte numbers decreased. the secretion of tumour necrosis factor alpha  and interferon gamma  from peripheral mononuclear blood cells ex vivo increased after treatments with dna, while il- <dig> secretion decreased. horses treated with dna had significantly higher myeloid cell numbers and chemokine  ligand - <dig> expression in skin samples at the intradermal injection sites compared to horses treated with transfection reagent only, suggesting an inflammatory response to dna treatment.

in horses treated with expressing dna, however, local cxcl- <dig> expression was highest and immunohistochemistry revealed more intradermal il-12-positive cells when compared to the other treatment groups.

in contrast to non-grey horses, grey horses showed fewer effects of dna treatments on blood lymphocyte counts, tnfα secretion and myeloid cell infiltration in the dermis.


CONCLUSIONS
treatment with complexed linear dna constructs induced an inflammatory response independent of the coding sequence and of cg motif content. expressing il-12/il- <dig> dna locally induces expression of the downstream mediator cxcl- <dig> 

the grey horses included appeared to display an attenuated immune response to dna treatment, although grey horses bearing melanoma responded to this treatment with moderate tumour remission in a preceding study. whether the different immunological reactivity compared to other horses may contributes to the melanoma susceptibility of grey horses remains to be elucidated.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
equine melanomagrey horsemidge vectorcytokinescpgil-12il-18transfection reagentdna vaccinecationic lipidissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

