BACKGROUND
information regarding bacteria biotopes is important for several research areas including health sciences, microbiology, and food processing and preservation. one of the challenges for scientists in these domains is the huge amount of information buried in the text of electronic resources. developing methods to automatically extract bacteria habitat relations from the text of these electronic resources is crucial for facilitating research in these areas.

methods
we introduce a linguistically motivated rule-based approach for recognizing and normalizing names of bacteria habitats in biomedical text by using an ontology. our approach is based on the shallow syntactic analysis of the text that include sentence segmentation, part-of-speech  tagging, partial parsing, and lemmatization. in addition, we propose two methods for identifying bacteria habitat localization relations. the underlying assumption for the first method is that discourse changes with a new paragraph. therefore, it operates on a paragraph-basis. the second method performs a more fine-grained analysis of the text and operates on a sentence-basis. we also develop a novel anaphora resolution method for bacteria coreferences and incorporate it with the sentence-based relation extraction approach.


RESULTS
we participated in the bacteria biotope  task of the bionlp shared task  <dig>  our system  achieved the second best performance with 68% slot error rate  in sub-task  <dig> , and ranked third with an f-score of 27% in sub-task  <dig> . this paper reports the system that is implemented for the shared task, including the novel methods developed and the improvements obtained after the official evaluation. the extensions include the expansion of the ontobiotope ontology using the training set for sub-task  <dig>  and the novel sentence-based relation extraction method incorporated with anaphora resolution for sub-task  <dig>  these extensions resulted in promising results for sub-task  <dig> with a ser of 68%, and state-of-the-art performance for sub-task  <dig> with an f-score of 53%.


CONCLUSIONS
our results show that a linguistically-oriented approach based on the shallow syntactic analysis of the text is as effective as machine learning approaches for the detection and ontology-based normalization of habitat entities. furthermore, the newly developed sentence-based relation extraction system with the anaphora resolution module significantly outperforms the paragraph-based one, as well as the other systems that participated in the bb shared task  <dig> 

bionlp shared taskbacteria biotopesbacteria habitatsshallow syntactic analysisontology-based annotationrelation extractionanaphora resolutioninformation extractiontext miningnatural language processing <dig>  <dig>  <dig>  bionlp shared task  <dig> sofia, bulgaria

