BACKGROUND
high throughput next-generation sequencing technology has enabled the collection of genome-wide sequence data and revolutionized single nucleotide polymorphism  discovery in a broad range of species. when analyzed within a population genomics framework, snp-based genotypic data may be used to investigate questions of evolutionary, ecological, and conservation significance in natural populations of non-model organisms. kokanee salmon are recently diverged freshwater populations of sockeye salmon  that exhibit reproductive ecotypes  in lakes throughout western north america and northeast asia. current conservation and management strategies may treat these ecotypes as discrete stocks, however their recent divergence and low levels of gene flow make in-season genetic stock identification a challenge. the development of genome-wide snp markers is an essential step towards fine-scale stock identification, and may enable a direct investigation of the genetic basis of ecotype divergence.


RESULTS
we used pooled cdna samples from both ecotypes of kokanee to generate  <dig> million base pairs of transcriptome sequence data. these raw data were assembled into  <dig>  high coverage contigs from which we identified  <dig>  novel single nucleotide polymorphisms. a subset of these putative snps was validated using high-resolution melt analysis and sanger resequencing to genotype independent samples of kokanee and anadromous sockeye salmon. we also identified a number of contigs that were composed entirely of reads from a single ecotype, which may indicate regions of differential gene expression between the two reproductive ecotypes. in addition, we found some evidence for greater pathogen load among the kokanee sampled in stream-spawning habitats, suggesting a possible evolutionary advantage to shore-spawning that warrants further study.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides novel genomic resources to support population genetic and genomic studies of both kokanee and anadromous sockeye salmon, and has the potential to produce markers capable of fine-scale stock assessment. while this rnaseq approach was successful at identifying a large number of new snp loci, we found that the frequency of alleles present in the pooled transcriptome data was not an accurate predictor of population allele frequencies.

adaptationhigh resolution melt analysisnext-generation sequencingoncorhynchus nerkasingle nucleotide polymorphisms

