BACKGROUND
the major histocompatibility complex  plays a crucial role in the adaptive immune system and has been extensively studied across vertebrate taxa. although the function of mhc genes appears to be conserved across taxa, there is great variation in the number and organisation of these genes. among avian species, for instance, there are notable differences in mhc structure between passerine and non-passerine lineages: passerines typically have a high number of highly polymorphic mhc paralogs whereas non-passerines have fewer loci and lower levels of polymorphism. although the occurrence of highly polymorphic mhc paralogs in passerines is well documented, their evolutionary origins are relatively unexplored. the majority of studies have focussed on the more derived passerine lineages and there is very little empirical information on the diversity of the mhc in basal passerine lineages. we undertook a study of mhc diversity and evolutionary relationships across seven species from four families  that comprise a prominent component of the basal passerine lineages. we aimed to determine if highly polymorphic mhc paralogs have an early evolutionary origin within passerines or are a more derived feature of the infraorder passerida.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> alleles of the mhc class ii β exon  <dig> in seven basal passerine species, with variation in numbers of alleles across individuals and species. overall, we found evidence of multiple gene loci, pseudoalleles, trans-species polymorphism and high allelic diversity in these basal lineages. phylogenetic reconstruction of avian lineages based on mhc class ii β exon  <dig> sequences strongly supported the monophyletic grouping of basal and derived passerine species.


CONCLUSIONS
our study provides evidence of a large number of highly polymorphic mhc paralogs in seven basal passerine species, with strong similarities to the mhc described in more derived passerine lineages rather than the simpler mhc in non-passerine lineages. these findings indicate an early evolutionary origin of highly polymorphic mhc paralogs in passerines and shed light on the evolutionary forces shaping the avian mhc.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
trans-species polymorphismgene duplicationconcerted evolutionconvergent evolutionbirth-and-death modelaccordion modelpasseridacorvidahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000923australian research councillp0776322sunnucks paul http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000987melbourne research, university of melbournehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000969australian academy of scienceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

