BACKGROUND
the insulin-like growth factor  system impacts cell proliferation and is highly activated in ovarian cancer. while an attractive therapeutic target, the igf system is complex with two receptors , two ligands , and at least six high affinity igf-binding proteins  that regulate the bioavailability of igf ligands. we hypothesized that a quantitative balance between these different network components regulated cell response.


RESULTS
ovcar <dig>  an immortalized ovarian cancer cell line, were found to be sensitive to igf <dig>  with the dose of igf <dig>  a more reliable predictor of cell response than ligand concentration. the applied dose of igf <dig> was depleted by both cell-secreted igfbps and endocytic trafficking, with igfbps sequestering up to 90% of the available ligand. to explore how different variables  impacted cell response, a mass-action steady-state model was developed. examination of the model revealed that the level of igf1-igf1r complexes per cell was directly proportional to the extent of proliferation induced by igf <dig>  model analysis suggested, and experimental results confirmed, that igfbps present during igf <dig> treatment significantly decreased igf1-mediated proliferation. we utilized this model to assess the efficacy of igf <dig> and igf1r antibodies against different network compositions and determined that igf1r antibodies were more globally effective due to the receptor-limited state of the network.


CONCLUSIONS
changes that affect igf1r occupancy have predictable effects on igf1-induced proliferation and our model captured these effects. analysis of this model suggests that igf1r antibodies will be more effective than igf <dig> antibodies, although the difference was minimal in conditions with low levels of igf <dig> and igfbps. examining how different components of the igf system influence cell response will be critical to improve our understanding of the igf signaling network in ovarian cancer.

insulin-like growth factor mathematical modelingovarian cancer

