BACKGROUND
since the function of a protein is largely dictated by its three dimensional configuration, determining a protein's structure is of fundamental importance to biology. here we report on a novel approach to determining the one dimensional secondary structure of proteins  from primary sequence data which makes use of parallel cascade identification , a powerful technique from the field of nonlinear system identification.


RESULTS
using psi-blast divergent evolutionary profiles as input data, dynamic nonlinear systems are built through a black-box approach to model the process of protein folding. genetic algorithms  are applied in order to optimize the architectural parameters of the pci models. the three-state prediction problem is broken down into a combination of three binary sub-problems and protein structure classifiers are built using  <dig> layers of pci classifiers. careful construction of the optimization, training, and test datasets ensures that no homology exists between any training and testing data. a detailed comparison between pci and  <dig> contemporary methods is provided over a set of  <dig> new protein chains guaranteed to be dissimilar to all training data. unlike other secondary structure prediction methods, here a web service is developed to provide both human- and machine-readable interfaces to pci-based protein secondary structure prediction. this server, called pci-ss, is available at . in addition to a dynamic php-generated web interface for humans, a simple object access protocol  interface is added to permit invocation of the pci-ss service remotely. this machine-readable interface facilitates incorporation of pci-ss into multi-faceted systems biology analysis pipelines requiring protein secondary structure information, and greatly simplifies high-throughput analyses. xml is used to represent the input protein sequence data and also to encode the resulting structure prediction in a machine-readable format. to our knowledge, this represents the only publicly available soap-interface for a protein secondary structure prediction service with published wsdl interface definition.


CONCLUSIONS
relative to the  <dig> contemporary methods included in the comparison cascaded pci classifiers perform well, however pci finds greatest application as a consensus classifier. when pci is used to combine a sequence-to-structure pci-based classifier with the current leading ann-based method, psipred, the overall error rate  is maintained while the rate of occurrence of a particularly detrimental error is reduced by up to 25%. this improvement in bad score, combined with the machine-readable soap web service interface makes pci-ss particularly useful for inclusion in a tertiary structure prediction pipeline.

