BACKGROUND
fungal skin infections associated with ophidiomyces ophiodiicola, a member of the chrysosporium anamorph of nannizziopsis vriesii  complex, have been linked to an increasing number of cases of snake fungal disease  in captive snakes around the world and in wild snake populations in eastern north america. the emergence of sfd in both captive and wild situations has led to an increased need for tools to better diagnose and study the disease.


RESULTS
we developed two taqman real-time polymerase chain reaction  assays to rapidly detect o. ophiodiicola in clinical samples. one assay targets the internal transcribed spacer region  of the fungal genome while the other targets the more variable intergenic spacer region . the pcr assays were qualified using skin samples collected from  <dig> snakes for which o. ophiodiicola had been previously detected by culture,  <dig> snakes with gross skin lesions suggestive of sfd but which were culture-negative for o. ophiodiicola, and  <dig> snakes with no clinical signs of infection. both assays performed equivalently and proved to be more sensitive than traditional culture methods, detecting o. ophiodiicola in 98% of the culture-positive samples and in 40% of the culture-negative snakes that had clinical signs of sfd. in addition, the assays did not cross-react with a panel of  <dig> fungal species that are closely related to o. ophiodiicola or that commonly occur on the skin of snakes. the assays did, however, indicate that some asymptomatic snakes  may harbor low levels of the fungus, and that pcr should be paired with histology when a definitive diagnosis is required.


CONCLUSIONS
these assays represent the first published methods to detect o. ophiodiicola by real-time pcr. the its assay has great utility for assisting with sfd diagnoses whereas the igs assay offers a valuable tool for research-based applications.

keywords
chrysosporium anamorph of nannizziopsis vriesii emerging diseaseophidiomyces ophiodiicolareal-time pcrsnake fungal diseaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

