BACKGROUND
oil palm is an important perennial oil crop with an extremely long selection cycle of  <dig> to 12 years. as such, any tool that speeds up its genetic improvement process, such as marker-assisted breeding is invaluable. previously, genetic linkage maps based on aflp, rflp and ssr markers were developed and qtls for fatty acid composition and yield components identified. high density genetic maps of crosses of different genetic backgrounds are indispensable tools for investigating oil palm genetics. they are also useful for comparative mapping analyses to identify markers closely linked to traits of interest.


RESULTS
a  <dig>  k customized oil palm snp array was developed using the illumina infinium platform. the snps and  <dig> ssrs were genotyped on two mapping populations, an intraspecific cross with  <dig> palms and an interspecific cross with  <dig> palms. parental maps with  <dig> linkage groups , were constructed for the three fruit forms of e. guineensis . map resolution was further increased by integrating the dura and pisifera maps into an intraspecific integrated map with  <dig>  markers spanning  <dig>  cm. we also report the first map of a colombian e. oleifera, comprising  <dig> lgs with  <dig> markers spanning 471 cm. although not very dense due to the high level of homozygosity in e. oleifera, the lgs were successfully integrated with the lgs of the tenera map. direct comparison between the parental maps identified  <dig> transferable markers polymorphic in at least two of the parents. further analysis revealed a high degree of marker transferability covering  <dig>  cm, between the intra- and interspecific integrated maps. the interspecific cross displayed higher segregation distortion than the intraspecific cross. however, inclusion of distorted markers in the genetic maps did not disrupt the marker order and no map expansion was observed.


CONCLUSIONS
the high density snp and ssr-based genetic maps reported in this paper have greatly improved marker density and genome coverage in comparison with the first reference map based on aflp and ssr markers. therefore, it is foreseen that they will be more useful for fine mapping of qtls and whole genome association mapping studies in oil palm.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
elaeis guineensise. oleiferainterspecificintraspecificcomparative mappingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

