BACKGROUND
the genetic features that facilitate campylobacter jejuni’s adaptation to a wide range of environments are not completely defined. however, whole genome expression studies showed that respiratory proteins  were differentially expressed under varying conditions and stresses, suggesting further unidentified roles for rps in c. jejuni’s adaptation. therefore, our objectives were to characterize the contributions of selected rps to c. jejuni’s i- key survival phenotypes under different temperature  and oxygen  conditions and ii- its interactions with intestinal epithelial cells from disparate hosts .


RESULTS
c. jejuni mutant strains with individual deletions that targeted five rps; nitrate reductase , nitrite reductase , formate dehydrogenase , hydrogenase , and methylmenaquinol:fumarate reductase  were used in this study. we show that only the Δfdha exhibited a decrease in motility; however, incubation at 42°c significantly reduced the deficiency in the Δfdha’s motility as compared to 37°c. under all tested conditions, the Δmfra showed a decreased susceptibility to hydrogen peroxide , while the Δnapa and the Δfdha showed significantly increased susceptibility to the oxidant as compared to the wildtype. further, the susceptibility of the Δnapa to h2o <dig> was significantly more pronounced at 37°c. the biofilm formation capability of individual rp mutants varied as compared to the wildtype. however, the impact of the deletion of certain rps affected biofilm formation in a manner that was dependent on temperature and/or oxygen concentration. for example, the Δmfra displayed significantly deficient and increased biofilm formation under microaerobic conditions at 37°c and 42°c, respectively. however, under anaerobic conditions, the Δmfra was only significantly impaired in biofilm formation at 42°c. additionally, the rps mutants showed differential ability for infecting and surviving in human intestinal cell lines  and primary chicken intestinal epithelial cells, respectively. notably, the Δfdha and the Δhydb were deficient in interacting with both cell types, while the Δmfra displayed impairments only in adherence to and invasion of int- <dig>  scanning electron microscopy showed that the Δhydb and the Δfdha exhibited filamentous and bulging  cell shapes, respectively, which might be indicative of defects in cell division.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the rps contribute to c. jejuni’s motility, h2o <dig> resistance, biofilm formation, and in vitro interactions with hosts’ intestinal cells. further, the impact of certain rps varied in response to incubation temperature and/or oxygen concentration. therefore, rps may facilitate the prevalence of c. jejuni in a variety of niches, contributing to the pathogen’s remarkable potential for adaptation.

campylobacter jejunirespiratory proteinssurvivaladaptationmotilityoxidative stressbiofilmoxygentemperatureint-407chicken intestinal epithelial cells

