BACKGROUND
during glacial periods, glacial advances caused temperate plant extirpation or retreat into localized warmer areas, and subsequent postglacial glacial retreats resulted in range expansions, which facilitated secondary contact of previously allopatric isolated lineages. the evolutionary outcomes of secondary contact, including hybrid zones, dynamic hybrid swarm, and resultant hybrid speciation, depends on the strengths of reproductive barriers that have arisen through epistatic and pleiotropic effects during allopatric isolation. the aim of this study was to demonstrate refugia isolation and subsequent secondary contact between two perennial asclepioid species and to assess the genetic consequences of the secondary contact. we modeled the range shift of two ecologically distinct vincetoxicum species using the species distribution model  and assessed the genetic consequences of secondary contact by combining morphological and genetic approaches. we performed morphometric analysis  and examined  <dig> nuclear microsatellites  in v. atratum, v. japonicum, and putative hybrid populations.


RESULTS
multivariate analysis, model-based bayesian analysis, and non-model-based discriminant analysis of principal components confirmed the hybridization between v. atratum and v. japonicum. high pollen fertility and a lack of linkage disequilibrium suggested that the hybrid populations may be self-sustaining and have persisted since v. atratum and v. japonicum came into contact during the post-glacial period. moreover, our findings show that the pattern of hybridization between v. atratum and v. japonicum is unidirectional and differs among populations. geographically-isolated hybrid populations exist as genetically distinct hybrid swarms that consist of v. atratum-like genotypes, v. japonicum-like genotypes, or admixed genotypes. in addition, bayesian-based clustering analysis and coalescent-based estimates of long-term gene flow showed patterns of introgressive hybridization in three morphologically ‘pure’ v. japonicum populations.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we demonstrated that climatic oscillations during the quaternary period likely led to species range shift and subsequently secondary contact. hybrid populations may be self-sustaining and have persisted since v. atratum and v. japonicum came into contact during the post-glacial period. pattern of hybridization between v. atratum and v. japonicum is unidirectional and differs among populations. we concluded that these differences in the genetic consequences of secondary contact are caused by historical colonization processes and/or natural selection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
historical introgressionhybrid swarmnuclear microsatellitepast secondary contactvincetoxicumhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of sciencekakenhi 21570086maki masayuki tohoku university global centre of excellence  programj03maki masayuki http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001700ministry of education, culture, sports, science, and technologyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

