BACKGROUND
multidrug and toxic compound extrusion  family is an important group of the multidrug efflux transporters that extrude organic compounds, transporting a broad range of substrates such as organic acids, plant hormones and secondary metabolites. however, genome-wide analysis of mate family in plant species is limited and no such studies have been reported in soybean.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> genes encoding mate transporters were identified from the whole genome sequence of soybean , which were denominated as gmmate <dig> - gmmate <dig>  these  <dig> gmmate genes were unevenly localized on soybean chromosomes  <dig> to  <dig>  with both tandem and segmental duplication events detected, and most genes showed tissue-specific expression patterns. soybean mate family could be classified into four subfamilies comprising ten smaller subgroups, with diverse potential functions such as transport and accumulation of flavonoids or alkaloids, extrusion of plant-derived or xenobiotic compounds, regulation of disease resistance, and response to abiotic stresses. eight soybean mate transporters clustered together with the previously reported mate proteins related to aluminum  detoxification and iron translocation were further analyzed. seven stress-responsive cis-elements such as abre, are, hse, ltr, mbs, as well as a cis-element of art <dig> , ggnvs, were identified in the upstream region of these eight gmmate genes. differential gene expression analysis of these eight gmmate genes in response to al stress helps us identify gmmate <dig> as the candidate gene for al tolerance in soybean, whose relative transcript abundance increased at  <dig>   <dig> and 24 h after al treatment, with more fold changes in al-tolerant than al-sensitive cultivar, which is consistent with previously reported al-tolerance related mate genes.


CONCLUSIONS
a total of  <dig> mate transporters were identified in soybean and their potential functions were proposed by phylogenetic analysis with known plant mate transporters. the cis-elements and expression patterns of eight soybean mate genes related to al detoxification/iron translocation were analyzed, and gmmate <dig> was identified as a candidate gene for al tolerance in soybean. this study provides a first insight on soybean mate family and their potential roles in soybean response to abiotic stresses especially al toxicity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
abiotic stressaluminum toxicitycis-elementduplicationexpression analysismatephylogenetic analysissoybeanthe national natural science foundation of china 31371645li yan the national high-tech r & d program of china2013aa102602li yan the fundamental research funds for the central universitiesthe program for changjiang scholars and innovative research team in universitypcsirt13073li yan the program for new century excellent talents in universityncet-12-0891li yan the program for high-level innovative and entrepreneurial talents in jiangsu provincethe jiangsu higher education papd programissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

