BACKGROUND
yarrowia lipolytica is an oleaginous ascomycete yeast that stores lipids in response to limitation of nitrogen. while the enzymatic pathways responsible for neutral lipid accumulation in y. lipolytica are well characterized, regulation of these pathways has received little attention. we therefore sought to characterize the response to nitrogen limitation at system-wide levels, including the proteome, phosphoproteome and metabolome, to better understand how this organism regulates and controls lipid metabolism and to identify targets that may be manipulated to improve lipid yield.


RESULTS
we found that ribosome structural genes are down-regulated under nitrogen limitation, during which nitrogen containing compounds  are depleted and sugar alcohols and tca cycle intermediates accumulate . we identified  <dig> novel phosphorylation sites in y. lipolytica,  <dig> of which change in their abundance during nitrogen limitation. regulatory proteins, including kinases and dna binding proteins, are particularly enriched for phosphorylation. within lipid synthesis pathways, we found that atp-citrate lyase, acetyl-coa carboxylase and lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase are phosphorylated during nitrogen limitation while many of the proteins involved in β-oxidation are down-regulated, suggesting that storage lipid accumulation may be regulated by phosphorylation of key enzymes. further, we identified short dna elements that associate specific transcription factor families with up- and down-regulated genes.


CONCLUSIONS
integration of metabolome, proteome and phosphoproteome data identifies lipid accumulation in response to nitrogen limitation as a two-fold result of increased production of acetyl-coa from excess citrate and decreased capacity for β-oxidation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
yarrowia lipolyticalipidproteomemetabolomephosphorylationphosphoproteomenitrogenregulationbeta-oxidationribosome biogenesistranslationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100006206biological and environmental research de- sc0008744baker scott e. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

