BACKGROUND
protein-protein interaction networks and phenotype similarity information have been synthesized together to discover novel disease-causing genes. genetic or phenotypic similarities are manifested as certain modularity properties in a phenotype-gene heterogeneous network consisting of the phenotype-phenotype similarity network, protein-protein interaction network and gene-disease association network. however, the quantitative analysis of modularity in the heterogeneous network and its influence on disease-gene discovery are still unaddressed. furthermore, the genetic correspondence of the disease subtypes can be identified by marking the genes and phenotypes in the phenotype-gene network. we present a novel network inference method to measure the network modularity, and in particular to suggest the subtypes of diseases based on the heterogeneous network.


RESULTS
based on a measure which is introduced to evaluate the closeness between two nodes in the phenotype-gene heterogeneous network, we developed a hitting-time-based method, cipher-hit, for assessing the modularity of disease gene predictions and credibly prioritizing disease-causing genes, and then identifying the genetic modules corresponding to potential subtypes of the queried phenotype. the cipher-hit is free to rely on any preset parameters. we found that when taking into account the modularity levels, the cipher-hit method can significantly improve the performance of disease gene predictions, which demonstrates modularity is one of the key features for credible inference of disease genes on the phenotype-gene heterogeneous network. by applying the cipher-hit to the subtype analysis of breast cancer, we found that the prioritized genes can be divided into two sub-modules, one contains the members of the fanconi anemia gene family, and the other contains a reported protein complex mre11/rad50/nbn.


CONCLUSIONS
the phenotype-gene heterogeneous network contains abundant information for not only disease genes discovery but also disease subtypes detection. the cipher-hit method presented here is effective for network inference, particularly on credible prediction of disease genes and the subtype analysis of diseases, for example breast cancer. this method provides a promising way to analyze heterogeneous biological networks, both globally and locally.

