BACKGROUND
carbohydrate-active enzymes are found in all organisms and participate in key biological processes. these enzymes are classified in  <dig> families in the cazy database but the sequence diversity within each family makes it a major task to identify new family members and to provide basis for prediction of enzyme function. a fast and reliable method for de novo annotation of genes encoding carbohydrate-active enzymes is to identify conserved peptides in the curated enzyme families followed by matching of the conserved peptides to the sequence of interest as demonstrated for the glycosyl hydrolase and the lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase families. this approach not only assigns the enzymes to families but also provides functional prediction of the enzymes with high accuracy.


RESULTS
we identified conserved peptides for all enzyme families in the cazy database with peptide pattern recognition. the conserved peptides were matched to protein sequence for de novo annotation and functional prediction of carbohydrate-active enzymes with the hotpep method. annotation of protein sequences from  <dig> bacterial and  <dig> fungal genomes to families with hotpep had an accuracy of  <dig>   compared to semiautomatic annotation by the cazy database whereas the dbcan hmm-based method had an accuracy of  <dig>  with optimized parameters. furthermore, hotpep provided a functional prediction with 86% accuracy for the annotated genes. hotpep is available as a stand-alone application for ms windows.


CONCLUSIONS
hotpep is a state-of-the-art method for automatic annotation and functional prediction of carbohydrate-active enzymes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
carbohydrate-active enzymesgenomicsannotationsoftwarenordic innovation fundmar 14319danish innovation fundsynferonhttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008398villum fondennot applicableissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

