BACKGROUND
a high-density genetic map is essential for de novo genome assembly, fine mapping qtl for important complex traits, comparative genomic studies and understanding the mechanisms of genome evolution. although a number of genomic resources are available in asian seabass , a high-density linkage map is still lacking. to facilitate qtl mapping for marker-assisted selection and genome assembly, and to understand the genome-wide recombination rates, we constructed high density linkage maps using three families and genotyping by sequencing.


RESULTS
a high-density consensus linkage map consisting of  <dig>   <dig> markers was constructed based on sex-averaged genetic maps. the genetic maps were then aligned and integrated with the current genome assembly of asian seabass. more than 90% of the genome contig sequences were anchored onto the consensus genetic map. evidence of assembly errors in the current genome assembly was identified. a fragment of up to  <dig>  mb belonging to lg <dig> was assembled into chr <dig>  the length of family-specific sex-averaged maps ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  cm. female maps were slightly longer than male maps using common markers. female-to-male ratios were highly variable both across chromosomes within each family and throughout three families for each chromosome. however, the distribution patterns of recombination along chromosomes were similar between sexes across the whole genome. the overall recombination rates were significantly correlated with genome-wide gc content and the correlations were revealed to be stronger in females than in males.


CONCLUSIONS
these high-density genetic maps provide not only essential tools for facilitating de novo genome assembly and comparative genomic studies in teleosts, but also critical resources for fine mapping qtl and genome-wide association mapping for economically important traits in asian seabass.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
linkage mapgenome assemblyrecombination ratesgc contentselective breedinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001381national research foundation singaporenrf-crp7-2010-01yue gen hua innovation support fund of temasek life sciences laboratory limitedissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

