BACKGROUND
a long-term existing schistosome infection can aid in maintaining immuno-homeostasis, thus providing protection against various types of autoimmune diseases to the infected host. such benefits have often been associated with acute or egg stage infection and with the egg-induced th <dig> response. however, since schistosome infection undergoes different stages, each associated with a specific induction of th responses, the requirements for the ability of the different stages of schistosome infection to protect against autoimmune disease has not been elucidated. the present study was designed to study whether different stages of schistosome infection offer unique protection in collagen-induced arthritis and its mechanisms.


RESULTS
arthritis susceptible strain dba/ <dig> male mice were infected with schistosoma japonicum for either  <dig> weeks resulting in early stage infection or for  <dig> weeks resulting in acute or egg stage infection. following schistosoma japonicum infection, collagen ii was administered to induce collagen-induced arthritis, an animal model for human rheumatoid arthritis. infection by schistosoma japonicum significantly reduced the severity and the incidence of experimental autoimmune collagen-induced arthritis. however, this beneficial effect can only be provided by a pre-established acute stage of infection but not by a pre-established early stage of the infection. the protection against collagen-induced arthritis correlated with reduced levels of anti-collagen ii igg, especially the subclass of igg2a. moreover, in protected mice increased levels of il- <dig> were present at the time of collagen ii injection together with sustained higher il- <dig> levels during the course of arthritis development. in contrast, in unprotected mice minimal levels of il- <dig> were present at the initial stage of collagen ii challenge together with lack of il- <dig> induction following schistosoma japonicum infection.


CONCLUSIONS
the protective effect against collagen-induced arthritis provided by schistosoma japonicum infection is infection stage-dependent. furthermore, the ability of schistosomiasis to negatively regulate the onset of collagen-induced arthritis is associated with a dominant as well as long-lasting th <dig> response at the initiation and development of autoimmune joint and systemic inflammation.

