BACKGROUND
dna methylation is an important epigenetic mark that can potentially link early life exposures to adverse health outcomes later in life. host factors like sex and age strongly influence biological variation of dna methylation, but characterization of these relationships is still limited, particularly in young children.

methods
in a sample of  <dig> mexican-american subjects , we interrogated dna methylation differences by sex at birth using the 450 k beadchip in umbilical cord blood specimens, adjusting for cell composition.


RESULTS
we observed that ~3 % of cpg sites were differentially methylated between girls and boys at birth . of those cpgs,  <dig> were located on autosomes, and  <dig>  % of those were hypermethylated in girls compared to boys. beyond individual cpgs, we found  <dig> sex-associated differentially methylated regions  where the majority  had higher methylation in girls. using pathway analysis, we found that sex-associated autosomal cpgs were significantly enriched for gene ontology terms related to nervous system development and behavior. among hits in our study,  <dig>  % had been previously reported as sex-associated cpg sites in other published human studies. further, for replicated hits, the direction of the association with methylation was highly concordant  with previous studies.


CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, this is the first reported epigenome-wide analysis by sex at birth that examined dmrs and adjusted for confounding by cell composition. we confirmed previously reported trends that methylation profiles are sex-specific even in autosomal genes, and also identified novel sex-associated cpgs in our methylome-wide analysis immediately after birth, a critical yet relatively unstudied developmental window.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
epigeneticsgene ontologybirth cohortewasgendercord bloodissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

