BACKGROUND
green fluorescent protein  and other fp fusions have been extensively utilized to track protein dynamics in living cells. recently, development of photoactivatable, photoswitchable and photoconvertible fluorescent proteins  has made it possible to investigate the fate of discrete subpopulations of tagged proteins. initial limitations to their use  were overcome when monomeric variants, such as dendra, meos, and mkikgr were cloned/engineered.


RESULTS
here, we report that by closing the field diaphragm, selective, precise and irreversible green-to-red photoconversion  of discrete subcellular protein pools was achieved on a wide-field fluorescence microscope equipped with standard dapi, fluorescein, and rhodamine filter sets and mercury arc illumination within 5- <dig> seconds. use of a dapi-filter cube with long-pass emission filter  allowed the observation and control of the photoconversion process in real time. following photoconversion, living cells were imaged for up to  <dig> hours often without detectable phototoxicity or photobleaching.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate the practicability of this technique using dendra <dig> and meos <dig> as monomeric, photoconvertible pafp representatives fused to proteins with low , medium , and high  dynamic cellular mobility as examples. comparable efficient, irreversible green-to-red photoconversion of selected portions of cell nuclei, gap junctions, microtubules and clathrin-coated vesicles was achieved. tracking over time allowed elucidation of the dynamic live-cycle of these subcellular structures. the advantage of this technique is that it can be performed on a standard, relatively inexpensive wide-field fluorescence microscope with mercury arc illumination. together with previously described laser scanning confocal microscope-based photoconversion methods, this technique promises to further increase the general usability of photoconvertible pafps to track the dynamic movement of cells and proteins over time.

