BACKGROUND
microalgae-derived biodiesel is a promising substitute for conventional fossil fuels. in particular, the green alga chlorella protothecoides sp.  <dig> is regarded as one of the best candidates for commercial manufacture of microalgae-derived biofuel. this is due not only to its ability to live autotrophically through photosynthesis, but also to its capacity to produce a large amount of biomass and lipid through fermentation of glucose. however, until the present study, neither its genome sequence nor the platform required for molecular manipulations were available.


RESULTS
we generated a draft genome for c. protothecoides, and compared its genome size and gene content with that of chlorella variabilis nc64a and coccomyxa subellipsoidea c- <dig>  this comparison revealed that c. protothecoides has a reduced genome size of  <dig>  mbp, about half that of its close relatives. the c. protothecoides genome encodes a smaller number of genes, fewer multi-copy genes, fewer unique genes, and fewer genome rearrangements compared with its close relatives. in addition, three chlorella-specific hexose-proton symporter -like genes were identified that enable the consumption of glucose and, consequently, heterotrophic growth. furthermore, through comparative transcriptomic and proteomic studies, we generated a global perspective regarding the changes in metabolic pathways under autotrophic and heterotrophic growth conditions. under heterotrophic conditions, enzymes involved in photosynthesis and co <dig> fixation were almost completely degraded, either as mrnas or as proteins. meanwhile, the cells were not only capable of quickly assimilating glucose but also showed accelerated glucose catabolism through the upregulation of glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid  cycle. moreover, the rapid synthesis of pyruvate, upregulation of most enzymes involved in fatty acid synthesis, and downregulation of enzymes involved in fatty acid degradation favor the synthesis of fatty acids within the cell.


CONCLUSIONS
despite similarities to other chlorella, c. protothecoides has a smaller genome than its close relatives. genes involved in glucose utilization were identified, and these genes explained its ability to grow heterotrophically. transcriptomic and proteomic results provided insight into its extraordinary ability to accumulate large amounts of lipid. the c. protothecoides draft genome will promote the use of this species as a research model.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
microalgaechlorella protothecoidesgenome sequenceproteomicoil accumulationhexose-proton symportertranscriptomelipidissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

