BACKGROUND
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies  affect both domestic sheep  and captive and free-ranging cervids . the geographical range of bighorn sheep  overlaps with states or provinces that have contained scrapie-positive sheep or goats and areas with present epizootics of cwd in cervids. no tses have been documented in bhs, but the susceptibility of this species to tses remains unknown.


RESULTS
we acquired a library of bhs tissues and found no evidence of preexisting tses in these animals. the prion protein gene  in all bhs in our library was identical to scrapie-susceptible domestic sheep . using an in vitro prion protein conversion assay, which has been previously used to assess tse species barriers and, in our study appears to recollect known species barriers in mice, we assessed the potential transmissibility of tses to bhs. as expected based upon prnp genotype, we observed bhs prion protein conversion by classical scrapie agent and evidence for a species barrier between transmissible mink encephalopathy  and bhs. interestingly, our data suggest that the species barrier of bhs to white-tailed deer or wapiti cwd agents is likely low. we also used protein misfolding cyclic amplification to confirm that cwd, but not tme, can template prion protein misfolding in a136r154q <dig> genotype sheep.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate the in vitro conversion assay used in our study does mimic the species barrier of mice to the tse agents that we tested. based on prnp genotype and results from conversion assays, bhs are likely to be susceptible to infection by classical scrapie. despite mismatches in amino acids thought to modulate prion protein conversion, our data indicate that a136r154q <dig> genotype sheep prion protein is misfolded by cwd agent, suggesting that these animals could be susceptible to cwd. further investigation of tse transmissibility to bhs, including animal studies, is warranted. the lack of reported tses in bhs may be attributable to other host factors or a lack of tse surveillance in this species.

bighorn sheepscrapiechronic wasting diseasetransmissible mink encephalopathyspecies barrier

