BACKGROUND
growing interest is turned to fat storage levels and allocation within body compartments, due to their impact on human health and quality properties of farm animals. energy intake and genetic background are major determinants of fattening in most animals, including humans. previous studies have evidenced that fat deposition depends upon balance between various metabolic pathways. using divergent selection, we obtained rainbow trout with differences in fat allocation between visceral adipose tissue and muscle, and no change in overall body fat content. transcriptome and proteome analysis were applied to characterize the molecular changes occurring between these two lines when fed a low or a high energy diet. we focused on the liver, center of intermediary metabolism and the main site for lipogenesis in fish, as in humans and most avian species.


RESULTS
the proteome and transcriptome analyses provided concordant results. the main changes induced by the dietary treatment were observed in lipid metabolism. the level of transcripts and proteins involved in intracellular lipid transport, fatty acid biosynthesis and anti-oxidant metabolism were lower with the lipid rich diet. in addition, genes and proteins involved in amino-acid catabolism and proteolysis were also under expressed with this diet. the major changes related to the selection effect were observed in levels of transcripts and proteins involved in amino-acid catabolism and proteolysis that were higher in the fat muscle line than in the lean muscle line.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study led to the identification of novel genes and proteins that responded to long term feeding with a high energy/high fat diet. although muscle was the direct target, the selection procedure applied significantly affected hepatic metabolism, particularly protein and amino acid derivative metabolism. interestingly, the selection procedure and the dietary treatment used to increase muscle fat content exerted opposite effects on the expression of the liver genes and proteins, with little interaction between the two factors. some of the molecules we identified could be used as markers to prevent excess muscle fat accumulation.

