BACKGROUND
5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase  is the sixth and penultimate enzyme in the shikimate biosynthesis pathway, and is the target of the herbicide glyphosate.  the epsps genes of allohexaploid wheat  have not been well characterized. herein, the three homoeologous copies of the allohexaploid wheat epsps gene were cloned and characterized.

methods
genomic and coding dna sequences of epsps from the three related genomes of allohexaploid wheat were isolated using pcr and inverse pcr approaches from soft white spring “louise’.  development of genome-specific primers allowed the mapping and expression analysis of taepsps-7a <dig>  taepsps-7d <dig>  and taepsps-4a <dig> on chromosomes 7a, 7d, and 4a, respectively. sequence alignments of cdna sequences from wheat and wheat relatives served as a basis for phylogenetic analysis. 


RESULTS
the three genomic copies of wheat epsps differed by insertion/deletion and single nucleotide polymorphisms , largely in intron sequences. rt-pcr analysis and cdna cloning revealed that epsps is expressed from all three genomic copies. however, taepsps-4a <dig> is expressed at much lower levels than taepsps-7a <dig> and taepsps-7d <dig> in wheat seedlings. phylogenetic analysis of 1190-bp cdna clones from wheat and wheat relatives revealed that: 1) taepsps-7a <dig> is most similar to epsps from the tetraploid ab genome donor, t. turgidum ; 2) taepsps-7d <dig> most resembles epsps from the diploid d genome donor, aegilops tauschii ; and 3) taepsps-4a <dig> resembles epsps from the diploid b genome relative, ae. speltoides . thus, epsps sequences in allohexaploid wheat are preserved from the most two recent ancestors. the wheat epsps genes are more closely related to lolium multiflorum and brachypodium distachyon than to oryza sativa .


CONCLUSIONS
the three related epsps homoeologues of wheat exhibited conservation of the exon/intron structure and of coding region sequence, but contained significant sequence variation within intron regions. the genome-specific primers developed will enable future characterization of natural and induced variation in epsps sequence and expression.  this can be useful in investigating new causes of glyphosate herbicide resistance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cloningepsp synthaseglyphosatepolyploidtaepsps-4a1taepsps-7a1taepsps-7d1triticeae evolutiontriticum aestivumwheatissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

