BACKGROUND
mutation of arabidopsis dmr <dig>  encoding homoserine kinase, leads to elevation in homoserine and foliar resistance to the biotrophic pathogens hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis and oidium neolycopersici through activation of an unidentified defence mechanism. this study investigates the effect of mutation of dmr <dig> on resistance to the ascomycete pathogens fusarium graminearum and f. culmorum, which cause fusarium ear blight  disease on small grain cereals.


RESULTS
we initially found that the dmr1- <dig> mutant allele confers increased resistance to f. culmorum and f. graminearum silique infection, and decreased colonisation of rosette leaves. meanwhile the dmr1- <dig> allele supports less rosette leaf colonisation but has wild type silique resistance. three additional dmr <dig> alleles were subsequently examined for altered f. culmorum susceptibility and all showed increased silique resistance, while leaf colonisation was reduced in two . amino acid analysis of dmr <dig> siliques revealed homoserine accumulation, which is undetectable in wild type plants. exogenous application of l-homoserine reduced bud infection in both dmr <dig> and wild type plants, whilst d-homoserine application did not. delayed leaf senescence was also observed in dmr <dig> plants compared to wild type and correlated with reduced fusarium leaf colonisation.


CONCLUSIONS
these findings suggest that common arabidopsis dmr <dig> mediated susceptibility mechanisms occur during infection by both obligate biotrophic oomycete and hemi-biotrophic fungal pathogens, not only in vegetative but also in reproductive plant tissues. this has the potential to aid the development of cereal crops with enhanced resistance to feb.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
arabidopsisfusarium culmorumfusarium graminearumhomoserine kinasedisease resistancegain of functionfusarium head scabissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

