BACKGROUND
brassica rapa  contains very diverse forms which include oleiferous types and many vegetable types. genome sequence of b. rapa line chiifu , a leafy vegetable type, was published in  <dig>  using this knowledge, it is important to develop genomic resources for the oleiferous types of b. rapa. this will allow more involved molecular mapping, in-depth study of molecular mechanisms underlying important agronomic traits and introgression of traits from b. rapa to major oilseed crops - b. juncea  and b. napus . the study explores the availability of snps in rna-seq generated contigs of three oleiferous lines of b. rapa - candle , yspb- <dig> and tetra  and their use in genome-wide linkage mapping and specific-region fine mapping using a ril population between chiifu and tetra.


RESULTS
rna-seq was carried out on the rna isolated from young inflorescences containing unopened floral buds, floral axis and small leaves, using illumina paired-end sequencing technology. sequence assembly was carried out using the velvet de-novo programme and the assembled contigs were organised against chiifu gene models, available in the brad-cds database. rna-seq confirmed the presence of more than  <dig>  single-copy gene models described in the brad database. the assembled contigs and the brad gene models were analyzed for the presence of ssrs and snps. while the number of ssrs was limited, more than  <dig>  million snps were observed between chiifu and the three oleiferous lines. assays for snps were designed using kaspar technology and tested on a f7-ril population derived from a chiifu x tetra cross. the design of the snp assays were based on three considerations - the 50 bp flanking region of the snps should be strictly similar, the snp should have a read-depth of ≥ <dig> and no exon/intron junction should be present within the 101 bp target region. using these criteria, a total of  <dig> markers  marking as many genes were tested for mapping. out of  <dig> markers that were tested,  <dig> markers could be mapped unambiguously which included  <dig> markers for genome-wide mapping and  <dig> markers for fine mapping of the tet-o locus that is involved with the trait tetralocular ovary in the line tetra.


CONCLUSIONS
a large number of snps and psvs are present in the transcriptome of b. rapa lines for genome-wide linkage mapping and specific-region fine mapping. criteria used for snp identification delivered markers, more than 93% of which could be successfully mapped to the f7–ril population of chiifu x tetra cross.

brassica raparna-seqnext generation sequencingsingle nucleotide polymorphism paralog specific variation coding dna sequences kaspar assays

