BACKGROUND
computer-aided, interdisciplinary researches for biomedicine have valuable prospects, as digitalization of experimental subjects provide opportunities for saving the economic costs of researches, as well as promoting the acquisition of knowledge. acute myeloid leukemia  is intensively studied over long periods of time. till nowaday, most of the studies primarily focus on the leukemic cells rather than how normal hematopoietic cells are affected by the leukemic environment. accordingly, the conventional animal models for aml are mostly myeloablated as leukemia can be induced with short latency and complete penetrance. meanwhile, most previous computational models focus on modeling the leukemic cells but not the multi-tissue leukemic body resided by both leukemic and normal blood cells. recently, a non-irradiated aml mouse model has been established; therefore, normal hematopoietic cells can be investigated during leukemia development. experiments based on the non-irradiated animal model have monitored the kinetics of leukemic and  hematopoietic cells in multiple tissues simultaneously; and thus a systematic computational model for the multi-tissue hematopoiesis under leukemia has become possible.


RESULTS
in the present work, we adopted the modeling methods in previous works, but aimed to model the tri-tissue  dynamics of hematopoiesis under leukemia. the cell kinetics generated from the non-irradiated experimental model were used as the reference data for modeling. all mathematical formulas were systematically enumerated, and model parameters were estimated via numerical optimization. multiple validations by additional experimental data were then conducted for the established computational model. in the results, we illustrated that the important fact of functional depression of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells  in leukemic bone marrow , which must require additional experiments to be established, could also be inferred from our computation model that utilized only the cell kinetics data as the input.


CONCLUSIONS
the digitalized aml model established in the present work is effective for reconstructing the hematopoiesis under leukemia as well as simulating the hematopoietic response to leukemic cell expansion. given the validity and efficiency, the model can be of potential utilities in future biomedical studies; additionally, the modeling method itself can be also applied elsewhere.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
non-irradiated aml modelcomputational modeling leukemiahematopoietic suppressionincreased quiescence of hscthe international conference on intelligent biology and medicine   <dig> indianapolis, in, usa 13- <dig> november  <dig> http://watson.compbio.iupui.edu/yunliu/icibm/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

