BACKGROUND
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs , transdermal fentanyl patches, and transmucosal buprenorphine are probably the most commonly used options for providing post-operative analgesia in the early at-home period. however, these require daily administration or are associated with abuse concerns. one of the significant unmet needs in veterinary surgery and pain management is for longer acting opioids for cats to effectively bridge the gap between the in-hospital and at-home recovery periods.

a proof of concept study of an extended release formulation of buprenorphine hcl  was conducted using objective kinetic measures and a unilateral onychectomy model. using a blinded, randomized, two period crossover design, four cats were allocated to control  or er-bup  treatment groups. all animals underwent a unilateral forelimb onychectomy per period with a washout/recovery period in between. observational pain scores and kinetic data  were collected prior to  and at intervals for 72 h following surgery. symmetry indices were derived for kinetic variables  of each forelimb for landing following a jump and for walking. a rescue analgesic protocol was in place. effect of surgery and treatment were evaluated using a mixed model statistical approach.


RESULTS
no cats required rescue analgesics based on subjective pain score. er-bup had a positive influence on subjective pain scores during the 72 h postsurgery . pvf and vi of the operated limb were significantly decreased for both landing  and walking  compared to control. er-bup resulted in significantly decreased asymmetry in limb use during landing  and walking . the novel use of data collected following a jump from an elevated platform appeared to provide all desired information and was easier to collect than walking data.


CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates that sc administration of er-bup may be an effective analgesic for a 72 h period postoperatively. furthermore, landing onto a psw from an elevated perch may be a useful and efficient way to assess analgesics in cats using a unilateral model of limb pain.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
buprenorphineextended releasepressure sensitive walkwaylandingcatkineticfarnam companies inc. phoenix, arizonaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

