BACKGROUND
dynamic transcriptional regulation is critical for an organism’s response to environmental signals and yet remains elusive to capture. such transcriptional regulation is mediated by master transcription factors  that control large gene regulatory networks. recently, we described a dynamic mode of tf regulation named “hit-and-run”. this model proposes that master tf can interact transiently with a set of targets, but the transcription of these transient targets continues after the tf dissociation from the target promoter. however, experimental evidence validating active transcription of the transient tf-targets is still lacking.


RESULTS
here, we show that active transcription continues after transient tf-target interactions by tracking de novo synthesis of rnas made in response to tf nuclear import. to do this, we introduced an affinity-labeled 4-thiouracil  nucleobase to specifically isolate newly synthesized transcripts following conditional tf nuclear import. thus, we extended the target system  to include 4tu-labeling and named this new technology target-tu. our proof-of-principle example is the master tf basic leucine zipper  <dig> , a central integrator of metabolic signaling in plants. using target-tu, we captured newly synthesized mrnas made in response to bzip <dig> nuclear import at a time when bzip <dig> is no longer detectably bound to its target. thus, the analysis of de novo transcripomics demonstrates that bzip <dig> may act as a catalyst tf to initiate a transcriptional complex , after which active transcription by rna polymerase continues without the tf being bound to the gene promoter .


CONCLUSIONS
our findings provide experimental proof for active transcription of transient tf-targets supporting a “hit-and-run” mode of action. this dynamic regulatory model allows a master tf to catalytically propagate rapid and broad transcriptional responses to changes in environment. thus, the functional read-out of de novo transcripts produced by transient tf-target interactions allowed us to capture new models for genome-wide transcriptional control.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcription factor target gene4-thiouracil dynamic regulationgene regulatory networks“hit-and-run” transcriptiontranscriptional regulationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of health r01-gm032877coruzzi gloria m. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundation ios-1339362coruzzi gloria m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

