BACKGROUND
there are increasing efforts to bring high-throughput systems biology techniques to bear on complex animal model systems, often with a goal of learning about underlying regulatory network structures . however, complex animal model systems typically have significant limitations on cohort sizes, number of samples, and the ability to perform follow-up and validation experiments. these constraints are particularly problematic for many current network learning approaches, which require large numbers of samples and may predict many more regulatory relationships than actually exist.


RESULTS
here, we test the idea that by leveraging the accuracy and efficiency of classifiers, we can construct high-quality networks that capture important interactions between variables in datasets with few samples. we start from a previously-developed tree-like bayesian classifier and generalize its network learning approach to allow for arbitrary depth and complexity of tree-like networks. using four diverse sample networks, we demonstrate that this approach performs consistently better at low sample sizes than the sparse candidate algorithm, a representative approach for comparison because it is known to generate bayesian networks with high positive predictive value. we develop and demonstrate a resampling-based approach to enable the identification of a viable root for the learned tree-like network, important for cases where the root of a network is not known a priori. we also develop and demonstrate an integrated resampling-based approach to the reduction of variable space for the learning of the network. finally, we demonstrate the utility of this approach via the analysis of a transcriptional dataset of a malaria challenge in a non-human primate model system, macaca mulatta, suggesting the potential to capture indicators of the earliest stages of cellular differentiation during leukopoiesis.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that by starting from effective and efficient approaches for creating classifiers, we can identify interesting tree-like network structures with significant ability to capture the relationships in the training data. this approach represents a promising strategy for inferring networks with high positive predictive value under the constraint of small numbers of samples, meeting a need that will only continue to grow as more high-throughput studies are applied to complex model systems.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bayesian networksnetwork learning algorithmtree-like networksmalarianon-human primatetranscriptomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

