BACKGROUND
understanding the factors underlying habitat selection is important in ecological and evolutionary contexts, and crucial for developing targeted conservation action in threatened species. however, the key factors associated to habitat selection often remain poorly known. we evaluated hypotheses related to abiotic and biotic factors thought to affect territory selection of the wood warbler phylloscopus sibilatrix, a passerine living in an unpredictable environment owing to irregular rodent outbreaks and showing long-term declines particularly in western europe.


RESULTS
comparing breeding territories to unoccupied areas located close-by revealed that territory occupancy in north-western switzerland was positively related to slope steepness  as well as to numbers of tussocks and trees, respectively, while it showed a unimodal relationship to cover of herb layer . furthermore, a strong negative correlation between breeding territory occupancy and rodent numbers was found, suggesting that wood warblers avoid areas with high rodent densities . comparing breeding territories to abandoned territories showed that breeding territories were located on steeper slopes , at larger distance from the forest edge  and harboured more trees  than abandoned territories.


CONCLUSIONS
aside from structural and topographic features of the habitat, wood warblers are affected by rodent numbers when settling, making habitat selection unpredictable from year to year. forestry practices promoting relatively high tree densities, few bushes and an intermediate low-growing ground vegetation cover would enhance habitat quality for this declining passerine. in contrast, forestry practices aiming at increasing light in forests  or keeping forest stands permanently covered with shrubs, bushes and trees of various sizes  do not benefit the wood warbler.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
habitatecological nicheforestryaicc model selectionavespasseriformeshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001711schweizerischer nationalfonds zur förderung der wissenschaftlichen forschung31003a_143879/1pasinelli gilberto hilfsfonds für die schweizerische vogelwarte sempachlotteriefonds des kantons solothurnpd-stiftung der universität zürichstotzer-kästli-stiftungstyner-stiftungissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

