BACKGROUND
there is a substantial paucity of studies concerning musculoskeletal injuries in harness standardbred racehorses. specifically, little is known about the epidemiology of exercise-related musculoskeletal injuries. most studies on this subject involve thoroughbred racehorses, whose biomechanics and racing speed differ from standardbred, making comparisons difficult. here, a population of standardbred racehorses trained at the same racecourse was studied over four years and a classification system for exercise-related musculoskeletal injuries was designed. the incidence rates of musculoskeletal injuries causing horses’ withdrawal from training for  <dig> days or longer were investigated. a mixed-effects poisson regression model was used to estimate musculoskeletal injury rates and to describe significance of selected risk factors for exercise-related injuries in this population.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> trotter racehorses from  <dig> different stables contributed  <dig> months at risk of musculoskeletal injuries. four-hundred-and-twenty-nine injuries were reported and classified into  <dig> categories, based on their aetiology and anatomical localisation. the overall exercise-related injury rate was  <dig>  per  <dig> horse months. when considering risk factors one by one in separate univariable analyses, we obtained the following results: rates did not differ significantly between genders and classes of age, whereas one driver seemed to cause fewer injuries than the others. racing speed and racing intensity, as well as recent medical history, seemed to be significant risk factors , while being shod or unshod during racing was not. on the other hand, when pooling several risk factors in a multivariable approach, only racing intensity turned out to be significant , since racing speed and the racing intensity were partially confounded, being strongly correlated to one another.


CONCLUSIONS
characterizing epidemiology of exercise-related musculoskeletal injuries in trotter racehorses provides baseline incidence rate values. incidence rates of stress fracture are lower in standardbreds compared to thoroughbreds, whereas the opposite is true for tendon and suspensory ligament injuries. in addition to identification of risk factors for musculoskeletal injuries among standardbred racehorses, results suggest that racing intensity seems to be a protective predictor of risk and recent medical history could be used to identify horses at risk of injury.

standardbred racehorsesepidemiologytrottermusculoskeletal injuriesexercise-related injuries

