BACKGROUND
huanglongbing , the most devastating disease of citrus, is associated with infection by candidatus liberibacter asiaticus  and is vectored by the asian citrus psyllid . recently, the molecular basis of citrus–hlb interactions has been examined using transcriptome analyses, and these analyses have identified many probe sets and pathways modulated by calas infection among different citrus cultivars. however, lack of consistency among reported findings indicates that an integrative approach is needed. this study was designed to identify the candidate probe sets in citrus–hlb interactions using meta-analysis and gene co-expression network modelling.


RESULTS
twenty-two publically available transcriptome studies on citrus–hlb interactions, comprising  <dig> susceptible  datasets and four resistant  datasets, were investigated using limma and rankprod methods of meta-analysis. a combined list of  <dig>  differentially expressed probe sets was generated using a teradata in-house structured query language  script. we identified the  <dig> most common probe sets modulated in hlb disease among different tissues from the s and r datasets. gene ontology analysis of these probe sets suggested that carbohydrate metabolism, nutrient transport, and biotic stress were the core pathways that were modulated in citrus by calas infection and hlb development. we also identified r-specific probe sets, which encoded leucine-rich repeat proteins, chitinase, constitutive disease resistance , miraculins, and lectins. weighted gene co-expression network analysis  was conducted on  <dig>  probe sets, and  <dig> modules with major hub probe sets were identified. further, a mirna nested network was created to examine gene regulation of the  <dig>  target probe sets. results suggest that csi-mir <dig> and csi-mir <dig> could affect ion transporters and defence response pathways, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
most of the potential candidate hub probe sets were co-expressed with gibberellin pathway -related probe sets, implying the role of ga signalling in hlb resistance. our findings contribute to the integration of existing citrus–hlb transcriptome data that will help to elucidate the holistic picture of the citrus–hlb interaction. the citrus probe sets identified in this analysis signify a robust set of hlb-responsive candidates that are useful for further validation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
citrusgene co-expression analysisgene ontologyhuanglongbinghlb resistancemeta-analysismirna network analysiscommon and r-specific probe setsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

