BACKGROUND

pepino mosaic virus  is an emerging plant pathogen that infects tomatoes worldwide. understanding the factors that influence its evolutionary success is essential for developing new control strategies that may be more robust against the evolution of new viral strains. one of these evolutionary factors is the distribution of mutational fitness effect , that is, the fraction of mutations that are lethal, deleterious, neutral, and beneficial on a given viral strain and host species. the goal of this study was to characterize the dmfe of introduced nonsynonymous mutations on a mild isolate of pepmv from the chilean  <dig> strain . additionally, we also explored whether the fitness effect of a given mutation depends on the gene where it appears or on epistatic interactions with the genetic background. to address this latter possibility, a subset of mutations were also introduced in a mild isolate of the european strain  and the fitness of the resulting clones measured.


RESULTS
a collection of  <dig> pepmv clones each containing a single nucleotide nonsynonymous substitution was created by site-directed mutagenesis and the fitness of each mutant was determined. pepmv-p <dig> genome showed a high degree of robustness against point mutations, with 80% of mutations being either neutral or even beneficial and only 20% being deleterious or lethal. we found that the effect of mutations strongly depended on the gene in which they were introduced. mutations with the largest average beneficial effects were those affecting the rdrp gene, in contrast to mutations affecting tgb <dig> and cp genes, for which the average effects were deleterious. moreover, significant epistatic interactions were observed between nonsynonymous mutations and the genetic background, meaning that the effect of a given nucleotide substitution on a particular genomic context cannot be predicted by knowing its effect in a different one.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicated that pepmv genome has a surprisingly high robustness against mutations. we also found that fitness consequences of a given mutation differ between the two strains analyzed. this discovery suggests that the strength of selection, and thus the rates of evolution, vary among pepmv strains.

keywords
epistasismutational fitness effectpepino mosaic virusreal-time quantitative pcrsite-directed mutagenesisvirus accumulationvirus evolutionpoland national science center2011/01/d/nz9/00279hasiów-jaroszewska beata spain ministry of economy and competitivenessbfu2015-65037-pelena santiago f. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003359generalitat valencianaprometeoii/2014/021elena santiago f. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

