BACKGROUND
the transglutaminase activated factor xiii  acts to strengthen pathological fibrin clots and to slow their dissolution, in part by crosslinking active α2-antiplasmin  to fibrin. we previously reported that a yeast-derived recombinant fusion protein comprising α2ap residues 13- <dig> linked to human serum albumin  weakened in vitro clots but failed to become specifically incorporated into in vivo clots. in this study, our aims were to improve both the stability and clot localization of the hsa fusion protein by replacing α2ap residues 13- <dig> with shorter sequences recognized more effectively by fxiiia.


RESULTS
expression plasmids were prepared encoding recombinant hsa with the following n-terminal  <dig> residue extensions: h6nqeqvspltllag4y ; h6dqmmlpwavtlg4y ; h6wqhkidlpyngag4y ; and their  <dig> residue non-his-tagged equivalents . the hsa moiety of xl4- to xl6-hsa proteins was c-terminally his-tagged. all chimerae were efficiently secreted from transformed pichia pastoris yeast except xl3-hsa, and following nickel chelate affinity purification were found to be intact by amino acid sequencing, as was an n-terminally his-tagged version of α2ap-hsa. of the proteins tested, xl5-hsa was cross-linked to biotin pentylamine  most rapidly by fxiiia, and was the most effective competitor of α2ap crosslinking not only to bpa but also to plasma fibrin clots. in the mouse ferric chloride vena cava thrombosis model, radiolabeled xl5-hsa was retained in the clot to a greater extent than recombinant hsa. in the rabbit jugular vein stasis thrombosis model, xl5-hsa was also retained in the clot, in a urea-insensitive manner indicative of crosslinking to fibrin, to a greater extent than recombinant hsa.


CONCLUSIONS
fusion protein xl5-hsa  was found to be more active as a substrate for fxiiia-mediated transamidation than seven other candidate fusion proteins in vitro. the improved stability and reactivity of this chimeric protein was further evidenced by its incorporation into in vivo clots formed in thrombosis models in both mice and rabbits.

