BACKGROUND
proteins in the glycoside hydrolase family  <dig>  are carbohydrate-active enzymes known as invertases that hydrolyse the glycosidic bonds of complex saccharides. fungi rely on these enzymes to gain access to and utilize plant-derived sucrose. in fungi, gh <dig> invertase genes are found in higher copy numbers in the genomes of pathogens when compared to closely related saprophytes, suggesting an association between invertases and ecological strategy. the aim of this study was to investigate the distribution and evolution of gh <dig> invertases in the ceratocystidaceae using a comparative genomics approach. this fungal family provides an interesting model to study the evolution of these genes, because it includes economically important pathogenic species such as ceratocystis fimbriata, c. manginecans and c. albifundus, as well as saprophytic species such as huntiella moniliformis, h. omanensis and h. savannae.


RESULTS
the publicly available ceratocystidaceae genome sequences, as well as the h. savannae genome sequenced here, allowed for the identification of novel gh32-like sequences. the de novo assembly of the h. savannae draft genome consisted of  <dig>  megabases that coded for  <dig>  <dig> putative genes of which one represented a gh <dig> family member. the number of gh <dig> gene family members appeared to be related to the ecological adaptations of these fungi. the pathogenic ceratocystis species all contained two gh <dig> family genes , while the saprophytic huntiella species had only one of these genes . further analysis showed that the evolution of the gh <dig> gene family in the ceratocystidaceae involved transposable element-based retro-transposition and translocation. as an example, the activity of a fot5-like element likely facilitated the assembly of the genomic regions harbouring the gh <dig> family genes in ceratocystis.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides insight into the evolutionary history of the gh <dig> gene family in ceratocystidaceae. our findings suggest that transposable elements shaped the evolution of the gh <dig> gene family, which in turn determines the sucrolytic activities and related ecological strategies of the ceratocystidaceae species that harbour them. the study also provides insights into the role of carbohydrate-active enzymes in plant-fungal interactions and adds to our understanding of the evolution of these enzymes and their role in the life style of these fungi.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ceratocystishuntiellavacuolar invertasescell wall invertasessucrolytic abilitygene family evolutionmolecular datingtransposable elementsparalogissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

