BACKGROUND
lophophora williamsii  is a small, spineless cactus with psychoactive alkaloids, particularly mescaline. peyote utilizes crassulacean acid metabolism , an alternative form of photosynthesis that exists in succulents such as cacti and other desert plants. therefore, its transcriptome can be considered an important resource for future research focused on understanding how these plants make more efficient use of water in marginal environments and also for research focused on better understanding of the overall mechanisms leading to production of plant natural products and secondary metabolites.


RESULTS
in this study, two cdna libraries were generated from l. williamsii. these libraries, representing buttons  and roots were sequenced using different sequencing platforms . a total of  <dig> , <dig> raw reads were generated, which were assembled into  <dig>  unigenes with an average length of  <dig>  bp. a total of  <dig>  unigenes  was annotated using public databases.  <dig> unigenes were found to be differentially expressed when comparing the two libraries, where  <dig> were preferentially expressed in buttons and  <dig> in roots. some of the major alkaloids, including mescaline, were identified by gc-ms and relevant metabolic pathways were reconstructed using the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes database . subsequently, the expression patterns of preferentially expressed genes putatively involved in mescaline production were examined and validated by qrt-pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
high throughput transcriptome sequencing  analysis allowed us to efficiently identify candidate genes involved in mescaline biosynthetic pathway in l. williamsii; these included tyrosine/dopa decarboxylase, hydroxylases, and o-methyltransferases. this study sets the theoretical foundation for bioassay design directed at confirming the participation of these genes in mescaline production.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

