BACKGROUND
multimodal data, especially imaging and non-imaging data, is being routinely acquired in the context of disease diagnostics; however, computational challenges have limited the ability to quantitatively integrate imaging and non-imaging data channels with different dimensionalities and scales. to the best of our knowledge relatively few attempts have been made to quantitatively fuse such data to construct classifiers and none have attempted to quantitatively combine histology  and proteomic  measurements for making diagnostic and prognostic predictions. the objective of this work is to create a common subspace to simultaneously accommodate both the imaging and non-imaging data , called a metaspace. this metaspace can be used to build a meta-classifier that produces better classification results than a classifier that is based on a single modality alone. canonical correlation analysis  and regularized cca  are statistical techniques that extract correlations between two modes of data to construct a homogeneous, uniform representation of heterogeneous data channels. in this paper, we present a novel modification to cca and rcca, supervised regularized canonical correlation analysis , that  enables the quantitative integration of data from multiple modalities using a feature selection scheme,  is regularized, and  is computationally cheap. we leverage this srcca framework towards the fusion of proteomic and histologic image signatures for identifying prostate cancer patients at the risk of  <dig> year biochemical recurrence following radical prostatectomy.


RESULTS
a cohort of  <dig> grade, stage matched prostate cancer patients, all of whom had radical prostatectomy, including  <dig> of whom had biochemical recurrence within  <dig> years of surgery and  <dig> of whom did not, were considered in this study. the aim was to construct a lower fused dimensional metaspace comprising both the histological and proteomic measurements obtained from the site of the dominant nodule on the surgical specimen. in conjunction with srcca, a random forest classifier was able to identify prostate cancer patients, who developed biochemical recurrence within  <dig> years, with a maximum classification accuracy of 93%.


CONCLUSIONS
the classifier performance in the srcca space was found to be statistically significantly higher compared to the fused data representations obtained, not only from cca and rcca, but also two other statistical techniques called principal component analysis and partial least squares regression. these results suggest that srcca is a computationally efficient and a highly accurate scheme for representing multimodal  data in a metaspace and that it could be used to construct fused biomarkers for predicting disease recurrence and prognosis.

