BACKGROUND
the rhinopomatidae, traditionally considered to be one of the most ancient chiropteran clades, remains one of the least known groups of rhinolophoidea. no relevant fossil record is available for this family. whereas there have been extensive radiations in related families rhinolophidae and hipposideridae, there are only a few species in the rhinopomatidae and their phylogenetic relationship and status are not fully understood.


RESULTS
here we present  a phylogenetic analysis based on a partial cytochrome b sequence,  new fossils from the upper miocene site elaiochoria  <dig> , which represents the first appearance datum of the family based on the fossil record, and  discussion of the phylogeographic patterns in both molecular and morphological traits. we found deep divergences in the rhinopoma hardwickii lineage, suggesting that the allopatric populations in  iran and  north africa and the middle east should have separate species status. the latter species  exhibits a shallow pattern of isolation by distance  that contrasts with the pattern of geographic variation in the morphometrical traits. a deep genetic gap was also found in rhinopoma muscatellum . we found only minute genetic distance between r. microphyllum from the levant and india, which fails to support the sub/species distinctness of the indian form .


CONCLUSIONS
the mtdna survey provided phylogenetic tree of the family rhinopomatidae for the first time and revealed an unexpected diversification of the group both within r. hardwickii and r. muscatellum morphospecies. the paleobiogeographic scenario compiled in respect to molecular clock data suggests that the family originated in the region south of the eocene western tethyan seaway or in india, and extended its range during the early miocene. the fossil record suggests a miocene spread into the mediterranean region, followed by a post-miocene retreat. morphological analysis compared with genetic data indicates considerable phenotypic plasticity in this group.

