BACKGROUND
inferring a gene regulatory network  from high throughput biological data is often an under-determined problem and is a challenging task due to the following reasons:  thousands of genes are involved in one living cell;  complex dynamic and nonlinear relationships exist among genes;  a substantial amount of noise is involved in the data, and  the typical small sample size is very small compared to the number of genes. we hypothesize we can enhance our understanding of gene interactions in important biological processes  and improve the inference accuracy of a grn by  incorporating prior biological knowledge into the inference scheme,  integrating multiple biological data sources, and  decomposing the inference problem into smaller network modules.


RESULTS
this study presents a novel grn inference method by integrating gene expression data and gene functional category information. the inference is based on module network model that consists of two parts: the module selection part and the network inference part. the former determines the optimal modules through fuzzy c-mean  clustering and by incorporating gene functional category information, while the latter uses a hybrid of particle swarm optimization and recurrent neural network  methods to infer the underlying network between modules. our method is tested on real data from two studies: the development of rat central nervous system  and the yeast cell cycle process. the results are evaluated by comparing them to previously published results and gene ontology annotation information.


CONCLUSIONS
the reverse engineering of grns in time course gene expression data is a major obstacle in system biology due to the limited number of time points. our experiments demonstrate that the proposed method can address this challenge by:  preprocessing gene expression data  to reduce the data noise;  clustering genes based on gene expression data and gene functional category information to identify biologically meaningful modules, thereby reducing the dimensionality of the data;  modeling grns with the pso-rnn method between the modules to capture their nonlinear and dynamic relationships. the method is shown to lead to biologically meaningful modules and networks among the modules.

14– <dig> july  <dig> the  <dig> international conference on bioinformatics & computational biology  las vegas, nv, usa

