BACKGROUND
sterile alpha motif  domains are ~ <dig> residues long and have been reported as common protein-protein interaction modules. this domain is found in a large number of proteins, including polycomb group  proteins and ets family transcription factors. in this work, we report the cloning and functional characterization of a novel sam domain-containing protein, which is predominantly expressed in retinal photoreceptors and the pineal gland and is designated mouse mr-s .


RESULTS
mr-s is evolutionarily conserved from zebrafish through human, organisms through which the mechanism of photoreceptor development is also highly conserved. phylogenetic analysis suggests that the sam domain of mr-s is most closely related to a mouse polyhomeotic  ortholog, mph1/rae <dig>  which is known as an epigenetic molecule involved in chromatin modifications. these findings provide the possibility that mr-s may play a critical role by regulating gene expression in photoreceptor development. mr-s is preferentially expressed in the photoreceptors at postnatal day 3– <dig> , when photoreceptors undergo terminal differentiation, and in the adult pineal gland. transcription of mr-s is directly regulated by the cone-rod homeodomain protein crx. immunoprecipitation assay showed that the mr-s protein self-associates mainly through the sam domain-containing region as well as ph. the mr-s protein localizes mainly in the nucleus, when mr-s is overexpressed in hek293t cells. moreover, in the luciferase assays, we found that mr-s protein fused to gal <dig> dna-binding domain functions as a transcriptional repressor. we revealed that the repression activity of mr-s is not due to a homophilic interaction through its sam domain but to the c-terminal region.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified a novel gene, mr-s, which is predominantly expressed in retinal photoreceptors and pineal gland. based on its expression pattern and biochemical analysis, we predict that mr-s may function as a transcriptional repressor in photoreceptor cells and in pinealocytes of the pineal gland.

