BACKGROUND
bisulfite treatment of dna followed by sequencing  has become a standard technique in epigenetic studies, providing researchers with tools for generating single-base resolution maps of whole methylomes. aligning bisulfite-treated reads, however, is a computationally difficult task: bisulfite treatment decreases the  complexity of low-methylated genomic regions, and c-to-t mismatches may reflect cytosine unmethylation rather than snps or sequencing errors. further challenges arise both during and after the alignment phase: data structures used by the aligner should be fast and should fit into main memory, and the methylation-caller output should be somehow compressed, due to its significant size.

methods
as far as data structures employed to align bisulfite-treated reads are concerned, solutions proposed in the literature can be roughly grouped into two main categories: those storing pointers at each text position , and those using the information-theoretic minimum number of bits . the former are fast and memory consuming. the latter are much slower and light. in this paper, we try to close this gap proposing a data structure for aligning bisulfite-treated reads which is at the same time fast, light, and very accurate. we reach this objective by combining a recent theoretical result on succinct hashing with a bisulfite-aware hash function. furthermore, the new versions of the tools implementing our ideas|the aligner erne-bs <dig>  <dig> and the caller erne-meth 2|have been extended with increased downstream compatibility , output compression, and support for target enrichment protocols.


RESULTS
experimental results on public and simulated wgbs libraries show that our algorithmic solution is a competitive tradeoff between hash-based and bwt-based indexes, being as fast and accurate as the former, and as memory-efficient as the latter.


CONCLUSIONS
the new functionalities of our bisulfite aligner and caller make it a fast and memory efficient tool, useful to analyze big datasets with little computational resources, to easily process target enrichment data, and produce statistics such as protocol efficiency and coverage as a function of the distance from target regions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bisulfitedna methylationngssuccinct hashingbwtnettab  <dig>  from structural bioinformatics to integrative systems biology nettab 2014torino, italy 15- <dig> october  <dig> http://www.nettab.org/2014/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

