BACKGROUND
we have recently developed several homozygous families of transgenic rainbow trout harbouring cecropin p <dig> transgene. these fish exhibit resistance characteristic to infection by aeromonas salmonicida and infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus . in our earlier studies we have reported that treatment of a rainbow trout macrophage cell line  with a linear cationic α-helical antimicrobial peptide  resulted in elevated levels of expression of two pro-inflammatory relevant genes . therefore, we hypothesized that in addition to the direct antimicrobial activity of cecropin p <dig> in the disease resistant transgenic rainbow trout, this antimicrobial peptide may also affect the expression of immune relevant genes in the host. to confirm this hypothesis, we launched a study to determine the global gene expression profiles in three immune competent organs of cecropin p <dig> transgenic rainbow trout by using a 44k salmonid microarray.


RESULTS
from the microarray data, a total of  <dig> genes in the spleen,  <dig> in the kidney, and  <dig> in the liver were determined as differentially expressed genes  in the cecropin p <dig> transgenic rainbow trout when compared to the non-transgenics. there were  <dig> degs in common among three tissues. enrichment analyses conducted by two different bioinformatics tools revealed a tissue specific profile of functional pathway perturbation. many of them were directly related to innate immune system such as phagocytosis, lysosomal processing, complement activation, antigen processing/presentation, and leukocyte migration. perturbation of other biological functions that might contribute indirectly to host immunity was also observed.


CONCLUSIONS
the gene product of cecropin p <dig> transgene produced in the disease resistant transgenic rainbow trout not only can kill the pathogens directly but also exert multifaceted immunomodulatory properties to boost host immunity. the identified genes involved in different pathways related to immune function are valuable indicators associated with enhanced host immunity. these genes may serve as markers for selective breeding of rainbow trout or other aquaculture important fish species bearing traits of disease resistance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rainbow troutdisease resistant transgenic fishcecropinantimicrobial peptidemicroarrayinnate/adaptive immunityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

