BACKGROUND
to understand the ecological and evolutionary consequences of species interactions in food webs necessitates that interactions are properly identified. genetic analyses suggest that many supposedly generalist parasitoid species should rather be defined as multiple species with a more narrow diet, reducing the probability that such species may mediate indirect interactions such as apparent competition among hosts. recent studies showed that the parasitoid asecodes lucens mediate apparent competition between two hosts, galerucella tenella and g. calmariensis, affecting both interaction strengths and evolutionary feedbacks. the same parasitoid was also recorded from other species in the genus galerucella, suggesting that similar indirect effects may also occur for other species pairs.

methods
to explore the possibility of such interactions, we sequenced mitochondrial and nuclear genetic markers to resolve the phylogeny of both host and parasitoid and to test the number of parasitoid species involved. we thus collected  <dig> galerucella larvae from  <dig> host plant species and sequenced  <dig> adult beetle and  <dig> parasitoid individuals.


RESULTS
the analysis of the galerucella data, that also included sequences from previous studies, verified the five species previously documented as reciprocally monophyletic, but the bayesian species delimitation for a. lucens suggested 3– <dig> cryptic taxa with a more specialised host use than previously suggested. the gene data analyzed under the multispecies coalescent model allowed us to reconstruct the species tree phylogeny for both host and parasitoid and we found a fully congruent coevolutionary pattern suggesting that parasitoid speciation followed upon host speciation.


CONCLUSIONS
using multilocus sequence data in a bayesian species delimitation analysis we propose that hymenopteran parasitoids of the genus asecodes that infest galerucella larvae constitute at least three species with narrow diet breath. the evolution of parasitoid asecodes and host galerucella show a fully congruent coevolutionary pattern. this finding strengthens the hypothesis that the parasitoid in host search uses cues of the host rather than more general cues of both host and plant.

