BACKGROUND
actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae causes pleuropneumonia in pigs, a disease which is associated with high morbidity and mortality, as well as impaired animal welfare. to obtain in-depth understanding of this infection, the interplay between virulence factors of the pathogen and defense mechanisms of the porcine host needs to be elucidated. however, research has traditionally focused on either bacteriology or immunology; an unbiased picture of the transcriptional responses can be obtained by investigating both organisms in the same biological sample.


RESULTS
host and pathogen responses in pigs experimentally infected with a. pleuropneumoniae were analyzed by high-throughput rt-qpcr. this approach allowed concurrent analysis of selected genes encoding proteins known or hypothesized to be important in the acute phase of this infection. the expression of  <dig> bacterial and  <dig> porcine genes was quantified in lung samples obtained within the first 48 hours of infection. this provided novel insight into the early time course of bacterial genes involved in synthesis of pathogen-associated molecular patterns  and genes involved in pattern recognition  in response to a. pleuropneumoniae. significant up-regulation of proinflammatory cytokines such as il1b, il <dig>  and il <dig> was observed, correlating with protein levels, infection status and histopathological findings. host genes encoding proteins involved in iron metabolism, as well as bacterial genes encoding exotoxins, proteins involved in adhesion, and iron acquisition were found to be differentially expressed according to disease progression. by applying laser capture microdissection, porcine expression of selected genes could be confirmed in the immediate surroundings of the invading pathogen.


CONCLUSIONS
microbial pathogenesis is the product of interactions between host and pathogen. our results demonstrate the applicability of high-throughput rt-qpcr for the elucidation of dual-organism gene expression analysis during infection. we showed differential expression of  <dig> bacterial and  <dig> porcine genes during infection and significant correlation of porcine and bacterial gene expression. this is the first study investigating the concurrent transcriptional response of both bacteria and host at the site of infection during porcine respiratory infection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
high-throughput rt-qpcrtranscriptional analysishost-pathogen interactionsinnate immunityactinobacillus pleuropneumoniaerespiratory infectionlaser capture microdissectionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

