BACKGROUND
2-chloroethyl ethyl sulphide  is a sulphur vesicating agent and an analogue of the chemical warfare agent  <dig> '-dichlorodiethyl sulphide, or sulphur mustard gas . both cees and hd are alkylating agents that influence cellular thiols and are highly toxic. in a previous publication, we reported that lipopolysaccharide  enhances the cytotoxicity of cees in murine raw <dig>  macrophages. in the present investigation, we studied the influence of cees on nitric oxide  production in lps stimulated raw <dig>  cells since no signalling affects inflammation, cell death, and wound healing. murine macrophages stimulated with lps produce no almost exclusively via inducible nitric oxide synthase  activity. we suggest that the influence of cees or hd on the cellular production of no could play an important role in the pathophysiological responses of tissues to these toxicants. in particular, it is known that macrophage generated no synthesised by inos plays a critical role in wound healing.


RESULTS
we initially confirmed that in lps stimulated raw <dig>  macrophages no is exclusively generated by the inos form of nitric oxide synthase. cees treatment inhibited the synthesis of no  in viable lps-stimulated raw <dig>  macrophages as measured by either nitrite secretion into the culture medium or the intracellular conversion of  <dig> -diaminofluorescein diacetate  or dichlorofluorescin diacetate . western blots showed that cees transiently decreased the expression of inos protein; however, treatment of active inos with cees in vitro did not inhibit its enzymatic activity


CONCLUSIONS
cees inhibits no production in lps stimulated macrophages by decreasing inos protein expression. decreased inos expression is likely the result of cees induced alteration in the nuclear factor kappa b  signalling pathway. since no can act as an antioxidant, the cees induced down-regulation of inos in lps-stimulated macrophages could elevate oxidative stress. since macrophage generated no is known to play a key role in cutaneous wound healing, it is possible that this work has physiological relevance with respect to the healing of hd induced skin blisters.

