BACKGROUND
microbial electrosynthesis and electro fermentation are techniques that aim to optimize microbial production of chemicals and fuels by regulating the cellular redox balance via interaction with electrodes. while the concept is known for decades major knowledge gaps remain, which make it hard to evaluate its biotechnological potential. here we present an in silico approach to identify beneficial production processes for electro fermentation by elementary mode analysis. since the fundamentals of electron transport between electrodes and microbes have not been fully uncovered yet, we propose different options and discuss their impact on biomass and product yields.


RESULTS
for the first time  <dig> different valuable products were screened for their potential to show increased yields during anaerobic electrically enhanced fermentation. surprisingly we found that an increase in product formation by electrical enhancement is not necessarily dependent on the degree of reduction of the product but rather the metabolic pathway it is derived from. we present a variety of beneficial processes with product yield increases of maximal 36% in reductive and 84% in oxidative fermentations and final theoretical product yields up to 100%. this includes compounds that are already produced at industrial scale such as succinic acid, lysine and diaminopentane as well as potential novel bio-commodities such as isoprene, para-hydroxybenzoic acid and para-aminobenzoic acid. furthermore, it is shown that the way of electron transport has major impact on achievable biomass and product yields. the coupling of electron transport to energy conservation could be identified as crucial for most processes.


CONCLUSIONS
this study introduces a powerful tool to determine beneficial substrate and product combinations for electro-fermentation. it also highlights that the maximal yield achievable by bio electrochemical techniques depends strongly on the actual electron transport mechanisms. therefore it is of great importance to reveal the involved fundamental processes to be able to optimize and advance electro fermentations beyond the level of lab-scale studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cathodeelectro synthesisbio productionmediatornad/nadhextracellular electron transportelectro fermentationanaerobic fermentationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

