BACKGROUND
x chromosome inactivation is the transcriptional silencing of one x chromosome in the somatic cells of female mammals. in eutherian mammals  one of the two x chromosomes is randomly chosen for silencing, with about 15%  of genes escaping this silencing. in contrast, in the distantly related marsupial mammals the paternally derived x is silenced, although not as completely as the eutherian x. a chromosome wide examination of x inactivation, using rna-seq, was recently undertaken in grey short-tailed opossum  brain and extraembryonic tissues. however, no such study has been conduced in australian marsupials, which diverged from their american cousins ~ <dig> million years ago, leaving a large gap in our understanding of marsupial x inactivation.


RESULTS
we used rna-seq data from blood or liver of a family  of tammar wallabies , which in conjunction with available genome sequence from the mother and father, permitted genotyping of  <dig> expressed heterozygous snps on the daughter’s x. these  <dig> snps represented  <dig> x loci, of which 68%  were confirmed as inactivated on the paternally derived x in the daughter’s liver; the remaining  <dig> x loci escaped inactivation. seven of the wallaby loci sampled were part of the old x evolutionary stratum, of which three escaped inactivation. three loci were classified as part of the newer x stratum, of which two escaped inactivation. a meta-analysis of previously published opossum x inactivation data revealed that  <dig> of  <dig> genes in the old x stratum escaped inactivation.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that chromosome wide inactivation of the paternal x is common to an australian marsupial representative, but that there is more escape from inactivation than reported for opossum . we also provide evidence that, unlike the human x chromosome, the location of loci within the oldest evolutionary stratum on the marsupial x does not correlate with their probability of escape from inactivation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
x inactivationmarsupialimprintingx chromosomeescaperna-seqsnpevolutionstrataissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

