BACKGROUND
the fragile histidine triad gene  is an oncosuppressor implicated in many human cancers, including vesical tumors. fhit is frequently hit by deletions caused by fragility at fra3b, the most active of human common fragile sites, where fhit lays. vesical tumors affect also cattle, including animals grazing in the wild on bracken fern; compounds released by the fern are known to induce chromosome fragility and may trigger cancer with the interplay of latent papilloma virus.


RESULTS
the bovine fhit was characterized by assembling a contig of  <dig> bacs. sequence tags were designed on human exons and introns and used directly to select bovine bacs, or compared with sequence data in the bovine genome database or in the trace archive of the bovine genome sequencing project, and adapted before use. fhit is split in ten exons like in man, with exons  <dig> to  <dig> coding for a  <dig> amino acids protein. vista global alignments between bovine genomic contigs retrieved from the bovine genome database and the human fhit region were performed. conservation was extremely high over a  <dig> mb region spanning the whole fhit locus, including the size of introns. thus, the bovine fhit covers about  <dig>  mb compared to  <dig>  mb in man. expression was analyzed by rt-pcr and northern blot, and was found to be ubiquitous. four cdna isoforms were isolated and sequenced, that originate from an alternative usage of three variants of exon  <dig>  revealing a size very close to the major human fhit cdnas.


CONCLUSIONS
a comparative genomic approach allowed to assemble a contig of  <dig> bacs and to completely annotate a  <dig>  mb region spanning the bovine fhit gene. the findings confirmed the very high level of conservation between human and bovine genomes and the importance of comparative mapping to speed the annotation process of the recently sequenced bovine genome. the detailed knowledge of the genomic fhit region will allow to study the role of fhit in bovine cancerogenesis, especially of vesical papillomavirus-associated cancers of the urinary bladder, and will be the basis to define the molecular structure of the bovine homologue of fra3b, the major common fragile site of the human genome.

