BACKGROUND
the heart’s physiological adaptation to aerobic training leads to an increase in heart chamber size, and is referred to as the athlete's heart. however, heart dimensions are also related to body weight , body size, growth and  breed. there are few published data on the relationships between heart dimensions and growth or aerobic training in arabian and arabian-related endurance horses. therefore the objective of the present study was to describe the influence of body dimensions , thoracic circumference , withers height ), bwt, age, gender, breed  and the initiation of endurance training on echocardiographic measurements in competition-fit endurance horses aged  <dig> to 6 years.


RESULTS
most left atrial  and left ventricular  dimensions increased with age, whereas la and lv functional indices did not. although there was no gender difference for lv dimensions, females had larger la dimensions. in terms of breed, anglo-arabians had the largest lv dimensions. regression models indicated that the included explanatory factors had a weak influence on heart dimensions. age, body dimensions, breed and gender showed the most consistent influence on la dimensions, whereas bwt, breed and kilometres covered in competition showed the most consistent influence on lv dimensions.


CONCLUSIONS
the increase in echocardiographic dimensions with age indicates on-going growth in our population of  <dig> to 6 year-old horses. we also observed small changes associated with the initiation of endurance training. morphometric dimensions had a greater influence on la dimensions, whereas lv dimensions were also influenced  by parameters associated with exercise intensity. these results may therefore reflect early adaptations linked to the initiation of endurance training.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
: equineechocardiographycardiovascularnon-invasive cardiac assessmentendurancebody weightbody dimensionsgenderagebreedissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

