BACKGROUND
the denervated hippocampus provides a proper microenvironment for the survival and neuronal differentiation of neural progenitors. while thousands of lncrnas were identified, only a few lncrnas that regulate neurogenesis in the hippocampus are reported. the present study aimed to perform microarray expression profiling to identify long noncoding rnas  that might participate in the hippocampal neurogenesis, and investigate the potential roles of identified lncrnas in the hippocampal neurogenesis.


RESULTS
in this study, the profiling suggested that  <dig> activated and  <dig> repressed  lncrnas were differentially expressed between the denervated and the normal hippocampi. furthermore, differentially expressed lncrnas associated with neurogenesis were found. according to the tissue-specific expression profiles, and a novel lncrna  was identified as a neural regulator in the hippocampus in this study. the expression of lncrna <dig> was activated in the denervated hippocampus. fish showed lncrna <dig> specially existed in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus in the hippocampus and in the cytoplasm of neural stem cells . the knockdown of lncrna <dig> depletes the edu-positive nscs. besides, the increased expression of lncrna <dig> was found to be triggered by the change in the microenvironment.


CONCLUSIONS
we concluded that expression changes of lncrnas exists in the microenvironment of denervated hippocampus, of which promotes hippocampal neurogenesis. the identified lncrna lncrna <dig> expressed in neural stem cells, located in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus, which can promote nscs proliferation in vitro. therefore, the question is exactly which part of the denervated hippocampus induced the expression of lncrna <dig>  further studies should aim to explore the exact molecular mechanism behind the expression of lncrna <dig> in the hippocampus, to lay the foundation for the clinical application of nscs in treating diseases of the central nervous system.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hippocampuslong noncoding rnamicroarrayneural stem cellsneurogenesisfoundation of the graduate innovation center,nantong universityno.ykc14044jin guohua grant from graduate innovation foundation of jiangsu no.ykc15002cheng xiang graduate innovation foundation of jiangsukyzz15_0350cheng xiang  the natural science foundation of nantong city ms12016006cheng xiang the natural science foundation of jiangsu provincebk20140434li haoming the national natural science foundation of china81501133li haoming issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

