BACKGROUND
in silico livers  are works in progress. they are used to challenge multilevel, multi-attribute, mechanistic hypotheses about the hepatic disposition of xenobiotics coupled with hepatic responses. to enhance isl-to-liver mappings, we added discrete time metabolism, biliary elimination, and bolus dosing features to a previously validated isl and initiated re-validated experiments that required scaling experiments to use more simulated lobules than previously, more than could be achieved using the local cluster technology. rather than dramatically increasing the size of our local cluster we undertook the re-validation experiments using the amazon ec <dig> cloud platform. so doing required demonstrating the efficacy of scaling a simulation to use more cluster nodes and assessing the scientific equivalence of local cluster validation experiments with those executed using the cloud platform.


RESULTS
the local cluster technology was duplicated in the amazon ec <dig> cloud platform. synthetic modeling protocols were followed to identify a successful parameterization. experiment sample sizes  on both platforms were  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> . experimental indistinguishability was demonstrated for isl outflow profiles of diltiazem using both platforms for experiments consisting of  <dig> or more samples. the process was analogous to demonstration of results equivalency from two different wet-labs.


CONCLUSIONS
the results provide additional evidence that disposition simulations using isls can cover the behavior space of liver experiments in distinct experimental contexts . the scientific value of experimenting with multiscale biomedical models has been limited to research groups with access to computer clusters. the availability of cloud technology coupled with the evidence of scientific equivalency has lowered the barrier and will greatly facilitate model sharing as well as provide straightforward tools for scaling simulations to encompass greater detail with no extra investment in hardware.

