BACKGROUND
xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous is a basal agaricomycete with uncertain taxonomic placement, known for its unique ability to produce astaxanthin, a carotenoid with antioxidant properties. it was the aim of this study to elucidate the organization of its coa-derived pathways and to use the genomic information of x. dendrorhous for a phylogenomic investigation of the basidiomycota.


RESULTS
the genome assembly of a haploid strain of xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous revealed a genome of  <dig>  megabases with  <dig> protein coding genes. phylogenetic analyses were conducted including  <dig> fungal genomes. these revealed ustilaginomycotina and agaricomycotina as sister groups. in the latter a well-supported sister-group relationship of two major orders, polyporales and russulales, was inferred. wallemia occupies a basal position within the agaricomycotina and x. dendrorhous represents the basal lineage of the tremellomycetes, highlighting that the typical tremelloid parenthesomes have either convergently evolved in wallemia and the tremellomycetes, or were lost in the cystofilobasidiales lineage. a detailed characterization of the coa-related pathways was done and all genes for fatty acid, sterol and carotenoid synthesis have been assigned.


CONCLUSIONS
the current study ascertains that wallemia with tremelloid parenthesomes is the most basal agaricomycotinous lineage and that cystofilobasidiales without tremelloid parenthesomes are deeply rooted within tremellomycetes, suggesting that parenthesomes at septal pores might be the core synapomorphy for the agaricomycotina. apart from evolutionary insights the genome sequence of x. dendrorhous will facilitate genetic pathway engineering for optimized astaxanthin or oxidative alcohol production.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
agaricomycotinaastaxanthin synthasefatty acid metabolismfungal evolutionxanthophyllomyces dendrorhousphylogenyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

