BACKGROUND
deep mining of healthcare data has provided maps of comorbidity relationships between diseases. in parallel, integrative multi-omics investigations have generated high-resolution molecular maps of putative relevance for understanding disease initiation and progression. yet, it is unclear how to advance an observation of comorbidity relations  to a molecular understanding of the driver processes and associated biomarkers.


RESULTS
since chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  has emerged as a central hub in temporal comorbidity networks, we developed a systematic integrative data-driven framework to identify shared disease-associated genes and pathways, as a proxy for the underlying generative mechanisms inducing comorbidity. we integrated records from approximately  <dig> m patients from the medicare database with disease-gene maps that we derived from several resources including a semantic-derived knowledge-base. using rank-based statistics we not only recovered known comorbidities but also discovered a novel association between copd and digestive diseases. furthermore, our analysis provides the first set of copd co-morbidity candidate biomarkers, including il <dig>  tnf and jup, and characterizes their association to aging and life-style conditions, such as smoking and physical activity.


CONCLUSIONS
the developed framework provides novel insights in copd and especially copd co-morbidity associated mechanisms. the methodology could be used to discover and decipher the molecular underpinning of other comorbidity relationships and furthermore, allow the identification of candidate co-morbidity biomarkers.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

statistical methods for omics data integration and analysis  <dig> valencia, spain 14- <dig> september  <dig> http://www.stategra.eu/smodia-2015-welcome-to-the-workshop-in-statistical-methods-for-omics-data-integration-and-analysis/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

