BACKGROUND
poecilimon and isophya are the largest genera of the tribe barbitistini and among the most systematically complicated and evolutionarily intriguing groups of palearctic tettigoniids. we examined the genomic organization of  <dig> taxa with a stable chromosome number using classical  and molecular 
n
 telomeric probes) cytogenetic techniques. these tools were employed to establish genetic organization and differences or similarities between genera or species within the same genus and determine if cytogenetic markers can be used for identifying some taxonomic groups of species.


RESULTS
differences between the karyotypes of the studied genera include some general changes in the morphology of the x chromosome in isophya . the number of major rdna clusters per haploid genome divided poecilimon into two main almost equal groups , while two rdna clusters predominated in isophya. in both genera, rdna loci were preferentially located in the paracentromeric region of the autosomes and rarely in the sex chromosomes. our results demonstrate a coincidence between the location of rdna loci and active nors and gc-rich heterochromatin regions. the c/dapi/cma <dig> bands observed in most poecilimon chromosomes suggest the presence of more families of repetitive dna sequences as compared to the heterochromatin patterns in isophya.


CONCLUSIONS
the results show both differences and similarities in genome organization among species of the same genus and between genera. previous views on the systematics and phylogenetic grouping of certain lineages are discussed in light of the present cytogenetic results. in some cases, variation of chromosome markers was observed to correspond with variation in other evolutionary traits, which is related to the processes of ongoing speciation and hybridization in zones of secondary contact. it was concluded that the physical mapping of rdna sequences and heterochromatin may be used as an additional marker for understanding interspecific relationships in these groups and their routes of speciation.

fishrdnaheterochromatinevolutionorthopterapoecilimonisophya

