BACKGROUND
coral reefs worldwide are being harmed through anthropogenic activities. some coral reefs in thailand remain well-preserved, including the shallow coral reefs along kra island, nakhon si thammarat province. interestingly, the microbial community in this environment remains unknown. the present study identified biodiversity of prokaryotes and eukaryotes of  <dig> -30 μm in sizes and their metabolic potentials in this coral reef surface in summer and winter seasons, using 16s and 18s rrna genes pyrosequencing.


RESULTS
the marine microbial profiles in summer and winter seasons comprised mainly of bacteria, in phylum, particular the proteobacteria. yet, different bacterial and eukaryotic structures existed between summer and winter seasons, supported by low lennon and yue & clayton theta similarity indices . the topmost prokaryotic phylum for the summer was proteobacteria , while for the winter proteobacteria  and bacteroidetes  were the most prevalent. uncultured bacteria in phyla cyanobacteria, planctomycetes, sar <dig> and sbr <dig> were absent in the summer. for eukaryotic profiles, species belonging to animals predominated in the summer, correlating with high animal activities in the summer, whereas dormancy and sporulation predominated in the winter. for the winter, eukaryotic plant species predominated and several diverse species were detected. moreover, comparison of our prokaryotic databases in summer and winter of kra reef surface against worldwide marine culture-independent prokaryotic databases indicated our databases to most resemblance those of coastal sichang island, chonburi province, thailand, and the  <dig> tropical gos sites close to galapagos island , in orderly.


CONCLUSIONS
the study investigated and obtained culture-independent databases for marine prokaryotes and eukaryotes in summer and winter seasons of kra reef surface. the data helped understand seasonal dynamics of microbial structures and metabolic potentials of this tropical ecosystem, supporting the knowledge of the world marine microbial biodiversity.

biodiversityprokaryoteeukaryote16s ribosomal rna18s ribosomal rnareef surfacepyrosequencing

