BACKGROUND
genomic alterations frequently occur in many cancer patients and play important mechanistic roles in the pathogenesis of cancer. furthermore, they can modify the expression level of genes due to altered copy number in the corresponding region of the chromosome. an accumulating body of evidence supports the possibility that strong genome-wide correlation exists between dna content and gene expression. therefore, more comprehensive analysis is needed to quantify the relationship between genomic alteration and gene expression. a well-designed bioinformatics tool is essential to perform this kind of integrative analysis. a few programs have already been introduced for integrative analysis. however, there are many limitations in their performance of comprehensive integrated analysis using published software because of limitations in implemented algorithms and visualization modules.


RESULTS
to address this issue, we have implemented the java-based program chess to allow integrative analysis of two experimental data sets: genomic alteration and genome-wide expression profile. chess is composed of a genomic alteration analysis module and an integrative analysis module. the genomic alteration analysis module detects genomic alteration by applying a threshold based method or sw-array algorithm and investigates whether the detected alteration is phenotype specific or not. on the other hand, the integrative analysis module measures the genomic alteration's influence on gene expression. it is divided into two separate parts. the first part calculates overall correlation between comparative genomic hybridization ratio and gene expression level by applying following three statistical methods: simple linear regression, spearman rank correlation and pearson's correlation. in the second part, chess detects the genes that are differentially expressed according to the genomic alteration pattern with three alternative statistical approaches: student's t-test, fisher's exact test and chi square test. by successive operations of two modules, users can clarify how gene expression levels are affected by the phenotype specific genomic alterations. as chess was developed in both java application and web environments, it can be run on a web browser or a local machine. it also supports all experimental platforms if a properly formatted text file is provided to include the chromosomal position of probes and their gene identifiers.


CONCLUSIONS
chess is a user-friendly tool for investigating disease specific genomic alterations and quantitative relationships between those genomic alterations and genome-wide gene expression profiling.

