BACKGROUND
circular chromosome conformation capture, when coupled with next-generation sequencing , can be used to identify genome-wide interaction of a given locus  with all of its interacting partners. conventional 4c approaches used restriction enzyme digestion to fragment chromatin, and recently sonication approach was also applied for this purpose. however, bioinformatics pipelines for analyzing sonication-based 4c-seq data are not well developed. in addition, data consistency as well as similarity between the two methods has not been explored previously. here we present a comparative analysis of 4c-seq data generated by both methods, using an enhancer element of pou5f <dig> gene in mouse embryonic stem  cells.


RESULTS
from biological replicates, we found good correlation  for inter-chromosomal interactions identified in either enzyme or sonication method. compared to enzyme approach, sonication method generated less distal intra-chromosomal interactions, possibly due to the difference in chromatin fragmentation. from all mapped interactions, we further applied statistical models to identify enriched interacting regions. interestingly, data generated from the two methods showed 30% overlap of the reproducible interacting regions. the interacting sites in the reproducible regions from both methods are similarly enriched with active histone marks. in addition, the interacting sites identified from sonication-based data are enriched with chip-seq signals of transcription factors oct <dig>  klf <dig>  esrrb, tcfcp2i <dig>  and zfx that are critical for reprogramming and pluripotency.


CONCLUSIONS
both enzyme-based and sonication-based 4c-seq methods are valuable tools to explore long-range chromosomal interactions. due to the nature of sonication-based method, correlation analysis of the 4c interactions with transcription factor binding should be more straightforward.

circular chromosome conformation capturesonication4c-seqbioinformaticsnext-generation sequencing

