BACKGROUND
the study of quantitative trait loci  in cotton  is focused on traits of agricultural significance. previous studies have identified a plethora of qtl attributed to fiber quality, disease and pest resistance, branch number, seed quality and yield and yield related traits, drought tolerance, and morphological traits. however, results among these studies differed due to the use of different genetic populations, markers and marker densities, and testing environments. since two previous meta-qtl analyses were performed on fiber traits, a number of papers on qtl mapping of fiber quality, yield traits, morphological traits, and disease resistance have been published. to obtain a better insight into the genome-wide distribution of qtl and to identify consistent qtl for marker assisted breeding in cotton, an updated comparative qtl analysis is needed.


RESULTS
in this study, a total of  <dig>  qtl from  <dig> different qtl studies in gossypium were surveyed and mapped using biomercator v <dig> based on the gossypium consensus map from the cotton marker database. a meta-analysis was first performed using manual inference and confirmed by biomercator v <dig> to identify possible qtl clusters and hotspots. qtl clusters are composed of qtl of various traits which are concentrated in a specific region on a chromosome, whereas hotspots are composed of only one trait type. qtl were not evenly distributed along the cotton genome and were concentrated in specific regions on each chromosome. qtl hotspots for fiber quality traits were found in the same regions as the clusters, indicating that clusters may also form hotspots.


CONCLUSIONS
putative qtl clusters were identified via meta-analysis and will be useful for breeding programs and future studies involving gossypium qtl. the presence of qtl clusters and hotspots indicates consensus regions across cultivated tetraploid gossypium species, environments, and populations which contain large numbers of qtl, and in some cases multiple qtl associated with the same trait termed a hotspot. this study combines two previous meta-analysis studies and adds all other currently available qtl studies, making it the most comprehensive meta-analysis study in cotton to date.

