BACKGROUND
anthracnose, caused by colletotrichum dematium, is a serious threat to the production and quality of mulberry leaves in susceptible varieties. control of the disease has been a major problem in mulberry cultivation. some strains of burkholderia cepacia were reported to be useful antagonists of plant pests and could increase the yields of several crop plants. although b. cepacia lu10- <dig> is an endophytic bacterium obtained from mulberry leaves, it has not been deployed to control c. dematium infection in mulberry nor its colonization patterns in mulberry have been studied using gfp reporter or other reporters. the present study sought to evaluate the antifungal and plant-growth-promoting properties of strain lu10- <dig>  to clarify its specific localization within a mulberry plant, and to better understand its potential as a biocontrol and growth-promoting agent.


RESULTS
lu10- <dig> inhibited conidial germination and mycelial growth of c. dematium in vitro; when applied on leaves or to the soil, lu10- <dig> also inhibited the development of anthracnose in a greenhouse, but the effectiveness varied with the length of the interval between the strain treatment and inoculation with the pathogen. strain lu10- <dig> could survive in both sterile and non-sterile soils for more than  <dig> days. the strain produced auxins, contributed to p solubilization and nitrogenase activity, and significantly promoted the growth of mulberry seedlings. the bacteria infected mulberry seedlings through cracks formed at junctions of lateral roots with the main root and in the zone of differentiation and elongation, and the cells were able to multiply and spread, mainly to the intercellular spaces of different tissues. the growth in all the tissues was around 1- <dig> ×  <dig> cfu per gram of fresh plant tissue.


CONCLUSIONS
burkholderia cepacia strain lu10- <dig> is an endophyte that can multiply and spread in mulberry seedlings rapidly and efficiently. the strain is antagonistic to c. dematium and acts as an efficient plant-growth-promoting agent on mulberry seedlings and is therefore a promising candidate as a biocontrol and growth-promoting agent.

