BACKGROUND
cross breeding is the most commonly used method in chrysanthemum  breeding; however, cross barriers always exist in these combinations. many studies have shown that paternal chromosome doubling can often overcome hybridization barriers during cross breeding, although the underlying mechanism has seldom been investigated.


RESULTS
in this study, we performed two crosses: c. morifolium  × diploid c. nankingense  and c. morifolium × tetraploid c. nankingense. seeds were obtained only from the latter cross. rna-seq and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation  were used to investigate differentially expressed genes and proteins during key embryo development stages in the latter cross. a previously performed cross, c. morifolium × diploid c. nankingense, was compared to our results and revealed that transcription factors , hormone-responsive genes , genes and proteins related to metabolism  and other genes reported to contribute to embryo development  had higher expression levels in the c. morifolium × tetraploid c. nankingense cross. in contrast, genes related to senescence and cell death were down-regulated in the c. morifolium × tetraploid c. nankingense cross.


CONCLUSIONS
the data resources helped elucidate the gene and protein expression profiles and identify functional genes during different development stages. when the chromosomes from the male parent are doubled, the genes contributing to normal embryo developmentare more abundant. however, genes with negative functions were suppressed, suggesting that chromosome doubling may epigenetically inhibit the expression of these genes and allow the embryo to develop normally.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chromosome doublingchrysanthemum morifoliumcross barrierinterspecific hybridizationitraqrna-seqhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3117198331479101teng nianjun fundamental research funds for the central universitieskyz201308teng nianjun the fourth phase of jiangsu “333” project to dr. nianjun tengᅟteng nianjun he natural science fund of jiangsu provincebk2016teng nianjun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

