BACKGROUND
the pathophysiological significance of variable region glycosylation of autoantibodies is still unclear. in the current study, the influence of the variable region n-linked oligosaccharides on the reactivity of three autoantibody specificities was investigated with sambucus nigra agglutinin , which mainly binds to oligosaccharides with terminal α <dig>  6-linked sialic acid on the variable region of igg.

methods
twenty-seven patients with serum positive anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies  against myeploperoxidase  or proteinase  <dig> , or autoantibodies against glomerular basement membrane  were included. total igg was isolated and separated into non-sna-binding and sna-binding fractions with sna affinity chromatography. antigen-specific igg was purified by immunoaffinity chromatography.


RESULTS
at the same concentration of igg, the antigen binding level of non-sna-binding igg was significantly lower than that of sna-binding igg for mpo-anca  and for pr3-anca . the antigen binding level of non-sna-binding igg was significantly higher than that of sna-binding igg for anti-gbm antibodies . the level of variable region glycosylation of total igg was significantly lower than that of affinity-purified mpo-anca . the level of variable region glycosylation of total igg was significantly higher than that of affinity-purified anti-gbm antibodies . the sna-binding fraction of mpo-anca-containing igg and pr3-anca-containing igg induced higher levels of neutrophil oxygen radical production than the corresponding non-sna-binding fractions . the level of variable region glycosylation of affinity-purified mpo-anca was higher in active aav than the same patients in remission .


CONCLUSIONS
characteristics of variable region glycosylation of anca and anti-gbm antibodies were different from that of total igg, which might influence the antigen-binding ability of these antibodies. variable region glycosylation of anca might influence the effect of anca-induced neutrophils respiratory burst.

glycosylationvariable regionancaanti-gbm

