BACKGROUND
neospora caninum is an apicomplexan protozoan that is considered one of the main agents responsible for abortion in ruminants. the lesions found in the central nervous system  of aborted fetuses show multifocal necrosis, gliosis, and perivascular cuffs of mononuclear cells, but the inflammatory and glial cells have not been immunophenotypically characterized. the lesions in the cns of infected adult animals have rarely been described. therefore, in this study, we characterized the lesions, the immunophenotypes of the inflammatory and glial cells and the expression of mhc-ii and pcna in the cns of goats infected with n. caninum. the cns of eight aborted fetuses and six adult male goats naturally infected with n. caninum were analyzed with lectin histochemistry  and immunohistochemistry . all animals were the offspring of dams naturally infected with n. caninum.


RESULTS
the microscopic lesions in the cns of the aborted fetuses consisted of perivascular cuffs composed mainly of macrophages , rare t lymphocytes , and rare b lymphocytes . multifocal necrosis surrounded by astrocytes , gliosis composed predominantly of monocytic-lineage cells , and the cysts of n. caninum, related  to the lesions were present. similar lesions were found in four of the six male goats, and multinucleate giant cells related to focal gliosis were also found in three adult goats. anti-gfap immunostaining showed astrocytes characterizing areas of glial scarring. cysts of n. caninum were found in three adult male goats. the presence of n. caninum was evaluated with histopathology, immunohistochemistry, and pcr. immunohistochemistry demonstrated anti-pcna labeling of macrophages and microglia in the perivascular cuffs and the expression of mhc-ii by microglia and endothelial cells in the cns of the aborted fetuses and adult male goats.


CONCLUSIONS
macrophages and microglia were the predominant inflammatory cells in the cns of aborted fetuses and healthy adult male goats infected with n. caninum. activated astrocytes were mainly associated with inflamed areas, suggesting that astrocytes were involved in the resolution of the lesions.

keywords
abortionencephalitisneosporosispcrissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

