BACKGROUND
the increased availability of genome sequences has advanced the development of genomic distance methods to describe bacterial diversity. results of these fast-evolving methods are highly correlated with those of the historically standard dna-dna hybridization technique. however, these genomic-based methods can be done more rapidly and less expensively and are less prone to technical and human error. they are thus a technically accessible replacement for species delineation. here, we use several genomic comparison methods, supported by our own proteomic analyses and metabolic characterization as well as previously published dna-dna hybridization analyses, to differentiate members of the ralstonia solanacearum species complex into three species. this pathogen group consists of diverse and widespread strains that cause bacterial wilt disease on many different plants.


RESULTS
we used three different methods to compare the complete genomes of  <dig> strains from the r. solanacearum species complex. in parallel we profiled the proteomes of  <dig> strains using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry . proteomic profiles together with genomic sequence comparisons consistently and comprehensively described the diversity of the r. solanacearum species complex. in addition, genome-driven functional phenotypic assays excitingly supported an old hypothesis ), that closely related members of the r. solanacearum could be identified through a simple assay of anaerobic nitrate metabolism. this assay allowed us to clearly and easily differentiate phylotype ii and iv strains from phylotype i and iii strains. further, genomic dissection of the pathway distinguished between proposed subspecies within the current phylotype iv. the assay revealed large scale differences in energy production within the r. solanacearum species complex, indicating coarse evolutionary distance and further supporting a repartitioning of this group into separate species.


CONCLUSIONS
together, the results of these studies support the proposed division of the r. solanacearum species complex into three species, consistent with recent literature, and demonstrate the utility of proteomic and genomic approaches to delineate bacterial species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ralstonia solanacearumbacterial wiltplant pathogentaxonomygenomicsproteomicsuniversite de la reunionebsfin13-01prior philippe european union agreenskills267196sanchez borja issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

