BACKGROUND
recent fundamental and clinical studies have confirmed the effectiveness of utilizing the potential of the immune system to remove tumor cells disseminated in a patient’s body. cytotoxic t lymphocytes  are considered the main effectors in cell-mediated antitumor immunity. approaches based on antigen presentation to ctls by dendritic cells  are currently being intensively studied, because dcs are more efficient in tumor antigen presentation to t cells through their initiation of strong specific antitumor immune responses than other types of antigen-presenting cells. today, it has become possible to isolate ctls specific for certain antigenic determinants from heterogeneous populations of mononuclear cells. this enables direct and specific cell-mediated immune responses against cells carrying certain antigens. the aim of the present study was to develop an optimized protocol for generating ctl populations specific for epitopes of tumor-associated antigen her2/neu, and to assess their cytotoxic effects against the her2/neu-expressing mcf- <dig> tumor cell line.

methods
the developed protocol included sequential stages of obtaining mature dcs from pbmcs from hla a*02-positive healthy donors, magnet-assisted transfection of mature dcs with the pmax plasmid encoding immunogenic peptides her <dig> p369– <dig>  and her <dig> p689– <dig> , coculture of antigen-activated dcs with autologous lymphocytes, magnetic-activated sorting of ctls specific to her <dig> epitopes, and stimulation of isolated ctls with cytokines .


RESULTS
the resulting ctl populations were characterized by high contents of cd8+ cells  and displayed strong cytotoxic effects against the mcf- <dig> cell line .


CONCLUSIONS
the developed protocol improves the efficiency of obtaining her2/neu-specific ctls and can be further used to obtain cell-based vaccines for eradicating targeted tumor cells to prevent tumor recurrence after the major tumor burden has been eliminated and preventing metastasis in patients with her2-overexpressing tumors.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cytotoxic t cellsctlsantigen-specific cellsdendritic cellsher2/neutumor-associated antigenantitumor immune responsefederal special-purpose program “research and development in priority areas of the russian scientific and technological complex development for 2014-2020”rfmefi60714x0043issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

