BACKGROUND
structural variations in human genomes, such as insertions, deletion, or rearrangements, play an important role in cancer development. next-generation sequencing technologies have been central in providing ways to detect such variations. most existing methods however are limited to the analysis of a single genome, and it is only recently that the comparison of closely related genomes has been considered. in particular, a few recent works considered the analysis of data sets obtained by sequencing both tumor and healthy tissues of the same cancer patient. in that context, the goal is to detect variations that are specific to exactly one of the genomes, for example to differentiate between patient-specific and tumor-specific variations. this is a difficult task, especially when facing the additional challenge of the possible contamination of healthy tissues by tumor cells and conversely.


RESULTS
in the current work, we analyzed a data set of paired-end short-reads, obtained by sequencing tumor tissues and healthy tissues, both from the same cancer patient. based on a combinatorial notion of conflict between deletions, we show that in the tumor data, more deletions are predicted than there could actually be in a diploid genome. in contrast, the predictions for the data from normal tissues are almost conflict-free. we designed and applied a method, specific to the analysis of such pooled and contaminated data sets, to detect potential tumor-specific deletions. our method takes the deletion calls from both data sets and assigns reads from the mixed tumor/normal data to the normal one with the goal to minimize the number of reads that need to be discarded to obtain a set of conflict-free deletion clusters. we observed that, on the specific data set we analyze, only a very small fraction of the reads needs to be discarded to obtain a set of consistent deletions.


CONCLUSIONS
we present a framework based on a rigorous definition of consistency between deletions and the assumption that the tumor sample also contains normal cells. a combined analysis of both data sets based on this model allowed a consistent explanation of almost all data, providing a detailed picture of candidate patient- and tumor-specific deletions.

8- <dig> october  <dig> ninth annual research in computational molecular biology  satellite workshop on comparative genomics galway, ireland

