BACKGROUND
shigella dysenteriae serotype  <dig>  causes the most severe form of epidemic bacillary dysentery. quantitative proteome profiling of shigella dysenteriae serotype  <dig>  in vitro  and in vivo  was performed by 2d-lc-ms/ms and apex, a label-free computationally modified spectral counting methodology.


RESULTS
overall,  <dig> proteins were quantitated at a 5% fdr , including  <dig> and  <dig> from in vitro and in vivo samples, respectively. identification of  <dig> cytoplasmic membrane and outer membrane  proteins  contributed to the most extensive survey of the shigella membrane proteome reported so far. differential protein abundance analysis using statistical tests revealed that sd <dig> cells switched to an anaerobic energy metabolism under in vivo conditions, resulting in an increase in fermentative, propanoate, butanoate and nitrate metabolism. abundance increases of transcription activators fnr and nar supported the notion of a switch from aerobic to anaerobic respiration in the host gut environment. high in vivo abundances of proteins involved in acid resistance  and mixed acid fermentation  indicated bacterial survival responses to acid stress, while increased abundance of oxidative stress proteins  implied that defense mechanisms against oxygen radicals were mobilized. proteins involved in peptidoglycan turnover  were increased, while β-barrel om proteins , om lipoproteins , chaperones involved in om protein folding pathways  and lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis  were decreased, suggesting unexpected modulations of the outer membrane/peptidoglycan layers in vivo. several virulence proteins of the mxi-spa type iii secretion system and invasion plasmid antigens  required for invasion of colonic epithelial cells, and release of bacteria into the host cell cytosol were increased in vivo.


CONCLUSIONS
global proteomic profiling of sd <dig> comparing in vivo vs. in vitro proteomes revealed differential expression of proteins geared towards survival of the pathogen in the host gut environment, including increased abundance of proteins involved in anaerobic energy respiration, acid resistance and virulence. the immunogenic ospc <dig>  ospc <dig> and ipga virulence proteins were detected solely under in vivo conditions, lending credence to their candidacy as potential vaccine targets.

