BACKGROUND
clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis  causes bacterial wilt and canker in tomato. cmm is present nearly in all european countries. during the last three years several local outbreaks were detected in belgium. the lack of a convenient high-resolution strain-typing method has hampered the study of the routes of transmission of cmm and epidemiology in tomato cultivation. in this study the genetic relatedness among a worldwide collection of cmm strains and their relatives was approached by gyrb and dnaa gene sequencing. further, we developed and applied a multilocus variable number of tandem repeats analysis  scheme to discriminate among cmm strains.


RESULTS
a phylogenetic analysis of gyrb and dnaa gene sequences of  <dig> cmm strains demonstrated that belgian cmm strains from recent outbreaks of 2010– <dig> form a genetically uniform group within the cmm clade, and cmm is phylogenetically distinct from other clavibacter subspecies and from non-pathogenic clavibacter-like strains. mlva conducted with eight minisatellite loci detected  <dig> haplotypes within cmm. all strains from belgian outbreaks, isolated between  <dig> and  <dig>  together with two french strains from  <dig> seem to form one monomorphic group. regardless of the isolation year, location or tomato cultivar, belgian strains from recent outbreaks belonged to the same haplotype. on the contrary, strains from diverse geographical locations or isolated over longer periods of time formed mostly singletons.


CONCLUSIONS
we hypothesise that the introduction might have originated from one lot of seeds or contaminated tomato seedlings that was the source of the outbreak in  <dig> and that these cmm strains persisted and induced infection in  <dig> and  <dig>  our results demonstrate that mlva is a promising typing technique for a local surveillance and outbreaks investigation in epidemiological studies of cmm.

clavibactermlvabacterial typingepidemiologybacterial wilt and cankerplant pathogen

