BACKGROUND
photo-activation of the hydrophobic membrane probe  <dig>   <dig> iodonaphthylazide  by irradiation with uv light  results in the covalent modification of transmembrane anchors of membrane proteins. this unique selectivity of ina towards the transmembrane anchor has been exploited to specifically label proteins inserted in membranes. previously, we have demonstrated that photo-activation of ina in enveloped viruses resulted in the inhibition of viral membrane protein-induced membrane fusion and viral entry into cells. in this study we show that photo-activation of ina in various cell lines, including those over-expressing the multi-drug resistance transporters mrp <dig> or pgp, leads to cell death. we analyzed mechanisms of cell killing by ina-uv treatment. the effects of ina-uv treatment on signaling via various cell surface receptors, on the activity of the multi-drug resistance transporter mrp <dig> and on membrane protein lateral mobility were also investigated.


RESULTS
ina treatment of various cell lines followed by irradiation with uv light  resulted in loss of cell viability in a dose dependent manner. the mechanism of cell death appeared to be apoptosis as indicated by phosphatidylserine exposure, mitochondrial depolarization and dna fragmentation. inhibition by pan-caspase inhibitors and cleavage of caspase specific substrates indicated that at low concentrations of ina apoptosis was caspase dependent. the ina-uv treatment showed similar cell killing efficacy in cells over-expressing mrp <dig> function as control cells. efflux of an mrp <dig> substrate was blocked by ina-uv treatment of the mrp1-overexpressing cells. although ina-uv treatment resulted in inhibition of calcium mobilization triggered by chemokine receptor signaling, akt phosphorylation triggered by igf <dig> receptor signaling was enhanced. furthermore, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments indicated that ina-uv treatment resulted in reduced lateral mobility of a seven transmembrane g protein-coupled receptor.


CONCLUSIONS
ina is a photo-activable agent that induces apoptosis in various cancer cell lines. it reacts with membrane proteins to alter the normal physiological function resulting in apoptosis. this activity of ina maybe exploited for use as an anti-cancer agent.

