BACKGROUND
bifidobacteria are commonly found as part of the microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract  of a broad range of hosts, where their presence is positively correlated with the host’s health status. in this study, we assessed the genomes of thirteen representatives of bifidobacterium breve, which is not only a frequently encountered component of the  human gut microbiota, but can also be isolated from human milk and vagina.


RESULTS
in silico analysis of genome sequences from thirteen b. breve strains isolated from different environments  shows that the genetic variability of this species principally consists of hypothetical genes and mobile elements, but, interestingly, also genes correlated with the adaptation to host environment and gut colonization. these latter genes specify the biosynthetic machinery for sortase-dependent pili and exopolysaccharide production, as well as genes that provide protection against invasion of foreign dna , and genes that encode enzymes responsible for carbohydrate fermentation. gene-trait matching analysis showed clear correlations between known metabolic capabilities and characterized genes, and it also allowed the identification of a gene cluster involved in the utilization of the alcohol-sugar sorbitol.


CONCLUSIONS
genome analysis of thirteen representatives of the b. breve species revealed that the deduced pan-genome exhibits an essentially close trend. for this reason our analyses suggest that this number of b. breve representatives is sufficient to fully describe the pan-genome of this species. comparative genomics also facilitated the genetic explanation for differential carbon source utilization phenotypes previously observed in different strains of b. breve.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bifidobacterium breveevolutionary genomicscore genomedispensable genomepan-genomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

