BACKGROUND
transcriptome analysis in combination with pathway-focused bioassays is
suggested to be a helpful approach for gaining deeper insights into the
complex mechanisms of action of herbal multicomponent preparations in living
cells. the polyherbalism based concept of tibetan and ayurvedic medicine
considers therapeutic efficacy through multi-target effects. a polyherbal
indo-tibetan preparation, padma  <dig>  approved by the swiss drug authorities
, was applied to a more detailed dissection of
mechanism of action in human hepatoma hepg <dig> cells. cell-free and cell-based
assays were employed to evaluate the antioxidant capacity. genome-wide
expression profiling was done by applying human genome u <dig> plus  <dig> 
affymetrix arrays. pathway- and network-oriented analysis elucidated the
affected biological processes. the results were validated using reporter
gene assays and quantitative real-time pcr.


RESULTS
to reveal the direct radical scavenging effects of the ethanolic extract of
the indo-tibetan polyherbal remedy padma  <dig>  an in vitro oxygen
radical absorbance capacity assay  was employed, which resulted in a
peroxyl-radical scavenging activity of  <dig> ±  <dig> μmol te/g.
furthermore, the antioxidant capacity of padma  <dig> was analysed in living
hepg <dig> cells, by measuring its scavenging potential against radical induced
ros. this formulation showed a considerable antioxidant capacity by
significantly reducing ros levels in a dose-dependent manner.

integrated transcriptome analysis revealed a major influence on phase i and
phase ii detoxification and the oxidative stress response. selected target
genes, such as heme oxygenase  <dig>  were validated in qpcr experiments. network
analysis showed  <dig> interrelated networks involved in important biological
functions such as drug and bio-molecule metabolism, molecular transport and
cellular communication. some molecules are part of signaling cascades that
are active during development and morphogenesis or are involved in
pathological conditions and inflammatory response.


CONCLUSIONS
the identified molecular targets and pathways suggest several mechanisms that
underlie the biological activity of the preparation. although extrapolation
of these findings to the in vivo situation is not possible, the
results obtained might be the basis for further investigations and new
hypotheses to be tested. this study demonstrates the potential of the
combination of focused and unbiased research strategies in the mode of
action analysis of multicomponent herbal mixtures.

hepg2microarraymulticomponentpathway analysispolyherbalqpcr

