BACKGROUND
pseudomonas syringae is pathogenic to a large number of plant species. for host colonization and disease progression, strains of this bacterium utilize an array of type iii-secreted effectors and other virulence factors, including small secreted molecules such as syringolin a, a peptide derivative that inhibits the eukaryotic proteasome. in strains colonizing dicotyledonous plants, the compound was demonstrated to suppress the salicylic-acid-dependent defense pathway. here, we analyze virulence factors of three strains colonizing wheat : p. syringae pathovar syringae  strains b <dig> and sm, as well as p. syringae brip <dig>  these strains have a relatively small repertoire of only seven to eleven type iii secreted effectors  and differ in their capacity to produce syringolin a. the aim of this study was to analyze the contribution of various known virulence factors in the context of a small t3e repertoire.


RESULTS
we demonstrate that syringolin a production enhances disease symptom development upon direct infiltration of strains into wheat leaves. however, it is not universally required for colonization, as psy sm, which lacks syringolin biosynthesis genes, reaches cell densities comparable to syringolin a producer p. syringae brip <dig>  next, we show that despite the small set of t3e-encoding genes, the type iii secretion system remains the key pathogenicity determinant in these strains, and that phenotypic effects of deleting t3e-coding genes become apparent only when multiple effectors are removed.


CONCLUSIONS
whereas production of syringolin a is not required for successful colonization of wheat leaves by p. syringae strains, its production results in increased lesion formation. despite the small number of known t3es encoded by the analyzed strains, the type iii secretion system is essential for endophytic growth of these strains.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pseudomonas syringaesyringolin atriticum aestivumtype iii secretion systemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

