BACKGROUND
high-throughput transcriptome sequencing  technology promises to discover novel protein-coding and non-coding transcripts, particularly the identification of long non-coding rnas  from de novo sequencing data. this requires tools that are not restricted by prior gene annotations, genomic sequences and high-quality sequencing.


RESULTS
we present an alignment-free tool called plek , which uses a computational pipeline based on an improved k-mer scheme and a support vector machine  algorithm to distinguish lncrnas from messenger rnas , in the absence of genomic sequences or annotations. the performance of plek was evaluated on well-annotated mrna and lncrna transcripts. 10-fold cross-validation tests on human refseq mrnas and gencode lncrnas indicated that our tool could achieve accuracy of up to  <dig> %. we demonstrated the utility of plek on transcripts from other vertebrates using the model built from human datasets. plek attained >90% accuracy on most of these datasets. plek also performed well using a simulated dataset and two real de novo assembled transcriptome datasets  with relatively high indel sequencing errors. in addition, plek is approximately eightfold faster than a newly developed alignment-free tool, named coding-non-coding index , and  <dig> times faster than the most popular alignment-based tool, coding potential calculator , in a single-threading running manner.


CONCLUSIONS
plek is an efficient alignment-free computational tool to distinguish lncrnas from mrnas in rna-seq transcriptomes of species lacking reference genomes. plek is especially suitable for pacbio or  <dig> sequencing data and large-scale transcriptome data. its open-source software can be freely downloaded from https://sourceforge.net/projects/plek/files/.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqlncrnak-merpredictionde novo sequencingde novo assembleissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

