BACKGROUND
environmental transmission of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria and resistance gene determinants originating from livestock is affected by their persistence in agricultural-related matrices. this study investigated the effects of administering subtherapeutic concentrations of antimicrobials to beef cattle on the abundance and persistence of resistance genes within the microbial community of fecal deposits. cattle  were administered chlortetracycline, chlortetracycline plus sulfamethazine, tylosin, or no antimicrobials . model fecal deposits  were prepared by mixing fresh feces from each pen into a single composite sample. real-time pcr was used to measure concentrations of tet, sul and erm resistance genes in dna extracted from composites over  <dig> days of environmental exposure in the field. the microbial communities were analyzed by quantification and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis  of pcr-amplified 16s-rrna.


RESULTS
the concentrations of 16s-rrna in feces were similar across treatments and increased by day  <dig>  declining thereafter. dgge profiles of 16s-rrna differed amongst treatments and with time, illustrating temporal shifts in microbial communities. all measured resistance gene determinants were quantifiable in feces after  <dig> days. antimicrobial treatment differentially affected the abundance of certain resistance genes but generally not their persistence. in the first  <dig> days, concentrations of tet, tet, sul <dig>  sul <dig>  erm tended to increase, and decline thereafter, whereas tet and tet gradually declined over  <dig> days. at day  <dig>  the concentration of erm was greatest in feces from cattle fed tylosin, compared to all other treatments.


CONCLUSIONS
the abundance of genes coding for antimicrobial resistance in bovine feces can be affected by inclusion of antibiotics in the feed. resistance genes can persist in feces from cattle beyond  <dig> days with concentrations of some genes increasing with time. management practices that accelerate dna degradation such as frequent land application or composting of manure may reduce the extent to which bovine feces serves as a reservoir of antimicrobial resistance.

