BACKGROUND
the mammalian inner ear contains sensory organs, the organ of corti in the cochlea and cristae and maculae in the vestibule, with each comprised of patterned sensory epithelia that are responsible for hearing and balance. the development, cell fate, patterning, and innervation of both the sensory and nonsensory regions of the inner ear are governed by tight regulation involving, among others, transcription factors and micrornas . in humans, mutations in specific mirna genes are associated with hearing loss. in mice, experimental reduction or mutations of mirnas in the inner ear leads to severe developmental and structural abnormalities. a comprehensive identification of mirnas in the sensory epithelia and their gene targets will enable pathways of auditory and vestibular function to be defined.


RESULTS
in this study, we used next-generation sequencing  to identify the most prominent mirnas in the inner ear and to define mirna-target pairs that form pathways crucial for the function of the sensory epithelial cells. ngs of rna from inner ear sensory epithelial cells led to the identification of  <dig> mirnas in both cochlear and vestibular sensory epithelium, with  <dig> and  <dig> mirnas found in only cochlea or vestibule, respectively. mir-6715-3p and mir-6715-5p were defined for the first time in the inner ear. gene targets were identified for each of these mirnas, including arhgap <dig>  a gtpase activating protein, for mir-6715-3p, implicating this mirna in sensory hair cell bundle development, actin reorganization, cell adhesion and inner ear morphogenesis.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a comprehensive atlas of mirnas in the inner ear sensory epithelia. the results provide further support of the essential regulatory role of mirnas in inner ear sensory epithelia and in regulating pathways that define development and growth of these cells.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
deafnessinner earsensory epitheliarna-seqmicrornasissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

