BACKGROUND
functions of most genes predicted in the soybean genome have not been clarified. a mutant library with a high mutation density would be helpful for functional studies and for identification of novel alleles useful for breeding. development of cost-effective and high-throughput protocols using next generation sequencing  technologies is expected to simplify the retrieval of mutants with mutations in genes of interest.


RESULTS
to increase the mutation density, seeds of the japanese elite soybean cultivar enrei were treated with the chemical mutagen ethyl methanesulfonate ; m <dig> seeds produced by m <dig> plants were treated with ems once again. the resultant library, which consisted of dna and seeds from  <dig> plants, revealed large morphological and physiological variations. based on whole-genome re-sequencing analysis of  <dig> mutant lines, the average number of base changes was  <dig>  per line. on average,  <dig> and  <dig> per line were missense and nonsense mutations, respectively. two screening strategies for high resolution melting  analysis and indexed amplicon sequencing were designed to retrieve the mutants; the mutations were confirmed by sanger sequencing as the final step. in comparison with hrm screening of several genes, indexed amplicon sequencing allows one to scan a longer sequence range and skip screening steps and to know the sequence information of mutation because it uses systematic dna pooling and the index of ngs reads, which simplifies the discovery of mutants with amino acid substitutions.


CONCLUSIONS
a soybean mutant library with a high mutation density was developed. a high mutation density  was achieved by repeating the ems treatment. the mutation density of our library is sufficiently high to obtain a plant in which a gene is nonsense mutated. thus, our mutant library and the indexed amplicon sequencing will be useful for functional studies of soybean genes and have a potential to yield useful mutant alleles for soybean breeding.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ems mutagenesismutant libraryhigh resolution meltingnext generation sequencingmutation densityamplicon sequencingnextera technologyhiseqmiseqdna poolingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

