BACKGROUND
the major histocompatibility complex  genes are one of the most important genetic systems in the vertebrate immune response. the diversity of mhc genes may directly influence the survival of individuals against infectious disease. however, there has been no investigation of mhc diversity in the asiatic black bear . here, we analyzed 270-bp nucleotide sequences of the entire exon  <dig> region of the mhc dqb gene by using  <dig> samples from the japanese black bear  from  <dig> local populations.


RESULTS
among  <dig> of  <dig> samples, we identified  <dig> mhc variants that encoded  <dig> different amino acid sequences  and one putative pseudogene. the phylogenetic analysis suggests that mhc variants detected from the japanese black bear are derived from the dqb locus. one of the  <dig> dqb allotypes, urth-dqb* <dig>  was found to be common to all local populations. moreover, this allotype was shared between the black bear on the asian continent and the japanese black bear, suggesting that urth-dqb* <dig> might have been maintained in the ancestral black bear population for at least  <dig>  years. our findings, from calculating the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous substitutions, indicate that balancing selection has maintained genetic variation of peptide-binding residues at the dqb locus of the japanese black bear. from examination of genotype frequencies among local populations, we observed a considerably lower level of observed heterozygosity than expected.


CONCLUSIONS
the low level of observed heterozygosity suggests that genetic drift reduced dqb diversity in the japanese black bear due to a bottleneck event at the population or species level. the decline of dqb diversity might have been accelerated by the loss of rare variants that have been maintained by negative frequency-dependent selection. nevertheless, dqb diversity of the black bear appears to be relatively high compared with some other endangered mammalian species. this result suggests that the japanese black bears may also retain more potential resistance against pathogens than other endangered mammalian species. to prevent further decline of potential resistance against pathogens, a conservation policy for the japanese black bear should be designed to maintain mhc rare variants in each local population.

balancing selectionconservation geneticsdqbgenetic diversityjapanese black bearmajor histocompatibility complexursidaeursus thibetanus

