BACKGROUND
rna interference  is an effective and important tool used to study gene function. for large-scale screens, rnai is used to systematically down-regulate genes of interest and analyze their roles in a biological process. however, rnai is associated with off-target effects , including microrna -like otes. the contribution of reagent-specific otes to rnai screen data sets can be significant. in addition, the post-screen validation process is time and labor intensive. thus, the availability of robust approaches to identify candidate off-targeted transcripts would be beneficial.


RESULTS
significant efforts have been made to eliminate false positive results attributable to sequence-specific otes associated with rnai. these approaches have included improved algorithms for rnai reagent design, incorporation of chemical modifications into sirnas, and the use of various bioinformatics strategies to identify possible otes in screen results. genome-wide enrichment of seed sequence matches  was developed to identify potential off-targeted transcripts in large-scale screen data by seed-region analysis. here, we introduce a user-friendly web application that provides researchers a relatively quick and easy way to perform gess analysis on data from human or mouse cell-based screens using short interfering rnas  or short hairpin rnas , as well as for drosophila screens using shrnas. online gess relies on up-to-date transcript sequence annotations for human and mouse genes extracted from ncbi reference sequence  and drosophila genes from flybase. the tool also accommodates analysis with user-provided reference sequence files.


CONCLUSIONS
online gess provides a straightforward user interface for genome-wide seed region analysis for human, mouse and drosophila rnai screen data. with the tool, users can either use a built-in database or provide a database of transcripts for analysis. this makes it possible to analyze rnai data from any organism for which the user can provide transcript sequences.

rnaioff-target effectsdata analysisseed regionmirnasirnashrnahigh-throughput screening

