BACKGROUND
bacteriocin-producing lactic acid bacteria are commonly used as natural protective cultures. among them, strains of the genus pediococcus are particularly interesting for their ability to produce pediocin, a broad spectrum antimicrobial peptide with a strong antagonistic activity against the food-borne pathogen listeria monocytogenes. furthermore, there is increasing interest in isolating new bacteriocin-producing strains of human intestinal origin that could be developed for probiotic effects and inhibition of pathogenic bacteria in the gut. in this work, we typed a new strain, co-isolated from baby faeces together with a bifidobacterium thermophilum strain, and characterized its proteinaceous compound with strong antilisterial activity.


RESULTS
the newly isolated strain uva <dig> was identified as a pediococcus acidilactici by carbohydrate fermentation profile, growth at 50°c and 16s rdna sequencing. the partially purified bacteriocin was heat resistant up to 100°c, active over a wide range of ph  and susceptible to proteolytic enzymes. the molecular weight, estimated by sds-page, was similar to that of pediocin ach/pa- <dig> . p. acidilactici uva <dig> harboured a  <dig> -kb plasmid that could be cured easily, which resulted in the loss of the antimicrobial activity. southern hybridization using the dig-labelled peda-probe established that the bacteriocin gene was plasmid-borne as for all pediocin described so far. nucleotide sequence of the whole operon  showed almost  <dig> % similarity to the pediocin ach/pa- <dig> operon. the mrna transcript for peda could be detected in p. acidilactici uva <dig> but not in the cured derivative, confirming the expression of the peda-gene in uva <dig>  using a new real-time pcr assay, eleven out of seventeen human faecal samples tested were found to contain peda-dna.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified and characterised the first pediocin produced by a human intestinal pediococcus acidilactici isolate and successfully developed a new real-time pcr assay to show the large distribution of peda-containing strains in baby faecal samples.

