BACKGROUND
hop  plants are grown primarily for the brewing industry and have been used as a traditional medicinal herb for a long time. severe hop stunt disease caused by the recently discovered citrus bark cracking viroid  is one of the most devastating diseases among other viroid infections in hop. micrornas  are a class of non-coding small rnas that play important roles in gene expression regulation. to identify mirnas in hop and their response to cbcvd-infection, two small rna  libraries were prepared from healthy and cbcvd-infected hop plants and were investigated by high throughput sequencing.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> conserved and  <dig> novel mirnas were identified. among them,  <dig> conserved and  <dig> novel mirnas were found to be differentially recovered in response to cbcvd-infection. a total of  <dig> potential targets was predicted for conserved and novel mirnas based on a sequence homology search using hop transcriptome data. the majority of predicted targets significantly belonged to transcriptional factors that may regulate hop leaf, root and cone growth and development. in addition, the identified mirnas might also play an important roles in other cellular and metabolic processes, such as signal transduction, stress response and other physiological processes, including prenylflavonoid biosynthesis pathways. quantitative real time pcr analysis of selected targets revealed their negative correlation with their corresponding cbcvd-responsive mirnas.


CONCLUSIONS
based on the results, we concluded that cbcvd-responsive mirnas modulate several hormone pathways and transcriptional factors that play important roles in the regulation of metabolism, growth and development. these results provide a framework for further analysis of regulatory roles of srnas in plant defense mechanism including other hop infecting viroids in particular.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
humulus lupulushigh-throughput sequencingcitrus bark cracking viroidmicrornaviroidstarget expressionlinkage programme, by slovenian research agency j4- <dig>  l4- <dig>  p4-0077jakse jernej msmt kontakt ii lh14255matoušek jaroslav issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

