BACKGROUND
allelic variation is the cornerstone of genetically determined differences in gene expression, gene product structure, physiology, and behavior. however, allelic variation, particularly cryptic  variation, is problematic for follow up analyses. polymorphisms result in a high incidence of false positive and false negative results in hybridization based analyses and hinder the identification of the true variation underlying genetically determined differences in physiology and behavior. given the proliferation of mouse genetic models  and the wealth of gene expression microarray and phenotypic studies using genetic models, the impact of naturally-occurring polymorphisms on these data is critical. with the advent of next-generation, high-throughput sequencing, we are now in a position to determine to what extent polymorphisms are currently cryptic in such models and their impact on downstream analyses.


RESULTS
we sequenced the two most commonly used inbred mouse strains, dba/2j and c57bl/6j, across a region of chromosome  <dig>  using two next generation high-throughput sequencing platforms: applied biosystems  and illumina . using the same templates on both platforms, we compared realignments and single nucleotide polymorphism  detection with an  <dig> fold average read depth across platforms and samples. while public datasets currently annotate  <dig>  snps between the two strains in this interval, thorough high-throughput sequencing identified a total of  <dig>  snps in the interval, including  <dig>  new snps. furthermore, we confirmed  <dig> missense snps and discovered  <dig> new missense snps.


CONCLUSIONS
comparisons utilizing even two of the best characterized mouse genetic models, dba/2j and c57bl/6j, indicate that more than half of naturally-occurring snps remain cryptic. the magnitude of this problem is compounded when using more divergent or poorly annotated genetic models. this warrants full genomic sequencing of the mouse strains used as genetic models.

