BACKGROUND
non-typeable h. influenzae  is a nasopharyngeal commensal that can become an opportunistic pathogen causing infections such as otitis media, pneumonia, and bronchitis. nthi is known to form biofilms. resistance of bacterial biofilms to clearance by host defense mechanisms and antibiotic treatments is well-established. in the current study, we used stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture  to compare the proteomic profiles of nthi biofilm and planktonic organisms. duplicate continuous-flow growth chambers containing defined media with either “light”  isoleucine or “heavy”  13c6-labeled isoleucine were used to grow planktonic  and biofilm  samples, respectively. bacteria were removed from the chambers, mixed based on weight, and protein extracts were generated. liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry  was performed on the tryptic peptides and  <dig> unique proteins were identified with 99% confidence.


RESULTS
comparisons of the nthi biofilm to planktonic samples demonstrated that  <dig> proteins showed differential expression with p-values ≤ <dig> . pathway analysis demonstrated that proteins involved in energy metabolism, protein synthesis, and purine, pyrimidine, nucleoside, and nucleotide processes showed a general trend of downregulation in the biofilm compared to planktonic organisms. conversely, proteins involved in transcription, dna metabolism, and fatty acid and phospholipid metabolism showed a general trend of upregulation under biofilm conditions. selected reaction monitoring -ms was used to validate a subset of these proteins; among these were aerobic respiration control protein arca, nad nucleotidase and heme-binding protein a.


CONCLUSIONS
the present proteomic study indicates that the nthi biofilm exists in a semi-dormant state with decreased energy metabolism and protein synthesis yet is still capable of managing oxidative stress and in acquiring necessary cofactors important for biofilm survival.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
non-typeable haemophilus influenzaemetabolic labelingbiofilmsmass spectrometryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

