BACKGROUND
membranes play a crucial role in cellular functions. membranes provide a physical barrier, control the trafficking of substances entering and leaving the cell, and are a major determinant of cellular ultra-structure. in addition, components embedded within the membrane participate in cell signaling, energy transduction, and other critical cellular functions. all these processes must share the limited space in the membrane; thus it represents a notable constraint on cellular functions. membrane- and location-based processes have not yet been reconstructed and explicitly integrated into genome-scale models.


RESULTS
the recent genome-scale model of metabolism and protein expression in escherichia coli  computes the complete composition of the proteome required to perform whole cell functions. here we expand the me-model to include  a reconstruction of protein translocation pathways,  assignment of all cellular proteins to one of four compartments  and a translocation pathway,  experimentally determined translocase catalytic and porin diffusion rates, and  a novel membrane constraint that reflects cell morphology. comparison of computations performed with this expanded me-model, named ijl1678-me, against available experimental data reveals that the model accurately describes translocation pathway expression and the functional proteome by compartmentalized mass.


CONCLUSIONS
ijl1678-me enables the computation of cellular phenotypes through an integrated computation of proteome composition, abundance, and activity in four cellular compartments . reconstruction and validation of the model has demonstrated that the ijl1678-me is capable of capturing the functional content of membranes, cellular compartment-specific composition, and that it can be utilized to examine the effect of perturbing an expanded set of network components. ijl1678-me takes a notable step towards the inclusion of cellular ultra-structure in genome-scale models.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
constraint-based modelinggene expressionmetabolismprotein translocationcompartmentalizationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

