BACKGROUND
the oomycete plasmopara viticola  berl. and de toni causes downy mildew in grapevine . this pathogen is strictly biotrophic, thus completely dependent on living host cells for its survival. the molecular basis of compatibility and disease development in this system is poorly understood. we have carried out a large-scale cdna-aflp analysis to identify grapevine and p. viticola genes associated with the infection process.


RESULTS
we carried out cdna-aflp analysis on artificially infected leaves of the susceptible cultivar riesling at the oil spot stage, on water-treated leaves and on a sample of pure sporangia as controls. selective amplifications with  <dig> primer combinations allowed the visualization of about  <dig> transcript-derived fragments  in infected leaves,  <dig> of which  were differentially expressed. we sequenced  <dig> fragments,  <dig> of which were identified as grapevine transcripts after homology searching, while  <dig> were homologous to sequences in phytophthora spp. databases and were attributed to p. viticola. there were  <dig> orphan tdfs. many grapevine genes spanning almost all functional categories were downregulated during infection, especially genes involved in photosynthesis. grapevine genes homologous to known resistance genes also tended to be repressed, as were several resistance gene analogs and carbonic anhydrase . in contrast, genes encoding cytoskeletal components, enzymes of the phenylpropanoid and beta-oxidation pathways, and pathogenesis related proteins were primarily upregulated during infection. the majority of p. viticola transcripts expressed in planta showed homology to genes of unknown function or to genomic phytophthora sequences, but genes related to metabolism, energy production, transport and signal transduction were also identified.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the first global catalogue of grapevine and p. viticola genes expressed during infection, together with their functional annotations. this will help to elucidate the molecular basis of the infection process and identify genes and chemicals that could help to inhibit the pathogen.

