BACKGROUND

sclerotinia sclerotiorum causes stem rot in brassica napus, which leads to lodging and severe yield losses. although recent studies have explored significant progress in the characterization of individual s. sclerotiorum pathogenicity factors, a gap exists in profiling gene expression throughout the course of s. sclerotiorum infection on a host plant. in this study, rna-seq analysis was performed with focus on the events occurring through the early  to the middle  stages of infection.


RESULTS
transcript analysis revealed the temporal pattern and amplitude of the deployment of genes associated with aspects of pathogenicity or virulence during the course of s. sclerotiorum infection on brassica napus. these genes were categorized into eight functional groups: hydrolytic enzymes, secondary metabolites, detoxification, signaling, development, secreted effectors, oxalic acid and reactive oxygen species production. the induction patterns of nearly all of these genes agreed with their predicted functions. principal component analysis delineated gene expression patterns that signified transitions between pathogenic phases, namely host penetration, ramification and necrotic stages, and provided evidence for the occurrence of a brief biotrophic phase soon after host penetration.


CONCLUSIONS
the current observations support the notion that s. sclerotiorum deploys an array of factors and complex strategies to facilitate host colonization and mitigate host defenses. this investigation provides a broad overview of the sequential expression of virulence/pathogenicity-associated genes during infection of b. napus by s. sclerotiorum and provides information for further characterization of genes involved in the s. sclerotiorum-host plant interactions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
sclerotinia sclerotiorumbrassica napusinfectiontranscriptomenecrosiseffectorshydrolytic enzymessecondary metabolitesoxalic acidsaskcanolaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

