BACKGROUND
blueberry is an economically important fruit crop in ericaceae family. the substantial quantities of flavonoids in blueberry have been implicated in a broad range of health benefits. however, the information regarding fruit development and flavonoid metabolites based on the transcriptome level is still limited. in the present study, the transcriptome and gene expression profiling over berry development, especially during color development were initiated.


RESULTS
a total of approximately  <dig>  gbp of data were obtained and assembled into  <dig>  transcripts and  <dig>  unigenes from three stages of blueberry fruit and color development. a large number of simple sequence repeats  and candidate genes, which are potentially involved in plant development, metabolic and hormone pathways, were identified. a total of  <dig> sequences containing  <dig> ssrs were characterized from  <dig>  unigenes and  <dig> unigenes contained more than one ssr. the expression profiles of key genes involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis were also studied. in addition, a comparison between our dataset and other published results was carried out.


CONCLUSIONS
our high quality reads produced in this study are an important advancement and provide a new resource for the interpretation of high-throughput data for blueberry species whether regarding sequencing data depth or species extension. the use of this transcriptome data will serve as a valuable public information database for the studies of blueberry genome and would greatly boost the research of fruit and color development, flavonoid metabolisms and regulation and breeding of more healthful blueberries.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
vaccinium corymbosumtranscriptomefruit developmentcolor developmentanthocyanin biosynthesisagricultural ministry of china2014zx08009-003-002zhang lingyun the national natural science foundation of china31270663zhang lingyun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

