BACKGROUND
mitochondrial dna-derived sequences have become popular markers for evolutionary studies, as their comparison may yield significant insights into the evolution of both the organisms and their genomes. from the more than  <dig>  teleost species, only  <dig> complete mtdna sequences are available . in this paper, we report the complete mitochondrial genome sequence of asian arowana, a basal bonytongue fish species, which belongs to the order of osteoglossiformes.


RESULTS
the complete mitochondrial genomic sequence  of asian arowana  was determined by using shotgun sequencing method. the length of asian arowana mtdna is ca.  <dig>  bp , containing  <dig> protein-coding genes,  <dig> trna and  <dig> rrna genes. twelve of the thirteen protein coding genes were found to be encoded by the heavy strand in the order typically observed for vertebrate mitochondrial genomes, whereas only nad <dig> was located on the light strand. an interesting feature of asian arowana mitogenome is that two different repeat arrays were identified in the control region: a  <dig> bp tandem repeat at the 5' end and an at-type dinucleotide microsatellite at the 3' end. both repeats show polymorphism among the six individuals tested; moreover the former one is present in the mitochondrial genomes of several other teleost groups. the tacat motif described earlier only from mammals and lungfish was found in the tandem repeat of several osteoglossid and eel species. phylogenetic analysis of fish species representing actinopterygii and sarcopterygii taxa has shown that the asian arowana is located near the baseline of the teleost tree, confirming its status among the ancestral teleost lineages.


CONCLUSIONS
the mitogenome of asian arowana is very similar to the typical vertebrate mitochondrial genome in terms of gene arrangements, codon usage and base composition. however its control region contains two different types of repeat units at both ends, an interesting feature that to our knowledge has never been reported before for other vertebrate mitochondrial control regions. phylogenetic analysis using the complete mtdna sequence of asian arowana confirmed that it belongs to an ancestral teleost lineage.

