BACKGROUND
aspergillus flavus link:fr, an opportunistic fungus that produces aflatoxin, is pathogenic to maize and other oilseed crops. aflatoxin is a potent carcinogen, and its presence markedly reduces the value of grain. understanding and enhancing host resistance to a. flavus infection and/or subsequent aflatoxin accumulation is generally considered an efficient means of reducing grain losses to aflatoxin.  different proteomic, genomic and genetic studies of maize  have generated large data sets with the goal of identifying genes responsible for conferring resistance to a. flavus, or aflatoxin. 


RESULTS
in order to maximize the usage of different data sets in new studies, including association mapping, we have constructed a relational database with web interface integrating the results of gene expression, proteomic , quantitative trait loci  genetic mapping studies, and sequence data from the literature to facilitate selection of candidate genes for continued investigation. the corn fungal resistance associated sequences database   was created with the main goal of identifying genes important to aflatoxin resistance.  cfras-db is implemented using mysql as the relational database management system running on a linux server, using an apache web server, and perl cgi scripts as the web interface.  the database and the associated web-based interface allow researchers to examine many lines of evidence  to assess the potential role of a gene or group of genes in the response of different maize lines to a. flavus infection and subsequent production of aflatoxin by the fungus. 


CONCLUSIONS
cfras-db provides the first opportunity to integrate data pertaining to the problem of a. flavus and aflatoxin resistance in maize in one resource and to support queries across different datasets.  the web-based interface gives researchers different query options for mining the database across different types of experiments.  the database is publically available at http://agbase.msstate.edu.

19– <dig> february  <dig> seventh annual mcbios conference.  bioinformatics: systems, biology, informatics and computation jonesboro, ar, usa

