BACKGROUND
the combination of imaging technologies and luciferase-based bioluminescent bacterial reporter strains provide a sensitive and simple non-invasive detection method  for the study of diverse biological processes, as well as efficacy of therapeutic interventions, in live animal models of disease. the engineering of bioluminescent bacteria required for photonic bioimaging is frequently hampered by lack of promoters suitable for strong, yet stable luciferase gene expression.


RESULTS
we devised a novel method for identification of constitutive native promoters in gram-negative bacteria. the method is based on a tn5/ <dig> transposon that exploits the unique features of tn <dig>  and tn <dig> . the transposons are designed such that tn <dig> transposition will allow insertion of a promoter-less bacterial luxcdabe operon downstream of a bacterial gene promoter. cloning of dna fragments from luminescent isolates results in a plasmid that replicates in pir+ hosts. sequencing of the lux-chromosomal dna junctions on the plasmid reveals transposon insertion sites within genes or operons. the plasmid is also a mini-tn7-lux delivery vector that can be used to introduce the promoter-lux operon fusion into other derivatives of the bacterium of interest in an isogenic fashion. alternatively, promoter-containing sequences can be pcr-amplified from plasmid or chromosomal dna and cloned into a series of accompanying mini-tn7-lux vectors. the mini-tn5/7-lux and mini-tn7-lux vectors are equipped with diverse selection markers and thus applicable in numerous gram-negative bacteria. various mini-tn5/7-lux vectors were successfully tested for transposition and promoter identification by imaging in acinetobacter baumannii, escherichia coli, and burkholderia pseudomallei. strong promoters were captured for lux expression in e. coli and a. baumannii. some mini-tn7-lux vectors are also equipped with attb sites for swapping of the lux operon with other reporter genes using gateway technology.


CONCLUSIONS
although mini-tn5-lux and mini-tn7-lux elements have previously been developed and used for bacterial promoter identification and chromosomal insertion of promoter-lux gene fusions, respectively, the newly developed mini-tn5/7-lux and accompanying accessory plasmids streamline and accelerate the promoter discovery and bioluminescent strain engineering processes. availability of vectors with diverse selection markers greatly extend the host-range of promoter probe and lux gene fusion vectors.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
imagingluciferasebioluminescent bacteriahost rangemini-tn5/7-lux vectorslux fusion vectorsgram-negative bacteriaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

