BACKGROUND
fusarium oxysporum infection leads to fusarium-derived wilt, which is responsible for the greatest losses in flax  crop yield. plants infected by fusarium oxysporum show severe symptoms of dehydration due to the growth of the fungus in vascular tissues. as the disease develops, vascular browning and leaf yellowing can be observed. in the case of more virulent strains, plants die. the pathogen’s attack starts with secretion of enzymes degrading the host cell wall. the main aim of the study was to evaluate the role of the cell wall polymers in the flax plant response to the infection in order to better understand the process of resistance and develop new ways to protect plants against infection. for this purpose, the expression of genes involved in cell wall polymer metabolism and corresponding polymer levels were investigated in flax seedlings after incubation with fusarium oxysporum.


RESULTS
this analysis was facilitated by selecting two groups of genes responding differently to the infection. the first group comprised genes strongly affected by the infection and activated later . the second group comprised genes which are slightly affected  and their expression vary as the infection progresses. fusarium oxysporum infection did not affect the contents of cell wall polymers, but changed their structure.


CONCLUSIONS
the results suggest that the role of the cell wall polymers in the plant response to fusarium oxysporum infection is manifested through changes in expression of their genes and rearrangement of the cell wall polymers. our studies provided new information about the role of cellulose and hemicelluloses in the infection process, the change of their structure and the expression of genes participating in their metabolism during the pathogen infection. we also confirmed the role of pectin and lignin in this process, indicating the major changes at the mrna level of lignin metabolism genes and the loosening of the pectin structure.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
flaxfusarium oxysporuminfectioncell wall polymershttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004281narodowe centrum nauki2013/11/n/nz1/023782012/06/nz1/00006wojtasik wioleta szopa jan the leading national research centre  programme for the years 2014-2018issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

