BACKGROUND
chlorophyll b is a major photosynthetic pigment in green plants that is synthesized by chlorophyllide a oxygenase . the regulation of chlorophyll b biosynthesis is an important determinant for the antenna size of photosystems. chlorophyll b synthesis is partly regulated on a transcriptional level by the expression of the cao gene. in addition, the synthesis of chlorophyll b is strictly regulated on a protein level by the stability of the cao enzyme. cao consists of three domains, which are sequentially named from the n terminus as the a, b and c domains. the a domain of cao participates in the regulation of the cao protein stability.


RESULTS
in order to clarify the physiological function of the a domain, we constructed transgenic arabidopsis  plants which either overexpressed the complete cao or a truncated version of cao lacking the a domain. the transgenic plants overexpressing the a-domain-deleted cao accumulated an excess amount of chlorophyll b during greening. the transgenic plants which lacked the a domain either died or were obviously retarded when they were exposed to continuous light immediately after etiolation. in addition, the loss of the a domain in cao impaired another step of chlorophyll biosynthesis, namely the conversion of divinyl-protochlorophyllide a to monovinyl protochlorophyllide a under dark conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
the a domain of cao regulates the level of cao, and thus prevents the excess accumulation of chlorophyll b. this function of the a domain is especially important during the greening stage of etiolated seedlings. at this stage, the plants are vulnerable to photodamages which could be caused by excessive chlorophyll b accumulation. in addition, de-regulation of the cao level affects monovinyl-protochlorophyllide biosynthesis in darkness by unknown mechanisms. in conclusion, the a domain of cao is essential in the control of chlorophyll biosynthesis and in the survival of seedlings during de-etiolation especially under strong illumination.

