BACKGROUND
the development of large-scale technologies for quantitative transcriptomics has enabled comprehensive analysis of the gene expression profiles in complete genomes. rna-seq allows the measurement of gene expression levels in a manner far more precise and global than previous methods. studies using this technology are altering our view about the extent and complexity of the eukaryotic transcriptomes. in this respect, multiple efforts have been done to determine and analyse the gene expression patterns of human cell types in different conditions, either in normal or pathological states. however, until recently, little has been reported about the evolutionary marks present in human protein-coding genes, particularly from the combined perspective of gene expression and protein evolution.


RESULTS
we present a combined analysis of human protein-coding gene expression profiling and time-scale ancestry mapping, that places the genes in taxonomy clades and reveals eight evolutionary major steps , that include clusters of functionally coherent proteins. the human expressed genes are analysed using a rna-seq dataset of  <dig> samples from  <dig> tissues. the evolutionary analysis of the human proteins is performed combining the information from:  a database of orthologous proteins ,  the taxonomy mapping of genes to lineage clades  and  the evolution time-scale mapping provided by timetree . the human protein-coding genes are also placed in a relational context based in the construction of a robust gene coexpression network, that reveals tighter links between age-related protein-coding genes and finds functionally coherent gene modules.


CONCLUSIONS
understanding the relational landscape of the human protein-coding genes is essential for interpreting the functional elements and modules of our active genome. moreover, decoding the evolutionary history of the human genes can provide very valuable information to reveal or uncover their origin and function.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
human protein evolutionhuman gene evolutiontranscriptomicsrna-seqtissue transcriptomicsprotein familiesgene coexpressiongene house-keepinggene tissue-enriched6th solbio international conference  <dig>  soibio 2016riviera maya, mexico 22- <dig> april  <dig> http://www.soibio.org/en/icmexico2016issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

