BACKGROUND
circannual rhythms in vertebrates can influence a wide variety of physiological processes. some notable examples include annual reproductive cycles and for poikilotherms, seasonal changes modulating growth. increasing water temperature elevates growth rates in fishes, but increases in photoperiod regime can have similar influences even at constant temperature. therefore, in order to understand the dynamics of growth in fish it is important to consider the background influence of photoperiod regime on gene expression differences. this study examined the influence of a declining photoperiod regime  compared to an increasing photoperiod regime  on white muscle transcriptome profiles in fast and slow-growing rainbow trout from a commercial aquaculture strain.


RESULTS
slow-growing fish could be characterized as possessing transcriptome profiles that conform in many respects to an endurance training regime in humans. they have elevated mitochondrial and cytosolic creatine kinase expression levels and appear to suppress mtor-signaling as evidenced by elevated tsc <dig> expression, and they also have elevated p <dig> levels. large fish display a physiological repertoire that may be consistent with strength/resistance physiology having elevated cytoskeletal gene component expression and glycogen metabolism cycling along with higher pi3k levels. in many respects small vs. large fish match eccentric vs. concentric muscle expression patterns, respectively. lipid metabolic genes are also more elevated in larger fish, the most notable being the g0s <dig> switch gene. m and z-line sarcomere remodelling appears to be more prevalent in large fish. twenty-three out of  <dig> gene families with previously reported significant snp-based growth differences were detected as having significant expression differences.


CONCLUSIONS
larger fish display a broader array of genes showing higher expression, and their profiles are more similar to those observed in december lot fish . conversely, small fish display gene profiles more similar to seasonal growth decline phases . overall, seasonal timing was coupled to greater differences in gene expression compared to differences associated with fish size.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rnaseqwhite musclesarcomere assemblyexercise physiologymetabolic profilehttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canada http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000199u.s. department of agriculture issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

