BACKGROUND
high throughput molecular sequencing and increased biospecimen variety have introduced significant informatics challenges for research biorepository infrastructures. we applied a modular system integration approach to develop an operational biorepository management system. this method enables aggregation of the clinical, specimen and genomic data collected for biorepository resources.

methods
we introduce an electronic honest broker  and biorepository portal  open source project that, in tandem, allow for data integration while protecting patient privacy. this modular approach allows data and specimens to be associated with a biorepository subject at any time point asynchronously. this lowers the bar to develop new research projects based on scientific merit without institutional review for a proposal.


RESULTS
by facilitating the automated de-identification of specimen and associated clinical and genomic data we create a future proofed specimen set that can withstand new workflows and be connected to new associated information over time. thus facilitating collaborative advanced genomic and tissue research.


CONCLUSIONS
as of janurary of  <dig> there are  <dig> unique protocols/patient cohorts being managed in the biorepository portal . there are over  <dig> unique subject records in the electronic honest broker , over  <dig>  specimens accessioned and  <dig> institutions participating in various biobanking activities using this tool kit. we specifically set out to build rich annotation of biospecimens with longitudinal clinical data; brp/redcap integration for multi-institutional repositories; emr integration; further annotated specimens with genomic data specific to a domain; build application hooks for experiments at the specimen level integrated with analytic software; while protecting privacy per the office of civil rights  and hipaa.

keywords
biorepository researchtranslational bioinformaticsprecision medicinehonest brokercancer genomicsdata integrationdata representationopen sourcepatient health information protectionpatient privacyieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine  <dig> washington, dc, usa 9- <dig> november  <dig> http://cci.drexel.edu/ieeebibm/bibm2015/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

