BACKGROUND
in eukaryotes, variation in gene copy numbers is often associated with deleterious effects, but may also have positive effects. for prokaryotes, studies on gene copy number variation are rare. previous studies have suggested that high numbers of rrna gene copies can be advantageous in environments with changing resource availability, but further association of gene copies and phenotypic traits are not documented. we used one of the morphologically most diverse prokaryotic phyla to test whether numbers of gene copies are associated with levels of cell differentiation.


RESULTS
we implemented a search algorithm that identified  <dig> genes with highly conserved copies across  <dig> fully sequenced cyanobacterial taxa. for two very basal cyanobacterial species, gloeobacter violaceus and a thermophilic synechococcus species, distinct phylogenetic positions previously found were supported by identical protein coding gene copy numbers. furthermore, we found that increased ribosomal gene copy numbers showed a strong correlation to cyanobacteria capable of terminal cell differentiation. additionally, we detected extremely low variation of 16s rrna sequence copies within the cyanobacteria. we compared our results for 16s rrna to three other eubacterial phyla . based on bayesian phylogenetic inference and the comparisons of genetic distances, we could confirm that cyanobacterial 16s rrna paralogs and orthologs show significantly stronger conservation than found in other eubacterial phyla.


CONCLUSIONS
a higher number of ribosomal operons could potentially provide an advantage to terminally differentiated cyanobacteria. furthermore, we suggest that 16s rrna gene copies in cyanobacteria are homogenized by both concerted evolution and purifying selection. in addition, the small ribosomal subunit in cyanobacteria appears to evolve at extraordinary slow evolutionary rates, an observation that has been made previously for morphological characteristics of cyanobacteria.

prokaryotic phylogeneticsconcerted evolutiongene copy number variationribosomal rrnacyanobacterial morphologygloeobacter violaceus

