BACKGROUND
hsp <dig> proteins are essential molecular chaperones involved in signal transduction, cell cycle control, stress management, and folding, degradation, and transport of proteins. hsp <dig> proteins have been found in a variety of organisms suggesting that they are ancient and conserved. in this study we investigate the nuclear genomes of  <dig> species across all kingdoms of organisms, and all sequences available in genbank, and address the diversity, evolution, gene structure, conservation and nomenclature of the hsp <dig> family of genes across all organisms.


RESULTS
twelve new genes and a new type hsp90c <dig> were identified. the chromosomal location, exon splicing, and prediction of whether they are functional copies were documented, as well as the amino acid length and molecular mass of their polypeptides. the conserved regions across all protein sequences, and signature sequences in each subfamily were determined, and a standardized nomenclature system for this gene family is presented. the proeukaryote hsp <dig> homologue, htpg, exists in most bacteria species but not in archaea, and it evolved into three lineages  via two gene duplication events. none of the organellar-localized hsp90s were derived from endosymbionts of early eukaryotes. mitochondrial trap and endoplasmic reticulum hsp90b separately originated from the ancestors of htpg group a in firmicutes-like organisms very early in the formation of the eukaryotic cell. trap is monophyletic and present in all animalia and some protista species, while hsp90b is paraphyletic and present in all eukaryotes with the exception of some fungi species, which appear to have lost it. both hsp90c  and cytosolic hsp90a are monophyletic, and originated from hsp90b by independent gene duplications. hsp90c exists only in plantae, and was duplicated into hsp90c <dig> and hsp90c <dig> isoforms in higher plants. hsp90a occurs across all eukaryotes, and duplicated into hsp90aa and hsp90ab in vertebrates. diplomonadida was identified as the most basal organism in the eukaryote lineage.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study presents the first comparative genomic study and evolutionary analysis of the hsp <dig> family of genes across all kingdoms of organisms. hsp <dig> family members underwent multiple duplications and also subsequent losses during their evolution. this study established an overall framework of information for the family of genes, which may facilitate and stimulate the study of this gene family across all organisms.

