BACKGROUND
over the last two years, considerable advances have been made in common bean  genomics, especially with the completion of the genome sequence and the availability of rnaseq data. however, as common bean is recalcitrant to stable genetic transformation, much work remains to be done for the development of functional genomics tools adapted to large-scale studies.


RESULTS
here we report the successful implementation of an efficient viral vector system for foreign gene expression, virus-induced gene silencing  and genetic mapping of a bpmv resistance gene in common bean, using a “one-step” bpmv vector originally developed in soybean. with the goal of developing this vector for high-throughput vigs studies in common bean, we optimized the conditions for rub-inoculation of infectious bpmv-derived plasmids in common bean cv. black valentine. we then tested the susceptibility to bpmv of six cultivars, and found that only black valentine and jaloeep <dig> were susceptible to bpmv. we used a bpmv-gfp construct to detect the spatial and temporal infection patterns of bpmv in vegetative and reproductive tissues. vigs of the phytoene desaturase  marker gene was successfully achieved with recombinant bpmv vectors carrying fragments ranging from  <dig> to 391 bp. finally, we mapped a gene for resistance to bpmv  at one end of linkage group  <dig>  in the vicinity of a locus  previously shown to be involved in virus resistance.


CONCLUSIONS
the “one-step” bpmv vector system therefore enables rapid and simple functional studies in common bean, and could be suitable for large-scale analyses. in the post-genomic era, these advances are timely for the common bean research community.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
disease resistancefunctional validationlegumephaseolus vulgarisrnaipost-transcriptional gene silencingsoybeanvirus resistance geneissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

