BACKGROUND
transcriptomic studies hold great potential towards understanding the human aging process. previous transcriptomic studies have identified many genes with age-associated expression levels; however, small samples sizes and mixed cell types often make these results difficult to interpret.


RESULTS
using transcriptomic profiles in cd14+ monocytes from  <dig>  participants of the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis , we identified  <dig>  genes differentially expressed with chronological age . we further identified six networks of co-expressed genes that included prominent genes from three pathways: protein synthesis , oxidative phosphorylation, and autophagy, with expression patterns suggesting these pathways decline with age. expression of several chromatin remodeler and transcriptional modifier genes strongly correlated with expression of oxidative phosphorylation and ribosomal protein synthesis genes. 17% of genes with age-associated expression harbored cpg sites whose degree of methylation significantly mediated the relationship between age and gene expression . lastly,  <dig> genes with age-associated expression were also associated  with pulse pressure independent of chronological age.

comparing transcriptomic profiles of cd14+ monocytes to cd4+ t cells from a subset  of the population, we identified  <dig> age-associated  genes in common, while larger sets of differentially expressed genes were unique to either t cells  or monocytes . at the pathway level, a decline in ribosomal protein synthesis machinery gene expression with age was detectable in both cell types.


CONCLUSIONS
an overall decline in expression of ribosomal protein synthesis genes with age was detected in cd14+ monocytes and cd4+ t cells, demonstrating that some patterns of aging are likely shared between different cell types. our findings also support cell-specific effects of age on gene expression, illustrating the importance of using purified cell samples for future transcriptomic studies. longitudinal work is required to establish the relationship between identified age-associated genes/pathways and aging-related diseases.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
agingmonocytet celltranscriptomemitochondrial ribosometranslationprotein synthesisribonucleoprotein complexoxidative phosphorylationautophagymethylationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

