BACKGROUND
milk exosomes are a rich source of micrornas  that are protected from degradation. ingestion of milk and subsequent absorption of mirnas into recipient cells by endocytosis may play a role in the regulation of neonatal innate and adaptive immunity. in contrast, the mirna content of milk exosomes may also be indicative of a lactating animal’s health; whereby, the presence or absence of specific mirnas could serve as biomarkers for early detection of bacterial infection that can lead to mastitis. in the present study, we therefore analyzed and compared mirna expression profiles of milk exosomes from four holstein cows obtained during mid-lactation prior to and after infection  of the mammary gland with staphylococcus aureus.

methods
milk exosomes, purified from control and s. aureus infected cows, were extracted for rna. following preparation indexed libraries from both groups the samples were subjected to next generation sequencing.


RESULTS
next generation sequencing of eight, unpooled small rna libraries derived from milk exosomes produced about  <dig>  million high-quality, bovine-specific sequence reads for comparison of mirna expression between treatments. sequence identity analysis showed the mirnas make up about 13 % of the average rna content of these exosomes. although  <dig> known bovine mirnas were identified, mirnas represented the least diverse class of rna accounting for only 1 % of all unique sequences. the  <dig> most prevalent unique sequences within this class accounted for about 90 % of the total mirna-associated reads across samples. non-annotated, unique reads provided evidence for another  <dig> previously unknown bovine mirnas. expression analyses found  <dig> known bovine micrornas significantly differed in frequency between exosomes from infected and control animals.


CONCLUSIONS
our survey of mirna expression from uninfected milk exosomes and those produced in response to infection provides new and comprehensive information supporting a role for delivery into milk of specific mirnas involved in immune response. in particular, bta-mir-142-5p, and − <dig> are potential biomarkers for early detection of bacterial infection of the mammary gland. additionally,  <dig> mammary-expressed genes involved in regulation of host immune processes and response to inflammation were identified as potential binding targets of the differentially expressed mirnas.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bovineexosomemilkmirnamastitisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

