BACKGROUND
plant nucleotide-binding site -leucine-rich repeat  proteins encoded by resistance genes play an important role in the responses of plants to various pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, fungi, and nematodes. in this study, a comprehensive analysis of nbs-encoding genes within the whole cucumber genome was performed, and the phylogenetic relationships of nbs-encoding resistance gene homologues  belonging to six species in five genera of cucurbitaceae crops were compared.


RESULTS
cucumber has relatively few nbs-encoding genes. nevertheless, cucumber maintains genes belonging to both toll/interleukine- <dig> receptor  and cc  families. eight commonly conserved motifs have been established in these two families which support the grouping into tir and cc families. moreover, three additional conserved motifs, namely, cnbs- <dig>  cnbs- <dig> and tnbs- <dig>  have been identified in sequences from cc and tir families. analyses of exon/intron configurations revealed that some intron loss or gain events occurred during the structural evolution between the two families. phylogenetic analyses revealed that gene duplication, sequence divergence, and gene loss were proposed as the major modes of evolution of nbs-encoding genes in cucurbitaceae species. compared with nbs-encoding sequences from the arabidopsis thaliana genome, the remaining seven tir familes of nbs proteins and rghs from cucurbitaceae species have been shown to be phylogenetically distinct from the tir family of nbs-encoding genes in arabidopsis, except for two subfamilies . on the other hand, in the cc-nbs family, they grouped closely with the cc family of nbs-encoding genes in arabidopsis. thus, the nbs-encoding genes in cucurbitaceae crops are shown to be ancient, and nbs-encoding gene expansions  may have occurred before the divergence of cucurbitaceae and arabidopsis.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this paper will provide a genomic framework for the further isolation of candidate disease resistance nbs-encoding genes in cucumber, and contribute to the understanding of the evolutionary mode of nbs-encoding genes in cucurbitaceae crops.

nbs-lrrcucumbercucurbitaceaephylogenetic relationship

