BACKGROUND
the dusky dolphin  is distributed along temperate, coastal regions of new zealand, south africa, argentina, and peru where it feeds on schooling anchovy, sardines, and other small fishes and squid tightly associated with temperate ocean sea surface temperatures. previous studies have suggested that the dusky dolphin dispersed in the southern hemisphere eastward from peru via a linear, temperate dispersal corridor provided by the circumpolar west-wind drift. with new mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequence data, we propose an alternative phylogeographic history for the dusky dolphin that was structured by paleoceanographic conditions that repeatedly altered the distribution of its temperate prey species during the plio-pleistocene.


RESULTS
in contrast to the west-wind drift hypothesis, phylogenetic analyses support a pacific/indian ocean origin, with a relatively early and continued isolation of peru from other regions. dispersal of the dusky dolphin into the atlantic is correlated with the history of anchovy populations, including multiple migrations from new zealand to south africa. additionally, the cooling of the eastern equatorial pacific led to the divergence of anchovy populations, which in turn explains the north-south equatorial transgression of l. obliquidens and the subsequent divergence of l. obscurus in the southern hemisphere.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, our study fails to support the west-wind drift hypothesis. instead, our data indicate that changes in primary productivity and related abundance of prey played a key role in shaping the phylogeography of the dusky dolphin, with periods of ocean change coincident with important events in the history of this temperate dolphin species. moderate, short-term changes in sea surface temperatures and current systems have a powerful effect on anchovy populations; thus, it is not infeasible that repeated fluctuations in anchovy populations continue to play an important role in the history of coastal dolphin populations.

