BACKGROUND
the hop bush, dodonaea viscosa, is a trans-oceanic species distributed oversix continents. it evolved in australia where it is found over a wide range of habitat types and is an ecologically important species. limited genomic resources are currently available for this species, thus our understanding of its evolutionary history and ecological adaptation is restricted. here, we present a comprehensive transcriptome dataset for future genomic studies into this species.

methods
we performed illumina sequencing of cdna prepared from leaf tissue collected from seven populations of d. viscosa ssp. angustissima and spatulata distributed along an environmental gradient in south australia. sequenced reads were assembled to provide a transcriptome resource. contiguous sequences  were annotated using blast searches against the ncbi non-redundant database and gene ontology definitions were assigned. single nucleotide polymorphisms were detected for the establishment of a genetic marker set. a comparison between the two subspecies was also carried out.


RESULTS
illumina sequencing returned  <dig> , <dig> sequence reads, which were de novoassembled into  <dig>  contigs. contigs with significant blast alignments numbered at  <dig> , with  <dig>  of these having their most significant hits to sequences from land plant species. gene ontology terms were assigned to  <dig>  contigs and kegg analysis identified  <dig> pathways that the gene products from  <dig>  contigs are potentially involved in. the subspecies comparison identified  <dig>  fixed snp differences across  <dig>  contiguous sequences, indicating a level of genetic differentiation between them. across all samples,  <dig>  snps were detected.


CONCLUSIONS
we have established a significant genomic data resource for d. viscosa,providing a comprehensive transcriptomic reference. genetic differences among morphologically distinct subspecies were found. a wide range of putative gene regions were identified along with a large set of variable snp markers, providing a basis for studies into the evolution and ecological adaptation of d. viscosa.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dodonaea viscosade novo assemblyrna-seqsnpgene ontologyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

