BACKGROUND
due to the importance of penicillium chrysogenum holding in medicine, the genome of low-penicillin producing laboratorial strain wisconsin54- <dig> had been sequenced and fully annotated. through classical mutagenesis of wisconsin54- <dig>  product titers and productivities of penicillin have dramatically increased, but what underlying genome structural variations is still little known. therefore, genome sequencing of a high-penicillin producing industrial strain is very meaningful.


RESULTS
to reveal more insights into the genome structural variations of high-penicillin producing strain, we sequenced an industrial strain p. chrysogenum ncpc <dig>  by whole genome comparative analysis, we observed a large number of mutations, insertions and deletions, and structural variations. there are  <dig> new genes that not exist in the genome sequence of wisconsin54- <dig> and some of them are involved in energy metabolism, nitrogen metabolism and glutathione metabolism. most importantly, we discovered a  <dig>  kb "new shift fragment" in a seven copies of determinative penicillin biosynthesis cluster in ncpc <dig> and the arrangement type of amplified region is unique. moreover, we presented two large-scale translocations in ncpc <dig>  containing genes involved energy, nitrogen metabolism and peroxysome pathway. at last, we found some non-synonymous mutations in the genes participating in homogentisate pathway or working as regulators of penicillin biosynthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
we provided the first high-quality genome sequence of industrial high-penicillin strain of p. chrysogenum and carried out a comparative genome analysis with a low-producing experimental strain. the genomic variations we discovered are related with energy metabolism, nitrogen metabolism and so on. these findings demonstrate the potential information for insights into the high-penicillin yielding mechanism and metabolic engineering in the future.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2014

