BACKGROUND
two-channel  microarrays are cost-effective platforms for comparative analysis of gene expression. they are traditionally analysed in terms of the log-ratios  of the two channel intensities at each spot, but this analysis does not use all the information available in the separate channel observations. mixed models have been proposed to analyse intensities from the two channels as separate observations, but such models can be complex to use and the gain in efficiency over the log-ratio analysis is difficult to quantify. mixed models yield test statistics for the null distributions can be specified only approximately, and some approaches do not borrow strength between genes.


RESULTS
this article reformulates the mixed model to clarify the relationship with the traditional log-ratio analysis, to facilitate information borrowing between genes, and to obtain an exact distributional theory for the resulting test statistics. the mixed model is transformed to operate on the m-values and a-values  instead of on the log-expression values. the log-ratio analysis is shown to ignore information contained in the a-values. the relative efficiency of the log-ratio analysis is shown to depend on the size of the intraspot correlation. a new separate channel analysis method is proposed that assumes a constant intra-spot correlation coefficient across all genes. this approach permits the mixed model to be transformed into an ordinary linear model, allowing the data analysis to use a well-understood empirical bayes analysis pipeline for linear modeling of microarray data. this yields statistically powerful test statistics that have an exact distributional theory. the log-ratio, mixed model and common correlation methods are compared using three case studies. the results show that separate channel analyses that borrow strength between genes are more powerful than log-ratio analyses. the common correlation analysis is the most powerful of all.


CONCLUSIONS
the common correlation method proposed in this article for separate-channel analysis of two-channel microarray data is no more difficult to apply in practice than the traditional log-ratio analysis. it provides an intuitive and powerful means to conduct analyses and make comparisons that might otherwise not be possible.

loop designunconnected designreference designintraclass correlationfalse discovery ratepowerefficiency

