BACKGROUND
doubled haploid  lines produced via in vivo haploid induction have become indispensable in maize research and practical breeding, so it is important to understand traits characteristics in dh and its corresponding haploids which derived from each dh lines. in this study, a dh population derived from zheng58 × chang7- <dig> and a haploid population, were developed, genotyped and evaluated to investigate genetic architecture of eight stalk traits, especially rind penetrometer resistance  and in vitro dry matter digestion , which affecting maize stalk lodging-resistance and feeding values, respectively.


RESULTS
phenotypic correlation coefficients ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  between the two populations for eight stalk traits. heritability values of all stalk traits ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  in the dh population, and  <dig>  to  <dig>  in the haploid population. quantitative trait loci  mapping study showed that a total of  <dig> qtl for all traits accounting for genetic variations ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  % were detected in two populations. one or more qtl sharing common region for each trait were detected between two different ploidy populations. potential candidate genes predicated from the four qtl support intervals for rpr and ivdmd were indirectly or directly involved with cellulose and lignin biosynthesis, which participated in cell wall formation. the increased expression levels of lignin and cellulose synthesis key genes in the haploid situation illustrated that dosage compensation may account for genome dosage effect in our study.


CONCLUSIONS
the current investigation extended understanding about the genetic basis of stalk traits and correlations between dh and its haploid populations, which showed consistence and difference between them in phenotype, qtl characters, and gene expression. the higher heritabilities and partly higher qtl detection power were presented in haploid population than in dh population. all of which described above could lay a preliminary foundation for genetic architecture study with haploid population and may benefit selection in haploid-stage to reduce cost in dh breeding.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keyword
maizeploidy effectrind penetrometer resistancein vitro dry matter digestiondhhaploid populationmodern maize industry technology systemcars–02–09chen shaojiang national science and technology project2014zx08003–002chen shaojiang national high-tech program of china2011aa10a <dig>  2012aa10a305chen shaojiang issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

