BACKGROUND
label-free quantitation of mass spectrometric data is one of the simplest and least expensive methods for differential expression profiling of proteins and metabolites. the need for high accuracy and performance computational label-free quantitation methods is still high in the biomarker and drug discovery research field. however, recent most advanced types of lc-ms generate huge amounts of analytical data with high scan speed, high accuracy and resolution, which is often impossible to interpret manually. moreover, there are still issues to be improved for recent label-free methods, such as how to reduce false positive/negatives of the candidate peaks, how to expand scalability and how to enhance and automate data processing. ab3d  has addressed these issues and has the capability to perform label-free quantitation using ms <dig> for proteomics study.


RESULTS
we developed an algorithm called ab3d, a label free peak detection and quantitative algorithm using ms <dig> spectral data. to test our algorithm, practical applications of ab3d for lc-ms data sets were evaluated using  <dig> datasets. comparisons were then carried out between widely used software tools such as mzmine  <dig>  msight, superhirn, openms and our algorithm ab3d, using the same lc-ms datasets. all quantitative results were confirmed manually, and we found that ab3d could properly identify and quantify known peptides with fewer false positives and false negatives compared to four other existing software tools using either the standard peptide mixture or the real complex biological samples of bartonella quintana . moreover, ab3d showed the best reliability by comparing the variability between two technical replicates using a complex peptide mixture of hela and bsa samples. for performance, the ab3d algorithm is about  <dig>  -  <dig> times faster than the four other existing software tools.


CONCLUSIONS
ab3d is a simple and fast algorithm for label-free quantitation using ms <dig> mass spectrometry data for large scale lc-ms data analysis with higher true positive and reasonable false positive rates. furthermore, ab3d demonstrated the best reproducibility and is about  <dig> -  <dig> times faster than those of existing  <dig> software tools.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
algorithmmass spectrometrylabel-free quantitationpeak pickingcomparisonissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

