BACKGROUND
wheat is an excellent plant species for nuclear mitochondrial interaction studies due to availability of large collection of alloplasmic lines. these lines exhibit different vegetative and physiological properties than their parents. to investigate the level of sequence changes introduced into the mitochondrial genome under the alloplasmic condition, three mitochondrial genomes of the triticum-aegilops species were sequenced: 1) durum alloplasmic line with the ae. longissima cytoplasm that carries the t. turgidum nucleus designated as  durum, 2) the cytoplasmic donor line, and 3) the nuclear donor line.


RESULTS
the mitochondrial genome of the t. turgidum was  <dig>  bp in length with high structural and nucleotide identity to the previously characterized t. aestivum genome. the assembled mitochondrial genome of the  durum and the ae. longissima were  <dig>  bp and  <dig>  bp in size, respectively. the high sequence coverage for all three genomes allowed analysis of heteroplasmy within each genome. the mitochondrial genome structure in the alloplasmic line was genetically distant from both maternal and paternal genomes. the alloplasmic durum and the ae. longissima carry the same versions of atp <dig>  nad <dig>  rps19-p, cob and cox <dig> exon  <dig> which are different from the t. turgidum parent. evidence of paternal leakage was also observed by analyzing nad <dig> and orf <dig> among all three lines. nucleotide search identified a number of open reading frames, of which  <dig> were specific to the  durum line.


CONCLUSIONS
several heteroplasmic regions were observed within genes and intergenic regions of the mitochondrial genomes of all three lines. the number of rearrangements and nucleotide changes in the mitochondrial genome of the alloplasmic line that have occurred in less than half a century was significant considering the high sequence conservation between the t. turgidum and the t. aestivum that diverged from each other  <dig>  years ago. we showed that the changes in genes were not limited to paternal leakage but were sufficiently significant to suggest that other mechanisms, such as recombination and mutation, were responsible. the newly formed orfs, differences in gene sequences and copy numbers, heteroplasmy, and substoichiometric changes show the potential of the alloplasmic condition to accelerate evolution towards forming new mitochondrial genomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aegilops longissimatriticum turgidumheteroplasmypaternal leakageatp6next generation sequencingcytoplasmic male sterilityalloplasmic lineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

