BACKGROUND
the detection and functional characterization of genomic structural variations are important for understanding the landscape of genetic variation in the chicken. a recently recognized aspect of genomic structural variation, called copy number variation , is gaining interest in chicken genomic studies. the aim of the present study was to investigate the pattern and functional characterization of cnvs in five characteristic chicken breeds, which will be important for future studies associating phenotype with chicken genome architecture.


RESULTS
using a commercial 385 k array-based comparative genomic hybridization  genome array, we performed cnv discovery using  <dig> chicken samples from four local chinese breeds and the french breed houdan chicken. the female anka broiler was used as a reference. a total of  <dig> copy number variation regions  were identified, covering  <dig>  mb of polymorphic sequences or  <dig> % of the entire chicken genome. the functional annotation of cnvrs indicated that these regions completely or partially overlapped with  <dig> genes and  <dig> quantitative traits loci, suggesting these cnvs have important functions and might be promising resources for exploring differences among various breeds. in addition, we employed quantitative pcr  to further validate several copy number variable genes, such as prolactin receptor, endothelin  <dig> , suppressor of cytokine signaling  <dig>  cd8a molecule, with important functions, and the results suggested that edn <dig> might be a molecular marker for the selection of dark skin color in poultry production. moreover, we also identified a new cnvr , encoding the sortilin-related receptor gene, with copy number changes in only black-bone chicken.


CONCLUSIONS
here, we report a genome-wide analysis of the cnvs in five chicken breeds using acgh. the association between edn <dig> and melanoblast proliferation was further confirmed using qpcr. these results provide additional information for understanding genomic variation and related phenotypic characteristics.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

