BACKGROUND
low temperature leads to major crop losses every year. although several studies have been conducted focusing on diversity of cold tolerance level in multiple phenotypically divergent arabidopsis thaliana  ecotypes, genome-scale molecular understanding is still lacking.


RESULTS
in this study, we report genome-scale transcript response diversity of  <dig> a. thaliana ecotypes originating from different geographical locations to non-freezing cold stress . to analyze the transcriptional response diversity, we initially compared transcriptome changes in all  <dig> ecotypes using arabidopsis nimblegen ath <dig> microarrays. in total  <dig> transcripts were significantly cold regulated  in  <dig> ecotypes, including  <dig> transcription factors and  <dig> transposable elements. the majority of the transcripts  showed ecotype specific expression pattern. by using sequence data available from arabidopsis thaliana  <dig> genome project, we further investigated sequence polymorphisms in the core cold stress regulon genes. significant numbers of non-synonymous amino acid changes were observed in the coding region of the cbf regulon genes. considering the limited knowledge about regulatory interactions between transcription factors and their target genes in the model plant a. thaliana, we have adopted a powerful systems genetics approach- network component analysis  to construct an in-silico transcriptional regulatory network model during response to cold stress. the resulting regulatory network contained  <dig>  nodes and  <dig>  connections, with  <dig> transcription factors and  <dig>  target genes.


CONCLUSIONS
a. thaliana ecotypes exhibit considerable variation in transcriptome level responses to non-freezing cold stress treatment. ecotype specific transcripts and related gene ontology  categories were identified to delineate natural variation of cold stress regulated differential gene expression in the model plant a. thaliana. the predicted regulatory network model was able to identify new ecotype specific transcription factors and their regulatory interactions, which might be crucial for their local geographic adaptation to cold temperature. additionally, since the approach presented here is general, it could be adapted to study networks regulating biological process in any biological systems.

arabidopsis thalianaecotypescold stressnatural variationadaptationgene expressionregulatory networksarabidopsis thaliana  <dig> genomesystems biologynetwork component analysis

