BACKGROUND
insect compound eyes are composed of ommatidia, which contain photoreceptor cells that are sensitive to different wavelengths of light defined by the specific rhodopsin proteins that they express. the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster has several different ommatidium types that can be localised to specific retinal regions, such as the dorsal rim area , or distributed stochastically in a mosaic across the retina, like the ‘pale’ and ‘yellow’ types. variation in these ommatidia patterns very likely has important implications for the vision of insects and could underlie behavioural and environmental adaptations. however, despite the detailed understanding of ommatidia specification in d. melanogaster, the extent to which the frequency and distribution of the different ommatidium types vary between sexes, strains and species of drosophila is not known.


RESULTS
we investigated the frequency and distribution of ommatidium types based on rhodopsin protein expression, and the expression levels of rhodopsin transcripts in the eyes of both sexes of different strains of d. melanogaster, d. simulans and d. mauritiana. we found that while the number of dra ommatidia was invariant, rh <dig> expressing ommatidia were more frequent in the larger eyes of females compared to the males of all species analysed. the frequency and distribution of ommatidium types also differed between strains and species. the d. simulans strain zom <dig> has the highest frequency of rh <dig> expressing ommatidia, which is associated with a non-stochastic patch of pale and odd-coupled ommatidia in the dorsal-posterior of their eyes.


CONCLUSIONS
our results show that there is striking variation in the frequency and distribution of ommatidium types between sexes, strains and species of drosophila. this suggests that evolutionary changes in the underlying regulatory mechanisms can alter the distribution of ommatidium types to promote or restrict their expression in specific regions of the eye within and between species, and that this could cause differences in vision among these flies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
sexual dimorphisminsect visioneye morphologyevolutionrhodopsinsdrosophilaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

