BACKGROUND
although the growth-factor g-csf is widely used to prevent granulotoxic side effects of cytotoxic chemotherapies, its optimal use is still unknown since treatment outcome depends on many parameters such as dosing and timing of chemotherapies, pharmaceutical derivative of g-csf used and individual risk factors. we showed in the past that a pharmacokinetic and –dynamic model of g-csf and human granulopoiesis can be used to predict the performance of yet untested g-csf schedules. however, only a single chemotherapy was considered so far.

in the present paper, we propose a comprehensive model of chemotherapy toxicity and combine it with our cell kinetic model of granulopoiesis. major assumptions are: proportionality of cell numbers and cell loss, delayed action of chemotherapy, drug, drug-dose and cell stage specific toxicities, no interaction of drugs and higher toxicity of drugs at the first time of application. correspondingly, chemotherapies can be characterized by a set of toxicity parameters which can be estimated by fitting the predictions of our model to clinical time series data of patients under therapy. data were either extracted from the literature or were received from cooperating clinical study groups.


RESULTS
model assumptions proved to be feasible in explaining granulotoxicity of  <dig> different chemotherapeutic drugs or drug-combinations applied in  <dig> different schedules with and without g-csf. risk groups of granulotoxicity were traced back to differences in toxicity parameters.


CONCLUSIONS
we established a comprehensive model of combined g-csf and chemotherapy action in humans which allows us to predict and compare the outcome of alternative g-csf schedules. we aim to apply the model in different clinical contexts to optimize and individualize g-csf treatment.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
leukopeniag-csffilgrastimpegfilgrastimchemotherapyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

