BACKGROUND
actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae  is the causative agent of porcine pleuropneumonia leading to high economic losses in the pig industry. infrared thermography  of the thorax might offer a new method to select swine with lung alterations for further diagnostics.

in this study  <dig> german landrace pigs were infected with a.pp. in an established model for respiratory tract disease, while  <dig> healthy pigs served as control animals. to avoid drift errors during ir measurements absolute skin temperatures and temperature differences between a thoracal and an abdominal region were assessed for its diagnostic validity.


RESULTS
irt findings during the course of experimental a.pp.-infection were verified by computed tomography  before and on days  <dig> and  <dig> after infection. significant correlations were found between clinical scores, ct score and lung lesion score. ambient temperature, body temperature and abdominal surface temperature were factors influencing the skin surface temperature of the thorax. on day  <dig> but not on day  <dig> after infection the right thoracal temperature was significantly higher and the difference between a thoracal region in the height of the left 10th vertebra and an abdominal region was significantly lower in infected pigs than in control pigs. at a cut off of 28°c of right thoracal temperature the specificity of the method was 100%  and the sensitivity 66% .

at a cut off of 2°c temperature difference between thoracal and abdominal region on the left body site the specificity of the method was 100%  and the sensitivity 32%  with all control pigs detected negative.

orientation for lung biopsy by irt resulted in 100% specificity and sensitivity  of bacteriological examination of tissue samples during the acute stage of infection.


CONCLUSIONS
irt might be a valuable tool for the detection of inflammatory lung alterations in pigs, especially during the acute stage of infection and if ambient temperatures are constant during individual measurements. external and internal factors interfere with this method, so that its application in the field might be restricted to a selection of pigs for further diagnostic with adequate specificity.

keywords
infrared thermographyimaging techniquescomputed tomographyaerosol challengediagnostic methodskin surface temperatureregional temperature differencesrespiratory tract diseaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

