BACKGROUND

elymus nutans griseb., is an important alpine perennial forage of pooideae subfamily with strong inherited cold tolerance. to get a deeper insight into its molecular mechanisms of cold tolerance, we compared the transcriptome profiling by rna-seq in two genotypes of elymus nutans griseb. the tolerant damxung  and the sensitive gannan  under cold stress.


RESULTS
the new e. nutans transcriptomes were assembled and comprised  <dig>  and  <dig>  transcripts in dx and gn, respectively. among them,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in dx and gn, with  <dig> genes commonly expressed over time. early cold responses involved numerous genes encoding transcription factors and signal transduction in both genotypes. the ap2/erebp famliy of transcription factors was predominantly expressed in both genotypes. the most significant transcriptomic changes in the later phases of cold stress are associated with oxidative stress, primary and secondary metabolism, and photosynthesis. higher fold expressions of fructan, trehalose, and alpha-linolenic acid metabolism-related genes were detected in dx. the dx-specific dehydrins may be promising candidates to improve cold tolerance. twenty-six hub genes played a central role in both genotypes under cold stress. qrt-pcr analysis of  <dig> genes confirmed the rna-seq results.


CONCLUSIONS
the stronger transcriptional differentiation during cold stress in dx explains its better cold tolerance compared to gn. the identified fructan biosynthesis, alpha-linolenic acid metabolism, and dx-specific dehydrin-related genes may provide genetic resources for the improvement of cold-tolerant characters in dx. our findings provide important clues for further studies of the molecular mechanisms underlying cold stress responses in plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cold stressco-expressiondehydrinspecies-specificitytranscriptomechina agriculture research system cars-35yang peizhi the major project for tibetan forage industry z2015c02n02hu tianming key projects in the national science and technology pillar program in the twelfth five-year plan period2011bad17b05hu tianming issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

