BACKGROUND
each year, influenza is responsible for hundreds of thousand cases of illness and deaths worldwide. due to the virus’ fast mutation rate, the world health organization  is constantly on alert to rapidly respond to emerging pandemic strains. although anti-viral therapies exist, the most proficient way to stop the spread of disease is through vaccination. the majority of influenza vaccines on the market are produced in embryonic hen’s eggs and are composed of purified viral antigens from inactivated whole virus. this manufacturing system, however, is limited in its production capacity. cell culture produced vaccines have been proposed for their potential to overcome the problems associated with egg-based production. virus-like particles  of influenza virus are promising candidate vaccines under consideration by both academic and industry researchers.

methods
in this study, vlps were produced in hek <dig> suspension cells using the bacmam transduction system and sf <dig> cells using the baculovirus infection system. the proposed systems were assessed for their ability to produce influenza vlps composed of hemagglutinin , neuraminidase  and matrix protein  and compared through the lens of bioprocessing by highlighting baseline production yields and bioactivity. vlps from both systems were characterized using available influenza quantification techniques, such as single radial immunodiffusion assay , ha assay, western blot and negative staining transmission electron microscopy  to quantify total particles.


RESULTS
for the hek <dig> production system, vlps were found to be associated with the cell pellet in addition to those released in the supernatant. sf <dig> cells produced  <dig> times more vlps than hek <dig> cells. sf9-vlps had higher total ha activity and were generally more homogeneous in morphology and size. however, sf <dig> vlp samples contained  <dig> times more baculovirus than vlps, whereas  <dig> vlps were produced along with vesicles.


CONCLUSIONS
this study highlights key production hurdles that must be overcome in both expression platforms, namely the presence of contaminants and the ensuing quantification challenges, and brings up the question of what truly constitutes an influenza vlp candidate vaccine.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
influenza vaccinesvirus like particles insect cellsmammalian cellsprocess developmentvlp characterizationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

