BACKGROUND
alloplasmic lines provide a unique tool to study nuclear-cytoplasmic interactions. three alloplasmic lines, with nuclear genomes from triticum aestivum and harboring cytoplasm from aegilops uniaristata, aegilops tauschii and hordeum chilense, were investigated by transcript and metabolite profiling to identify the effects of cytoplasmic substitution on nuclear-cytoplasmic signaling mechanisms.


RESULTS
in combining the wheat nuclear genome with a cytoplasm of h. chilense,  <dig> genes were significantly altered, whereas  <dig> and  <dig> genes were significantly changed in the alloplasmic lines carrying the cytoplasm of ae. uniaristata or ae. tauschii, respectively. we identified the rna maturation-related process as one of the most sensitive to a perturbation of the nuclear-cytoplasmic interaction. several key components of the ros chloroplast retrograde signaling, together with the up-regulation of the ros scavenging system, showed that changes in the chloroplast genome have a direct impact on nuclear-cytoplasmic cross-talk. remarkably, the h. chilense alloplasmic line down-regulated some genes involved in the determination of cytoplasmic male sterility without expressing the male sterility phenotype. metabolic profiling showed a comparable response of the central metabolism of the alloplasmic and euplasmic lines to light, while exposing larger metabolite alterations in the h. chilense alloplasmic line as compared with the aegilops lines, in agreement with the transcriptomic data. several stress-related metabolites, remarkably raffinose, were altered in content in the h. chilense alloplasmic line when exposed to high light, while amino acids, as well as organic acids were significantly decreased. alterations in the levels of transcript, related to raffinose, and the photorespiration-related metabolisms were associated with changes in the level of related metabolites.


CONCLUSIONS
the replacement of a wheat cytoplasm with the cytoplasm of a related species affects the nuclear-cytoplasmic cross-talk leading to transcript and metabolite alterations. the extent of these modifications was limited in the alloplasmic lines with aegilops cytoplasm, and more evident in the alloplasmic line with h. chilense cytoplasm. we consider that, this finding might be linked to the phylogenetic distance of the genomes.

wheatalloplasmic linenuclear-cytoplasmic interactionros signalingcytoplasmic male sterility

