BACKGROUND
in a gene regulatory network , gene expressions are affected by noise, and stochastic fluctuations exist in the interactions among genes. these stochastic interactions are context dependent, thus it becomes important to consider noise in a context-sensitive manner in a network model. as a logical model, context-sensitive probabilistic boolean networks  account for molecular and genetic noise in the temporal context of gene functions. in a cspbn with n genes and k contexts, however, a computational complexity of o ) is required for an accurate  computation of the state transition matrix  of the size  ×  . the evaluation of a steady state distribution  is more challenging. recently, stochastic boolean networks  have been proposed as an efficient implementation of an instantaneous pbn.


RESULTS
the notion of stochastic boolean networks  is extended for the general model of pbns, i.e., cspbns. this yields a novel structure of context-sensitive sbns  for modeling the stochasticity in a grn. a cssbn enables an efficient simulation of a cspbn with a complexity of o for computing the state transition matrix, where l is a factor related to the required sequence length in cssbn for achieving a desired accuracy. a time-frame expanded cssbn can further efficiently simulate the stationary behavior of a cspbn and allow for a tunable tradeoff between accuracy and efficiency. the cssbn approach is more efficient than an analytical method and more accurate than an approximate analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
context-sensitive stochastic boolean networks  are proposed as an efficient approach to modeling the effects of gene perturbation and intervention in gene regulatory networks. a cssbn analysis provides biologically meaningful insights into the oscillatory dynamics of the p53-mdm <dig> network in a context-switching environment. it is shown that random gene perturbation has a greater effect on the final distribution of the steady state of a network compared to context switching activities. the cssbn approach can further predict the steady state distribution of a glioma network under gene intervention. ultimately, this will help drug discovery and develop effective drug intervention strategies.

gene regulatory networksboolean networksstochastic boolean networkscontext dependentgene perturbationinterventioncontext switchsteady state distributionp <dig> networkglioma network

