BACKGROUND
hemolymph plays key roles in honey bee molecule transport, immune defense, and in monitoring the physiological condition. there is a lack of knowledge regarding how the proteome achieves these biological missions for both the western and eastern honey bees . a time-resolved proteome was compared using two-dimensional electrophoresis-based proteomics to reveal the mechanistic differences by analysis of hemolymph proteome changes between the worker bees of two bee species during the larval to pupal stages.


RESULTS
the brood body weight of apis mellifera was significantly heavier than that of apis cerana at each developmental stage. significantly, different protein expression patterns and metabolic pathways were observed in  <dig> proteins  that were differentially abundant between the two bee species. the function of hemolymph in energy storage, odor communication, and antioxidation is of equal importance for the western and eastern bees, indicated by the enhanced expression of different protein species. however, stronger expression of protein folding, cytoskeletal and developmental proteins, and more highly activated energy producing pathways in western bees suggests that the different bee species have developed unique strategies to match their specific physiology using hemolymph to deliver nutrients and in immune defense.


CONCLUSIONS
our disparate findings constitute a proof-of-concept of molecular details that the ecologically shaped different physiological conditions of different bee species match with the hemolymph proteome during the brood stage. this also provides a starting point for future research on the specific hemolymph proteins or pathways related to the differential phenotypes or physiology.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
apis mellifera ligusticaapis cerana ceranalarvaepupaehemolymphproteomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

