BACKGROUND
the aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of gross pathology suggestive of bovine tuberculosis  and evaluate animal’s characteristics associated with the risk of having bovine tb-like lesions among cattle slaughtered in mubende district in the uganda cattle corridor.

method
we conducted a cross sectional study in which  <dig>  slaughtered cattle in mubende district municipal abattoir underwent post-mortem inspection between august  <dig> and january  <dig>  the presence of bovine tb-like lesions in addition to the animal’s sex, age, breed, and sub-county of origin prior to slaughter were recorded. associations between the presence of bovine tb-like lesions and animal’s age, sex, breed, and sub-county of origin prior to slaughter were initially analysed using a univariable approach with the chi-square test, and subsequently with a multivariable logistic regression model to assess the combined impact of these animal characteristics with the risk of having a bovine tb-like lesion. additionally, and as a secondary objective, tissue samples were collected from all carcases that had a bovine tb-like lesion and were processed using standard mycobacterium culture and identification methods. the culture and acid fast positive samples were tested using capilia tb-neo® assay to identify mycobacterium tuberculosis complex .


RESULTS
of  <dig>  carcasses inspected,  <dig> %  had bovine tb-like lesions from which mycobacterium spp and mycobacterium tuberculosis complex  were isolated in  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. bovine tb-like lesions were more likely to be found in females  and in older cattle . when compared to ankole cattle, cross breed  and zebu cattle  had higher odds of having bovine tb-like lesions. animals from kasanda  were more likely to have bovine tb-like lesions than cattle from kasambya.


CONCLUSIONS
the findings of study reveals that approximately one in ten slaughtered cattle presents with gross pathology suggestive of bovine tb in mubende district in the uganda cattle corridor district, however, we isolated mtc in only  <dig> % of these bovine tb-like lesions. therefore, there is a need to understand the cause of all the other bovine tb-like lesions in order to safe guard diagnostic integrity of meat inspection in uganda.

keywords
tuberculous -like lesionsuganda cattle corridorbovine tuberculosisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

