BACKGROUND
mollusca is an extremely diverse animal phylum that includes the aculiferans  and their sister group, the conchiferans, comprising monoplacophorans, bivalves , gastropods , scaphopods  and cephalopods . studies on mollusks have revealed an overall number of  <dig> hox genes in seven out of eight molluscan “class”-level taxa, but expression data of key developmental regulators such as homeotic genes are only available for three gastropod and two cephalopod species. these show that hox genes are involved in the formation of specific features including shell, foot, funnel or tentacles and not in antero-posterior body plan patterning as in most other bilaterian animals. the role of hox genes in non-conchiferan  mollusks remains entirely unknown.


RESULTS
here we present the first data on the expression of seven hox genes in apolyplacophoran mollusk, acanthochitona crinita. in a. crinita the hox genes acr-hox1- <dig>  hox <dig> and post <dig> are expressed in a co-linear pattern along the antero-posterior axis, but not in molluscan-specific features such as the shell or the foot. the expression pattern is restricted to the post-trochal region and the transcripts are present in ecto-, endo- and mesodermal cell layers. contrary to the situation in gastropods and cephalopods, we did neither find hox gene expression in distinct neural subsets of a. crinita, nor in its developing shell plates.


CONCLUSIONS
our analysis and comparison with other lophotrochozoans indicate that the basal role of hox genes is in antero-posterior axis patterning in mollusks, similar to the vast majority of bilaterian animals, and that this role has been conserved in polyplacophorans, while co-option into patterning of evolutionary novelties emerged either at the base of conchifera or independently in gastropods and cephalopods. these morphological innovations most likely contributed to the evolutionary success of its representatives, as exemplified by, e.g., the wide ecological range and species richness of gastropods.

keywords
body plandevelopmentevo-devoevolutionmolluscanoveltypatterningpolyplacophoraissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

