BACKGROUND
although escherichia coli is one of the best studied model organisms, a comprehensive understanding of its gene regulation is not yet achieved. there exist many approaches to reconstruct regulatory interaction networks from gene expression experiments. mutual information based approaches are most useful for large-scale network inference.


RESULTS
we used a three-step approach in which we combined gene regulatory network inference based on directed information  and sequence analysis. dti values were calculated on a set of gene expression profiles from  <dig> time course experiments extracted from the many microbes microarray database. focusing on influences between pairs of genes in which one partner encodes a transcription factor  we derived a network which contains  <dig> tf - gene interactions of which  <dig> are known according to regulondb. afterward, we selected a subset of  <dig> interactions that could be confirmed by the presence of a phylogenetically conserved binding site of the respective regulator. by this second step, the fraction of known interactions increased from 19% to 60%. in the last step, we checked the  <dig> of the  <dig> interactions not yet included in regulondb for functional relationships between the regulator and the target and, thus, obtained ten tf - target gene interactions. five of them concern the regulator lexa and have already been reported in the literature. the remaining five influences describe regulations by fis , phdr, phop, and kdgr. for the validation of our approach, one of them, the regulation of lipoate synthase  by the pyruvate-sensing pyruvate dehydrogenate repressor , was experimentally checked and confirmed.


CONCLUSIONS
we predicted a set of five novel tf - target gene interactions in e. coli. one of them, the regulation of lipa by the transcriptional regulator pdhr was validated experimentally. furthermore, we developed dtinfer, a new r-package for the inference of gene-regulatory networks from microarrays using directed information.

