BACKGROUND
members of fastidious granulicatella and aggregatibacter genera belong to normal oral flora bacteria that can cause serious infections, such as infective endocarditis. aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans has long been implicated in aggressive periodontitis, whereas dna-based methods only recently showed an association between granulicatella spp. and dental diseases. as bacterial coaggregation is a key phenomenon in the development of oral and nonoral multispecies bacterial communities it would be of interest knowing coaggregation pattern of granulicatella species with a. actinomycetemcomitans in comparison with the multipotent coaggregator fusobacterium nucleatum.

the aim was to investigate coaggregation and biofilm formation of granulicatella elegans and granulicatella adiacens with a. actinomycetemcomitans and f. nucleatum strains.


RESULTS
f. nucleatum exhibited significantly  higher autoaggregation than all other test species, followed by a. actinomycetemcomitans sa <dig> and g. elegans. a. actinomycetemcomitans cu <dig> and g. adiacens did not autoaggregate. g. elegans with f. nucleatum exhibited significantly  higher coaggregation than most others, but failed to grow as biofilm together or separately. with f. nucleatum as partner, a. actinomycetemcomitans strains sa <dig>  a rough-colony wild-type strain, and cu <dig>  a spontaneous smooth-colony laboratory variant, and g. adiacens were the next in coaggregation efficiency. these dual species combinations also were able to grow as biofilms. while both g. elegans and g. adiacens coaggregated with a. actinomycetemcomitans strain sa <dig>  but not with cu <dig>  they grew as biofilms with both a. actinomycetemcomitans strains.


CONCLUSIONS
g. elegans failed to form biofilm with f. nucleatum despite the strongest coaggregation with it. the ability of granulicatella spp. to coaggregate and/or form biofilms with f. nucleatum and a. actinomycetemcomitans strains suggests that granulicatella spp. have the potential to integrate into dental plaque biofilms.

keywords
coaggregationbiofilmgranulicatellaaggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitansfusobacterium nucleatumautoaggregationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

