BACKGROUND
insects can be models for understanding human intestinal infection and pathology. molting, a special period during which the old insect cuticle is shed and a new one is produced, is crucial for insect development. holometabolous insects may experience several larva-to-larva moltings to become larger, a pupal molt and adult eclosion to become adults. during the larval molts, they stop feeding and become quiescent. although the molting larvae become quiescent, it is not known if changes in microbiome, physiology, development and immunity of midguts occur.


RESULTS
transcriptome analysis indicated that functions such as metabolism, digestion, and transport may become reduced due to the downregulated expression of many associated genes. during the molting stage, midguts harbor less microflora and dna synthesis decreases. both ecdysone and juvenile hormone in the larval midgut likely degrade after entering the larva-to-larva molting stage. however, at 12 h after ecdysis, the feeding larvae of 5th instars that were injected with 20-hydroxyecdysone entered a molting-like stage, during which changes in midgut morphology, dna synthesis, gene expression, and microflora exhibited the same patterns as observed in the actual molting state.


CONCLUSIONS
this study is important for understanding insect midgut physiology, development and immunity during a special development stage when no food is ingested. although the molting larva becomes immobile and quiescent, we demonstrate that numerous changes occur in midgut morphology, physiology, metabolism and microbiome during this period.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
midgutmicrofloralarva-to-larva moltingmicroarrayhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31472043ling erjun ministry of agriculture of china2014zx08009-003-001ling erjun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

