BACKGROUND
leafy spurge  is a perennial weed that is considered glyphosate tolerant, which is partially attributed to escape through establishment of new vegetative shoots from an abundance of underground adventitious buds. leafy spurge plants treated with sub-lethal concentrations of foliar-applied glyphosate produce new vegetative shoots with reduced main stem elongation and increased branching. processes associated with the glyphosate-induced phenotype were determined by rnaseq using aerial shoots derived from crown buds of glyphosate-treated and -untreated plants. comparison between transcript abundance and accumulation of shikimate or phytohormones  from these same samples was also done to reveal correlations.


RESULTS
transcriptome assembly and analyses confirmed differential abundance among  <dig>  transcripts  and highlighted numerous processes associated with shoot apical meristem maintenance and stem growth, which is consistent with the increased number of actively growing meristems in response to glyphosate. foliar applied glyphosate increased shikimate abundance in crown buds prior to decapitation of aboveground shoots, which induces growth from these buds, indicating that 5-enolpyruvylshikimate 3-phosphate  the target site of glyphosate was inhibited. however, abundance of shikimate was similar in a subsequent generation of aerial shoots derived from crown buds of treated and untreated plants, suggesting epsps is no longer inhibited or abundance of shikimate initially observed in crown buds dissipated over time. overall, auxins, gibberellins , and cytokinins  were more abundant in the aboveground shoots derived from glyphosate-treated plants.


CONCLUSIONS
based on the overall data, we propose that the glyphosate-induced phenotype resulted from complex interactions involving shoot apical meristem maintenance, hormone biosynthesis and signaling , cellular transport, and detoxification mechanisms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bud dormancybranchingglyphosatephytohormonesshikimatetranscriptomicsrnaseqissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

