BACKGROUND
6-shogaol is one of the major compounds in the ginger rhizome that may contribute to its anti-inflammatory properties. confirmation of this contribution was sought in this study in sprague- dawley rats  treated with a single injection  of a commercial preparation of complete freund's adjuvant  to induce monoarthritis in the right knee over a period of  <dig> days. during this development of arthritis, each rat received a daily oral dose of either peanut oil  or 6-shogaol .


RESULTS
within  <dig> days of cfa injection, the control group produced maximum edematous swelling of the knee that was sustained up to the end of the investigation period. but, in the 6-shogaol treated group, significantly lower magnitudes of unsustained swelling of the knees  were produced during the investigation period. unsustained swelling of the knees  was also produced after  <dig> days of treatment with indomethacin  as a standard anti-inflammatory drug, but during the first  <dig> days of drug treatment swelling of the knees was significantly larger  than either the controls or the 6-shogaol treated group of rats. this exaggerated effect in the early stage of indomethacin treatment was inhibited by montelukast, a cysteinyl leukotriene receptor antagonist. also, 6-shogaol and indomethacin were most effective in reducing swelling of the knees on day  <dig> when the controls still had maximum swelling. the effect of 6-shogaol compared to the controls was associated with significantly lower concentration of soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule- <dig>  in the blood and infiltration of leukocytes, including lymphocytes and monocytes/macrophages, into the synovial cavity of the knee. there was also preservation of the morphological integrity of the cartilage lining the femur compared to damage to this tissue in the peanut oil treated control group of rats.


CONCLUSIONS
from these results, it is concluded that 6-shogaol reduced the inflammatory response and protected the femoral cartilage from damage produced in a cfa monoarthritic model of the knee joint of rats.

