BACKGROUND
the south china landmass has been characterized by a complex geological history, including mountain lifting, climate changes, and river capture/reversal events. to determine how this complexity has influenced the landmass’s phylogeography, our study examined the phylogeography of garra orientalis, a cyprinid widely distributed in south china, using sequences from the mitochondrial dna control region and cytochrome b gene  and polymorphisms of thirteen microsatellite loci.


RESULTS
in total,  <dig> specimens were collected from eight populations. all  <dig> mtdna haplotypes were identified as belonging to three major lineages, and these lineages were almost allopatric in their distributions. the results of a statistical dispersal-vicariance analysis suggested that the ancestral populations of g. orientalis were distributed south of the yunkai mountains, including on hainan island. the mtdna data revealed a strong relationship between phylogeny and geography. in the microsatellite analysis, a total of  <dig> alleles with an average of  <dig> alleles per locus were observed across thirteen microsatellite loci. a clustering algorithm for microsatellite data revealed an admixture-like genetic structure. although the mtdna and microsatellite data sets displayed a discordant population structure, the results of an approximate bayesian computation approach showed that these two markers revealed congruent historical signals. the population history of g. orientalis reflects vicariance events and dispersal related to the complex geological history of south china.


CONCLUSIONS
our results  found that the discordances between mtdna and microsatellite markers were accounted for by admixtures;  showed that the wuzhishan and yinggeling mountain ranges and qiongzhou strait were important barriers limiting gene exchange between populations on both sides;  indicated that during glaciation and inter-glacial periods, the strait and continental shelves were exposed and sank, which contributed with the dispersion and differentiation of populations; and  displayed that the admixtures between lineages took place in coastal populations and then colonized the tributaries of the pearl river.

keywords
garra orientalismicrosatellitemitochondriaphylogeographyapproximate bayesian computationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

