BACKGROUND
brain inflammation has been recognized as a complex phenomenon with numerous related aspects. in addition to the very well-described neurodegenerative effect of inflammation, several studies suggest that inflammatory signals exert a potentially positive influence on neural stem cell proliferation, migration and differentiation. tumor necrosis factor alpha  is one of the best-characterized mediators of inflammation. to date, conclusions about the action of tnf on neural stem or progenitor cells  have been conflicting. tnf seems to activate nsc proliferation and to inhibit their differentiation into npcs. the purpose of the present study was to analyze the molecular signal transduction mechanisms induced by tnf and resulting in nsc proliferation.


RESULTS
here we describe for the first time the tnf-mediated signal transduction cascade in neural stem cells  that results in increased proliferation. moreover, we demonstrate ikk-α/β-dependent proliferation and markedly up-regulated cyclin d <dig> expression after tnf treatment. the significant increase in proliferation in tnf-treated cells was indicated by increased neurosphere volume, increased bromodeoxyuridin  incorporation and a higher total cell number. furthermore, tnf strongly activated nuclear factor-kappa b  as measured by reporter gene assays and by an activity-specific antibody. proliferation of control and tnf-treated nscs was strongly inhibited by expression of the nf-κb super-repressor iκb-aa <dig>  pharmacological blockade of iκb ubiquitin ligase activity led to comparable decreases in nf-κb activity and proliferation. in addition, ikk-β gene product knock-down via sirna led to diminished nf-κb activity, attenuated cyclin d <dig> expression and finally decreased proliferation. in contrast, tgfβ-activated kinase  <dig>  is partially dispensable for tnf-mediated and endogenous proliferation. understanding stem cell proliferation is crucial for future regenerative and anti-tumor medicine.


CONCLUSIONS
tnf-mediated activation of ikk-β resulted in activation of nf-κb and was followed by up-regulation of the bona-fide target gene cyclin d <dig>  activation of the canonical nf-κb pathway resulted in strongly increased proliferation of nscs.

