BACKGROUND
gastrointestinal nematode infections constitute a threat to the health and welfare of donkeys worldwide. their primary means of control is via anthelmintic treatments; however, use of these drugs has constraints in developing countries, including cost, limited availability, access to cheaper generic forms of variable quality and potential anthelmintic resistance. as an alternative, bioactive plants have been proposed as an option to treat and control gastrointestinal helminths in donkeys. this study aimed to use participatory methodology to explore donkey owner knowledge, attitudes and beliefs relating to the use of plant-based treatments for gastrointestinal parasites of donkeys in ethiopia.


RESULTS
in focus groups, 22/ <dig> groups stated they knew of plants used for the treatment of gastrointestinal parasites in donkeys. all groups volunteered plants that were used in cattle and/or small ruminants. in total,  <dig> plants were named by participants. ‘koso’  ‘grawa’  and a mixed roots and leaves preparation were the most frequently named plant preparations. ‘enkoko’  and ‘a mixture of roots and leaves’ were ranked highly for effectiveness in donkeys. however, ‘grawa’ and ‘koso’ were the highest ranked when taking into account both the rank position and the number of groups ranking the plant.

thematic analysis of participants’ current attitudes and beliefs surrounding traditional plant-based remedies for gastrointestinal parasites revealed that anthelmintics obtained from clinics were generally favoured due to their ease of administration and perceived higher effectiveness. there was doubt surrounding the effectiveness of some plant-based treatments, but there were also perceived advantages including their low cost, ease of cultivation and availability. however, plant-based treatments were considered a “past trend” and people favoured “modern” medicine, particularly among the younger generation.


CONCLUSIONS
there was extensive knowledge of plant-based treatments for gastrointestinal parasites in livestock in ethiopia. in donkeys, koso , grawa , enkoko  and ‘mixed roots and leaves’ were the most frequently named and/or highest ranked plants with reported efficacy against gastrointestinal parasites. further in vitro and in vivo investigation of these plants is now required to determine viable alternatives for the treatment and control of gastrointestinal parasites in ethiopia.

ethnoveterinaryanthelminticnematodeparticipatorydonkeyequidethiopiathematic analysis

