BACKGROUND
enterococcus faecalis is a multifaceted microorganism known to act as a beneficial intestinal commensal bacterium. it is also a dreaded nosocomial pathogen causing life-threatening infections in hospitalised patients. isolates of a distinct mlst type st <dig> represent the most frequent strain type of this species, distributed worldwide and originating from various sources  and different conditions . since enterococci are known to be highly recombinogenic we determined to analyse the microevolution and niche adaptation of this highly distributed clonal type.


RESULTS
we compared a set of  <dig> st <dig> isolates by assessing key molecular determinants, performing whole genome sequencing  and a number of phenotypic assays including resistance profiling, formation of biofilm and utilisation of carbon sources. we generated the first circular closed reference genome of an e. faecalis isolate d <dig> of animal origin and compared it with the genomes of other reference strains. d <dig> was used as a template for detailed wgs comparisons of high-quality draft genomes of  <dig> st <dig> isolates. genomic and phylogenetic analyses suggest a high level of similarity regarding the core genome, also demonstrated by similar carbon utilisation patterns. distribution of known and putative virulence-associated genes did not differentiate between st <dig> strains from a commensal and clinical background or an animal or human source. further analyses of mobile genetic elements  revealed genomic diversity owed to:  a modularly structured pathogenicity island;  a site-specifically integrated and previously unknown genomic island of  <dig> kb in two strains putatively involved in exopolysaccharide synthesis; and  isolate-specific plasmid and phage patterns. moreover, we used different cell-biological and animal experiments to compare the isolate d <dig> with a closely related st <dig> endocarditis isolate whose draft genome sequence was also generated. d <dig> generally showed a greater capacity of adherence to human cell lines and an increased pathogenic potential in various animal models in combination with an even faster growth in vivo .


CONCLUSIONS
molecular, genomic and phenotypic analysis of representative isolates of a major clone of e. faecalis mlst st <dig> revealed new insights into the microbiology of a commensal bacterium which can turn into a conditional pathogen.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
enterococcus faecaliswhole genomeesppathogenicity islandcapsuleissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

