BACKGROUND
many critical biological processes are strongly related to protein-rna interactions. revealing the protein structure motifs for rna-binding will provide valuable information for deciphering protein-rna recognition mechanisms and benefit complementary structural design in bioengineering. rna-binding events often take place at pockets on protein surfaces. the structural classification of local binding pockets determines the major patterns of rna recognition.


RESULTS
in this work, we provide a novel framework for systematically identifying the structure motifs of protein-rna binding sites in the form of pockets on regional protein surfaces via a structure alignment-based method. we first construct a similarity network of rna-binding pockets based on a non-sequential-order structure alignment method for local structure alignment. by using network community decomposition, the rna-binding pockets on protein surfaces are clustered into groups with structural similarity. with a multiple structure alignment strategy, the consensus rna-binding pockets in each group are identified. the crucial recognition patterns, as well as the protein-rna binding motifs, are then identified and analyzed.


CONCLUSIONS
large-scale rna-binding pockets on protein surfaces are grouped by measuring their structural similarities. this similarity network-based framework provides a convenient method for modeling the structural relationships of functional pockets. the local structural patterns identified serve as structure motifs for the recognition with rna on protein surfaces.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-binding pocketlocal structure classificationstructural alignmentnetwork clusteringstructure motifstrategic priority research program of the chinese academy of sciencesxdb13040600wu ling-yun national center for mathematics and interdisciplinary sciences, chinese academy of scienceshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china <dig>   <dig>  91330114liu shutang wu ling-yun natural science foundation of shandong province zr2015fq001liu zhi-ping fundamental research funds of shandong university2014tb <dig>  2015qy <dig>  2016jc007liu zhi-ping scientific research foundation for the returned overseas chinese scholars, ministry of education of chinaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

