BACKGROUND
small rnas complex with proteins to mediate a variety of functions in animals and plants. some small rnas, particularly mirnas, circulate in mammalian blood and may carry out a signaling function by entering target cells and modulating gene expression. the subject of this study is a set of circulating 30– <dig> nt rnas that are processed derivatives of the 5′ ends of a small subset of trna genes, and closely resemble cellular trna derivatives  previously shown to inhibit translation initiation in response to stress in cultured cells.


RESULTS
in sequencing small rnas extracted from mouse serum, we identified abundant 5′ trna halves derived from a small subset of trnas, implying that they are produced by trna type-specific biogenesis and/or release. the 5′ trna halves are not in exosomes or microvesicles, but circulate as particles of 100– <dig> kda. the size of these particles suggest that the 5′ trna halves are a component of a macromolecular complex; this is supported by the loss of 5′ trna halves from serum or plasma treated with edta, a chelating agent, but their retention in plasma anticoagulated with heparin or citrate. a survey of somatic tissues reveals that 5′ trna halves are concentrated within blood cells and hematopoietic tissues, but scant in other tissues, suggesting that they may be produced by blood cells. serum levels of specific subtypes of 5′ trna halves change markedly with age, either up or down, and these changes can be prevented by calorie restriction.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that 5′ trna halves circulate in the blood in a stable form, most likely as part of a nucleoprotein complex, and their serum levels are subject to regulation by age and calorie restriction. they may be produced by blood cells, but their cellular targets are not yet known. the characteristics of these circulating molecules, and their known function in suppression of translation initiation, suggest that they are a novel form of signaling molecule.

agingcalorie restrictioncirculating small rnastrna derivativestrna halvesserumplasma

