BACKGROUND
special resemblance of animals to natural objects such as leaves provides a representative example of evolutionary adaptation. the existence of such sophisticated features challenges our understanding of how complex adaptive phenotypes evolved. leaf mimicry typically consists of several pattern elements, the spatial arrangement of which generates the leaf venation-like appearance. however, the process by which leaf patterns evolved remains unclear.


RESULTS
in this study we show the evolutionary origin and process for the leaf pattern in kallima  butterflies. using comparative morphological analyses, we reveal that the wing patterns of kallima and  <dig> closely related species share the same ground plan, suggesting that the pattern elements of leaf mimicry have been inherited across species with lineage-specific changes of their character states. on the basis of these analyses, phylogenetic comparative methods estimated past states of the pattern elements and enabled reconstruction of the wing patterns of the most recent common ancestor. this analysis shows that the leaf pattern has evolved through several intermediate patterns. further, we use bayesian statistical methods to estimate the temporal order of character-state changes in the pattern elements by which leaf mimesis evolved, and show that the pattern elements changed their spatial arrangement  in a stepwise manner and finally establish a close resemblance to a leaf venation-like appearance.


CONCLUSIONS
our study provides the first evidence for stepwise and contingent evolution of leaf mimicry.　 leaf mimicry patterns evolved in a gradual, rather than a sudden, manner from a non-mimetic ancestor. through a lineage of kallima butterflies, the leaf patterns evolutionarily originated through temporal accumulation of orchestrated changes in multiple pattern elements.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
masqueradebutterfly wing patternphylogenetic comparative methodsnymphalid ground planissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

