BACKGROUND
campylobacter jejuni infection represents the most frequent antecedent infection triggering the onset of the neuropathic disorders guillain-barré syndrome  and miller fisher syndrome . although sialylated ganglioside-mimicking lipo-oligosaccharide  structures are the strongest neuropathogenic determinants in c. jejuni, they do not appear to be the only requirement for a neuropathic outcome since strains capable of their production have been isolated from patients with uncomplicated cases of enteritis. consequently, other pathogen and/or host-related factors contribute to the onset of neurological complications. we have used comparative genomic hybridization to perform a detailed genomic comparison of strains isolated from gbs/mfs and enteritis-only patients. our dataset, in which the gene conservation profile for  <dig> genes was assayed in  <dig> strains, including  <dig> neuropathogenic isolates, represents the largest systematic search for c. jejuni factors associated with gbs/mfs to date and has allowed us to analyze the genetic background of neuropathogenic c. jejuni strains with an unprecedented level of resolution.


RESULTS
the majority of gbs/mfs strains can be assigned to one of six major lineages, suggesting that several genetic backgrounds can result in a neuropathogenic phenotype. a statistical analysis of gene conservation rates revealed that although genes involved in the sialylation of los structures were significantly associated with neuropathogenic strains, still many enteritis-control strains both bear these genes and share remarkable levels of genomic similarity with their neuropathogenic counterparts. two capsule biosynthesis genes  showed higher conservation rates among neuropathogenic strains compared to enteritis-control strains. any potential involvement of these genes in neuropathogenesis must be assessed. a single gene  had a higher conservation rate among enteritis-control strains. this gene encodes a glucosyltransferase that is found in some of the los classes that do not express ganglioside mimics.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings corroborate that neuropathogenic factors may be transferred between unrelated strains of different genetic background. our results would also suggest that the failure of some strains isolated from uncomplicated cases of enteritis to elicit a neuropathic clinical outcome may be due to subtle genetic differences that silence their neuropathogenic potential and/or due to host-related factors.

the microarray data has been deposited in ncbi's gene expression omnibus under accession number gse <dig> 

