BACKGROUND
microrna  expression profiling data has recently been found to be particularly important in cancer research and can be used as a diagnostic and prognostic tool. current approaches of tumor classification using mirna expression data do not integrate the experimental knowledge available in the literature. a judicious integration of such knowledge with effective mirna and sample selection through a biclustering approach could be an important step in improving the accuracy of tumor classification.


RESULTS
in this article, a novel classification technique called sfssclass is developed that judiciously integrates a biclustering technique samba for simultaneous feature  and sample  selection , a cancer-mirna network that we have developed by mining the literature of experimentally verified cancer-mirna relationships and a classifier uncorrelated shrunken centroid . sfssclass is used for classifying multiple classes of tumors and cancer cell lines. in a part of the investigation, poorly differentiated tumors  having non diagnostic histological appearance are classified while training on more differentiated tumor  samples. the proposed method is found to outperform the best known accuracy in the literature on the experimental data sets. for example, while the best accuracy reported in the literature for classifying pdt samples is ~ <dig> %, the accuracy of sfssclass is found to be ~ <dig> %. the advantage of incorporating biclustering integrated with the cancer-mirna network is evident from the consistently better performance of sfssclass  over usc .


CONCLUSIONS
in this article, we develop the sfssclass algorithm which judiciously integrates a biclustering technique for simultaneous feature  and sample  selection, the cancer-mirna network and a classifier. the novel integration of experimental knowledge with computational tools efficiently selects relevant features that have high intra-class and low inter-class similarity. the performance of the sfssclass is found to be significantly improved with respect to the other existing approaches.

18- <dig> january  <dig> the eighth asia pacific bioinformatics conference  bangalore, india

