BACKGROUND
streptomyces are widespread bacteria that contribute to the terrestrial carbon cycle and produce the majority of clinically useful antibiotics. while interspecific genomic diversity has been investigated among streptomyces, information is lacking on intraspecific genomic diversity. streptomyces pratensis has high rates of homologous recombination but the impact of such gene exchange on genome evolution and the evolution of natural product gene clusters remains uncharacterized.


RESULTS
we report draft genome sequences of four s. pratensis strains and compare to the complete genome of streptomyces flavogriseus iaf-45-cd , a strain recently reclassified to s. pratensis. despite disparate geographic origins, the genomes are highly similar with  <dig> % of genes present in the core genome and conservation of all natural product gene clusters. natural products include a novel combination of carbapenem and beta-lactamase inhibitor gene clusters. while high intraspecies recombination rates abolish the phylogenetic signal across the genome, intraspecies recombination is suppressed in two genomic regions. the first region is centered on an insertion/deletion polymorphism and the second on a hybrid nrps-pks gene. finally, two gene families accounted for over 25% of the divergent genes in the core genome. the first includes homologs of bldb  while the second includes homologs of an uncharacterized protein with a helix-turn-helix motif . genes from these families co-occur with fifteen pairs spread across the genome. these genes have evidence for co-evolution of co-localized pairs, supporting previous assertions that these genes may function akin to a toxin-antitoxin system.


CONCLUSIONS
s. pratensis genomes are highly similar with exceptional levels of recombination which erase phylogenetic signal among strains of the species. this species has a large core genome and variable terminal regions that are smaller than those found in interspecies comparisons. there is no geographic differentiation between these strains, but there is evidence for local linkage disequilibrium affecting two genomic regions. we have also shown further observational evidence that the duf397-hth  are a novel toxin-antitoxin pair.

keywords
streptomycescomparative genomicsbioprospectinghomologous recombinationgenome evolutioncore genomepan-genomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

