BACKGROUND
it has been an abiding belief among geneticists that multicellular organisms’ genomes can be analyzed under the assumption that a single individual has a uniform genome in all its cells. despite some evidence to the contrary, this belief has been used as an axiomatic assumption in most genome analysis software packages. in this paper we present observations in human whole genome data, human whole exome data and in mouse whole genome data to challenge this assumption. we show that heterogeneity is in fact ubiquitous and readily observable in ordinary next generation sequencing  data.


RESULTS
starting with the assumption that a single ngs read  must come from one haplotype, we built a procedure for directly observing haplotypes at a local level by examining  <dig> or  <dig> adjacent single nucleotide polymorphisms  which are close enough on the genome to be spanned by individual reads. we applied this procedure to ngs data from three different sources: whole genome of a central european trio from the  <dig> genomes project, whole genome data from laboratory-bred strains of mouse, and whole exome data from a set of patients of head and neck tumors. thousands of loci were found in each genome where reads spanning  <dig> or  <dig> snps displayed more than two haplotypes, indicating that the locus is heterogeneous. we show that such loci are ubiquitous in the genome and cannot be explained by segmental duplications. we explain them on the basis of cellular heterogeneity at the genomic level. such heterogeneous loci were found in all normal and tumor genomes examined.


CONCLUSIONS
our results highlight the need for new methods to analyze genomic variation because existing ones do not systematically consider local haplotypes. identification of cancer somatic mutations is complicated because of tumor heterogeneity. it is further complicated if, as we show, normal tissues are also heterogeneous. methods for biomarker discovery must consider contextual haplotype information rather than just whether a variant “is present”.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

