BACKGROUND
the 14-3- <dig>  proteins are central mediators in various cellular signaling pathways regulating development and growth, including cell cycle regulation. we previously reported that all seven mammalian 14-3- <dig> isoforms are expressed in mouse oocytes and eggs and that, 14-3-3η  accumulates and co-localizes in the region of meiotic spindle in mouse eggs matured in vivo. therefore, we investigated the role of 14-3-3η in spindle formation during mouse oocyte maturation.


RESULTS
examination of oocytes matured in vitro demonstrated that 14-3-3η accumulates in both meiosis i and ii spindles. to explore if 14-3-3η interacts directly with α-tubulin in meiotic spindles, we performed an in situ proximity ligation assay that can detect intracellular protein-protein interactions at the single molecule level and which allows visualization of the actual interaction sites. this assay revealed a marked interaction between 14-3-3η and α-tubulin at the metaphase ii spindle. to demonstrate a functional role for 14-3-3η in oocyte maturation, mouse oocytes were microinjected with a translation-blocking morpholino oligonucleotide against 14-3-3η mrna to reduce 14-3-3η protein synthesis during oocyte maturation. meiotic spindles in those cells were examined by immunofluorescence staining of 14-3-3η and α-tubulin along with observation of dna. in 76% of cells injected with the morpholino, meiotic spindles were found to be deformed or absent and there was reduced or no accumulation of 14-3-3η in the spindle region. those cells contained clumped chromosomes, with no polar body formation. immunofluorescence staining of 14-3-3η and α-tubulin in control eggs matured in vitro from uninjected oocytes and oocytes microinjected with the ineffective, inverted form of a morpholino against 14-3-3η, a morpholino against 14-3-3γ, or deionized water showed normal, bipolar spindles.


CONCLUSIONS
the results indicate that 14-3-3η is essential for normal meiotic spindle formation during in vitro maturation of mouse oocytes, in part by interacting with α-tubulin, to regulate the assembly of microtubules. these data add to our understanding of the roles of 14-3- <dig> proteins in mouse oocyte maturation and mammalian reproduction.

meiosisoocyte maturation14-3-3ηmeiotic spindlemorpholino oligonucleotideα-tubulin

