BACKGROUND
rnas play key roles in cells through the interactions with proteins known as the rna-binding proteins  and their binding motifs enable crucial understanding of the post-transcriptional regulation of rnas. how the rbps correctly recognize the target rnas and why they bind specific positions is still far from clear. machine learning-based algorithms are widely acknowledged to be capable of speeding up this process. although many automatic tools have been developed to predict the rna-protein binding sites from the rapidly growing multi-resource data, e.g. sequence, structure, their domain specific features and formats have posed significant computational challenges. one of current difficulties is that the cross-source shared common knowledge is at a higher abstraction level beyond the observed data, resulting in a low efficiency of direct integration of observed data across domains. the other difficulty is how to interpret the prediction results. existing approaches tend to terminate after outputting the potential discrete binding sites on the sequences, but how to assemble them into the meaningful binding motifs is a topic worth of further investigation.


RESULTS
in viewing of these challenges, we propose a deep learning-based framework  by using a novel hybrid convolutional neural network and deep belief network to predict the rbp interaction sites and motifs on rnas. this new protocol is featured by transforming the original observed data into a high-level abstraction feature space using multiple layers of learning blocks, where the shared representations across different domains are integrated. to validate our ideep method, we performed experiments on  <dig> large-scale clip-seq datasets, and our results show that by integrating multiple sources of data, the average auc can be improved by 8% compared to the best single-source-based predictor; and through cross-domain knowledge integration at an abstraction level, it outperforms the state-of-the-art predictors by 6%. besides the overall enhanced prediction performance, the convolutional neural network module embedded in ideep is also able to automatically capture the interpretable binding motifs for rbps. large-scale experiments demonstrate that these mined binding motifs agree well with the experimentally verified results, suggesting ideep is a promising approach in the real-world applications.


CONCLUSIONS
the ideep framework not only can achieve promising performance than the state-of-the-art predictors, but also easily capture interpretable binding motifs. ideep is available at http://www.csbio.sjtu.edu.cn/bioinf/ideep


electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-binding proteinclip-seqdeep belief networkconvolutional neural networkmultimodal deep learninghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003399science and technology commission of shanghai municipality16jc1404300shen hong-bin http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china61671288shen hong-bin http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31628003shen hong-bin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

