BACKGROUND
the brown planthopper  is a destructive piercing-sucking insect pest of rice. the plant hormones salicylic acid  and jasmonic acid  play important roles in plant–pest interactions. many isolated rice genes that modulate bph resistance are involved in the metabolism or signaling pathways of sa, ja and ethylene. ‘rathu heenati’  is a rice cultivar with a high-level, broad-spectrum resistance to all bph biotypes. here, rh was used as the research material, while a bph-susceptible rice cultivar ‘taichung native 1’  was the control. a cdna microarray analysis illuminated the resistance response at the genome level of rh under bph infestation. the levels of sa and ja in rh and tn <dig> seedlings after bph infestation were also determined.


RESULTS
the expression pattern clustering indicated that  <dig> differential probe sets may be associated with constitutive resistance and  <dig> with the bph infestation-responsive resistance of rh. a venn diagram analysis revealed  <dig> rh-specific and bph-inducible probe sets. finally,  <dig> bph resistance-related gene candidates were selected based on the expression pattern clustering and venn diagram analysis. in rh, the sa content significantly increased and the ja content significantly decreased after bph infestation, with the former occurring prior to the latter. in rh, the differential genes in the sa pathway were synthesis-related and were up-regulated after bph infestation. the differential genes in the ja pathway were also up-regulated. they were jasmonate zim-domain transcription factors, which are important negative regulators of the ja pathway. comparatively, genes involved in the et pathway were less affected by a bph infestation in rh. dna sequence analysis revealed that most bph infestation-inducible genes may be regulated by the genetic background in a trans-acting manner, instead of by their promoters.


CONCLUSIONS
we profiled the analysis of the global gene expression in rh and tn <dig> under bph infestation, together with changes in the sa and ja levels. sa plays a leading role in the resistance response of rice to bph. our results will aid in understanding the molecular basis of rh’s bph resistance and facilitate the identification of new resistance-related genes for breeding bph-resistant rice varieties.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
oryza sativanilaparvata lugenscdna microarrayinsect-resistancenational special key project for transgenic breeding2016zx08010002-002chen hao fundamental research funds for the central university2013py06chen hao national natural science foundation of china 91317312xiao langtao issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

