BACKGROUND
meyerozyma guilliermondii  and meyerozyma caribbica  are closely related species of the genetically heterogenous m. guilliermondii complex. conventional phenotypic methods frequently misidentify the species within this complex and also with other species of the saccharomycotina ctg clade. even the long-established sequencing of large subunit  rrna gene remains ambiguous. we also faced similar problem during identification of yeast isolates of m. guilliermondii complex from indigenous bamboo shoot fermentation in north east india. there is a need for development of reliable and accurate identification methods for these closely related species because of their increasing importance as emerging infectious yeasts and associated biotechnological attributes.


RESULTS
we targeted the highly variable internal transcribed spacer  region  and identified seven restriction enzymes through in silico analysis for differentiating m. guilliermondii from m. caribbica. fifty five isolates of m. guilliermondii complex which could not be delineated into species-specific taxonomic ranks by api  <dig> c aux and lsu rrna gene d1/d <dig> sequencing were subjected to its-restriction fragment length polymorphism  analysis. taqi its-rflp distinctly differentiated the isolates into m. guilliermondii  and m. caribbica  with reproducible species-specific patterns similar to the in silico prediction. the reliability of this method was validated by its1- <dig> s-its <dig> sequencing, mitochondrial dna rflp and electrophoretic karyotyping.


CONCLUSIONS
we herein described a reliable its-rflp method for distinct differentiation of frequently misidentified m. guilliermondii from m. caribbica. even though in silico analysis differentiated other closely related species of m. guilliermondii complex from the above two species, it is yet to be confirmed by in vitro analysis using reference strains. this method can be used as a reliable tool for rapid and accurate identification of closely related species of m. guilliermondii complex and for differentiating emerging infectious yeasts of the saccharomycotina ctg clade.

meyerozyma guilliermondiiemerging infectious yeastsits-rflpmtdna-rflppfge karyotypingsoibum

