BACKGROUND
mycelium-to-yeast transition in the human host is essential for pathogenicity by the fungus paracoccidioides brasiliensis and both cell types are therefore critical to the establishment of paracoccidioidomycosis , a systemic mycosis endemic to latin america. the infected population is of about  <dig> million individuals, 2% of whom will eventually develop the disease. previously, transcriptome analysis of mycelium and yeast cells resulted in the assembly of  <dig>  sequence groups. gene expression analysis, using both in silico est subtraction and cdna microarray, revealed genes that were differential to yeast or mycelium, and we discussed those involved in sugar metabolism. to advance our understanding of molecular mechanisms of dimorphic transition, we performed an extended analysis of gene expression profiles using the methods mentioned above.


RESULTS
in this work, continuous data mining revealed  <dig> new differentially expressed sequences that were mips-categorised according to the cellular process in which they are presumably involved. two well represented classes were chosen for further analysis:  control of cell organisation – cell wall, membrane and cytoskeleton, whose representatives were hex , bgl  in mycelium cells; and ags , cda  and vrp  in yeast cells;  ion metabolism and transport – two genes putatively implicated in ion transport were confirmed to be highly expressed in mycelium cells – isc and ktp, respectively an iron-sulphur cluster-like protein and a cation transporter; and a putative p-type cation pump  in yeast. also, several enzymes from the cysteine de novo biosynthesis pathway were shown to be up regulated in the yeast form, including atp sulphurylase, aps kinase and also paps reductase.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, these data show that several genes involved in cell organisation and ion metabolism/transport are expressed differentially along dimorphic transition. hyper expression in yeast of the enzymes of sulphur metabolism reinforced that this metabolic pathway could be important for this process. understanding these changes by functional analysis of such genes may lead to a better understanding of the infective process, thus providing new targets and strategies to control pcm.

