BACKGROUND
columnaris disease caused by flavobacterium columnare is a serious problem in aquaculture, annually causing large economic losses around the world. despite considerable research, the molecular epidemiology of f. columnare remains poorly understood.

methods
we investigated the population structure and spatiotemporal changes in the genetic diversity of f. columnare population in finland by using a multilocus sequence typing  and analysis  based on dna sequence variation within six housekeeping genes. a total of  <dig> strains of f. columnare were collected from eight different areas located across the country between  <dig> and  <dig> 


RESULTS
partial sequencing of six housekeeping genes  revealed eight sequence types and a moderate level of genetic diversity . phylogenetic analysis of the concatenated protein-encoding gene sequence data  formed two lineages, which could be further divided into five clusters. all analysed f. columnare strains appeared to have a genetic origin distinct from that of another important fish pathogen form the genus flavobacterium, f. psychrophilum. although the value of the index of association between alleles,  <dig>  , supports some degree of clonality for this species in finland, recombination has introduced molecular diversity to the population almost three times more than mutation.


CONCLUSIONS
the results suggest that finnish f. columnare strains have an epidemic population structure followed by clonal expansion of successful genotypes. our study with reproducible methodology and comparable results establishes a robust framework for the discrimination and phylogenetic analysis of f. columnare isolates, which will help to improve our understanding about geographic distribution and epidemiology of columnaris disease.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
flavobacterium columnaremlst/mlsa schemeclonalframerecombination rateclonalityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

