BACKGROUND
the slaughterhouse is a central processing point for food animals and thus a source of both demographic data  and health-related data  that are not available through other sources. using these data for syndromic surveillance is therefore tempting. however many possible reasons for condemnation and condemned portions exist, making the definition of relevant syndromes challenging.

the objective of this study was to determine a typology of cattle with at least one portion of the carcass condemned in order to define syndromes. multiple factor analysis  in combination with clustering methods was performed using both health-related data and demographic data.


RESULTS
analyses were performed on  <dig>  cattle with at least one portion of the carcass condemned among the  <dig> , <dig> cattle slaughtered in ten french abattoirs. results of the mfa and clustering methods led to  <dig> clusters considered as stable according to year of slaughter and slaughterhouse. one cluster was specific to a disease of public health importance . two clusters were linked to the slaughtering process . two clusters respectively characterized by chronic liver lesions and chronic peritonitis could be linked to diseases of economic importance to farmers. three clusters could be linked respectively to reticulo-pericarditis, fatty liver syndrome and farmer’s lung syndrome, which are related to both diseases of economic importance to farmers and herd management issues. three clusters respectively characterized by arthritis, myopathy and dark firm dry  meat could notably be linked to animal welfare issues. finally, one cluster, characterized by bronchopneumonia, could be linked to both animal health and herd management issues.


CONCLUSIONS
the statistical approach of combining multiple factor analysis with cluster analysis showed its relevance for the detection of syndromes using available large and complex slaughterhouse data. the advantages of this statistical approach are to i) define groups of reasons for condemnation based on meat inspection data, ii) help grouping reasons for condemnation among a list of various possible reasons for condemnation for which a consensus among experts could be difficult to reach, iii) assign each animal to a single syndrome which allows the detection of changes in trends of syndromes to detect unusual patterns in known diseases and emergence of new diseases.

syndromic surveillanceanimal healthmeat inspectionslaughterhousescattle

