BACKGROUND
use of alternative gene promoters that drive widespread cell-type, tissue-type or developmental gene regulation in mammalian genomes is a common phenomenon. chromatin immunoprecipitation methods coupled with dna microarray  or massive parallel sequencing  are enabling genome-wide identification of active promoters in different cellular conditions using antibodies against pol-ii. however, these methods produce enrichment not only near the gene promoters but also inside the genes and other genomic regions due to the non-specificity of the antibodies used in chip. further, the use of these methods is limited by their high cost and strong dependence on cellular type and context.

methods
we trained and tested different state-of-art ensemble and meta classification methods for identification of pol-ii enriched promoter and pol-ii enriched non-promoter sequences, each of length  <dig> bp. the classification models were trained and tested on a bench-mark dataset, using a set of  <dig> different feature variables that are based on chromatin modification signatures and various dna sequence features. the best performing model was applied on seven published chip-seq pol-ii datasets to provide genome wide annotation of mouse gene promoters.


RESULTS
we present a novel algorithm based on supervised learning methods to discriminate promoter associated pol-ii enrichment from enrichment elsewhere in the genome in chip-chip/seq profiles. we accumulated a dataset of  <dig>  promoter and  <dig>  non-promoter sequences, each of length  <dig> bp, generated from rna pol-ii chip-seq data of five tissues . we evaluated the classification models in building the best predictor and found that bagging and random forest based approaches give the best accuracy. we implemented the algorithm on seven different published chip-seq datasets to provide a comprehensive set of promoter annotations for both protein-coding and non-coding genes in the mouse genome. the resulting annotations contain  <dig>   protein-coding  genes with single promoters and  <dig>   protein-coding  genes with two or more alternative promoters, and a significant number of unassigned novel promoters.


CONCLUSIONS
our new algorithm can successfully predict the promoters from the genome wide profile of pol-ii bound regions. in addition, our algorithm performs significantly better than existing promoter prediction methods and can be applied for genome-wide predictions of pol-ii promoters.

18- <dig> january  <dig> the eighth asia pacific bioinformatics conference  bangalore, india

