BACKGROUND
the anatomy of the adrenal glands has been widely studied in many species of domestic and wild mammals. however, there are no available literature reports describing the morphology and morphometry of the adrenal glands of the european bison .


RESULTS
the study was conducted on  <dig> european bison of both sexes. the growth of the adrenal glands corresponded to the growth of the whole body, with the largest increase in size occurring in the first 2 years of the animal’s life, followed by a slower increase in size until the animal was 5– <dig> years old. there were no statistically significant differences between ipsilateral adrenal glands of males and females with respect to age. there was no statistically significant difference in weight between the left and the right adrenal gland. however, there was a difference in the length, width and thickness of the two glands. reference intervals for adrenal gland size and weight were computed separately for two bison age groups . the adrenal gland consisted of a cortex and a medulla. the connective-tissue capsule contained two layers. it had a fibrous structure and abundant adipose tissue. the cortex was divided into three zones. the zona glomerulosa contained cells arranged in bundles and curves. numerous apoptotic cells were observed among regular cells in the zona reticularis. there were vacuoles in the cells of both zona fasciculata and zona reticularis, which formed a foamy cytoplasm. the adrenal medulla was composed of large, dark cells with a highly basophilic cytoplasm in the superficial region and of smaller, lighter cells in deeper layers. sinusoidal vessels were located in the central part of the medulla.


CONCLUSIONS
the left adrenal gland was significantly longer, narrower and thinner than the right one. there were no significant differences in the structure of the adrenal medulla and cortex of the european bison compared to other species of domestic and wild mammals. there was a thick layer of adipose cells at numerous locations in the adrenal capsule of the bison.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
european bisonadrenal glandmorphologyhistologyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

