BACKGROUND
understanding and predicting protein stability upon point mutations has wide-spread importance in molecular biology. several prediction models have been developed in the past with various algorithms. statistical potentials are one of the widely used algorithms for the prediction of changes in stability upon point mutations. although the methods provide flexibility and the capability to develop an accurate and reliable prediction model, it can be achieved only by the right selection of the structural factors and optimization of their parameters for the statistical potentials. in this work, we have selected five atom classification systems and compared their efficiency for the development of amino acid atom potentials. additionally, torsion angle potentials have been optimized to include the orientation of amino acids in such a way that altered backbone conformation in different secondary structural regions can be included for the prediction model. this study also elaborates the importance of classifying the mutations according to their solvent accessibility and secondary structure specificity. the prediction efficiency has been calculated individually for the mutations in different secondary structural regions and compared.


RESULTS
results show that, in addition to using an advanced atom description, stepwise regression and selection of atoms are necessary to avoid the redundancy in atom distribution and improve the reliability of the prediction model validation. comparing to other atom classification models, melo-feytmans model shows better prediction efficiency by giving a high correlation of  <dig>  between experimental and theoretical ΔΔg with  <dig> % of the mutations correctly predicted out of  <dig> mutations. the theoretical ΔΔg values for the mutations in partially buried β-strands generated by the structural training dataset from pisces gave a correlation of  <dig>  without performing the gaussian apodization of the torsion angle distribution. after the gaussian apodization, the correlation increased to  <dig>  and prediction accuracy increased from 80% to  <dig> % respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
these findings were useful for the optimization of the melo-feytmans atom classification system and implementing them to develop the statistical potentials. it was also significant that the prediction efficiency of mutations in the partially buried β-strands improves with the help of gaussian apodization of the torsion angle distribution. all these comparisons and optimization techniques demonstrate their advantages as well as the restrictions for the development of the prediction model. these findings will be quite helpful not only for the protein stability prediction, but also for various structure solutions in future.

