BACKGROUND
short cold periods comprise a challenge to plant growth and development. series of cold stresses improve plant performance upon a future cold stress. this effect could be provoked by priming, training or acclimation dependent hardening. here, we compared the effect of 24 h  and of 2 week long cold-pretreatment  on the response of arabidopsis thaliana to a single 24 h cold stimulus  after a 5 day long lag-phase, to test arabidopsis for cold primability.


RESULTS
three types of pretreatment dependent responses were observed:  the cbf-regulon controlled gene cor15a was stronger activated only after long-term cold pretreatment.  the non-chloroplast specific stress markers pal <dig> and chs were more induced by cold after long-term and slightly stronger expressed after short-term cold priming.  the chloroplast ros signaling marker genes zat <dig> and bap <dig> were less activated by the triggering stimulus in primed plants.

the effects on zat <dig> and bap <dig> were more pronounced in 24 h cold-primed plants than in 14 day long cold-primed ones demonstrating independence of priming from induction and persistence of primary cold acclimation responses. transcript and protein abundance analysis and studies in specific knock-out lines linked the priming-specific regulation of zat <dig> and bap <dig> induction to the priming-induced long-term regulation of stromal and thylakoid-bound ascorbate peroxidase  expression.


CONCLUSIONS
the plastid antioxidant system, especially, plastid ascorbate peroxidase regulation, transmits information on a previous cold stress over time without the requirement of establishing cold-acclimation. we hypothesize that the plastid antioxidant system serves as a priming hub and that priming-dependent regulation of chloroplast-to-nucleus ros signaling is a strategy to prepare plants under unstable environmental conditions against unpredictable stresses by supporting extra-plastidic stress protection.

keywords
primingantioxidantsantioxidant systemchloroplastcoldelevated light intensityarabidopsis thalianaascorbate peroxidasehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftcrc973-c4baier margarete issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

