BACKGROUND
crossing over assures the correct segregation of the homologous chromosomes to both poles of the dividing meiocyte. this exchange of dna creates new allelic combinations thus increasing the genetic variation present in offspring. crossovers are not uniformly distributed along chromosomes; rather there are preferred locations where they may take place. the positioning of crossovers is known to be influenced by both exogenous and endogenous factors as well as structural features inherent to the chromosome itself. we have introduced large structural changes into arabidopsis chromosomes and report their effects on crossover positioning.


RESULTS
the introduction of large deletions and putative inversions silenced recombination over the length of the structural change. in the majority of cases analyzed, the total recombination frequency over the chromosomes was unchanged. the loss of crossovers at the sites of structural change was compensated for by increases in recombination frequencies elsewhere on the chromosomes, mostly in single intervals of one to three megabases in size. interestingly, two independent cases of induced structural changes in the same chromosomal interval were found on both chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  in both cases, compensatory increases in recombination frequencies were of similar strength and took place in the same chromosome region. in contrast, deletions in chromosome arms carrying the nucleolar organizing region did not change recombination frequencies in the remainder of those chromosomes.


CONCLUSIONS
when taken together, these observations show that changes in the physical structure of the chromosome can have large effects on the positioning of cos within that chromosome. moreover, different reactions to induced structural changes are observed between and within chromosomes. however, the similarity in reaction observed when looking at chromosomes carrying similar changes suggests a direct causal relation between induced change and observed reaction.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
arabidopsis thalianameiosiscrossover positioningrecombination frequencychromosome modificationsdeletioninversiongamma-irradiationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

