BACKGROUND
micrornas  are ubiquitous components of endogenous plant transcriptome. mirnas are small, single-stranded and ~ <dig> nt long rnas which regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level and are known to play essential roles in various aspects of plant development and growth. previously, a number of mirnas have been identified in potato through in silico analysis and deep sequencing approach. however, identification of mirnas through deep sequencing approach was limited to a few tissue types and developmental stages. this study reports the identification and characterization of potato mirnas in three different vegetative tissues and four stages of tuber development by high throughput sequencing.


RESULTS
small rna libraries were constructed from leaf, stem, root and four early developmental stages of tuberization and subjected to deep sequencing, followed by bioinformatics analysis. a total of  <dig> conserved mirnas ,  <dig> potato-specific mirnas  and  <dig> candidate potato-specific mirnas  were identified. the digital expression profiling based on tpm  and qrt-pcr analysis of conserved and potato-specific mirnas revealed that some of the mirnas showed tissue specific expression  while a few demonstrated tuberization stage-specific expressions. targets were predicted for identified conserved and potato-specific mirnas, and predicted targets of four conserved mirnas, mir <dig>  mir <dig>  mir <dig> and mir <dig>  which are arf <dig> , nam , rap <dig>  and ham  respectively, were experimentally validated using 5′ rlm-race . gene ontology  analysis for potato-specific mirnas was also performed to predict their potential biological functions.


CONCLUSIONS
we report a comprehensive study of potato mirnas at genome-wide level by high-throughput sequencing and demonstrate that these mirnas have tissue and/or developmental stage-specific expression profile. also, predicted targets of conserved mirnas were experimentally confirmed for the first time in potato. our findings indicate the existence of extensive and complex small rna population in this crop and suggest their important role in pathways involved in diverse biological processes, including tuber development.

potatotuberizationmicrornahigh-throughput sequencingdigital expression profilingqrt-pcrtargetgene ontologyrlm-race

