BACKGROUND
breeding for cold tolerance in maize promises to allow increasing growth area and production in temperate zones. the objective of this research was to conduct genome-wide association analyses  in temperate maize inbred lines and to find strategies for pyramiding genes for cold tolerance. two panels of  <dig> dent and  <dig> european flint maize inbred lines were evaluated per se and in testcrosses under cold and control conditions in a growth chamber. we recorded indirect measures for cold tolerance as the traits number of days from sowing to emergence, relative leaf chlorophyll content or quantum efficiency of photosystem ii. association mapping for identifying genes associated to cold tolerance in both panels was based on genotyping with  <dig>  genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism  markers.


RESULTS
we found  <dig> significant associations, most of them in the inbreds evaluated per se, in the flint panel, and under control conditions. a few candidate genes coincided between the current research and previous reports. a total of  <dig> flint inbreds harbored the favorable alleles for six significant quantitative trait loci  detected for inbreds per se evaluated under cold conditions, four of them had also the favorable alleles for the main qtl detected from the testcrosses. only four dent inbreds  harbored the favorable alleles for three main qtl detected from the evaluation of the dent inbreds per se under cold conditions. there were more qtl in the flint panel and most of the qtl were associated with days to emergence and Φpsii.


CONCLUSIONS
these results open new possibilities to genetically improve cold tolerance either with genome-wide selection or with marker assisted selection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gwas, maizecold tolerancechillingqtlspanish ministry of science and innovation eui2008- <dig> and eui2008-03635revilla pedro french national agency for research german federal ministry of education and research0315461a-dmelchinger albrecht e. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

