BACKGROUND
meiotic recombination hotspots play important roles in various aspects of genomics, but the underlying mechanisms for regulating the locations and strengths of recombination hotspots are not yet fully revealed. most existing algorithms for estimating recombination rates from sequence polymorphism data can only output average recombination rates of a population, although there is evidence for the heterogeneity in recombination rates among individuals. for genome-wide association studies  of recombination hotspots, an efficient algorithm that estimates the individualized strengths of recombination hotspots is highly desirable.


RESULTS
in this work, we propose a novel graph mining algorithm named arg-walker, based on random walks on ancestral recombination graphs , to estimate individual-specific recombination hotspot strengths. extensive simulations demonstrate that arg-walker is able to distinguish the hot allele of a recombination hotspot from the cold allele. integrated with output of arg-walker, we performed gwas on the phased haplotype data of the  <dig> autosome chromosomes of the hapmap asian population samples of chinese and japanese . significant cis-regulatory signals have been detected, which is corroborated by the enrichment of the well-known 13-mer motif ccnccntnnccnc of prdm <dig> protein. moreover, two new dna motifs have been identified in the flanking regions of the significantly associated snps , which are likely to be new cis-regulatory elements of meiotic recombination hotspots of the human genome.


CONCLUSIONS
our results on both simulated and real data suggest that arg-walker is a promising new method for estimating the individual recombination variations. in the future, it could be used to uncover the mechanisms of recombination regulation and human diseases related with recombination hotspots.

meiotic recombination hotspotindividual recombination strengthancestral recombination graph genome-wide association study major histocompatibility complex random walks on graphs9- <dig> september  <dig> joint 26th genome informatics workshop and asia pacific bioinformatics network  14th international conference on bioinformatics  tokyo, japan

