BACKGROUND
the bacterium coxiella burnetii has caused unprecedented outbreaks of q fever in the netherlands between  <dig> and  <dig>  since  <dig>  over  <dig> human cases have been reported, with  <dig> cases in  <dig> alone. dairy goat farms were identified as most probable sources for emerging clusters of human q fever cases in their vicinity. however, identifying individual farms as primary source for specific clusters of human cases remains a challenge, partly due to limited knowledge of the different c. burnetii strains circulating in livestock, the environment and humans.


RESULTS
we used a multiplex multi-locus variable number of tandem repeats analysis  assay to investigate the genotypic diversity of c. burnetii in different types of samples that were collected nationwide during the dutch q fever outbreaks between  <dig> and  <dig>  typing was performed on c. burnetii positive samples obtained from several independent studies investigating c. burnetii presence in animals and the environment. six different genotypes were identified on  <dig> farm locations, based on sequence-confirmed estimates of repeat numbers of six mlva markers. mlva genotype a was observed on  <dig> of the  <dig> selected farm locations in animals and in environmental samples.


CONCLUSIONS
sequence confirmation of the numbers of tandem repeats within each locus and consensus about repeat identification is essential for accurate mlva typing of c. burnetii. mlva genotype a is the most common genotype in animal samples obtained from goat, sheep, and rats, as well as in environmental samples such as  dust, which is considered to be the major transmission route from animals via the environment to humans. the finding of a single dominant mlva genotype in patients, the environment, and livestock complicates accurate source-finding. pinpointing individual sources in the netherlands requires discrimination of genotypes at a higher resolution than attained by using mlva, as it is likely that the dominant c. burnetii mlva type will be detected on several farms and in different patients in a particular area of interest.

coxiella burnetiiq fevermolecular typingmlvaenvironmentgoatsheep

