BACKGROUND
host-specific environmental factors induce changes in bacillus anthracis gene transcription during infection. a global transcription regulator, cody, plays a pivotal role in regulating central metabolism, biosynthesis, and virulence in b. anthracis. in this study, we utilized rna-sequencing to assess changes in the transcriptional patterns of cody-regulated b. anthracis genes in response to three conditions of environmental starvation: iron, co <dig>  or glucose deprivation. in addition, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation on newly identified cody-mediated genes.


RESULTS
environmental deprivation induced transcriptional changes in cody-regulated genes in both wild-type and cody null strains, and both cody-specific and environment-specific patterns were observed. in the iron-depleted condition, overexpression of iron homeostasis genes was observed independent of cody deletion; however, transcription of siderophore and amino acid biosynthesis genes was cody dependent. although cody has a significant regulatory role in central metabolism and the carbon overflow pathway, metabolism-associated genes exhibited cody-independent expression patterns under glucose starvation. genes that were differentially expressed in response to co <dig> availability showed cody-dependent regulation, though their maximal expression did require a supply of co2/bicarbonate.


CONCLUSIONS
we speculate that cody regulates the expression of environmental-responsive genes in a hierarchical manner and is likely associated with other transcription regulators that are specific for a particular environmental change.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacillus anthraciscodyenvironmental signalsstarvationrna-sequencingchromatin immunoprecipitationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003725national research foundation of korea2012-003722msip 2011-0030049kim se kye chai young gyu issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

