BACKGROUND
the visualisation of genetic and genomic maps aligned within and between species and across data sources can be used to inform studies of genome evolution, assist genome assembly projects and aid gene discovery and identification. whilst annotation, integration and exploration of assembled genome sequences is well supported, there are fewer tools available which can display genetic maps for less well-characterized species, and integrate these maps with annotated reference genomes to support cross species comparisons.


RESULTS
we have developed a desktop application to draw and align genetic and genomic maps, retrieved from remote data sources or loaded as local files. maps can be retrieved from our public map database arkdb or from any ensembl data source . by using the jensembl api, maps can be drawn for any release version of any of the thousands of species present in ensembl data sources, allowing not only inter-specific comparisons, but also comparisons between different versions/revisions of assembled genomes. maps can be aligned by relating identical or synonymous markers across maps, or through the gene homology/orthology relationship data stored in the ensembl compara databases, allowing ready visualization of regions of conserved synteny between species. the map drawing canvas is highly configurable, supports interactive exploration of maps, markers and relationships and allows export of publication quality graphics.


CONCLUSIONS
arkmap allows users to draw and interactively explore gene and variation maps for any version of any annotated genome curated in the ensembl data sources, and to integrate local mapping data. the maps and inter-map relationships drawn are highly configurable and arkmap may be used to produce publication quality graphics. arkmap is freely available as an auto-updating java ‘web start’ application, or as a standalone archived application.

softwaremap drawinggenetic mapgenomic mapsyntenyconserved syntenyjensemblensembl

