BACKGROUND
flowering time is a domestication trait of glycine max and varies in soybeans, yet, a gene for flowering time variation has not been associated with soybean domestication. gigantea  is a major gene involved in the control of flowering time in arabidopsis, although three gi homologs complicate this model in the soybean genome.


RESULTS
in the present work, we revealed that the geographic evolution of the giganteaa  haplotypes in g. max  and glycine soja . three gia haplotypes  were found among cultivated soybeans and their wild relatives, yet an additional  <dig> diverse haplotypes were observed in wild soybeans. h <dig> had a premature stop codon in the 10th exon, whereas the other haplotypes encoded full-length gia protein isoforms. in both wild-type and cultivated soybeans, h <dig> was present in the southern region of china, and h <dig> was restricted to areas near the northeast region of china. h <dig> was genetically derived from h <dig>  and it was dominant and widely distributed among cultivated soybeans, whereas in wild populations, the ortholog of this domesticated haplotype h <dig> was only found in yellow river basin with a low frequency. moreover, this mutated gia haplotype significantly correlated with early flowering. we further determined that the differences in gene expression of the three gmgia haplotypes were not correlated to flowering time variations in cultivated soybeans. however, only the truncated gmgia h <dig> could partially rescue gi- <dig> arabidopsis from delayed flowering in transgenic plants, whereas both gmgia h <dig> and h <dig> haplotypes could significantly repress flowering in transgenic arabidopsis with a wild-type background.


CONCLUSIONS
thus, gmgia haplotype diversification may have contributed to flowering time adaptation that facilitated the radiation of domesticated soybeans. in light of the evolution of the gia gene, soybean domestication history for an early flowering phenotype is discussed.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
domesticationevolutionflowering timegiganteahaplotypesoybeanissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

