BACKGROUND
high precision protein loop modelling remains a challenge, both in template based and template independent approaches to protein structure prediction.

method
we introduce the concepts of protein loop clustering and percolation, to develop a quantitative approach to systematically classify the modular building blocks of loops in crystallographic folded proteins. these fragments are all different parameterisations of a unique kink solution to a generalised discrete nonlinear schrödinger  equation. accordingly, the fragments are also local energy minima of the ensuing energy function.


RESULTS
we show how the loop fragments cover practically all ultrahigh resolution crystallographic protein structures in protein data bank , with a  <dig>  Ångström root-mean-square  precision. we find that no more than  <dig> different loop fragments are needed, to describe around  <dig> % of ultrahigh resolution loops in pdb. but there is also a large number of loop fragments that are either unique, or very rare, and examples of unique fragments are found even in the structure of a myoglobin.


CONCLUSIONS
protein loops are built in a modular fashion. the loops are composed of fragments that can be modelled by the kink of the dnls equation. the majority of loop fragments are also common, which are shared by many proteins. these common fragments are probably important for supporting the overall protein conformation. but there are also several fragments that are either unique to a given protein, or very rare. such fragments are probably related to the function of the protein. furthermore, we have found that the amino acid sequence does not determine the structure in a unique fashion. there are many examples of loop fragments with an identical amino acid sequence, but with a very different structure.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
loop modelingprotein backbonec α trace problemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

