BACKGROUND
technological advances are progressively increasing the application of genomics to a wider array of economically and ecologically important species. high-density maps enriched for transcribed genes facilitate the discovery of connections between genes and phenotypes. we report the construction of a high-density linkage map of expressed genes for the heterozygous genome of eucalyptus using single feature polymorphism  markers.


RESULTS
sfp discovery and mapping was achieved using pseudo-testcross screening and selective mapping to simultaneously optimize linkage mapping and microarray costs. sfp genotyping was carried out by hybridizing complementary rna prepared from  <dig>  year-old trees xylem to an sfp array containing  <dig>  25-mer oligonucleotide probes representing  <dig>  unigenes derived from a modest size expressed sequence tags collection. an sfp-mapping microarray with  <dig>  selected candidate sfp probes representing  <dig>  genes was subsequently designed and used to genotype sfps in a larger subset of the segregating population drawn by selective mapping. a total of  <dig>  genes were mapped, with  <dig> of them ordered with high likelihood support on a framework map anchored to  <dig> microsatellites with average density of  <dig>  cm. using more probes per unigene increased by two-fold the likelihood of detecting segregating sfps eventually resulting in more genes mapped. in silico validation showed that 87% of the sfps map to the expected location on the  <dig> x draft sequence of the eucalyptus grandis genome.


CONCLUSIONS
the eucalyptus  <dig>  gene map is the most highly enriched map for transcriptional information for any forest tree species to date. it represents a major improvement on the number of genes previously positioned on eucalyptus maps and provides an initial glimpse at the gene space for this global tree genome. a general protocol is proposed to build high-density transcript linkage maps in less characterized plant species by sfp genotyping with a concurrent objective of reducing microarray costs. high-density gene-rich maps represent a powerful resource to assist gene discovery endeavors when used in combination with qtl and association mapping and should be especially valuable to assist the assembly of reference genome sequences soon to come for several plant and animal species.

