BACKGROUND
detecting somatic mutations in whole exome sequencing data of cancer samples has become a popular approach for profiling cancer development, progression and chemotherapy resistance. several studies have proposed software packages, filters and parametrizations. however, many research groups reported low concordance among different methods. we aimed to develop a pipeline which detects a wide range of single nucleotide mutations with high validation rates. we combined two standard tools – genome analysis toolkit  and mutect – to create the gatk-lodn method. as proof of principle, we applied our pipeline to exome sequencing data of hematological  and solid  tumors. we performed experiments on simulated data to test the sensitivity and specificity of our pipeline.


RESULTS
the software mutect presented the highest validation rate  for mutation detection, but limited number of somatic mutations detected. the gatk detected a high number of mutations but with low specificity. the gatk-lodn increased the performance of the gatk variant detection , while preserving mutations not detected by mutect. however, gatk-lodn filtered more variants in the hematological samples than in the solid tumors. experiments in simulated data demonstrated that gatk-lodn increased both specificity and sensitivity of gatk results.


CONCLUSIONS
we presented a pipeline that detects a wide range of somatic single nucleotide variants, with good validation rates, from exome sequencing data of cancer samples. we also showed the advantage of combining standard algorithms to create the gatk-lodn method, that increased specificity and sensitivity of gatk results. this pipeline can be helpful in discovery studies aimed to profile the somatic mutational landscape of cancer genomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cancersomatic single nucleotide variantswhole exome sequencingtwelfth annual meeting of the italian society of bioinformatics  milan, italy 3- <dig> june  <dig> http://www.bioinformatics.it/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

