BACKGROUND
mastitis is the most important disease in dairy cows and it causes significant lost of profit to producers. identification of the genes, and their variants, involved in innate immune responses is essential for the understanding of this inflammatory disease and to identify potential genetic markers for resistance to mastitis. the progeny of dairy cows would benefit from receiving favourable alleles that support greater resistance to infection, thus reducing antibiotic use. this study aims to identify a key gene in the innate immune response to mastitis, led us to evaluate its genetic association with somatic cell score , which is an indicator of clinical mastitis, and to evaluate its impact on other traits related to milk production.


RESULTS
the osteopontin transcript  was identified in the somatic cells from cows experimentally infected with escherichia coli. by selecting bulls with extreme estimated breeding values  for scs, which is an indicator of mammary gland health, four dna polymorphisms in the spp <dig> genomic sequence were found. statistical analysis revealed that the snp spp1c.-1301g>a has an impact on ebv for scs  using an allele substitution model, spp1c.-1251c>t, spp1c.-430g>a, and spp1c.*40a>c have an impact on scs whereas spp1c.-1301g>a has an effect on the ebvs for milk yield , fat and protein percentages . analysis revealed statistically significant differences between haplotype groups at a comparison-wise level with sire ebvs for scs for the first , second , and third  lactations.


CONCLUSIONS
this study reports the link between dna polymorphisms of spp <dig>  the number of milk immune cells and, potentially, the susceptibility to mastitis. these snps were identified by in silico search to be located in transcription factor recognition sites which factors are presumably involved in the th <dig> immune response and in the th <dig> regulation pathway. indeed, one snp abolished the sp <dig> recognition site, whereas another snp affected the transcription binding factor ikaros. all together, these findings support the genetic potential of these variants in terms of selection for the improvement of mastitis resistance in dairy cows.

