BACKGROUND
alzheimer's disease is the leading cause of dementia in the elderly and the third most common cause of death in the united states. a vast number of genes regulate alzheimer’s disease, including presenilin  <dig> . multiple studies have attempted to locate novel variants in the psen <dig> gene that affect alzheimer's disease status. a recent study suggested that one of these variants, psen <dig> e318g , significantly affects alzheimer's disease status in a large case–control dataset, particularly in connection with the apoeε <dig> allele.

methods
our study looks at the same variant in the cache county study on memory and aging, a large population-based dataset. we tested for association between e318g genotype and alzheimer’s disease status by running a series of fisher’s exact tests. we also performed logistic regression to test for an additive effect of e318g genotype on alzheimer’s disease status and for the existence of an interaction between e318g and apoeε <dig> 


RESULTS
in our fisher’s exact test, it appeared that apoeε <dig> carriers with an e318g allele have slightly higher risk for ad than those without the allele ; however, the 95 % confidence intervals of those estimates overlapped completely, indicating non-significance. our logistic regression model found a positive but non-significant main effect for e318g . the interaction term between e318g and apoeε <dig> was also non-significant .


CONCLUSIONS
our findings do not provide significant support for e318g as a risk factor for ad in apoeε <dig> carriers. our calculations indicated that the overall sample used in the logistic regression models was adequately powered to detect the sort of effect sizes observed previously. however, the power analyses of our fisher’s exact tests indicate that our partitioned data was underpowered, particularly in regards to the low number of e318g carriers, both ad cases and controls, in the cache county dataset. thus, the differences in types of datasets used may help to explain the difference in effect magnitudes seen. analyses in additional case–control datasets will be required to understand fully the effect of e318g on alzheimer's disease status.

keywords
alzheimer’s diseasepresenilinrare variantsepistasis12th annual biotechnology and bioinformatics symposium  provo, ut, usa 10- <dig> december  <dig> http://biotconf.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

