BACKGROUND
dogs have the second largest number of genetic diseases, after humans. among the diseases present in dogs, progressive retinal atrophy has been reported in more than a hundred breeds. in some of them, the mutation has been identified and genetic tests have allowed the identification of carriers, thus enabling a drastic reduction in the incidence of the disease. the finnish lapphund is a dog breed presenting late-onset progressive retinal atrophy for which the disease locus remains unknown.


RESULTS
in this study we mapped the progressive retinal atrophy locus in the finnish lapphund using a dna pooling approach, assuming that all affected dogs within the breed share the same identical-by descent-mutation as the cause of the disease . autosomal recessive inheritance was also assumed, after ruling out, from pedigree analysis, dominant and x-linked inheritance. dna from  <dig> finnish lapphund cases was mixed in one pool, and dna from  <dig> first-degree relatives of these cases was mixed to serve as the control pool. the  <dig> pools were tested with  <dig> microsatellite markers,  <dig> of which showed a shift towards homozygosity in the cases. individual genotyping with these  <dig> markers confirmed homozygosity for the galk <dig> microsatellite only . further individual genotyping with additional samples  confirmed the association between this marker and the disease locus . closely related to this breed are the swedish lapphund and the lapponian herder for which a small number of retinal atrophy cases have been reported. swedish lapphund cases, but not lapponian herder cases, had the same galk <dig> microsatellite genotype as finnish lapphund cases.


CONCLUSIONS
the locus for progressive rod-cone degeneration is known to be close to the galk <dig> locus, on the telomeric region of chromosome  <dig>  where the retinal atrophy locus of the finnish lapphund has been mapped. this suggests that the disease in this breed, as well as in the swedish lapphund, may correspond to progressive rod-cone degeneration. this would increase the number of known dog breeds having this particular form of progressive retinal atrophy.

