BACKGROUND
the unattractive appearance of the surface of pear fruit caused by the postharvest disorder friction discolouration  is responsible for significant consumer dissatisfaction in markets, leading to lower returns to growers. developing an understanding of the genetic control of fd is essential to enable the full application of genomics-informed breeding for the development of new pear cultivars. biochemical constituents , polyphenol oxidase  activity, as well as skin anatomy, have been proposed to play important roles in fd susceptibility in studies on a limited number of cultivars. however, to date there has been no investigation on the biochemical and genetic control of fd, employing segregating populations. in this study, we used  <dig> seedlings from two segregating populations  derived from interspecific crosses between asian  and european  pears to identify genetic factors associated with susceptibility to fd.


RESULTS
single nucleotide polymorphism -based linkage maps suitable for qtl analysis were developed for the parents of both populations. the maps for population pop <dig> comprised  <dig> and  <dig> snp markers for the male and female parent, respectively, while pop <dig> maps comprised  <dig> and  <dig> snp markers for the male and female parent, respectively. phenotypic data for  <dig> variables were measured over two successive years  for pop <dig> and one year  only for pop <dig>  a total of  <dig> qtls were identified that were linked to  <dig> phenotyped variables, including qtls associated with fd for both populations that were stable over the successive years. in addition, clear evidence of the influence of developmental factors  on fd and other variables was also recorded.


CONCLUSIONS
the qtls associated with fruit firmness, ppo activity, asa concentration and concentration of polyphenol compounds as well as fd are the first reported for pear. we conclude that the postharvest disorder fd is controlled by multiple small effect qtls and that it will be very challenging to apply marker-assisted selection based on these qtls. however, genomic selection could be employed to select elite genotypes with lower or no susceptibility to fd early in the breeding cycle.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
friction discolourationpostharvestqtlsnpppopyrusissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

