BACKGROUND
tree peony  is known for its excellent ornamental and medicinal values. in  <dig>  seeds from p. ostii have been identified as novel resource of α-linolenic acid  for seed oil production and development in china. however, the molecular mechanism on biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids in tree peony seeds remains unknown. therefore, transcriptome data is needed to better understand the underlying mechanisms.


RESULTS
in this study, lipid accumulation contents were measured using gc-ms methods across developing tree peony seeds, which exhibited an extraordinary ala content  in p. ostii mature seeds. transcriptome analysis was performed using illumina sequencing platform. a total of  <dig> million 100-bp paired-end reads were generated from six libraries, which identified  <dig>  contigs. in the kegg orthology enrichment of differentially expressed genes, lipid metabolism pathways were highly represented categories. using this data we identified  <dig> unigenes that may be involved in de novo fatty acid and triacylglycerol biosynthesis. in particular, three unigenes  encoding fatty acid desaturase with high expression levels in the fast oil accumulation stage compared with the initial stage of seed development were identified.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the first comprehensive genomic resources characterizing tree peony seeds gene expression at the transcriptional level. these data lay the foundation for further understanding of molecular mechanism responsible for lipid biosynthesis and the high unsaturated fatty acids  accumulation. meanwhile, it provides theoretical base for potential oilseed application in the respect of n- <dig> to n- <dig> ratio for human diets and future regulation of target healthy components of oils.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
paeoniaceaetree peonytranscriptomeα-linolenic acidomega- <dig> fatty acidtriacylglycerolsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

