BACKGROUND
transcriptome sequencing of brain samples provides detailed enrichment analysis of differential expression and genetic interactions for evaluation of mitochondrial and coagulation function of schizophrenia. it is implicated that schizophrenia genetic and protein interactions may give rise to biological dysfunction of energy metabolism and hemostasis. these findings may explain the biological mechanisms responsible for negative and withdraw symptoms of schizophrenia and antipsychotic-induced venous thromboembolism.

we conducted a comparison of schizophrenic candidate genes from literature reviews and constructed the schizophrenia-mediator network  which consists of schizophrenic candidate genes and associated mediator genes by applying differential expression analysis to ba <dig> rna-seq brain data. the network was searched against pathway databases such as pid, reactome, humancyc, and cell-map. the candidate complexes were identified by mcl clustering using corum for potential pathogenesis of schizophrenia.


RESULTS
published ba <dig> rna-seq brain data of  <dig> schizophrenic patients and  <dig> controls samples were analyzed. the differentially expressed genes in the ba <dig> brain samples of schizophrenia are proposed as schizophrenia candidate marker genes . the genetic interactions between mitochondrial genes and many under-expressed sczcgs indicate the genetic predisposition of mitochondria dysfunction in schizophrenia. the biological functions of sczcgs, as listed in the pathway interaction database , indicate that these genes have roles in dna binding transcription factor, signal and cancer-related pathways, coagulation and cell cycle regulation and differentiation pathways.

in the query-query protein-protein interaction  network of sczcgs, tp <dig>  prkaca, stat <dig> and sp <dig> were identified as the central "hub" genes. mitochondrial function was modulated by dopamine inhibition of respiratory complex i activity. the genetic interaction between mitochondria function and schizophrenia may be revealed by drd <dig> linked to ndufs <dig> through protein-protein interactions of flna and arrb <dig> 

the biological mechanism of signaling pathway of coagulation cascade was illustrated by the ppi network of the sczcgs and the coagulation-associated genes. the relationship between antipsychotic target genes  and coagulation factor genes  appeared to cascade the following hemostatic process implicating the bottleneck of coagulation genetic network by the bridging of actin-binding protein .


CONCLUSIONS
it is implicated that the energy metabolism and hemostatic process have important roles in the pathogenesis for schizophrenia. the cross-talk of genetic interaction by these co-expressed genes and reached candidate genes may address the key network in disease pathology. the accuracy of candidate genes evaluated from different quantification tools could be improved by crosstalk analysis of overlapping genes in genetic networks.

 <dig> july- <dig> august  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  thirteenth international conference on bioinformatics  sydney, australia

