BACKGROUND
bifidobacteria are key commensals in human gut, and their abundance is associated with the health of their hosts. although they are dominant in infant gut, their number becomes lower in adult gut. the changes of the diet are considered to be main reason for this difference. large amounts of whole-genomic sequence data of bifidobacteria make it possible to elucidate the genetic interpretation of their adaptation to the nutrient environment. among the nutrients in human gut, starch is a highly fermentable substrate and can exert beneficial effects by increasing bifidobacteria and/or being fermented to short chain fatty acids.


RESULTS
in order to determine the potential substrate preference of bifidobacteria, we compared the glycoside hydrolase  profiles of a pooled-bifidobacterial genome  with a representative microbiome  of the human gut. in bifidobacterial genomes, only 15% of ghs contained signal peptides, suggesting their weakness in utilization of complex carbohydrate, such as plant cell wall polysaccharides. however, compared with other intestinal bacteria, bifidobacteiral genomes encoded more gh genes for degrading starch and starch hydrolysates, indicating that they have genetic advantages in utilizing these substrates. bifidobacterium longum subsp. longum bbmn <dig> isolated from centenarian’s faeces was used as a model strain to further investigate the carbohydrate utilization. the pathway for degrading starch and starch hydrolysates was the only complete pathway for complex carbohydrates in human gut. it is noteworthy that all of the gh genes for degrading starch and starch hydrolysates in the bbmn <dig> genome were conserved in all studied bifidobacterial strains. the in silico analyses of bbmn <dig> were further confirmed by growth experiments, proteomic and real-time quantitative pcr  analyses.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrated that starch and starch hydrolysates were the most universal and favorable carbon sources for bifidobacteria. the low amount of these carbon sources in adult intestine was speculated to contribute to the low relative abundance of bifidobacteria.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bifidobacteriastarchnutrient-nicheadaptationgemomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

