BACKGROUND
listeriosis is a severe infection which mainly affects pregnant women, neonates and immuno-compromised adults. anses’s laboratory for food safety has been the european union reference laboratory  for l. monocytogenes in the food chain since  <dig>  pulsed field gel electrophoresis  is routinely used in the eurl for the surveillance of l. monocytogenes isolated from foods, animals and the environment. one of the main eurl activities is to evaluate alternative molecular subtyping methods to pfge, and integrate their use within the national reference laboratories  network. since  <dig>  the united kingdom -nrl for l. monocytogenes at the health protection agency , london, has used fluorescent amplified fragment length polymorphism  for the routine surveillance of l. monocytogenes isolated from human clinical cases, food and food processing environments in the uk. this study compares faflp with pfge for subtyping l. monocytogenes.


RESULTS
a panel of  <dig> l. monocytogenes isolates from either human cases of listeriosis, foods, food processing environments and animals were used for the comparative evaluation. among these,  <dig> strains were tested from duplicate culture by both methods. the panel also included field isolates, isolates associated with outbreaks or sporadic cases and reference strains. the two strains tested in duplicate displayed the same faflp and pfge types. strains known to be epidemiologically associated with one another were found to have unique pfge and faflp types. faflp and pfge divided the strains into  <dig> and  <dig> distinct profiles, or types, respectively. the discriminatory index calculated was  <dig>  and  <dig>  for faflp and pfge, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
the discriminatory ability of faflp was similar to that of pfge for the subtyping of l. monocytogenes isolates. as a less labour intensive technique faflp may be a better method to use than pfge in investigating outbreaks of human listeriosis and tracking the source of contamination in food processing facilities in real time.

faflppfgemolecular subtypinglisteria monocytogenesdiscriminatory power

