BACKGROUND
epidemiological models often use information on host social contacts to predict the potential impact of infectious diseases on host populations and the efficiency of control measures. it can be difficult, however, to determine whether social contacts are actually meaningful predictors of transmission. we investigated the role of host social structure in the transmission of escherichia coli in a wild population of primates, verreaux’s sifakas . using multilocus sequence typing , we compared genetic similarities between e. coli isolates from different individuals and groups to infer transmission pathways.


RESULTS
correlation of social and transmission networks revealed that membership to the same group significantly predicted sharing of e. coli mlst sequence types . intergroup encounter rate and a measure of space-use sharing provided equally potent explanations for type sharing between social groups when closely related sts were taken into account, whereas animal age, sex and dispersal history had no influence. no antibiotic resistance was found, suggesting low rates of e. coli spillover from humans into this arboreal species.


CONCLUSIONS
we show that patterns of e. coli transmission reflect the social structure of this group-living lemur species. we discuss our results in the light of the species’ ecology and propose scent-marking, a type of social contact not considered in previous epidemiological studies, as a likely route of transmission between groups. however, further studies are needed to explicitly test this hypothesis and to further elucidate the relative roles of direct contact and environmental transmission in pathogen transfer.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fecal-oral disease transmissionpropithecus verreauxiescherichia colimultilocus sequence typingscent-markingsocial contactssocial network analysisspilloverhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft ka 1082/29-1kappeler peter m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

