BACKGROUND
fungi are among the most abundant and diverse organisms on earth. however, a substantial amount of the species diversity, relationships, habitats, and life strategies of these microorganisms remain to be discovered and characterized. one important factor hindering progress is the difficulty in correctly identifying fungi. morphological and molecular characteristics have been applied in such tasks. later, dna barcoding has emerged as a new method for the rapid and reliable identification of species. the nrits region is considered the universal barcode of fungi, and the its <dig> and its <dig> sub-regions have been applied as metabarcoding markers. in this study, we performed a large-scale analysis of all the available basidiomycota sequences from genbank. we carried out a rigorous trimming of the initial dataset based in methodological principals of dna barcoding. two different approaches  were used to determine the performance of the complete its region and sub-regions.


RESULTS
for most of the basidiomycota genera, the three genomic markers performed similarly, i.e., when one was considered a good marker for the identification of a genus, the others were also; the same results were observed when the performance was insufficient. however, based on barcode gap analyses, we identified genomic markers that had a superior identification performance than the others and genomic markers that were not indicated for the identification of some genera. notably, neither the complete its nor the sub-regions were useful in identifying  <dig> of the  <dig> basidiomycota genera. the complex phylogenetic relationships and the presence of cryptic species in some genera are possible explanations of this limitation and are discussed.


CONCLUSIONS
knowledge regarding the efficiency and limitations of the barcode markers that are currently used for the identification of organisms is crucial because it benefits research in many areas. our study provides information that may guide researchers in choosing the most suitable genomic markers for identifying basidiomycota species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
itsits1its2probable correct identificationbarcode gapbasidiomycotahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003593conselho nacional de desenvolvimento científico e tecnológico308148/2013-4564944/ <dig> góes-neto aristóteles issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

