BACKGROUND
salmonella enterica subspecies i includes several closely related serovars which differ in host ranges and ability to cause disease. the basis for the diversity in host range and pathogenic potential of the serovars is not well understood, and it is not known how host-restricted variants appeared and what factors were lost or acquired during adaptations to a specific environment. differences apparent from the genomic data do not necessarily correspond to functional proteins and more importantly differential regulation of otherwise identical gene content may play a role in the diverse phenotypes of the serovars of salmonella.


RESULTS
in this study a comparative analysis of the cytosolic proteins of serovars typhimurium and pullorum was performed using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and the proteins of interest were identified using mass spectrometry. an annotated reference map was created for serovar typhimurium containing  <dig> entries, which included many metabolic enzymes, ribosomal proteins, chaperones and many other proteins characteristic for the growing cell. the comparative analysis of the two serovars revealed a high degree of variation amongst isolates obtained from different sources and, in some cases, the variation was greater between isolates of the same serovar than between isolates with different sero-specificity. however, several serovar-specific proteins, including intermediates in sulphate utilisation and cysteine synthesis, were also found despite the fact that the genes encoding those proteins are present in the genomes of both serovars.


CONCLUSIONS
current microbial proteomics are generally based on the use of a single reference or type strain of a species. this study has shown the importance of incorporating a large number of strains of a species, as the diversity of the proteome in the microbial population appears to be significantly greater than expected. the characterisation of a diverse selection of strains revealed parts of the proteome of s. enterica that alter their expression while others remain stable and allowed for the identification of serovar-specific factors that have so far remained undetected by other methods.

