BACKGROUND
aristaless-related homeobox  is a paired-like homeodomain transcription factor that functions primarily as a transcriptional repressor and has been implicated in neocortical interneuron specification and migration. given the role interneurons appear to play in numerous human conditions including those associated with arx mutations, it is essential to understand the consequences of mutations in this gene on neocortical interneurons. previous studies have examined the effect of germline loss of arx, or targeted mutations in arx, on interneuron development. we now present the effect of conditional loss of arx on interneuron development.


RESULTS
to further elucidate the role of arx in forebrain development we performed a series of anatomical and developmental studies to determine the effect of conditional loss of arx specifically from developing interneurons in the neocortex and hippocampus. analysis and cell counts were performed from mouse brains using immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization assays at  <dig> times points across development. our data indicate that early in development, instead of a loss of ventral precursors, there is a shift of these precursors to more ventral locations, a deficit that persists in the adult nervous system. the result of this developmental shift is a reduced number of interneurons  at early postnatal and later time periods. in addition, we find that x inactivation is stochastic, and occurs at the level of the neural progenitors.


CONCLUSIONS
these data provide further support that the role of arx in interneuron development is to direct appropriate migration of ventral neuronal precursors into the dorsal cortex and that the loss of arx results in a failure of interneurons to reach the cortex and thus a deficiency in interneurons.

keywords
interneurondevelopmentmigrationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000065national institute of neurological disorders and strokens065975ns46616marsh eric d. golden jeffrey a. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000065national institute of neurological disorders and stroke ns082761marsh eric d. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

