BACKGROUND
the fox gene family comprises a large and functionally diverse group of forkhead-related transcriptional regulators, many of which are essential for metazoan embryogenesis and physiology. defining conserved functional domains that mediate the transcriptional activity of fox proteins will contribute to a comprehensive understanding of the biological function of fox family genes.


RESULTS
systematic analysis of  <dig> protein sequences of the metazoan fox family was performed to identify the presence of the engrailed homology- <dig> motif , a motif known to mediate physical interaction with transcriptional corepressors of the tle/groucho family. greater than 50% of fox proteins contain sequences with high similarity to the eh <dig> motif, including ten of the nineteen fox subclasses  and fox proteins of early divergent species such as marine sponge. the eh <dig> motif is not detected in fox proteins of the f, j, k, m, n, o, p, r and s subclasses, or in yeast fox proteins. the eh1-like motifs are positioned c-terminal to the winged helix dna-binding domain in all subclasses except for foxg proteins, which have an n-terminal motif. two similar eh1-like motifs are found in the zebrafish foxq <dig> and in foxg proteins of sea urchin and amphioxus. the identification of eh1-like motifs by manual sequence alignment was validated by statistical analyses of the swiss protein database, confirming a high frequency of occurrence of eh1-like sequences in fox family proteins. structural predictions suggest that the majority of identified eh1-like motifs are short α-helices, and wheel modeling revealed an amphipathicity that supports this secondary structure prediction.


CONCLUSIONS
a search for eh <dig> groucho interaction motifs in the fox gene family has identified eh1-like sequences in greater than 50% of fox proteins. the results predict a physical and functional interaction of tle/groucho corepressors with many members of the fox family of transcriptional regulators. given the functional importance of the eh <dig> motif in transcriptional regulation, our annotation of this motif in the fox gene family will facilitate further study of the diverse transcriptional and regulatory roles of fox family proteins.

