BACKGROUND
exposures to environmental toxins are now thought to contribute to the development of autism spectrum disorder. propionic acid  found as a metabolic product of gut bacteria has been reported to mimic/mediate the neurotoxic effects of autism. results from animal studies may guide investigations on human populations toward identifying environmental contaminants that produce or drugs that protect from neurotoxicity. forty-eight young male western albino rats were used in the present study. they were grouped into six equal groups  <dig> rats each. the first group received a neurotoxic dose of buffered pa . the second group received only phosphate buffered saline . the third and fourth groups were intoxicated with pa as described above followed by treatment with either coenzyme q  or melatonin  for one week . the fifth and sixth groups were administered both compounds for one week prior to pa . heat shock protein <dig> , gamma amino-butyric acid , serotonin, dopamine, oxytocin and interferon γ-inducible protein  <dig> together with comet dna assay were measured in brain tissues of the six studied groups.


RESULTS
the obtained data showed that pa caused multiple signs of brain toxicity revealed in depletion of gaba, serotonin, and dopamine, are which important neurotransmitters that reflect brain function, interferon γ-inducible protein  <dig> and oxytocin. a high significant increase in tail length, tail dna% damage and tail moment was reported indicating the genotoxic effect of pa. administration of melatonin or coenzyme q showed both protective and therapeutic effects on pa–treated rats demonstrated in a remarkable amelioration of most of the measured parameters.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, melatonin and coenzyme q have potential protective and restorative effects against pa-induced brain injury, confirmed by improvement in biochemical markers and dna double strand breaks.

propionic acidmelatonincoenzyme qserotoningamma amino-butyric aciddopamineoxytocininterferon γ-inducible protein 16comet dnaautism

