BACKGROUND
external root resorption, commonly starting from cementum, is a severe side effect of orthodontic treatment. in this pathological process and repairing course followed, cementoblasts play a significant role. previous studies implicated that parathyroid hormone  could act on committed osteoblast precursors to promote differentiation, and inhibit apoptosis. but little was known about the role of pth in cementoblasts. the purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of intermittent pth on cementoblasts and its influence after mechanical strain treatment.


RESULTS
higher levels of cementogenesis- and differentiation-related biomarkers , osteocalcin , collagen type i  and osterix ) were shown in 1– <dig> cycles of intermittent pth treated groups than the control group. additionally, intermittent pth increased alkaline phosphatase  activity and mineralized nodules formation, as measured by alp staining, quantitative alp assay, alizarin red s staining and quantitative calcium assay. the morphology of occm- <dig> cells changed after mechanical strain exertion. expression of bsp, alp, ocn, osteopontin  and osx was restrained after 18 h mechanical strain. furthermore, intermittent pth significantly increased the expression of cementogenesis- and differentiation-related biomarkers in mechanical strain treated occm- <dig> cells.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, these data suggested that intermittent pth promoted cementum formation through activating cementogenesis- and differentiation-related biomarkers, and attenuated the catabolic effects of mechanical strain in immortalized cementoblasts occm- <dig> 

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
occm- <dig> cellintermittent parathyroid hormone mechanical straincementogenesistooth root resorptionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china81470777zou shujuan issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

