BACKGROUND
animal mitochondrial  genomes are characteristically circular molecules of ~16– <dig> kb. medusozoa  are exceptional in that their mt genomes are linear and sometimes subdivided into two to presumably four different molecules. in the genus hydra, the mt genome comprises one or two mt chromosomes. here, we present the whole mt genome sequence from the hydrozoan hydra magnipapillata, comprising the first sequence of a fragmented metazoan mt genome encoded on two linear mt chromosomes .


RESULTS
the h. magnipapillata mt chromosomes contain the typical metazoan set of  <dig> genes for respiratory proteins, the two rrna genes and two trna genes. all genes are unidirectionally oriented on mt <dig> and mt <dig>  and several genes overlap. the gene arrangement suggests that the two mt chromosomes originated from one linear molecule that separated between nd <dig> and rns. strong correlations between the at content of rrna genes  and the at content of protein-coding genes among  <dig> cnidarian genomes imply that base composition is mainly determined by mt genome-wide constraints. we show that identical inverted terminal repeats  occur on both chromosomes; these itr contain a partial copy or part of the 3' end of cox <dig> . additionally, both mt chromosomes possess identical oriented sequences  at the 5' and 3' ends  adjacent to the itr. the 5' ios contains trnm and non-coding sequences , whereas the 3' ios comprises a larger part  with a larger partial copy of cox <dig> .


CONCLUSIONS
itr are also documented in the two other available medusozoan mt genomes . in h. magnipapillata, the arrangement of itr and 5' ios and 3' ios suggest that these regions are crucial for mt dna replication and/or transcription initiation. an analogous organization occurs in a highly fragmented ichthyosporean mt genome. with our data, we can reject a model of mt replication that has previously been proposed for hydra. this raises new questions regarding replication mechanisms probably employed by all medusozoans, and also has general implications for the expected organization of fragmented linear mt chromosomes of other taxa.

