BACKGROUND
bisdioxopiperazine anti-cancer agents are inhibitors of eukaryotic dna topoisomerase ii, sequestering this protein as a non-covalent protein clamp on dna. it has been suggested that such complexes on dna represents a novel form of dna damage to cells. in this report, we characterise the cytotoxicity and dna damage induced by the bisdioxopiperazine icrf- <dig> by a combination of genetic and molecular approaches. in addition, the well-established topoisomerase ii poison m-amsa is used for comparison.


RESULTS
by utilizing a panel of saccharomyces cerevisiae single-gene deletion strains, homologous recombination was identified as the most important dna repair pathway determining the sensitivity towards icrf- <dig>  however, sensitivity towards m-amsa depended much more on this pathway. in contrast, disrupting the post replication repair pathway only affected sensitivity towards m-amsa. homologous recombination  defective irs1sf chinese hamster ovary  cells showed increased sensitivity towards icrf- <dig>  while their sensitivity towards m-amsa was increased even more. furthermore, complementation of the xrcc <dig> deficiency in irs1sf cells fully abrogated hypersensitivity towards both drugs. dna-pkcs deficient v3- <dig> cho cells having reduced levels of non-homologous end joining  showed slightly increased sensitivity to both drugs. while exposure of human small cell lung cancer  oc-nyh cells to m-amsa strongly induced γh2ax, exposure to icrf- <dig> resulted in much less induction, showing that icrf- <dig> generates fewer dna double strand breaks than m-amsa. accordingly, when yeast cells were exposed to equitoxic concentrations of icrf- <dig> and m-amsa, the expression of dna damage-inducible genes showed higher levels of induction after exposure to m-amsa as compared to icrf- <dig>  most importantly, icrf- <dig> stimulated homologous recombination in spd <dig> hamster lung fibroblast cells to lower levels than m-amsa at all cytotoxicity levels tested, showing that the mechanism of action of bisdioxopiperazines differs from that of classical topoisomerase ii poisons in mammalian cells.


CONCLUSIONS
our results point to important differences in the mechanism of cytotoxicity induced by bisdioxopiperazines and topoisomerase ii poisons, and suggest that bisdioxopiperazines kill cells by a combination of dna break-related and dna break-unrelated mechanisms.

