BACKGROUND
divergence of transcription factor binding sites is considered to be an important source of regulatory evolution. the associations between transcription factor binding sites and phenotypic diversity have been investigated in many model organisms. however, the understanding of other factors that contribute to it is still limited. recent studies have elucidated the effect of chromatin structure on molecular evolution of genomic dna. though the profound impact of nucleosome positions on gene regulation has been reported, their influence on transcriptional evolution is still less explored. with the availability of genome-wide nucleosome map in yeast species, it is thus desirable to investigate their impact on transcription factor binding site evolution. here, we present a comprehensive analysis of the role of nucleosome positioning in the evolution of transcription factor binding sites.


RESULTS
we compared the transcription factor binding site frequency in nucleosome occupied regions and nucleosome depleted regions in promoters of old  and young  genes; and in duplicate gene pairs. we demonstrated that nucleosome occupied regions accommodate greater binding site variations than nucleosome depleted regions in young genes and in duplicate genes. this finding was confirmed by measuring the difference in evolutionary rates of binding sites in sensu stricto yeasts at nucleosome occupied regions and nucleosome depleted regions. the binding sites at nucleosome occupied regions exhibited a consistently higher evolution rate than those at nucleosome depleted regions, corroborating the difference in the selection constraints at the two regions. finally, through site-directed mutagenesis experiment, we found that binding site gain or loss events at nucleosome depleted regions may cause more expression differences than those in nucleosome occupied regions.


CONCLUSIONS
our study indicates the existence of different selection constraint on binding sites at nucleosome occupied regions than at the nucleosome depleted regions. we found that the binding sites have a different rate of evolution at nucleosome occupied and depleted regions. finally, using transcription factor binding site-directed mutagenesis experiment, we confirmed the difference in the impact of binding site changes on expression at these regions. thus, our work demonstrates the importance of composite analysis of chromatin and transcriptional evolution.

