BACKGROUND
whole-exome sequencing  is rapidly evolving into a tool of choice for rapid, and inexpensive identification of molecular genetic lesions within targeted regions of the human genome. while biases in wes coverage of nucleotides in targeted regions are recognized, it is not well understood how repetition of wes improves the interpretation of sequencing results in a clinical diagnostic setting.

method
to address this, we compared independently generated exome-capture of six individuals from three-generations sequenced in triplicate. this generated between 48x-86x mean target depth of high-quality mapped bases  for each technical replicate library. cumulatively, we achieved  <dig> - 208x average target coverage for each individual in the pedigree. using this experimental design, we evaluated stochastics in wes interpretation, genotyping sensitivity, and accuracy to detect de novo variants.


RESULTS
in this study, we show that repetition of wes improved the interpretation of the capture target regions after aggregating the data . compared to  <dig>  -  <dig>  %  coverage of targeted bases at ≥20x in the individual technical replicates, the aggregated data covered  <dig>  -  <dig>  % of targeted bases  at ≥20x threshold, suggesting a  <dig>  –  <dig>  % improvement in coverage. each individual’s aggregate dataset recovered  <dig>  –  <dig>  million bases within variable targeted regions. we uncovered technical variability  inherent to wes technique. we also show improved interpretation in assessing clinically important regions that lack interpretation under current conditions, affecting 12– <dig> of the  <dig> genes recommended for secondary analysis by american college of medical genetics . we demonstrate that comparing technical replicate wes datasets and their derived aggregate data can effectively address overall wes genotyping discrepancies.


CONCLUSIONS
we describe a method to evaluate the reproducibility and stochastics in exome library preparation, and delineate the advantages of aggregating the data derived from technical replicates. the implications of this study are directly applicable to improved experimental design and provide an opportunity to rapidly, efficiently, and accurately arrive at reliable candidate nucleotide variants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

