BACKGROUND
the phenotype of a living cell is determined by its pattern of active signaling networks, giving rise to a “molecular phenotype” associated with differential gene expression. digital amplicon based rna quantification by sequencing is a useful technology for molecular phenotyping as a novel tool to characterize the state of biological systems.


RESULTS
we show here that the activity of signaling networks can be assessed based on a set of established key regulators and expression targets rather than the entire transcriptome. we compiled a panel of  <dig> human pathway reporter genes, representing  <dig> human signaling and metabolic networks for integrated knowledge- and data-driven understanding of biological processes. the reporter genes are significantly enriched for regulators and effectors covering a wide range of biological processes, and faithfully capture gene-level and pathway-level changes. we apply the approach to ipsc derived cardiomyocytes and primary human hepatocytes to describe changes in molecular phenotype during development or drug response. the reporter genes deliver an accurate pathway-centric view of the biological system under study, and identify known and novel modulation of signaling networks consistent with literature or experimental data.


CONCLUSIONS
a panel of  <dig> pathway reporter genes is sufficient to describe changes in the molecular phenotype defined by  <dig> signaling cascades in various human cell types. ampliseq-rna based digital transcript imaging enables simultaneous monitoring of the entire pathway reporter gene panel in up to  <dig> samples. we propose molecular phenotyping as a useful approach to understand diseases and drug action at the network level.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
molecular phenotypepathway analysisgene expressionpathway reporter genesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

