BACKGROUND
rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease with a strong mhc class ii component and where many patients develop characteristic autoantibodies towards the noncoding amino acid citrulline. such anti-citrullinated protein antibodies  have recently been put forward as an independent predictive factor for treatment response by co-stimulation blockade by ctla4-ig . we have performed a mechanism of action study to dissect t cell functionality in ra patients with long-standing disease undergoing abatacept treatment and the influence of acpa status.


RESULTS
peripheral blood samples were collected from ra patients as they started ctla4-ig treatment and  <dig> and  <dig> months later. a general decrease of regulatory t cell subsets was observed in the cohort. additionally within the acpa-positive group significant down-regulation of all key t cell effector subsets including th <dig>  th <dig>  and th <dig> was observed by analyzing cytokines by intracellular flow cytometry and in cell culture supernatants.

ra synovial fluid samples were cultured in vitro in the presence or absence of ctla4-ig . t cell cytokine production was diminished, but without increasing the functional capacity of cd4+cd25hi regulatory t cells as previously demonstrated in the context of tnf-blockade and anti-il6r therapy.


CONCLUSIONS
our immunological study of t cell functionality in ra patients, both acpa-positive and acpa-negative, starting biological therapy with the co-stimulation blockade abatacept  supports the recently published registry study implicating acpa seropositivity as an independent predictive factor to treatment response as we observed the most striking effect on t cell subset modulation in acpa-positive patients. these data further support the notion of ra as a disease with several sub-entities, where the acpa-positive fraction represents a classical hla-associated autoimmune disorder while acpa-negative patients may have other driving forces apart from classical adaptive immune responses.

rheumatoid arthritisautoimmunityt lymphocytecytokinesregulatory t cellsabataceptacpa

