BACKGROUND
multiple functional genomics data for complex human diseases have been published and made available by researchers worldwide. the main goal of these studies is the detailed analysis of a particular aspect of the disease. complementary, meta-analysis approaches try to extract supersets of disease genes and interaction networks by integrating and combining these individual studies using statistical approaches.


RESULTS
here we report on a meta-analysis approach that integrates data of heterogeneous origin in the domain of type- <dig> diabetes mellitus . different data sources such as dna microarrays and, complementing, qualitative data covering several human and mouse tissues are integrated and analyzed with a bootstrap scoring approach in order to extract disease relevance of the genes. the purpose of the meta-analysis is two-fold: on the one hand it identifies a group of genes with overall disease relevance indicating common, tissue-independent processes related to the disease; on the other hand it identifies genes showing specific alterations with respect to a single study. using a random sampling approach we computed a core set of  <dig> t2dm genes across multiple tissues in human and mouse, including well-known genes such as pdk <dig>  adipoq, scd, pik3r <dig>  socs <dig> that monitor important hallmarks of t2dm, for example the strong relationship between obesity and insulin resistance, as well as a large fraction  of yet barely characterized novel candidate genes. furthermore, we explored functional information and identified cellular networks associated with this core set of genes such as pathway information, protein-protein interactions and gene regulatory networks. additionally, we set up a web interface in order to allow users to screen t2dm relevance for any – yet non-associated – gene.


CONCLUSIONS
in our paper we have identified a core set of  <dig> t2dm candidate genes by a meta-analysis of existing data sources. we have explored the relation of these genes to disease relevant information and – using enrichment analysis – we have identified biological networks on different layers of cellular information such as signaling and metabolic pathways, gene regulatory networks and protein-protein interactions. the web interface is accessible via .

