BACKGROUND
today many large mammals live in small, fragmented populations, but it is often unclear whether this subdivision is the result of long-term or recent events. demographic modeling using genetic data can estimate changes in long-term population sizes while temporal sampling provides a way to compare genetic variation present today with that sampled in the past. in order to better understand the dynamics associated with the divergences of great ape populations, these analytical approaches were applied to western gorillas  and in particular to the isolated and critically endangered cross river gorilla subspecies .


RESULTS
we used microsatellite genotypes from museum specimens and contemporary samples of cross river gorillas to infer both the long-term and recent population history. we find that cross river gorillas diverged from the ancestral western gorilla population ~ <dig>  years ago . however, gene flow ceased only ~ <dig> years ago , followed by a bottleneck beginning ~ <dig> years ago  that caused a 60-fold decrease in the effective population size of cross river gorillas. direct comparison of heterozygosity estimates from museum and contemporary samples suggests a loss of genetic variation over the last  <dig> years.


CONCLUSIONS
the composite history of western gorillas could plausibly be explained by climatic oscillations inducing environmental changes in western equatorial africa that would have allowed gorilla populations to expand over time but ultimately isolate the cross river gorillas, which thereafter exhibited a dramatic population size reduction. the recent decrease in the cross river population is accordingly most likely attributable to increasing anthropogenic pressure over the last several hundred years. isolation of diverging populations with prolonged concomitant gene flow, but not secondary admixture, appears to be a typical characteristic of the population histories of african great apes, including gorillas, chimpanzees and bonobos.

