BACKGROUND
the salangid icefish neosalanx taihuensis  is an economically important fish, which is endemic to china, restricted to large freshwater systems  and typically exhibit low vagility. the continuous distribution ranges from the temperate region of the huai and yellow river basins to the subtropical region of the pearl river basin. this wide ranging distribution makes the species an ideal model for the study of palaeoclimatic effects on population genetic structure and phylogeography. here, we aim to analyze population genetic differentiation within and between river basins and demographic history in order to understand how this species responded to severe climatic oscillations, decline of the sea levels during the pleistocene ice ages and tectonic activity.


RESULTS
we obtained the complete mtdna cytochrome b sequences  of  <dig> individuals from  <dig> populations in the pearl river, the yangze river and the huai river basin. thirty-six haplotypes were detected. haplotype frequency distributions were strongly skewed, with most haplotypes  represented only in single samples each and thus restricted to a single population. the most common haplotype  was found in  <dig> % of all individuals. analysis of molecular variance  revealed a random pattern in the distribution of genetic diversity, which is inconsistent with contemporary hydrological structure. significant levels of genetic subdivision were detected among populations within basins rather than between the three basins. demographic analysis revealed that the population size in the pearl river basin has remained relatively constant whereas the populations in the yangze river and the huai river basins expanded about  <dig> and  <dig> kyr ago, respectively, with the majority of mutations occurring after the last glacial maximum .


CONCLUSIONS
the observed complex genetic pattern of n. taihuensis is coherent with a scenario of multiple unrelated founding events by long-distance colonization and dispersal combined with contiguous population expansion and locally restricted gene flow. we also found that this species was likely severely impacted by past glaciations. more favourable climate and the formation of large suitable habitations together facilitated population expansion after the late quaternary . we proposed that all populations should be managed and conserved separately, especially for habitat protection.

