BACKGROUND
xanthomonas oryzae pv oryzae is a devastating pathogen of rice and has been extensively studied as a model pathogen of monocotyledons. expressional studies in both the contenders have been undertaken in past to understand the molecular mechanism underlying the compatible and incompatible interactions in the pathosystem. continuous update on database and gene annotations necessitates constant updating on the roles of the new entities as well as reinterpretation of regulations of the previous ones. moreover the past endeavors have addressed the middle or late defense responses of the rice plant whereas in the present study an attempt has been made to investigate the early defense responses taking place immediately after inoculation.


RESULTS
microarray was used to study the transcriptional modulations in eighteen days old rice seedling leaves of both susceptible and resistant genotypes one hour after inoculation. in resistant plants as compared to susceptible ones  <dig> genes were found to be differentially expressed. annotations could be assigned to  <dig> up- and  <dig> down-regulated transcripts and gene interaction maps were generated for  <dig> transcripts. expressional data and interaction maps were used to develop a hypothetical scheme of the molecular events taking place during early defense response. network analysis with the differential transcripts showed up-regulation of major clusters of cell signaling proteins and transcription factors while growth and basal metabolic components were largely found to be down-regulated.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides an understanding of the early defense signaling in rice cells. components of the calcium and lipid signaling as well as mapk cascade were modulated, by signals from surface receptors and cytosolic r-proteins, to arouse jasmonic acid and ethylene signaling and suppress auxin signaling through various transcription factors. abscisic acid modulation was also evident through the expression regulation of transcription factors involved with its functions. moreover adjustments in expression levels of components of primary as well as secondary metabolism, protein trafficking and turnout were apparent, highlighting the complexity of defense response.

