BACKGROUND
mesenchymal stem cells  are multipotent progenitor cells localized in the stromal compartment of the bone marrow . the potential of msc for mesenchymal differentiation has been well documented in different animal models predominantly on rodents. however, information regarding bovine msc  is limited, and the differentiation potential of bmsc derived from fetal bm remains unknown. in the present study we sought to isolate bmsc from abattoir-derived fetal bm and to characterize the multipotent and differentiation potential under osteogenic, chondrogenic and adipogenic conditions by quantitative and qualitative analyses.


RESULTS
plastic-adherent bmsc isolated from fetal bm maintained a fibroblast-like morphology under monolayer culture conditions. these cells expressed high levels of msc surface markers  and low levels of hematopoietic surface markers . culture of bmsc under osteogenic conditions during a 27-day period induced up-regulation of the osteocalcin  gene expression and alkaline phosphatase  activity, and promoted mineralization of the matrix. increasing supplementation levels of ascorbic acid to culture media enhanced osteogenic differentiation of bmsc; whereas, reduction of fbs supplementation compromised osteogenesis. bmsc increased expression of cartilage-specific genes aggrecan , collagen 2a <dig>  and sry  box  <dig>  at day  <dig> of chondrogenic differentiation. treatment of bmsc with adipogenic factors increased levels of fatty acid-binding protein  <dig>  mrna and accumulation of lipid vacuoles after 18 days of culture. nanog mrna levels in differentiating bmsc were not affected during adipogenic culture; however, osteogenic and chondrogenic conditions induced higher and lower levels, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
our analyses revealed the potential multilineage differentiation of bmsc isolated from abattoir-derived fetal bm. nanog mrna pattern in differentiating bmsc varied according to differentiation culture conditions. the osteogenic differentiation of bmsc was affected by ascorbic acid and fbs concentrations in culture media. the simplicity of isolation and the differentiation potential suggest that bmsc from abattoir-derived fetal bm are appropriate candidate for investigating msc biology and for eventual applications for regenerative therapy.

mesenchymal stem cellbovine fetusesdifferentiation potentialmultipotency

