BACKGROUND
methanol is present in most ecosystems and may also occur in industrial applications, e.g. as an impurity of carbon sources such as technical glycerol. methanol often inhibits growth of bacteria, thus, methanol tolerance may limit fermentative production processes.


RESULTS
the methanol tolerance of the amino acid producing soil bacterium corynebacterium glutamicum was improved by experimental evolution in the presence of methanol. the resulting strain tol <dig> exhibited significantly increased growth rates in the presence of up to 1 m methanol. however, neither transcriptional changes nor increased enzyme activities of the linear methanol oxidation pathway were observed, which was in accordance with the finding that tolerance to the downstream metabolites formaldehyde and formate was not improved. genome sequence analysis of strain tol <dig> revealed two point mutations potentially relevant to enhanced methanol tolerance: one leading to the amino acid exchange a165t of o-acetylhomoserine sulfhydrolase mety and the other leading to shortened coa transferase cat . introduction of either mutation into the genome of c. glutamicum wild type increased methanol tolerance and introduction of both mutations into c. glutamicum was sufficient to achieve methanol tolerance almost indistinguishable from that of strain tol <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
the methanol tolerance of c. glutamicum can be increased by two point mutations leading to amino acid exchange of o-acetylhomoserine sulfhydrolase mety and shortened coa transferase cat. introduction of these mutations into producer strains may be helpful when using carbon sources containing methanol as component or impurity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
corynebacteriummethanoltoleranceo-acetylhomoserine sulfhydrolasecoenzyme a hydrolase/transferasemethionineethanolacetyl-coametycatissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

