BACKGROUND
the maintenance of biological systems requires plasticity and robustness. the function of the ecdysone receptor, a heterodimer composed of the nuclear receptors ecr  and usp , was maintained in insects despite a dramatic divergence that occurred during the emergence of mecopterida. this receptor is therefore a good model to study the evolution of plasticity. we tested the hypothesis that selection has shaped the ligand-binding domain  of usp during evolution of mecopterida.


RESULTS
we isolated usp and cox <dig> in several species of drosophilidae, tenebrionidae and blattaria and estimated non-synonymous/synonymous rate ratios using maximum-likelihood methods and codon-based substitution models. although the usp sequences were mainly under negative selection, we detected relaxation at residues located on the surface of the lbd within mecopterida families. using branch-site models, we also detected changes in selective constraints along three successive branches of the mecopterida evolution. residues located at the bottom of the ligand-binding pocket  underwent strong positive selection during the emergence of mecopterida. this change is correlated with the acquisition of a large lbp filled by phospholipids that probably allowed the stabilisation of the new mecopterida structure. later, when the two subgroups of mecopterida  diverged, the same positions became under purifying selection. similarly, several positions of the heterodimerisation interface experienced positive selection during the emergence of mecopterida, rapidly followed by a phase of constrained evolution. an enlargement of the heterodimerisation surface is specific for mecopterida and was associated with a reinforcement of the obligatory partnership between ecr and usp, at the expense of homodimerisation.


CONCLUSIONS
in order to explain the episodic mode of evolution of usp, we propose a model in which the molecular adaptation of this protein is seen as a process of resilience for the maintenance of the ecdysone receptor functionality.

nuclear receptorsecdysone receptorecruspmecopteridaselection

