BACKGROUND
chrysanthemum morifolium is one of the most important global cut flower and pot plants, and has been cultivated worldwide. however, limited genomic resources are available and the molecular mechanisms involved in the two morphologically distinct floret developmental cycles in chrysanthemum remain unclear.


RESULTS
the transcriptomes of chrysanthemum ray florets, disc florets and leaves were sequenced using illumina paired-end sequencing technology. in total,  <dig>  g reads were assembled into  <dig>  unigenes with an average length of 738 bp, of which  <dig>  unigenes showed similarity to known proteins in the swissprot or ncbi non-redundant protein databases. additionally,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  unigenes were assigned to  <dig> gene ontology  categories,  <dig> eukaryotic orthologous groups  categories, and  <dig> kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways, respectively.

a total of  <dig> differentially expressed genes   were identified between ray florets and disc florets, including genes encoding transcription factors and protein kinases. go and kegg pathway enrichment analyses were performed on the degs to identify differences in the biological processes and pathways between ray florets and disc florets. the important regulatory genes controlling flower development and flower organ determination, as well as important functional genes in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway, were identified, of which two leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase-encoding genes showed specific expression in ray florets. lastly, reverse transcription quantitative pcr was conducted to validate the degs identified in our study.


CONCLUSIONS
comparative transcriptome analysis revealed significant differences in patterns of gene expression and signaling pathways between ray florets and disc florets in chrysanthemum morifolium. this study provided the first step to understanding the molecular mechanism of the differential development of ray florets and disc florets in chrysanthemum, and also provided valuable genomic resources for candidate genes applicable for the breeding of novel varieties in chrysanthemum.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chrysanthemum morifoliumray floretsdisc floretstranscriptomerna-seqdifferentially expressed genesflower developmentanthocyanin biosynthetic pathway12th five years key programs for science and technology development of china2012bad01b <dig>  2013bad01b07zhang qixiang issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

