BACKGROUND
soybean cyst nematode  is the most devastating pathogen of soybean. many gene expression profiling studies have been conducted to investigate the responses of soybean to the infection by this pathogen using primarily the first-generation soybean genome array that covered approximately  <dig>  soybean transcripts. however, no study has been reported yet using the second-generation affymetrix soybean whole-genome transcript array  that represents approximately  <dig>  predicted soybean transcripts.


RESULTS
in the present work, the gene expression profiles of two soybean plant introductions  pi  <dig> and pi 567516c  and cultivar magellan  were compared in the presence or absence of the scn inoculum at  <dig> and 8 days post-inoculation using the soybean wt array. data analysis revealed that the two resistant soybean lines showed distinctive gene expression profiles from each other and from magellan not only in response to the scn inoculation, but also in the absence of scn. overall,  <dig>  genes and many pathways were revealed to be differentially regulated. among them,  <dig> genes were constitutively regulated in the two resistant lines  and  <dig>  genes were responsive to the scn inoculation in the three lines, with  <dig> genes regulated both constitutively and by scn. in addition to the findings similar to those in the published work, many genes involved in ethylene, protein degradation, and phenylpropanoid pathways were also revealed differentially regulated in the present study. gc-rich elements  were found over-represented in the promoter regions of certain groups of genes. these have not been observed before, and could be new defense-responsive regulatory elements.


CONCLUSIONS
different soybean lines showed different gene expression profiles in the presence and absence of the scn inoculum. both inducible and constitutive gene expression may contribute to resistance to multiple scn hg types in the resistant soybean pi lines. ethylene, protein degradation, and phenylpropanoid pathways, as well as many other pathways reported previously, may play important roles in mediating the soybean-scn interactions. the revealed genes, pathways, and promoter elements can be further explored to regulate or engineer soybean for resistance to scn.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
defensegene expression profileheterodera glycinesmagellanmicroarrayresistancepi 437654pi 567516csoybeansoybean cyst nematode issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

