BACKGROUND
clinical trial registries may allow for producing a global mapping of health research. however, health conditions are not described with standardized taxonomies in registries. previous work analyzed clinical trial registries to improve the retrieval of relevant clinical trials for patients. however, no previous work has classified clinical trials across diseases using a standardized taxonomy allowing a comparison between global health research and global burden across diseases. we developed a knowledge-based classifier of health conditions studied in registered clinical trials towards categories of diseases and injuries from the global burden of diseases   <dig> study.

the classifier relies on the umls® knowledge source  and on heuristic algorithms for parsing data. it maps trial records to a 28-class grouping of the gbd categories by automatically extracting umls concepts from text fields and by projecting concepts between medical terminologies. the classifier allows deriving pathways between the clinical trial record and candidate gbd categories using natural language processing and links between knowledge sources, and selects the relevant gbd classification based on rules of prioritization across the pathways found. we compared automatic and manual classifications for an external test set of  <dig>  trials. we automatically classified  <dig>  interventional trials registered before february  <dig> at who ictrp.


RESULTS
in the external test set, the classifier identified the exact gbd categories for 78 % of the trials. it had very good performance for most of the  <dig> categories, especially “neoplasms” . the sensitivity was moderate for trials not relevant to any gbd category  and low for trials of injuries . for the  <dig>  trials registered at who ictrp, the classifier did not assign any gbd category to  <dig>  % of trials while the most common gbd categories were “neoplasms”  and “diabetes” .


CONCLUSIONS
we developed and validated a knowledge-based classifier allowing for automatically identifying the diseases studied in registered trials by using the taxonomy from the gbd  <dig> study. this tool is freely available to the research community and can be used for large-scale public health studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
clinical trialsglobal burden of diseasesdisease classificationmappingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

