BACKGROUND
genetically improved farmed tilapia  are susceptible to infection by streptococcus iniae when maintained in modern intensive culture systems. gift are commercially important fishes that are cultured widely in southern china. the role of micrornas  in the regulatory response of gift to s. iniae infection has been underestimated and has not yet been well studied. head kidney has an important immune function in teleost fishes. the main aim of this study was to determine the possible function of mirnas in head kidney of s. iniae-infected gift. mirnas are small, non-coding rnas that regulate gene expression by binding to the 3’-untranslated regions of their target mrnas. mirnas are known to regulate immune-regulated signaling and inflammatory response pathways.


RESULTS
high-throughput deep sequencing of two libraries  of rna extracted from gift head kidney tissues generated  <dig> , <dig>  and  <dig> , <dig>  clean reads. bioinformatics analysis identified  <dig> and  <dig> conserved mirnas and  <dig> and  <dig> novel mirnas in the co and in libraries, respectively. three mirnas  were found to be up-regulated and four mirnas  were found to be down-regulated in the s. iniae-infected gift. the expressions of these mirnas were verified by quantitative real-time pcr. rnahybrid and targetscan were used to identify complementary mirna and mrna target sites, and the gene ontology and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes databases were used to annotate and predict potential downstream regulation of biological pathways. seven target genes, which encode immune-related proteins  were predicted to play crucial roles in the gift response to s. iniae infection.


CONCLUSIONS

s. iniae outbreaks have hindered the development of the tilapia industry in china. understanding the mirna transcriptome of s. iniae-infected gift is important for exploring the immune responses regulated by mirnas as well as for studying novel regulated networks to prevent and treat s. iniae infections in the future.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
giftmicrornadeep sequencingtarget predictionstreptococcus iniaehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 31502143qiang jun national science and technology program 2012bad26b03-1he jie special fund for agro-scientific research in the public interest project 2017jbfm08qiang jun issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

