BACKGROUND
diazotrophic  gram-positive and endospore-formed paenibacillus spp. have potential uses as a bacterial fertilizer in agriculture. the transcriptional analysis of nitrogen fixation in paenibacillus is lacking, although regulation mechanisms of nitrogen fixation have been well studied in gram-negative diazotrophs.


RESULTS
here we report a global transcriptional profiling analysis of nitrogen fixation in paenibacillus sp. wly <dig> cultured under n2-fixing condition  and non-n2-fixing condition . the nif  gene operon composed of  <dig> genes  in this bacterium was significantly up-regulated in n2-fixing condition compared to non-n2-fixing condition, indicating that nif gene transcription is strictly controlled by nh4+ and o <dig>  qrt-pcr confirmed that these nif genes were differently expressed. non-nif genes specifically required in nitrogen fixation, such as mod, feoab and cys encoding transporters of mo, fe and s atoms, were coordinately transcribed with nif genes in n2-fixing condition. the transcript abundance of suf operon specific for synthesis of fe-s cluster was up-regulated in n2-fixing condition, suggesting that sul system, which takes place of nifs and nifu, plays important role in the synthesis of nitrogenase. we discover potential specific electron transporters which might provide electron from fe protein to mofe protein of nitrogenase. the glnr whose predicted protein might mediate nif transcription regulation by nh4+ is significantly up-regulated in n2-fixing condition. the transcription levels of nitrogen metabolism and anaerobic respiration were also analyzed.


CONCLUSIONS
the nif gene operon  in paenibacillus sp. wly <dig> is significantly up-regulated in n2-fixing condition compared to non-n2-fixing condition. non-nif genes specifically required in nitrogen fixation were also significantly up-regulated in n2-fixing condition. fur and fnr which are involved in anaerobic regulation and glnr which might mediate nif gene transcription regulation by nh4+ were significantly up-regulated in n2-fixing condition. this study provides valuable insights into nitrogen fixation process and regulation in gram-positive firmicutes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
paenibacillus sp. wly78nif genetranscriptionup-regulationnitrogen metabolismnational nature science foundation of china31470189issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

