BACKGROUND
in vitro generated dose-response curves of human cancer cell lines are
widely used to develop new therapeutics. the curves are summarised by simplified
statistics that ignore the conventionally used dose-response curves’
dependency on drug exposure time and growth kinetics. this may lead to suboptimal
exploitation of data and biased conclusions on the potential of the drug in
question. therefore we set out to improve the dose-response assessments by
eliminating the impact of time dependency.


RESULTS
first, a mathematical model for drug induced cell growth inhibition was formulated
and used to derive novel dose-response curves and improved summary statistics that
are independent of time under the proposed model. next, a statistical analysis
workflow for estimating the improved statistics was suggested consisting of 1)
nonlinear regression models for estimation of cell counts and doubling times, 2)
isotonic regression for modelling the suggested dose-response curves, and 3)
resampling based method for assessing variation of the novel summary statistics.
we document that conventionally used summary statistics for dose-response
experiments depend on time so that fast growing cell lines compared to slowly
growing ones are considered overly sensitive. the adequacy of the mathematical
model is tested for doxorubicin and found to fit real data to an acceptable
degree. dose-response data from the nci <dig> drug screen were used to illustrate the
time dependency and demonstrate an adjustment correcting for it. the applicability
of the workflow was illustrated by simulation and application on a doxorubicin
growth inhibition screen. the simulations show that under the proposed
mathematical model the suggested statistical workflow results in unbiased
estimates of the time independent summary statistics. variance estimates of the
novel summary statistics are used to conclude that the doxorubicin screen covers a
significant diverse range of responses ensuring it is useful for biological
interpretations.


CONCLUSIONS
time independent summary statistics may aid the understanding of drugs’
action mechanism on tumour cells and potentially renew previous drug sensitivity
evaluation studies.

dose response experimentsnci60doxorubicinmathematical modellingdifferential equation modellingnonlinear regressionisotonic regressionbootstrapparametric bootstrap

