BACKGROUND
indication-based data on the use of antimicrobials in animals were collected using a prospective cross-sectional survey, similarly as for surveys carried out in human medicine, but adapting the questionnaire to include veterinary-specific issues. the participating veterinarians were randomly selected from a sample population of practising veterinarians. the sampling was stratified to take into account the proportions of different types of veterinary practice in the country. all patients consulting the veterinary practice during a 1-week period were included in the study and veterinarians returned a completed questionnaire for each patient receiving antimicrobial treatment. as cattle received most of the treatments, results from the survey are given using cattle as an example species.


RESULTS
the survey was sent to  <dig> veterinarians, of whom  <dig>  responded. in total  <dig> questionnaires were completed. the largest quantities of antimicrobials, measured in kilograms, were used for cattle, followed by pigs, dogs and horses. the species that were treated most were cattle , dogs  and cats . for cattle, the most common reason for treatment was acute mastitis , followed by dry-cow therapy , subclinical mastitis  and treatment for acute enteritis . the remaining treatments covered 17% of cattle patients and  <dig> different indications. for acute mastitis, parenteral or intramammary treatment was used in 36% and 34% of the cases, respectively. the remaining 30% received both treatments simultaneously. of the parenteral treatments , benzyl penicillin was used in 83% of the treated animals , while fluoroquinolones were used in  <dig> cases . of the  <dig> cows receiving intramammary treatment, ampicillin combined with cloxacillin was most commonly used , followed by cephalexin+streptomycin .


CONCLUSIONS
this cross-sectional prospective survey provided a useful method for the collection of information on the indication-based use of antimicrobials in different animal species. cattle were the most commonly treated animal species during the study period. the most common indication for antimicrobial use in cows was mastitis. benzyl penicillin was the drug most frequently used for the treatment of mastitis, which seems appropriate according to the national guidelines on the use of antimicrobials in cattle in finland.

