BACKGROUND
cotton fiber, a highly elongated, thickened single cell of the seed epidermis, is a powerful cell wall research model. fiber length, largely determined during the elongation stage, is a key property of fiber quality. several studies using expressed sequence tags and microarray analysis have identified transcripts that accumulate preferentially during fiber elongation. to further show the mechanism of fiber elongation, we used digital gene expression tag profiling to compare transcriptome data from longer fiber chromosome introgressed lines  containing segments of various gossypium barbadense chromosomes with data from its recurrent parent tm- <dig> during fiber elongation .


RESULTS
a large number of differentially expressed genes  involved in carbohydrate, fatty acid and secondary metabolism, particularly cell wall biosynthesis, were highly upregulated during the fiber elongation stage, as determined by functional enrichment and pathway analysis. furthermore, degs related to hormone responses and transcription factors showed upregulated expression levels in the csils. moreover, metabolic and regulatory network analysis indicated that the same pathways were differentially altered, and distinct pathways exhibited altered gene expression, in the csils. interestingly, mining of upregulated degs in the introgressed segments of these csils based on d-genome sequence data showed that these lines were enriched in glucuronosyltransferase, inositol- <dig>   <dig>  5-trisphosphate 3-kinase and desulfoglucosinolate sulfotransferase activity. these results were similar to the results of transcriptome analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
this report provides an integrative network about the molecular mechanisms controlling fiber length, which are mainly tied to carbohydrate metabolism, cell wall biosynthesis, fatty acid metabolism, secondary metabolism, hormone responses and transcription factors. the results of this study provide new insights into the critical factors associated with cell elongation and will facilitate further research aimed at understanding the mechanisms underlying cotton fiber elongation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
csildegfiber lengthfunctional enrichmentmetabolic pathway analysistranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

