BACKGROUND
bacteria use alternative sigma factors  to regulate condition-specific gene expression for survival and shewanella harbors multiple ecf  σ genes and cognate anti-sigma factor genes. here we comparatively analyzed two of the rpoe-like operons in the strain mr-1: rpoe-rsea-rseb-rsec and rpoe2-chrr.


RESULTS
rpoe was important for bacterial growth at low and high temperatures, in the minimal medium, and high salinity. the degp/htra orthologue, required for growth of escherichia coli and pseudomonas aeruginosa at high temperature, is absent in shewanella, while the degq gene is rpoe-regulated and is required for bacterial growth at high temperature. rpoe <dig> was essential for the optimal growth in oxidative stress conditions because the rpoe <dig> mutant was sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and paraquat. the operon encoding a ferrochelatase paralogue  and a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase  was identified as rpoe2-dependent. pgpd exhibited higher activities and played a more important role in the oxidative stress responses than the cytoplasmic glutathione peroxidase cgpd under tested conditions. the rpoe2-chrr operon and the identified regulon genes, including pgpd and hemh <dig>  are coincidently absent in several psychrophilic and/or deep-sea shewanella strains.


CONCLUSIONS
in s. oneidensis mr- <dig>  the rpoe-dependent degq gene is required for optimal growth under high temperature. the rpoe <dig> and rpoe2-dependent pgpd gene encoding a periplasmic glutathione peroxidase are involved in oxidative stress responses. but rpoe <dig> is not required for bacterial growth at low temperature and it even affected bacterial growth under salt stress, indicating that there is a tradeoff between the salt resistance and rpoe2-mediated oxidative stress responses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
periplasmic glutathione peroxidaseshewanellaecf sigma factoroxidative stress responseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

