BACKGROUND
hybridization is a major driver of evolution in plants. in a number of plant species, the process of hybridization has been revealed to be accompanied by wide-ranging genetic and epigenetic alterations, some of which have consequences on gene transcripts. the asteraceae family includes a number of polyploid species, and wide crossing is seen as a viable means of genetically improving ornamental species such as chrysanthemum spp. however, the consequences of hybridization in this taxon have yet to be characterized.


RESULTS
amplified fragment length polymorphism , methylation sensitive amplification polymorphism  and cdna-aflp profiling of the two intergeneric hybrids c. nankingense × tanacetum vulgare and c. crassum × crossostephium chinense were employed to characterize, respectively, the genomic, epigenomic and transcriptomic changes induced by the hybridization event. the hybrids’ aflp profiles included both the loss of specific parental fragments and the gain of fragments not present in either parent’s profile. about 10% of the paternal fragments were not inherited by the hybrid, while the corresponding rate for the maternal parent fragments was around 4–5%. the novel fragments detected may have arisen either due to heterozygosity in one or other parent, or as a result of a deletion event following the hybridization. around one half of the cdna-aflp fragments were common to both parents, about 30% were specific to the female parent, and somewhat under 20% specific to the male parent; the remainder  of the hybrids’ fragments were not present in either parent’s profile. the msap fingerprinting demonstrated that the hybridization event also reduced the amount of global cytosine methylation, since > 50% of the parental fragments were methylated, while the corresponding frequencies for the two hybrids were  <dig> % and  <dig> %.


CONCLUSIONS
combining two different asteraceae genomes via hybridization clearly induced a range of genomic and epigenomic alterations, some of which had an effect on the transcriptome. the rapid genomic and transcriptomic alterations induced by hybridization may accelerate the evolutionary process among progenies.

genome evolutiongene transcriptscytosine methylationwide hybridizationasteraceae

