BACKGROUND
polymorphisms underlying complex traits often explain a small part  of the phenotypic variance . this makes identification of mutations underling complex traits difficult and usually only a subset of large-effect loci are identified. one approach to identify more loci is to increase sample size of experiments but here we propose an alternative. the aim of this paper is to use secondary phenotypes for genetically simple traits during the qtl discovery phase for complex traits. we demonstrate this approach in a dairy cattle data set where the complex traits were milk production phenotypes  measured on thousands of individuals while secondary  traits are detailed milk composition traits .


RESULTS
quantitative trait loci  were identified using  <dig>  holstein cattle with milk production records and up to  <dig> cows with milk composition traits. there were eight regions that contained qtl for both milk production and a composition trait, including four novel regions. one region on btau <dig> affected both milk yield and phosphorous concentration in milk. the qtl interval included the gene slc37a <dig>  a phosphorous antiporter. the most significant imputed sequence variants in this region explained  <dig>  σ2
p for milk yield, and  <dig>  σ2
p for phosphorus concentration. since the polymorphisms were non-coding, association mapping for slc37a <dig> gene expression was performed using high depth mammary rnaseq data from a separate group of  <dig> lactating cows. this confirmed a strong eqtl for slc37a <dig>  with peak association at the same imputed sequence variants that were most significant for phosphorus concentration. fitting any of these variants as covariables in the association analysis removed the qtl signal for milk production traits. plausible causative mutations in the casein complex region were also identified using a similar strategy.


CONCLUSIONS
milk production traits in dairy cows are typical complex traits where polymorphisms explain only a small portion of the phenotypic variance. however, here we show that these mutations can have larger effects on secondary traits, such as concentrations of minerals, proteins and sugars in the milk, and expression levels of genes in mammary tissue. these larger effects were used to successfully map variants for milk production traits. genetically simple traits also provide a direct biological link between possible causal mutations and the effect of these mutations on milk production.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
qtl mappinggene expressionpleiotropycomplex traitsdairy futures crclivestock improvement corporationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000923australian research councildp1093502goddard m. e. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

