BACKGROUND
since the end of  <dig> an outbreak of pseudorabies affected chinese pig herds that had been vaccinated with the commercial vaccine made of bartha k <dig> strain. it is now clear that the outbreak was caused by an emergent prv variant. even though vaccines made of prv bartha k <dig> strain can confer certain cross protection against prv variants based on experimental data, less than optimal clinical protection and virus shedding reduction were observed, making the control or eradication of this disease difficult.


RESULTS
an infectious clone of prv ah02la strain was constructed to generate a ge deletion mutant prv strain. prv strain can reach a titer of  <dig>  tcid <dig> /ml  on bhk- <dig> cells. to evaluate the efficiency of the inactivated vaccine made of prv strain, thirty 3-week-old prv-negative piglets were divided randomly into six groups for vaccination and challenge test. all five piglets in the challenge control showed typical clinical symptoms of pseudorabies post challenge. sneezing and nasal discharge were observed in four and three piglets in groups c and d respectively. in contrast, piglets in both groups a and b presented mild or no clinical symptoms. moreover, viral titers detected via nasal swabs were approximately  <dig> times lower in group b than in the challenge control, and the duration of virus shedding  was shorter than in either the challenge control  or groups c and d .


CONCLUSIONS
the infectious clone constructed in this study harbors the whole genome of the prv variant ah02la strain. the ge deletion mutant prvstrain generated from prv ah02la strain can reach a high titer on bhk- <dig> cells. an inactivated vaccine of prv la-ab provides clinical protection and significantly reduces virus shedding post challenge, especially if accompanied by the adjuvant cvc <dig>  while inactivated or live vaccines made of prv barth k <dig> strain can provide only partial protection in this test.

keywords
pseudorabies virus emerging variantge deletioninactivated vaccineadjuvantbacterial artificial chromosomechallenge protectionthe natural science foundation of jiangsu provincebk20131334wang jichun program for independence and innovation in agricultural sciences of jiangsu provincecx3061wang jichun the special fund for agro-scientific research in the public interest201303046hou jibo issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

