BACKGROUND
since ancient times the filamentous fungus aspergillus oryzae has been used in the fermentation industry for the production of fermented sauces and the production of industrial enzymes. recently, the genome sequence of a. oryzae with  <dig>  annotated genes was released but the number of hypothetical proteins accounted for more than 50% of the annotated genes. considering the industrial importance of this fungus, it is therefore valuable to improve the annotation and further integrate genomic information with biochemical and physiological information available for this microorganism and other related fungi. here we proposed the gene prediction by construction of an a. oryzae expressed sequence tag  library, sequencing and assembly. we enhanced the function assignment by our developed annotation strategy. the resulting better annotation was used to reconstruct the metabolic network leading to a genome scale metabolic model of a. oryzae.


RESULTS
our assembled est sequences we identified  <dig>  newly predicted genes in the a. oryzae genome. furthermore, it was possible to assign putative protein functions to  <dig> of the newly predicted genes. noteworthy, our annotation strategy resulted in assignment of new putative functions to  <dig>  hypothetical proteins already present in the a. oryzae genome database. using the substantially improved annotated genome we reconstructed the metabolic network of a. oryzae. this network contains  <dig> enzymes,  <dig>  enzyme-encoding genes,  <dig>  metabolites and  <dig>   biochemical reactions. the metabolic reactions are compartmentalized into the cytosol, the mitochondria, the peroxisome and the extracellular space. transport steps between the compartments and the extracellular space represent  <dig> reactions, of which  <dig> are unique. the metabolic model was validated and shown to correctly describe the phenotypic behavior of a. oryzae grown on different carbon sources.


CONCLUSIONS
a much enhanced annotation of the a. oryzae genome was performed and a genome-scale metabolic model of a. oryzae was reconstructed. the model accurately predicted the growth and biomass yield on different carbon sources. the model serves as an important resource for gaining further insight into our understanding of a. oryzae physiology.

