BACKGROUND
ecological and evolutionary model organisms have provided extensive insight into the ecological triggers, adaptive benefits, and evolution of life-history driven developmental plasticity. despite this, we still have a poor understanding of the underlying genetic changes that occur during shifts towards different developmental trajectories. the goal of this study is to determine whether we can identify underlying gene expression patterns that can describe the different life-history trajectories individuals follow in response to social cues of competition. to do this, we use the australian black field cricket , a species with sex-specific developmental trajectories moderated by the density and quality of calls heard during immaturity. in this study, we manipulated the social information males and females could hear by rearing individuals in either calling or silent treatments. we next used rna-seq to develop a reference transcriptome to study changes in brain gene expression at two points prior to sexual maturation.


RESULTS
we show accelerated development in both sexes when exposed to calling; changes were also seen in growth, lifespan, and reproductive effort. functional relationships between genes and phenotypes were apparent from ontological enrichment analysis. we demonstrate that increased investment towards traits such as growth and reproductive effort were often associated with the expression of a greater number of genes with similar effect, thus providing a suite of candidate genes for future research in this and other invertebrate organisms.


CONCLUSIONS
our results provide interesting insight into the genomic underpinnings of developmental plasticity and highlight the potential of a genomic exploration of other evolutionary theories such as condition dependence and sex-specific developmental strategies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
teleogryllus commodusblack field cricketdevelopmental plasticitysexual selectiongene expressiontranscriptome analysisbehaviouraustralian research council dp120101502http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000923australian research councilde120100214new south wales state government science leveraging fund issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

