BACKGROUND
cancer immunotherapy has demonstrated significant clinical activity in different cancers. t cells represent a crucial component of the adaptive immune system and are thought to mediate anti-tumoral immunity. antigen-specific recognition by t cells is via the t cell receptor  which is unique for each t cell. next generation sequencing  of the tcrs can be used as a platform to profile the t cell repertoire. though there are a number of software tools available for processing repertoire data by mapping antigen receptor segments to sequencing reads and assembling the clonotypes, most of them are not designed to track and examine the dynamic nature of the tcr repertoire across multiple time points or between different biologic compartments  in a clinical context.


RESULTS
we integrated different diversity measures to assess the t cell repertoire diversity and examined the robustness of the diversity indices. among those tested, clonality was identified for its robustness as a key metric for study design and the first choice to measure tcr repertoire diversity. to evaluate the dynamic nature of t cell clonotypes across time, we utilized several binary similarity measures , relative clonality and morisita’s overlap index, as well as the intraclass correlation coefficient, and performed fold change analysis, which was further extended to investigate the transition of clonotypes among different biological compartments. furthermore, the application of differential testing enabled the detection of clonotypes which were significantly changed across time. by applying the proposed “3d” analysis pipeline to the real example of prostate cancer subjects who received sipuleucel-t, an fda-approved immunotherapy, we were able to detect changes in tcr sequence frequency and diversity thus demonstrating that sipuleucel-t treatment affected tcr repertoire in blood and in prostate tissue. we also found that the increase in common tcr sequences between tissue and blood after sipuleucel-t treatment supported the hypothesis that treatment-induced t cell migrated into the prostate tissue. in addition, a second example of prostate cancer subjects treated with ipilimumab and granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor  was presented in the supplementary documents to further illustrate assessing the treatment-associated change in a clinical context by the proposed workflow.


CONCLUSIONS
our paper provides guidance to study the diversity and dynamics of ngs-based tcr repertoire profiling in a clinical context to ensure consistency and reproducibility of post-analysis. this analysis pipeline will provide an initial workflow for tcr sequencing data with serial time points and for comparing t cells in multiple compartments for a clinical study.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
binary similarity measurecaner immunotherapyclonalitydiversity indexdynamics indexdifferential testingfold changenext generation sequencingt cell receptort cell repertoirehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of health1r <dig> ca <dig> nih 1r <dig> ca163012nih 1r <dig> ca163012nih 1r <dig> ca163012zhang li cham jason fong lawrence issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

