BACKGROUND
a prominent and distinctive feature of the rye  chromosomes is the presence of massive blocks of subtelomeric heterochromatin, the size of which is correlated with the copy number of tandem arrays. the rapidity with which these regions have formed over the period of speciation remains unexplained.


RESULTS
using a bac library created from the short arm telosome of rye chromosome 1r we uncovered numerous arrays of the psc <dig> and psc <dig> tandem repeat families which are concentrated in subtelomeric heterochromatin and identified the adjacent dna sequences. the arrays show significant heterogeneity in monomer organization.  <dig> reads were used to gain a representation of the expansion of these tandem repeats across the whole rye genome. the presence of multiple, relatively short monomer arrays, coupled with the mainly star-like topology of the monomer phylogenetic trees, was taken as indicative of a rapid expansion of the psc <dig> and psc <dig> arrays. the evolution of subtelomeric heterochromatin appears to have included a significant contribution of illegitimate recombination. the composition of transposable elements  within the regions flanking the psc <dig> and psc <dig> arrays differed markedly from that in the genome a whole. solo-ltrs were strongly enriched, suggestive of a history of active ectopic exchange. several dna motifs were over-represented within the ltr sequences.


CONCLUSIONS
the large blocks of subtelomeric heterochromatin have arisen from the combined activity of tes and the expansion of the tandem repeats. the expansion was likely based on a highly complex network of recombination mechanisms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tandem repeatstransposable elementssubtelomeric heterochromatinryesecale cereale1rs bac library <dig> sequenceste–tandem junctionsdna motifsimcb sb ras budget project 0310-2014-0002http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002261russian foundation for basic research 12-04-00512czech ministry of education, youth and sports lo1204issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

