BACKGROUND
rapid and consistent genotyping is an important requirement for cultivar identification in many crop species. among them grapevine cultivars have been the subject of multiple studies given the large number of synonyms and homonyms generated during many centuries of vegetative multiplication and exchange. simple sequence repeat  markers have been preferred until now because of their high level of polymorphism, their codominant nature and their high profile repeatability. however, the rapid application of partial or complete genome sequencing approaches is identifying thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms  that can be very useful for such purposes. although snp markers are bi-allelic, and therefore not as polymorphic as microsatellites, the high number of loci that can be multiplexed and the possibilities of automation as well as their highly repeatable results under any analytical procedure make them the future markers of choice for any type of genetic identification.


RESULTS
we analyzed over  <dig> snp in the genome of grapevine using a re-sequencing strategy in a selection of  <dig> genotypes. among the identified polymorphisms, we selected  <dig> snp spread across all grapevine chromosomes with allele frequencies balanced enough as to provide sufficient information content for genetic identification in grapevine allowing for good genotyping success rate. marker stability was tested in repeated analyses of a selected group of cultivars obtained worldwide to demonstrate their usefulness in genetic identification.


CONCLUSIONS
we have selected a set of  <dig> stable snp markers with a high discrimination power and a uniform genome distribution , which is proposed as a standard set for grapevine  genotyping. any previous problems derived from microsatellite allele confusion between labs or the need to run reference cultivars to identify allele sizes disappear using this type of marker. furthermore, because snp markers are bi-allelic, allele identification and genotype naming are extremely simple and genotypes obtained with different equipments and by different laboratories are always fully comparable.

