BACKGROUND
particulates of nanometers size have occupied a significant area in the field of medicinal and agricultural purposes due to their large surface-to-volume ratio and exceptional physicochemical, electronic and mechanical properties. myconanotechnology, an interface between mycology and nanotechnology is budding nowadays for nanoparticle-fabrication using fungus or its metabolites. in the present study, we have isolated and characterized a novel phosphate solubilizing fungus b. tetramera kf <dig> from rhizospheric soil. this phosphatase releasing fungus was subjected to extracellular synthesis of metal nanoparticles by redox reaction.


RESULTS
silver  and gold nanoparticles  were characterized by dynamic light scattering and transmission electron microscopic analysis. the formulated agnps were irregular shaped with a size ranging between  <dig>  nm to  <dig>  nm whereas aunps were spherical or hexagonal, with a size of  <dig>  and  <dig>  nm, respectively. the nanoparticles were assessed for their antibacterial and antifungal efficacy. the results showed effective antimicrobial activity of agnps against bacillus cereus, staphylococcus aureus, enterobacter aeroginosa and trichoderma sp. at higher concentrations, however, aunps possessed only moderate antibacterial efficacy while they found no antifungal activity. cytotoxicity analysis of nanoparticles on j <dig> and thp <dig> α cell lines revealed the dose dependence in case of agnps, while aunps were non-toxic at both low and high doses. furthermore, significant elevation of intracellular ros was observed after 4 h of incubation with both the nanoparticles. the capping of fungal proteins on the particulates might be involved in the activities demonstrated by these inert metal nanoparticles.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the findings showed that the metal nanoparticles synthesized by fungus b. tetramera could be used as an antimicrobial agents as well as cost effective and nontoxic immunomodulatory delivery vehicle.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bipolaris tetrameracytotoxicitygold nanoparticleimmunomodulatorysilver nanoparticleissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

