BACKGROUND
the production and use of biologically derived soil additives is one of the fastest growing sectors of the fertilizer industry. these products have been shown to improve crop yields while at the same time reducing fertilizer inputs to and nutrient loss from cropland. the mechanisms driving the changes in primary productivity and soil processes are poorly understood and little is known about changes in secondary productivity associated with the use of microbial products. here we investigate secondary metabolic responses to a biologically derived soil additive by monitoring changes in the phenlypropanoid  pathway in arabidopsis thaliana.


RESULTS
this study was designed to test the influence of one of these products  on secondary metabolism after being applied at different times. one time  application of sb to arabidopsis increased the accumulation of flavonoids compared to multiple  applications of the same products. fourteen phenolic compounds including flavonols and anothocyanins were identified by mass spectrometry. kaempferol- <dig> -o-bis-α-l-rhamnoside and quercetin  <dig> -dirhamnoside, the major compounds, increased 3-fold and 4-fold, respectively compared to control in the ti treatment. the most abundant anthocyanin was cyanidin 3-rhamnoglucoside, which increased 3-fold and 2-fold in ti compared to the control and tii, respectively. simultaneously, the expression of genes coding for key enzymes in the pp pathway  and regulatory genes  were up-regulated in both treatments . furthermore, application of ti and tii induced expression of the lignin pathway genes (hydroxyl cinamyl transferase, caffeyl-coa o-methyl transferase, cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase, cinnamyl-coa reductase, secondary wall-associated nac domain protein <dig>  myb <dig> and myb <dig> resulting in higher accumulation of lignin content compared to the control.


CONCLUSIONS
these results indicate that the additions of microbially based soil additives have a perceptible influence on phenylpropanoid pathway gene regulation and its production of secondary metabolites. these findings open an avenue of research to investigate the mode of action of microbially-based soil additives which may assist in the sustainable production of food, feed, fuel and fiber.

arabidopsismetabolitesmicrobestranscriptional profilingplant growth promoting rhizobacteriasoil builder

