BACKGROUND
exposure to ionizing radiation  results in the simultaneous activation or downregulation of multiple signaling pathways that play critical roles in cell type-specific control of survival or death. ir is a well-known genotoxic agent and human carcinogen that induces cellular damage through direct and indirect mechanisms. however, its impact on epigenetic mechanisms has not been elucidated, and more specifically, little information is available regarding genome-wide dna methylation changes in cancer cells after ir exposure. recently, genome-wide dna methylation profiling technology using the illumina humanmethylation450k platform has emerged that allows us to query > <dig>  loci within the genome. this improved technology is capable of identifying genome-wide dna methylation changes in cpg islands and other cpg island-associated regions.


RESULTS
in this study, we employed this technology to test the hypothesis that exposure to ir not only induces differential dna methylation patterns at a genome-wide level, but also results in locus- and gene-specific dna methylation changes. we screened for differential dna methylation changes in colorectal cancer cells after ir exposure with  <dig> and 5 gy. twenty-nine genes showed radiation-induced hypomethylation in colon cancer cells, and of those, seven genes showed a corresponding increase in gene expression by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction . in addition, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation  to confirm that the dna-methyltransferase  <dig>  level associated with the promoter regions of these genes correlated with their methylation level and gene expression changes. finally, we used a gene ontology  database to show that a handful of hypomethylated genes induced by ir are associated with a variety of biological pathways related to cancer.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified alterations in global dna methylation patterns and hypomethylation at specific cancer-related genes following ir exposure, which suggests that radiation exposure plays a critical role in conferring epigenetic alterations in cancer.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ionizing radiation5-aza-2′-deoxycytidinedna hypomethylationmethylation profilinggene ontologycolon cancerissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

