BACKGROUND
heterosis is a phenomenon in which hybrids exhibit superior performance relative to parental phenotypes. in addition to the heterosis of above-ground agronomic traits on which most existing studies have focused, root heterosis is also an indispensable component of heterosis in the entire plant and of major importance to plant breeding. consequently, systematic investigations of root heterosis, particularly in reproductive-stage rice, are needed. the recent advent of rna sequencing technology  provides an opportunity to conduct in-depth transcript profiling for heterosis studies.


RESULTS
using the illumina hiseq  <dig> platform, the root transcriptomes of the super-hybrid rice variety xieyou  <dig> and its parents were analyzed at tillering and heading stages. approximately  <dig> million high-quality paired-end reads  were generated and aligned against the nipponbare reference genome. we found that  <dig>  of  <dig>   annotated transcripts were represented by at least one sequence read. a total of  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts that were differentially expressed between the hybrid and its parents  were identified at tillering and heading stages, respectively. out of the dghp,  <dig> % were down-regulated at the tillering stage and  <dig> % were up-regulated at the heading stage. at the heading stage, the dghp were significantly enriched in pathways related to processes such as carbohydrate metabolism and plant hormone signal transduction, with most of the key genes that are involved in the two pathways being up-regulated in the hybrid. several significant dghp that could be mapped to quantitative trait loci  for yield and root traits are also involved in carbohydrate metabolism and plant hormone signal transduction pathways.


CONCLUSIONS
an extensive transcriptome dataset was obtained by rna-seq, giving a comprehensive overview of the root transcriptomes at tillering and heading stages in a heterotic rice cross and providing a useful resource for the rice research community. using comparative transcriptome analysis, we detected dghp and identified a group of potential candidate transcripts. the changes in the expression of the candidate transcripts may lay a foundation for future studies on molecular mechanisms underlying root heterosis.

heterosisroottranscriptomerna-seqhybrid rice

