BACKGROUND
the caenorhabditis elegans male exhibits a stereotypic behavioral pattern when attempting to mate. this behavior has been divided into the following steps: response, backing, turning, vulva location, spicule insertion, and sperm transfer. we and others have begun in-depth analyses of all these steps in order to understand how complex behaviors are generated. here we extend our understanding of the sperm-transfer step of male mating behavior.


RESULTS
based on observation of wild-type males and on genetic analysis, we have divided the sperm-transfer step of mating behavior into four sub-steps: initiation, release, continued transfer, and cessation. to begin to understand how these sub-steps of sperm transfer are regulated, we screened for ethylmethanesulfonate -induced mutations that cause males to transfer sperm aberrantly. we isolated an allele of unc- <dig>  a previously reported member of the sec1/munc- <dig>  family of proteins that is necessary for regulated exocytosis in c. elegans motor neurons. our allele, sy <dig>  is defective in two distinct sub-steps of sperm transfer: initiation and continued transfer. by a series of transgenic site-of-action experiments, we found that motor neurons in the ventral nerve cord require unc- <dig> for the initiation of sperm transfer, and that unc- <dig> acts downstream or in parallel to the spv sensory neurons in this process. in addition to this neuronal requirement, we found that non-neuronal expression of unc- <dig>  in the male gonad, is necessary for the continuation of sperm transfer.


CONCLUSIONS
our division of sperm-transfer behavior into sub-steps has provided a framework for the further detailed analysis of sperm transfer and its integration with other aspects of mating behavior. by determining the site of action of unc- <dig> in sperm-transfer behavior, and its relation to the spv sensory neurons, we have further defined the cells and tissues involved in the generation of this behavior. we have shown both a neuronal and non-neuronal requirement for unc- <dig> in distinct sub-steps of sperm-transfer behavior. the definition of circuit components is a crucial first step toward understanding how genes specify the neural circuit and hence the behavior.

