BACKGROUND
pathway analysis combining multiple types of high-throughput data, such as genomics and proteomics, has become the first choice to gain insights into the pathogenesis of complex diseases. currently, several pathway analysis methods have been developed to study complex diseases. however, these methods did not take into account the interaction between internal and external genes of the pathway and between pathways. hence, these approaches still face some challenges. here, we propose a network-based pathway-expanding approach that takes the topological structures of biological networks into account.


RESULTS
first, two weighted gene-gene interaction networks  are constructed integrating protein-protein interaction information, gene expression data and pathway databases. then, they are used to identify significant pathways through testing the difference of topological structures of expanded pathways in the two weighted networks. the proposed method is employed to analyze two breast cancer data. as a result, the top  <dig> pathways identified using the proposed method are supported by biological knowledge from the published literatures and other methods. in addition, the proposed method is also compared with other methods, such as gsea and spia, and estimated using the classification performance of the top  <dig> expanded pathways.


CONCLUSIONS
a novel network-based pathway-expanding approach is proposed to avoid the limitations of existing pathway analysis approaches. experimental results indicate that the proposed method can accurately and reliably identify significant pathways which are related to the corresponding disease.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pathway analysisnetwork-basedsignificant pathwayprotein-protein interactionthe 27th international conference on genome informatics shanghai, china 3- <dig> october  <dig> http://admis.fudan.edu.cn/giw2016/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

