BACKGROUND
the enormous diversity found in east african cichlid fishes in terms of morphology, coloration, and behavior have made them a model for the study of speciation and adaptive evolution. in particular, haplochromine cichlids, by far the most species-rich lineage of cichlids, are a well-known textbook example for parallel evolution. southwestern uganda is an area of high tectonic activity, and is home to numerous crater lakes. many ugandan crater lakes were colonized, apparently independently, by a single lineage of haplochromine cichlids. thereby, this system could be considered a natural experiment in which one can study the interaction between geographical isolation and natural selection promoting phenotypic diversification.


RESULTS
we sampled  <dig> crater lakes and six potentially-ancestral older lakes and, using both mitochondrial and microsatellite markers, discovered strong genetic and morphological differentiation whereby  geographically close lakes tend to be genetically more similar and  three different geographic areas seem to have been colonized by three independent waves of colonization from the same source population. using a geometric morphometric approach, we found that body shape elongation  evolved repeatedly from the ancestral deeper-bodied benthic morphology in the clear and deep crater lake habitats.


CONCLUSIONS
a pattern of strong genetic and morphological differentiation was observed in the ugandan crater lakes. our data suggest that body shape changes have repeatedly evolved into a more limnetic-like form in several ugandan crater lakes after independent waves of colonization from the same source population. the observed morphological changes in crater lake cichlids are likely to result from a common selective regime.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
parallel evolutionbenthic-limneticspeciationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

