BACKGROUND
prophylactic measures are key components of dairy herd mastitis control programs, but some are only relevant in specific housing systems. to assess the association between management practices and mastitis incidence, data collected in  <dig> by a survey among  <dig> randomly selected swiss dairy farms, and information from the regular test day recordings from  <dig> of these farms was analyzed.


RESULTS
the median incidence of farmer-reported clinical mastitis  was  <dig>   cases per  <dig> cows per year. the median annual proportion of milk samples with a composite somatic cell count  above  <dig>  cells/ml was  <dig>   %. a multivariable negative binomial regression model was fitted for each of the mastitis indicators for farms with tie-stall and free-stall housing systems separately to study the effect of other  management practices on the icm and pscc events . the results differed substantially by housing system and outcome. in tie-stall systems, clinical mastitis incidence was mainly affected by region  =  <dig> ), the dairy herd replacement system  and farmers age . the proportion of high scc was mainly associated with dry cow udder controls , clean bedding material at calving , using total merit values to select bulls  and body condition scoring . in free-stall systems, the irr for clinical mastitis was mainly associated with stall climate/temperature , comfort mats as resting surface  and when no feed analysis was carried out . the proportion of high ssc was only associated with hand and arm cleaning after calving  and beef producing value to select bulls .


CONCLUSIONS
there were substantial differences in identified risk factors in the four models. some of the factors were in agreement with the reported literature while others were not. this highlights the multifactorial nature of the disease and the differences in the risks for both mastitis manifestations. attempting to understand these multifactorial associations for mastitis within larger management groups continues to play an important role in mastitis control programs.

cumulative incidenceprevalenceswiss dairy farmsclinical mastitissubclinical mastitisprophylaxismanagementnegative binomial regressionsomatic cell count

