BACKGROUND
the dystroglycan  complex is a major non-integrin cell adhesion system whose multiple biological roles involve, among others, skeletal muscle stability, embryonic development and synapse maturation. dg is composed of two subunits: α-dg, extracellular and highly glycosylated, and the transmembrane β-dg, linking the cytoskeleton to the surrounding basement membrane in a wide variety of tissues. a single copy of the dg gene  has been identified so far in humans and other mammals, encoding for a precursor protein which is post-translationally cleaved to liberate the two dg subunits. similarly, d. rerio  seems to have a single copy of dag <dig>  whose removal was shown to cause a severe dystrophic phenotype in adult animals, although it is known that during evolution, due to a whole genome duplication  event, many teleost fish acquired multiple copies of several genes .


RESULTS
data mining of pufferfish  and other teleost fish  available nucleotide sequences revealed the presence of two functional paralogous dg sequences. rt-pcr analysis proved that both the dg sequences are transcribed in t. nigroviridis. one of the two dg sequences harbours an additional mini-intronic sequence,  <dig> bp long, interrupting the uncomplicated exon-intron-exon pattern displayed by dag <dig> in mammals and d. rerio. a similar scenario emerged also in d. labrax , from whose genome we have cloned and sequenced a new dg sequence that also harbours a shorter additional intronic sequence of  <dig> bp. western blot analysis confirmed the presence of dg protein products in all the species analysed including two teleost antarctic species .


CONCLUSIONS
our evolutionary analysis has shown that the whole-genome duplication event in the class actinopterygii  involved also dag <dig>  we unravelled new important molecular genetic details about fish orthologous dgs, which might help to increase the current knowledge on dg expression, maturation and targeting and on its physiopathological role in higher organisms.

