BACKGROUND
 conducting research on the molecular biology, immunology, and physiology of brain tumors  and primary brain tissues requires the use of viably dissociated single cells. inadequate methods for tissue dissociation generate considerable loss in the quantity of single cells produced and in the produced cells’ viability. improper dissociation may also demote the quality of data attained in functional and molecular assays due to the presence of large quantities cellular debris containing immune-activatory danger associated molecular patterns, and due to the increased quantities of degraded proteins and rna.


RESULTS
over  <dig> resected bts and non-tumorous brain tissue samples were dissociated into single cells by mechanical dissociation or by mechanical and enzymatic dissociation. the quality of dissociation was compared for all frequently used dissociation enzymes  and for neutral protease  from clostridium histolyticum. single-cell-dissociated cell mixtures were evaluated for cellular viability and for the cell-mixture dissociation quality. dissociation quality was graded by the quantity of subcellular debris, non-dissociated cell clumps, and dna released from dead cells. of all enzymes or enzyme combinations examined, np  produced dissociated cell mixtures with the highest mean cellular viability: 93 % in gliomas, 85 % in brain metastases, and 89 % in non-tumorous brain tissue. np also produced cell mixtures with significantly less cellular debris than other enzymes tested. dissociation using np was non-aggressive over time—no changes in cell viability or dissociation quality were found when comparing 2-h dissociation at 37 °c to overnight dissociation at ambient temperature.


CONCLUSIONS
the use of np allows for the most effective dissociation of viable single cells from human bts or brain tissue. its non-aggressive dissociative capacity may enable ambient-temperature shipping of tumor pieces in multi-center clinical trials, meanwhile being dissociated. as clinical grade np is commercially available it can be easily integrated into cell-therapy clinical trials in neuro-oncology. the high quality viable cells produced may enable investigators to conduct more consistent research by avoiding the experimental artifacts associated with the presence dead cells or cellular debris.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
brain tumorsgliomaglioblastomabrain metastasisbraintissue dissociationneutral proteasedispasecollagenasednasethe public committee for allocation of estate funds, ministry of justice, israel.5313volovitz ilan issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

