BACKGROUND
completely sequenced plant genomes provide scope for designing a large number of microsatellite markers, which are useful in various aspects of crop breeding and genetic analysis. with the objective of developing genic but non-coding microsatellite  markers for the rice  genome, we characterized the frequency and relative distribution of microsatellite repeat-motifs in  <dig>  predicted protein coding genes including  <dig>  putative promoter sequences.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig>  perfect gnms repeats with densities ranging from  <dig> /mb in chromosome  <dig> to 450/mb in chromosome  <dig> with an average of  <dig>  gnms per mb. the average microsatellite density was maximum in the 5' untranslated regions  followed by those in introns, promoters, 3'utrs and minimum in the coding sequences . primers were designed for  <dig>   gnms repeats, including  <dig>   hypervariable class i types, which were bin-mapped on the rice genome. the gnms markers were most polymorphic in the intronic region  followed by markers in the promoter region  and least in the cds . the robust polymerase chain reaction  amplification efficiency and high polymorphic potential of gnms markers over genic coding and random genomic microsatellite markers suggest their immediate use in efficient genotyping applications in rice. a set of these markers could assess genetic diversity and establish phylogenetic relationships among domesticated rice cultivar groups. we also demonstrated the usefulness of orthologous and paralogous conserved non-coding microsatellite  markers, identified in the putative rice promoter sequences, for comparative physical mapping and understanding of evolutionary and gene regulatory complexities among rice and other members of the grass family. the divergence between long-grained aromatics and subspecies japonica was estimated to be more recent  compared to short-grained aromatics from japonica  and long-grained aromatics from subspecies indica .


CONCLUSIONS
our analyses showed that gnms markers with their high polymorphic potential would be preferred candidate functional markers in various marker-based applications in rice genetics, genomics and breeding. the cnms markers provided encouraging implications for their use in comparative genome mapping and understanding of evolutionary complexities in rice and other members of grass family.

