BACKGROUND
previous reports of inhibition in the neocortex suggest that inhibition is mediated predominantly through gabaa receptors exhibiting fast kinetics. within the hippocampus, it has been shown that gabaa responses can take the form of either fast or slow response kinetics. our findings indicate, for the first time, that the neocortex displays synaptic responses with slow gabaa receptor mediated inhibitory postsynaptic currents . these ipscs are kinetically and pharmacologically similar to responses found in the hippocampus, although the anatomical specificity of evoked responses is unique from hippocampus. spontaneous slow gabaa ipscs were recorded from both pyramidal and inhibitory neurons in rat visual cortex.


RESULTS
gabaa slow ipscs were significantly different from fast responses with respect to rise times and decay time constants, but not amplitudes. spontaneously occurring gabaa slow ipscs were nearly  <dig> times less frequent than fast sipscs and both were completely abolished by the chloride channel blocker, picrotoxin. the gabaa subunit-specific antagonist, furosemide, depressed spontaneous and evoked gabaa fast ipscs, but not slow gabaa-mediated ipscs. anatomical specificity was evident using minimal stimulation: ipscs with slow kinetics were evoked predominantly through stimulation of layer 1/ <dig> apical dendritic zones of layer  <dig> pyramidal neurons and across their basal dendrites, while gabaa fast ipscs were evoked through stimulation throughout the dendritic arborization. many evoked ipscs were also composed of a combination of fast and slow ipsc components.


CONCLUSIONS
gabaa slow ipscs displayed durations that were approximately  <dig> fold longer than typical gabaa fast ipscs, but shorter than gabab-mediated inhibition. the anatomical and pharmacological specificity of evoked slow ipscs suggests a unique origin of synaptic input. incorporating gabaa slow ipscs into computational models of cortical function will help improve our understanding of cortical information processing.

