BACKGROUND
one of the essential processing events during pre-mrna maturation is the post-transcriptional addition of a polyadenine  tail. the 3'-end poly track protects mrna from unregulated degradation, and indicates the integrity of mrna through recognition by mrna export and translation machinery. the position of a poly site is predetermined by signals in the pre-mrna sequence that are recognized by a complex of polyadenylation factors. these signals are generally tri-part sequence patterns around the cleavage site that serves as the future poly site. in plants, there is little sequence conservation among these signal elements, which makes it difficult to develop an accurate algorithm to predict the poly site of a given gene. we attempted to solve this problem.


RESULTS
based on our current working model and the profile of nucleotide sequence distribution of the poly signals and around poly sites in arabidopsis, we have devised a generalized hidden markov model based algorithm to predict potential poly sites. the high specificity and sensitivity of the algorithm were demonstrated by testing several datasets, and at the best combinations, both reach 97%. the accuracy of the program, called poly site sleuth or pass, has been demonstrated by the prediction of many validated poly sites. pass also predicted the changes of poly site efficiency in poly signal mutants that were constructed and characterized by traditional genetic experiments. the efficacy of pass was demonstrated by predicting poly sites within long genomic sequences.


CONCLUSIONS
based on the features of plant poly signals, a computational model was built to effectively predict the poly sites in arabidopsis genes. the algorithm will be useful in gene annotation because a poly site signifies the end of the transcript. this algorithm can also be used to predict alternative poly sites in known genes, and will be useful in the design of transgenes for crop genetic engineering by predicting and eliminating undesirable poly sites.

