BACKGROUND
rainbow trout  are the most-widely cultivated cold freshwater fish in the world and an important model species for many research areas. coupling great interest in this species as a research model with the need for genetic improvement of aquaculture production efficiency traits justifies the continued development of genomics research resources. many quantitative trait loci  have been identified for production and life-history traits in rainbow trout. a bacterial artificial chromosome  physical map is needed to facilitate fine mapping of qtl and the selection of positional candidate genes for incorporation in marker-assisted selection  for improving rainbow trout aquaculture production. this resource will also facilitate efforts to obtain and assemble a whole-genome reference sequence for this species.


RESULTS
the physical map was constructed from dna fingerprinting of  <dig>  bac clones using the 4-color high-information content fingerprinting  method. the clones were assembled into physical map contigs using the finger-printing contig  program. the map is composed of  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons. the total number of unique fingerprinting fragments  in contigs is  <dig> , <dig>  which corresponds to an estimated physical length of  <dig>  gb. the map assembly was validated by 1) comparison with probe hybridization results and agarose gel fingerprinting contigs; and 2) anchoring large contigs to the microsatellite-based genetic linkage map.


CONCLUSIONS
the production and validation of the first bac physical map of the rainbow trout genome is described in this paper. we are currently integrating this map with the ncccwa genetic map using more than  <dig> microsatellites isolated from bac end sequences and by identifying bacs that harbor more than  <dig> previously mapped markers. the availability of an integrated physical and genetic map will enable detailed comparative genome analyses, fine mapping of qtl, positional cloning, selection of positional candidate genes for economically important traits and the incorporation of mas into rainbow trout breeding programs.

