BACKGROUND
when populations evolve under disparate environmental conditions, they experience different selective pressures that shape patterns of sequence evolution and gene expression. these may be manifested in genetic and phenotypic differences such as a diverse immunogenetic repertoire in species from tropical latitudes that have greater and/or different parasite burdens than more temperate species. to test this idea, we compared the transcriptomes of one tropical species  and two species from temperate latitudes  from the heteromyidae. we did so in a search for positive selection on sequences and/or differential expression, while controlling for phylogenetic history in our choice of species.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig>  contigs and annotated  <dig>  of these, identifying immune genes associated with interleukins, cytokines, and the production of mast cells. we identified  <dig> genes that were upregulated in h. desmarestianus  and  <dig>  that were downregulated. gene ontology terms including “immune response” were associated with  <dig>  of the  <dig> upregulated genes. we found preliminary evidence for positive selection on three genes  along the h. desmarestianus lineage.


CONCLUSIONS
overall our findings pinpoint genes in species from disparate environments that are on different evolutionary trajectories in terms of expression levels and/or nucleotide sequence. our data indicate there are significant differences in the expression of genes among the spleen transcriptomes of these species and that a number of these differentially expressed genes do not show the same pattern of differential expression in another tissue type. this points to the possibility of expression differences between these species specific to the spleen transcriptome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomicsspleenlatitudinal diversity gradientdifferential gene expressionevolutionary genomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

