BACKGROUND
pyrethroids are neurotoxic pesticides that interact with membrane bound ion channels in neurons and disrupt nerve function. the purpose of this study was to characterize and explore changes in gene expression that occur in the rat frontal cortex, an area of cns affected by pyrethroids, following an acute low-dose exposure.


RESULTS
rats were acutely exposed to either deltamethrin  or permethrin  followed by collection of cortical tissue at  <dig> hours. the doses used range from those that cause minimal signs of intoxication at the behavioral level to doses well below apparent no effect levels in the whole animal. a statistical framework based on parallel linear  and isotonic regression  methods identified  <dig> and  <dig> probe sets as dose-responsive. the pir analysis was most sensitive for detecting transcripts with changes in expression at the noael dose. a sub-set of genes  was then confirmed by qrt-pcr and examined in a time course study. changes in mrna levels were typically less than 3-fold in magnitude across all components of the study. the responses observed are consistent with pyrethroids producing increased neuronal excitation in the cortex following a low-dose in vivo exposure. in addition, significance analysis of function and expression  identified significantly enriched gene categories common for both pyrethroids, including some relating to branching morphogenesis. exposure of primary cortical cell cultures to both compounds resulted in an increase  in the number of neurite branch points, supporting the results of the safe analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, pyrethroids induced changes in gene expression in the frontal cortex near the threshold for decreases in ambulatory motor activity in vivo. the penalized regression methods performed similarly in detecting dose-dependent changes in gene transcription. finally, safe analysis of gene expression data identified branching morphogenesis as a biological process sensitive to pyrethroids and subsequent in vitro experiments confirmed this predicted effect. the novel findings regarding pyrethroid effects on branching morphogenesis indicate these compounds may act as developmental neurotoxicants that affect normal neuronal morphology.

