BACKGROUND
in some genomic applications it is necessary to design large numbers of pcr primers in exons flanking one or several introns on the basis of orthologous gene sequences in related species. the primer pairs designed by this target gene approach are called "intron-flanking primers" or because they are located in exonic sequences which are usually conserved between related species, "conserved primers". they are useful for large-scale single nucleotide polymorphism  discovery and marker development, especially in species, such as wheat, for which a large number of ests are available but for which genome sequences and intron/exon boundaries are not available. to date, no suitable high-throughput tool is available for this purpose.


RESULTS
we have developed, the conservedprimers  <dig>  pipeline, for designing intron-flanking primers for large-scale snp discovery and marker development, and demonstrated its utility in wheat. this tool uses non-redundant wheat est sequences, such as wheat contigs and singleton ests, and related genomic sequences, such as those of rice, as inputs. it aligns the ests to the genomic sequences to identify unique colinear exon blocks and predicts intron lengths. intron-flanking primers are then designed based on the intron/exon information using the primer <dig> core program or batchprimer <dig>  finally, a tab-delimited file containing intron-flanking primer pair sequences and their primer properties is generated for primer ordering and their pcr applications. using this tool,  <dig>  bin-mapped wheat ests  were found to have unique colinear exon blocks suitable for primer design and  <dig>  primer pairs were designed from these single- or low-copy genes for pcr amplification and snp discovery. with these primers and subsequently designed genome-specific primers, a total of  <dig>  loci were found to contain one or more genome-specific snps.


CONCLUSIONS
the conservedprimers  <dig>  pipeline for designing intron-flanking primers was developed and its utility demonstrated. the tool can be used for snp discovery, genetic variation assays and marker development for any target genome that has abundant ests and a related reference genome that has been fully sequenced. the conservedprimers  <dig>  pipeline has been implemented as a command-line tool as well as a web application. both versions are freely available at .

