BACKGROUND
there is an unspoken assumption that imprecision of measurement of phenotypes will not have large systematic effects on the location of significant associations in a genome wide association study . in this report, the effects of two independent measurements of the same trait, subcutaneous fat thickness, were examined in gwas of  <dig> individuals.


RESULTS
the trait values obtained by two independent groups working to the same trait definition were correlated with r =  <dig> . the allele effects obtained from the two analyses were only moderately correlated, with r =  <dig> , and there was one significant  association in common to the two measurements. the correlation between allele effects was approximately equal to the square of the correlation between the trait measurements. an important quantitative trait locus  on bta <dig> appeared to be shifted distally by  <dig> mb along the chromosome. the divergence in gwas was stronger with data coded into two discrete classes. univariate trimming of the top and bottom 5% of data, a method used to control for erroneous trait values, decreased the similarity between the gwas and increased the apparent shift of the qtl on bta <dig>  stringent bivariate trimming of data, using only trait values that were similar to each other in the two data sets, substantially improved the correlation of trait values and allele effects in the gwas, and showed evidence for two qtl on bta <dig> separated by  <dig> mb. despite the reduction in sample size due to trimming, more snp were significant. using the mean of the two measurements of the trait was not as efficient as bivariate trimming.


CONCLUSIONS
it is recommended that trait values in gwas experiments be examined for repeatability before the experiment is performed. for traits that do not have high repeatability , two or more independent measurements of the same trait should be obtained for all samples, and individuals genotyped that have highly correlated trait measurements.

