BACKGROUND
seed metabolism is dynamically adjusted to oxygen availability. processes underlying this auto-regulatory mechanism control the metabolic efficiency under changing environmental conditions/stress and thus, are of relevance for biotechnology. non-symbiotic hemoglobins have been shown to be involved in scavenging of nitric oxide  molecules, which play a key role in oxygen sensing/balancing in plants and animals. steady state levels of no are suggested to act as an integrator of energy and carbon metabolism and subsequently, influence energy-demanding growth processes in plants.


RESULTS
we aimed to manipulate oxygen stress perception in arabidopsis seeds by overexpression of the non-symbiotic hemoglobin athb <dig> under the control of the seed-specific leb <dig> promoter. seeds of transgenic athb <dig> plants did not accumulate no under transient hypoxic stress treatment, showed higher respiratory activity and energy status compared to the wild type. global transcript profiling of seeds/siliques from wild type and transgenic plants under transient hypoxic and standard conditions using affymetrix ath <dig> chips revealed a rearrangement of transcriptional networks by athb <dig> overexpression under non-stress conditions, which included the induction of transcripts related to aba synthesis and signaling, receptor-like kinase- and map kinase-mediated signaling pathways, wrky transcription factors and ros metabolism. overexpression of athb <dig> shifted seed metabolism to an energy-saving mode with the most prominent alterations occurring in cell wall metabolism. in combination with metabolite and physiological measurements, these data demonstrate that athb <dig> overexpression improves oxidative stress tolerance compared to the wild type where a strong transcriptional and metabolic reconfiguration was observed in the hypoxic response.


CONCLUSIONS
athb <dig> overexpression mediates a pre-adaptation to hypoxic stress. under transient stress conditions transgenic seeds were able to keep low levels of endogenous no and to maintain a high energy status, in contrast to wild type. higher weight of mature transgenic seeds demonstrated the beneficial effects of seed-specific overexpression of athb <dig> 

