BACKGROUND
constitutive expression of the cbf/dreb <dig> for increasing freezing tolerance in woody plants is often associated with other phenotypic changes including dwarf plant and delayed flowering. these phenotypic changes have been observed when arabidopsis dwarf and delayed flowering  <dig>  was overexpressed in a. thaliana plants. to date, the ddf <dig> orthologues have not been studied in woody plants. the aim of this study is to investigate transcriptomic responses to the overexpression of blueberry  ddf <dig> .


RESULTS
the vcddf1-ox resulted in enhanced freezing tolerance in tetraploid blueberry plants and did not result in significant changes in plant size, chilling requirement, and flowering time. comparative transcriptome analysis of transgenic ‘legacy-vcddf1-ox’ plants containing an overexpressed vcddf <dig> with non-transgenic highbush blueberry ‘legacy’ plants revealed the vcddf1-ox derived differentially expressed  genes and transcripts in the pathways of cold-response, plant flowering, della proteins, and plant phytohormones. the increase in freezing tolerance was associated to the expression of cold-regulated genes  and the ethylene pathway genes. the unchanged plant size, dormancy and flowering were due to the minimal effect of the vcddf1-ox on the expression of della proteins, flowering pathway genes, and the other phytohormone genes related to plant growth and development. the de genes in auxin and cytokinin pathways suggest that the vcddf1-ox has also altered plant tolerance to drought and high salinity.


CONCLUSIONS
a ddf <dig> orthologue in blueberry functioned differently from the ddf <dig> reported in arabidopsis. the overexpression of vcddf <dig> or its orthologues is a new approach to increase freezing tolerance of deciduous woody plant species with no obvious effect on plant size and plant flowering time.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
abiotic stresscold hardnessc-repeat-binding factorddf1dehydration responsive element-binding factorfreezing tolerancevaccinium corymbosumwoody plantissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

