BACKGROUND
bioluminescence imaging  is a powerful technique for monitoring the temporal and spatial dynamics of gene expression in the mouse brain. however, the black fur, skin pigmentation and hair regrowth after depilation of mouse interfere with bli during developmental and daily examination. the aim of this study was to extend the application of arc-luc transgenic  mice to the bli of neuronal activity in the mouse brain by introducing the hairless  gene and to examine arc-luc expression at various developmental stages without interference from black fur, skin pigmentation, and hair regrowth.


RESULTS
the arc-luc tg hl mice were established by crossing the tg c57bl/ <dig> mouse strain with the hl mouse strain. under physiological and pathological conditions, bli was performed to detect the signal intensity changes at various developmental stages and at an interval of <7 days. the established arc-luc tg hl mice exhibited clear and stable photon signals from the brain without interference during development. after surgical monocular deprivation during visual-critical period, large signal intensity changes in bioluminescence were observed in the mouse visual cortex. exposure of mice to a novel object changed the photon distribution in the caudal and rostral cerebral areas. the temporal pattern of kainic-acid-induced arc-luc expression showed biphasic changes in signal intensity over 24 h.


CONCLUSIONS
this study showed the advantages of using the mutant hl gene in bli of arc expression in the mouse brain at various developmental stages. thus, the use of the arc-luc tg hl mice enabled the tracking of neuronal-activity-dependent processes over a wide range from a focal area to the entire brain area with various time windows.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hairlessarcdevelopmentbioluminescence imagingcabinet office, government of japan the food safety commission of japan, no.1001mori hisashi the ministry of education, science, sports and culture of japanscientific research on innovation area, comprehensive brain science network, no.221s003mori hisashi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

