BACKGROUND
several studies have focused on cold tolerance in multiple regulated levels. however, a genome-scale molecular analysis of the regulated network under the control of transcription factors  is still lacking, especially for trees. to comprehensively identify the tfs that regulate cold stress response in the paper mulberry and understand their regulatory interactions, transcriptomic data was used to assess changes in gene expression induced by exposure to cold.


RESULTS
results indicated that  <dig> tfs, belonging to  <dig> families and comprising more than 59% of the total tfs of this plant, were involved in the cold stress response. they were clustered into three groups, namely early, intermediate and late responsive groups which contained  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> tfs, respectively. among of these differentially expressed tfs, one bhlh, two erfs and three camtas were considered to be the key tfs functioning in the primary signal transduction. after that, at the intermediate stage of cold stress, there were mainly two biological processes that were regulated by tfs, namely cold stress resistance  and growth and development of lateral organ or apical meristem . in late responsive group,  <dig> arr-b, c3h,  <dig> co-like, 2 g2-like,  <dig> hsfs,  <dig> nacs and tcp. most of them presented the up-regulated expression at  <dig> or 24 hours after cold stress implied their important roles for the new growth homeostasis under cold stress.


CONCLUSIONS
our study identified the key tfs that function in the regulatory cascades mediating the activation of downstream genes during cold tress tolerance in the paper mulberry. based on the analysis, we found that the ap2/erf, bhlh, myb, nac and wrky families might play the central and significant roles during cold stress response in the paper mulberry just as in other species. meanwhile, many other tf families previously reported as involving in regulation of growth and development, including arf, dbb, g2-like, grf, gras, lbd, wox and yaaby exhibited their important potential function in growth regulation under cold stress.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cold stressplant developmentsignaling crosstalktranscription factorissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

