BACKGROUND
foot-and-mouth disease virus  possess a positive sense, single stranded rna genome. internal ribosomal entry site  element exists within its 5′ untranslated region  of the viral rna. translation of the viral rna is initiated by internal entry of the 40s ribosome within the ires element. this process is facilitated by cellular factors known as ires trans-acting factors .

foot-and-mouth disease  is host-restricted disease for cloven-hoofed animals such as cattle and pigs, but the factors determining the host range have not been identified yet. although, itafs are known to promote ires-mediated translation, these findings were confirmed only in cells derived from fmdv-insusceptible animals so far.

we evaluated and compared the ires-mediated translation activities among cell lines derived from four different animal species using bicistronic luciferase reporter plasmid, which possesses an fmdv-ires element between renilla and firefly luciferase genes. furthermore, we analyzed the effect of the cellular factors on ires-mediated translation by silencing the cellular factors using sirna in both fmdv-susceptible and -insusceptible animal cells.


RESULTS
our data indicated that ires-mediated translational activity was not linked to fmdv host range. itaf <dig> promoted ires-mediated translation in all cell lines, and the effects of poly-pyrimidine tract binding protein  and eukaryotic initiation factor 4e-binding protein  <dig>  were observed only in fmdv-susceptible cells. thus, ptb and 4e-bp <dig> may influence the host range of fmdv.


CONCLUSIONS
ires-mediated translation activity of fmdv was not predictive of its host range. itaf <dig> promoted ires-mediated translation in all cells, and the effects of ptb and 4e-bp <dig> were observed only in fmdv-susceptible cells.

keywords
fmdviresitafitaf454e-bp1ptbtranslationthis study was supported by the grant from the ministry of education, science and culture, japan.15k14781tsukiyama-kohara kyoko issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

