BACKGROUND
training of a repetitive synchronised movement of two limb muscles leads to short-term plastic changes in the primary motor cortex, which can be assessed by transcranial magnetic stimulation  mapping. we used this paradigm to study the effect of memantine, a ndma antagonist, on short-term motor cortex plasticity in  <dig> healthy human subjects, and we were especially interested in possible differential effects of different treatment regimens. in a randomised double-blinded cross over study design we therefore administered placebo or memantine either as a single dosage or as an ascending dosage over  <dig> days. before and after one hour of motor training, which consisted of a repetitive co-contraction of the abductor pollicis brevis  and the deltoid muscle, we assessed the motor output map of the apb muscle by tms under the different conditions.


RESULTS
we found a significant medial shift of the apb motor output map after training in the placebo condition, indicating training-induced short-term plastic changes in the motor cortex. a single dosage of memantine had no significant effect on this training-induced plasticity, whereas memantine administered in an ascending dosage over  <dig> days was able to block the cortical effect of the motor training. the memantine serum levels after  <dig> days were markedly higher than the serum levels after a single dosage of memantine, but there was no individual correlation between the shift of the motor output map and the memantine serum level. besides, repeated administration of a low memantine dosage also led to an effective blockade of training-induced cortical plasticity in spite of serum levels comparable to those reached after single dose administration, suggesting that the repeated administration was more important for the blocking effect than the memantine serum levels.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the nmda-antagonist memantine is able to block training-induced motor cortex plasticity when administered over  <dig> days, but not after administration of a single dose. this differential effect might be mainly due to the prolonged action of memantine at the nmda receptor. these findings must be considered if clinical studies are designed, which aim at evaluating the potency of memantine to prevent "maladaptive" plasticity, e.g. after limb amputation.

