BACKGROUND
hyperosmolar therapy, using either mannitol or hypertonic saline , is considered the treatment of choice for intracranial hypertension. however, hyperosmolar agents may impair coagulation and platelet function, limiting their use in patients at risk for hemorrhage. despite this, studies evaluating the effects of mannitol compared to other hyperosmolar agents in dogs are largely lacking. the aim of this study was to compare the in vitro effects on global hemostasis and platelet function of 20 % mannitol and 3 % hts on canine blood.

methods
citrated whole blood from  <dig> healthy dogs was diluted with  <dig>  % saline, 20 % mannitol and 3 % hts in ratios of 1: <dig> and 1: <dig>  rotational thromboelastometry  was used to assess clotting time , clot formation time  and maximal clot firmness  following extrinsic activation  and after platelet inhibition . a platelet function analyzer  was used to assess closure time .


RESULTS
no significant differences were observed between untreated whole blood and samples diluted with saline. samples diluted with both mannitol and hts were hypocoagulable compared to untreated whole blood samples. at a dilution of 1: <dig>  no significant differences were found between any measured parameter in samples diluted with saline compared to mannitol or hts. at a 1: <dig> dilution, ctpfa was prolonged in samples diluted with mannitol and hts compared to saline, and ctpfa was prolonged more with mannitol than hts. ex-tem ct was increased at a 1: <dig> dilution with mannitol compared to hts. ex-tem cft was prolonged at a 1: <dig> dilution with both agents compared to saline, and was prolonged more with mannitol than hts. ex-tem mcf was reduced at a 1: <dig> dilution with both agents compared to saline.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
data in this study indicate that both mannitol and hts affect canine platelet function and whole blood coagulation in vitro in a dose-dependent fashion. the most pronounced effects were observed after high dilutions with mannitol, which impaired platelet aggregation, clot formation time, clot strength, and fibrin formation significantly more than hts. further in vivo studies are necessary before recommendations can be made.

keywords
doghemostasishypertonic salinehypocoagulationmannitolosmotherapeuticsintracranial hypertensionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

