BACKGROUND
acupuncture has been practiced in china for thousands of years as part of the traditional chinese medicine  and has gradually accepted in western countries as an alternative or complementary treatment. however, the underlying mechanism of acupuncture, especially whether there exists any difference between varies acupoints, remains largely unknown, which hinders its widespread use.


RESULTS
in this study, we develop a novel linear programming based feature selection method  to understand the mechanism of acupuncture effect, at molecular level, by revealing the metabolite biomarkers for acupuncture treatment. specifically, we generate and investigate the high-throughput metabolic profiles of acupuncture treatment at several acupoints in human. to select the subsets of metabolites that best characterize the acupuncture effect for each meridian point, an optimization model is proposed to identify biomarkers from high-dimensional metabolic data from case and control samples. importantly, we use nearest centroid as the prototype to simultaneously minimize the number of selected features and the leave-one-out cross validation error of classifier. we compared the performance of lpfs to several state-of-the-art methods, such as svm recursive feature elimination  and sparse multinomial logistic regression approach . we find that our lpfs method tends to reveal a small set of metabolites with small standard deviation and large shifts, which exactly serves our requirement for good biomarker. biologically, several metabolite biomarkers for acupuncture treatment are revealed and serve as the candidates for further mechanism investigation. also biomakers derived from five meridian points, zusanli , liangmen , juliao , yanglingquan , and weizhong , are compared for their similarity and difference, which provide evidence for the specificity of acupoints.


CONCLUSIONS
our result demonstrates that metabolic profiling might be a promising method to investigate the molecular mechanism of acupuncture. comparing with other existing methods, lpfs shows better performance to select a small set of key molecules. in addition, lpfs is a general methodology and can be applied to other high-dimensional data analysis, for example cancer genomics.

02- <dig> september  <dig> the 5th ieee international conference on computational systems biology  zhuhai, china

