BACKGROUND
a tannic acid-inducible and mycoviral-regulated laccase <dig>  from the chestnut blight fungus cryphonectria parasitica has recently been identified, but further characterization was hampered because of the precipitation of protein products by tannic acid supplementation. the present study investigated the heterologous expression of the functional laccase <dig> using a yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae.


RESULTS
laccase activity in the culture broth of transformants measured using a laccase-specific substrate suggested that the lac <dig> gene was successfully expressed and the corresponding protein product secreted into the culture media. in addition, activity staining and western blot analysis of a native gel revealed that the enzyme activity co-existed with the protein product specific to anti-laccase <dig> antibody, confirming that the cloned lac <dig> gene is responsible for the laccase activity. when transformants were grown on plates containing tannic acid-supplemented media, brown coloration was observed around transformed cells, indicating the oxidation of tannic acid. however, the enzymatic activity was measurable only in the selective ura- media and was negligible in nonselective nutrient-rich culture conditions. this was in part because of the increased plasmid instability in the nonselective media. moreover, the protein product of lac <dig> appears to be sensitive to the cultured nonselective nutrient-rich broth, because a rapid decline in enzymatic activity was observed when the cultured broth of ura- media was mixed with that of nonselective nutrient-rich broth. in addition, constitutive expression of the lac <dig> gene resulted in a reduced cell number of the lac <dig> transformants compared to that of vector-only transformed control. however, the presence of recombinant vector without lac <dig> induction did not affect the growth of transformants.


CONCLUSIONS
the results suggest that expression of the lac <dig> gene has an inhibitory effect on the growth of transformed s. cerevisiae and that the controlled expression of lac <dig> is appropriate for the possible application of recombinant yeast to the treatment of phenolic compounds.

