BACKGROUND
formation of compression  and opposite wood  in branches and bent trunks is an adaptive feature of conifer trees in response to various displacement forces, such as gravity, wind, snow and artificial bending. several previous studies have characterized tracheids, wood and gene transcription in artificially or naturally bent conifer trunks. these studies have provided molecular basis of reaction wood formation in response to bending forces and gravity stimulus. however, little is known about reaction wood formation and gene transcription in conifer branches under gravity stress. in this study silviscan® technology was used to characterize tracheid and wood traits in radiate pine  branches and genes differentially transcribed in cw and ow were investigated using cdna microarrays.


RESULTS
cw drastically differed from ow in tracheids and wood traits with increased growth, thicker tracheid walls, larger microfibril angle , higher density and lower stiffness. however, cw and ow tracheids had similar diameters in either radial or tangential direction. thus, gravity stress largely influenced wood growth, secondary wall deposition, cellulose microfibril orientation and wood properties, but had little impact on primary wall expansion. microarray gene transcription revealed about 29% of the xylem transcriptomes were significantly altered in cw and ow sampled in both spring and autumn, providing molecular evidence for the drastic variation in tracheid and wood traits. genes involved in cell division, cellulose biosynthesis, lignin deposition, and microtubules were mostly up-regulated in cw, conferring its greater growth, thicker tracheid walls, higher density, larger mfa and lower stiffness. however, genes with roles in cell expansion and primary wall formation were differentially transcribed in cw and ow, respectively, implicating their similar diameters of tracheid walls and different tracheid lengths. interestingly, many genes related to hormone and calcium signalling as well as various environmental stresses were exclusively up-regulated in cw, providing important clues for earlier molecular signatures of reaction wood formation under gravity stimulus.


CONCLUSIONS
the first comprehensive investigation of tracheid characteristics, wood properties and gene transcription in branches of a conifer species revealed more accurate and new insights into reaction wood formation in response to gravity stress. the identified differentially transcribed genes with diverse functions conferred or implicated drastic cw and ow variation observed in radiata pine branches. these genes are excellent candidates for further researches on the molecular mechanisms of reaction wood formation with a view to plant gravitropism.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
compression woodtracheidconiferstranscriptomemicroarrayplant gravitropismmicrofibril angle wood stiffnessissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013

