BACKGROUND
the root architecture of grafted apple  is affected by various characteristics of the scions. to provide information on the molecular mechanisms underlying this influence, we examined root transcriptomes of m. robusta rootstock grafted with scions of wild-type  apple  and a more-branching  mutant at the branching stage.


RESULTS
the growth rate of rootstock grafted mb was repressed significantly, especially the primary root length and diameter, and root weight. biological function categories of differentially expressed genes were significantly enriched in processes associated with hormone signal transduction and intracellular activity, with processes related to the cell cycle especially down-regulated. roots of rootstock grafted with mb scions displayed elevated auxin and cytokinin contents and reduced expression of mrpin <dig>  mrarf, mrahp, most mrcre <dig> genes, and cell growth-related genes mrgh <dig>  mrsaur and mrtch <dig>  although auxin accumulation and transcription of mrpin <dig>  mralf <dig> and mralf <dig> tended to induce lateral root formation in mb-grafted rootstock, the number of lateral roots was not significantly changed. sucrose, fructose and glucose contents were not decreased in mb-grafted roots compared with those bearing wt scions, but glycolysis and tricarboxylic acid cycle metabolic activities were repressed. root resistance and nitrogen metabolism were reduced in mb-grafted roots as well.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings suggest that root growth and development of rootstock are mainly influenced by sugar metabolism and auxin and cytokinin signaling pathways. this study provides a basis that the characteristics of scions are related to root growth and development, resistance and activity of rootstocks.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
grafted appleroot growth and developmentsugar metabolismauxin signalingcks signalingcell cyclenational science and technology supporting project2013bad20b03han mingyu national apple industry technology system of agriculture ministry of chinacars-28han mingyu national spark plan program2014ga850002han mingyu science and technology innovative engineering project in shaanxi province of china2015ny114han mingyu innovation project of science and technology plan projects of shaanxi province2016tzc-n-11-6han mingyu issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

