BACKGROUND
analysis of codon usage bias is an extremely versatile method using in furthering understanding of the genetic and evolutionary paths of species. codon usage bias of envelope glycoprotein genes in nuclear polyhedrosis virus  has remained largely unexplored at present. hence, the codon usage bias of npv envelope glycoprotein was analyzed here to reveal the genetic and evolutionary relationships between different viral species in baculovirus genus.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> codons from  <dig> different species of npv of the baculovirus genera were used to perform this analysis. glycoprotein of npv exhibits weaker codon usage bias. neutrality plot analysis and correlation analysis of effective number of codons  values indicate that natural selection is the main factor influencing codon usage bias, and that the impact of mutation pressure is relatively smaller. another cluster analysis shows that the kinship or evolutionary relationships of these viral species can be divided into two broad categories despite all of these  <dig> species are from the same baculovirus genus.


CONCLUSIONS
there are many elements that can affect codon bias, such as the composition of amino acids, mutation pressure, natural selection, gene expression level, and etc. in the meantime, cluster analysis also illustrates that codon usage bias of virus envelope glycoprotein can serve as an effective means of evolutionary classification in baculovirus genus.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nuclear polyhedrosis viruscodon usage biasenvelope glycoproteinevolutionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31372373sun jingchen natural science foundation of guangdong province, china2016a030311018sun jingchen science and technology planning project of guangdong province, china2013b090500118sun jingchen science and technology planning project of guangzhou, china201510010276sun jingchen issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

