BACKGROUND
targeted capture of genomic regions reduces sequencing cost while generating
higher coverage by allowing biomedical researchers to focus on specific loci
of interest, such as exons. targeted capture also has the potential to
facilitate the generation of genomic data from dna collected via saliva or
buccal cells. dna samples derived from these cell types tend to have a lower
human dna yield, may be degraded from age and/or have contamination from
bacteria or other ambient oral microbiota. however, thousands of samples
have been previously collected from these cell types, and saliva collection
has the advantage that it is a non-invasive and appropriate for a wide
variety of research.


RESULTS
we demonstrate successful enrichment and sequencing of  <dig> south african
khoesan exomes and  <dig> full genomes with samples initially derived from
saliva. the expanded exome dataset enables us to characterize genetic
diversity free from ascertainment bias for multiple khoesan populations,
including new exome data from six hgdp namibian san, revealing substantial
population structure across the kalahari desert region. additionally, we
discover and independently verify thirty-one previously unknown kir
alleles using methods we developed to accurately map and call the highly
polymorphic hla and kir loci from exome capture data.
finally, we show that exome capture of saliva-derived dna yields sufficient
non-human sequences to characterize oral microbial communities, including
detection of bacteria linked to oral disease . for comparison, two samples were sequenced using
standard full genome library preparation without exome capture and we found
no systematic bias of metagenomic information between exome-captured and
non-captured data.


CONCLUSIONS
dna from human saliva samples, collected and extracted using standard
procedures, can be used to successfully sequence high quality human exomes,
and metagenomic data can be derived from non-human reads. we find that
individuals from the kalahari carry a higher oral pathogenic microbial load
than samples surveyed in the human microbiome project. additionally, rare
variants present in the exomes suggest strong population structure across
different khoesan populations.

exomeskhoesangenetic diversitymetagenomicsmicrobiome

