BACKGROUND
ornamental peaches cv. ‘yaguchi’  batsch) can be propagated via seeds. the establishment of efficient seed treatments for early germination and seedling growth is required to shorten nursery and breeding periods. it is important, therefore, to identify potential candidate genes responsible for the effects of rinsing and chilling on seed germination. we hypothesized that longer rinsing combined with chilling of seeds can alter the genes expression in related to dormancy and then raise the germination rate in the peach. to date, most molecular studies in peaches have involved structural genomics, and few transcriptome studies of seed germination have been conducted. in this study, we investigated the function of key seed dormancy-related genes using next-generation sequencing to profile the transcriptomes involved in seed dormancy in peaches. de novo assembly and analysis of the transcriptome identified differentially expressed and unique genes present in this fruit.


RESULTS
de novo rna-sequencing of peach was performed using the illumina miseq  <dig> system. paired-end sequence from mrnas generated high quality sequence reads  from ‘yaguchi’ peach seeds before rinsed  and after rinsed for  <dig> or 7 days with a chilling period of 4 weeks , respectively. the germination rate of 7d4w was significantly higher than that of 2d4w. in total, we obtained  <dig>  unique sequences. differential expression analysis identified  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed genes from br vs 2d4w, br vs 7d4w and 2d4w vs 7d4w libraries respectively, filtered based on p-value and an adjusted false discovery rate of less than  <dig> . this study identified genes associated with the rinsing and chilling process that included those associated with phytohormones, the stress response and transcription factors. 7d4w treatment downregulated genes involved in aba synthesis, catabolism and signaling pathways, which eventually suppressed abscisic acid activity and consequently promoted germination and seedling growth. stress response genes were also downregulated by the 7d4w treatment, suggesting that this treatment released seeds from endodormancy. transcription factors were upregulated by the br and 2d4w treatment, suggesting that they play important roles in maintaining seed dormancy.


CONCLUSIONS
this work indicated that longer rinsing combined with chilling affects gene expression and germination rate, and identified potential candidate genes responsible for dormancy progression in seeds of ‘yaguchi’ peach. the results could be used to develop breeding programs and will aid future functional genomic research in peaches and other fruit trees.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomeseed germinationrinsingchillingornamental peachissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

