BACKGROUND
akabane virus is a member of the genus orthobunyavirus in the family bunyaviridae. it is transmitted by hematophagous arthropod vectors such as culicoides biting midges and is widely distributed in temperate to tropical regions of the world. the virus is well known as a teratogenic pathogen which causes abortions, stillbirths, premature births and congenital abnormalities with arthrogryposis-hydranencephaly syndrome in cattle, sheep and goats. on the other hand, it is reported that the virus rarely induces encephalomyelitis in cattle by postnatal infection. a first large-scale epidemic of akabane viral encephalomyelitis in cattle occurred in the southern part of japan from summer to autumn in  <dig>  the aim of this study is to define the epidemiological, pathological and virological properties of the disease.


RESULTS
nonsuppurative encephalomyelitis was observed in cattle that showed neurological symptoms such as astasia, ataxia, opisthotonus and hypersensitivity in beef and dairy farms by histopathological analysis. akabane viral antigen and genome were consistently detected from the central nervous system of these animals, and the virus was isolated not only from them but also from the blood samples of clinically healthy calves in the epidemic area. the isolates were classified into genogroup i a containing the iriki strain, which caused encephalitis of calves almost twenty years ago in japan. most of the affected cattle possessed the neutralizing antibody against akabane virus. seroconversion of the cohabitated and sentinel cattle in the epidemic area was also confirmed during an outbreak of the disease.


CONCLUSIONS
the ecological and epidemiological data we have obtained so far demonstrated that the akabane virus is not endemic in japan. no evidence of akabane virus circulation was observed in  <dig> through nation-wide serological surveillance, suggesting that a new strain belonging to genogroup i a invaded southern japan from overseas in the summer of  <dig> and caused an unprecedented epizootic of encephalomyelitis mainly in susceptible calves. it will be necessary to reconsider the vaccine strategy to control the disease effectually.

