BACKGROUND
in marine organisms, and in particular for benthic invertebrates including echinoderms, olfaction is a dominant sense with chemosensation being a critical signalling process. until recently natural product chemistry was the primary investigative approach to elucidate the nature of chemical signals but advances in genomics and transcriptomics over the last decade have facilitated breakthroughs in understanding not only the chemistry but also the molecular mechanisms underpinning chemosensation in aquatic environments. integration of these approaches has the potential to reveal the fundamental elements influencing community structure of benthic ecosystems as chemical signalling modulates intra- and inter-species interactions. such knowledge also offers avenues for potential development of novel biological control methods for pest species such as the predatory crown-of-thorns starfish , acanthaster planci which are the primary biological cause of coral cover loss in the indo-pacific.


RESULTS
in this study, we have analysed the cots sensory organs through histological and electron microscopy. we then investigated key elements of the cots molecular olfactory toolkit, the putative olfactory rhodopsin-like g protein-protein receptors  within its genome and olfactory organ transcriptomes. many of the identified acanthaster planci olfactory receptors  genes were found to cluster within the cots genome, indicating rapid evolution and replication from an ancestral olfactory gpcr sequence. tube feet and terminal sensory tentacles contain the highest proportion of apors. in situ hybridisation confirmed the presence of four apors, apor <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> within cots sensory organs, however expression of these genes was not specific to the adhesive epidermis, but also within the nerve plexus of tube feet stems and within the myomesothelium. g alpha subunit proteins were also identified in the sensory organs, and we report the spatial localisation of gαi within the tube foot and sensory tentacle.


CONCLUSIONS
we have identified putative cots olfactory receptors that localise to sensory organs. these results provide a basis for future studies that may enable the development of a biological control not only for cots, but also other native pest or invasive starfish.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
olfactiongpcrin situ hybridisationstarfishcotsaustralian government department of the environment and energy's reef rescueissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

