BACKGROUND
the fungus purpureocillium lilacinum is widely known as a biological control agent against plant parasitic nematodes. this research article consists of genomic annotation of the first draft of whole genome sequence of p. lilacinum. the study aims to decipher the putative genetic components of the fungus involved in nematode pathogenesis by performing comparative genomic analysis with nine closely related fungal species in hypocreales.


RESULTS
de novo genomic assembly was done and a total of  <dig> scaffolds were constructed for p. lilacinum genomic dna. by employing structural genome prediction models,  <dig>   <dig> genes coding for proteins were predicted in the genome. approximately 73 % of the predicted genes were functionally annotated using blastp, interproscan and gene ontology. a  <dig>  % fraction of the predicted genes shared significant homology with genes in the pathogen host interactions  database. the phylogenomic analysis carried out using maximum likelihood raxml algorithm provided insight into the evolutionary relationship of p. lilacinum. in congruence with other closely related species in the hypocreales namely, metarhizium spp., pochonia chlamydosporia, cordyceps militaris, trichoderma reesei and fusarium spp., p. lilacinum has large gene sets coding for g-protein coupled receptors , proteases, glycoside hydrolases and carbohydrate esterases that are required for degradation of nematode-egg shell components. screening of the genome by antibiotics & secondary metabolite analysis shell  pipeline indicated that the genome potentially codes for a variety of secondary metabolites, possibly required for adaptation to heterogeneous lifestyles reported for p. lilacinum. significant up-regulation of subtilisin-like serine protease genes in presence of nematode eggs in quantitative real-time analyses suggested potential role of serine proteases in nematode pathogenesis.


CONCLUSIONS
the data offer a better understanding of purpureocillium lilacinum genome and will enhance our understanding on the molecular mechanism involved in nematophagy.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
p. lilacinumde novo assemblywhole genome sequencingannotationpathogen-host interactionphylogenomic analysisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

