BACKGROUND
venom variation occurs at all taxonomical levels and can impact significantly upon the clinical manifestations and efficacy of antivenom therapy following snakebite. variation in snake venom composition is thought to be subject to strong natural selection as a result of adaptation towards specific diets. members of the medically important genus echis exhibit considerable variation in venom composition, which has been demonstrated to co-evolve with evolutionary shifts in diet. we adopt a venom gland transcriptome approach in order to investigate the diversity of toxins in the genus and elucidate the mechanisms which result in prey-specific adaptations of venom composition.


RESULTS
venom gland transcriptomes were created for e. pyramidum leakeyi, e. coloratus and e. carinatus sochureki by sequencing ~ <dig> expressed sequence tags from venom gland cdna libraries. a standardised methodology allowed a comprehensive intra-genus comparison of the venom gland profiles to be undertaken, including the previously described e. ocellatus transcriptome. blast annotation revealed the presence of snake venom metalloproteinases, c-type lectins, group ii phopholipases a <dig>  serine proteases, l-amino oxidases and growth factors in all transcriptomes throughout the genus. transcripts encoding disintegrins, cysteine-rich secretory proteins and hyaluronidases were obtained from at least one, but not all, species. a representative group of novel venom transcripts exhibiting similarity to lysosomal acid lipase were identified from the e. coloratus transcriptome, whilst novel metallopeptidases exhibiting similarity to neprilysin and dipeptidyl peptidase iii were identified from e. p. leakeyi and e. coloratus respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
the comparison of echis venom gland transcriptomes revealed substantial intrageneric venom variation in representations and cluster numbers of the most abundant venom toxin families. the expression profiles of established toxin groups exhibit little obvious association with venom-related adaptations to diet described from this genus. we suggest therefore that alterations in isoform diversity or transcript expression levels within the major venom protein families are likely to be responsible for prey specificity, rather than differences in the representation of entire toxin families or the recruitment of novel toxin families, although the recruitment of lysosomal acid lipase as a response to vertebrate feeding cannot be excluded. evidence of marked intrageneric venom variation within the medically important genus echis strongly advocates further investigations into the medical significance of venom variation in this genus and its impact upon antivenom therapy.

