BACKGROUND
hepatocellular carcinoma  is one of the most highly malignant and lethal cancers of the world. its pathogenesis has been reported to be multi-factorial, and the molecular carcinogenesis of hcc can not be attributed to just a few individual genes. based on the microrna and mrna expression profiling of normal liver tissues, pericancerous hepatocellular tissues and hepatocellular carcinoma tissues, we attempted to find prognosis related gene sets for hcc patients.


RESULTS
we identified differentially expressed genes  from three comparisons: cancer/normal, cancer/pericancerous and pericancerous/normal. gsea  were performed. based on the enriched gene sets of go terms, pathways and transcription factor targets, it was found that the genome instability and cell proliferation increased while the metabolism and differentiation decreased in hcc tissues. the expression profile of degs in each enriched gene set was used to correlate to the postoperative survival time of hcc patients. nine gene sets were found to prognostic correlation. furthermore, after substituting deg-targeting-microrna for deg members of each gene set, two gene sets with the microrna expression profiles were obtained that had prognostic potential.


CONCLUSIONS
the malignancy of hcc could be represented by gene sets, and pericancerous liver exhibits important characteristics of liver cancer. the expression level of gene sets not only in hcc but also in the pericancerous liver showed potential for prognosis implying an option for hcc prognosis at an early stage. additionally, the gene-targeting-microrna expression profiles also showed prognostic potential, demonstrating that the multi-factorial molecular pathogenesis of hcc is contributed by various genes and micrornas.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hepatocellular carcinomagene expression profilegene set enrichment analysisprognosismicrornaissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2014

