BACKGROUND
many genes involved in responses to photoperiod and vernalization have been characterized or predicted in arabidopsis , brachypodium , wheat  and barley . however, little is known about the transcription regulation of these genes, especially in the large, complex genomes of wheat and barley.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes that are known or postulated to control pathways of photoperiod , vernalization  and pathway integration  in arabidopsis, brachypodium, wheat and barley for predicting transcription factor binding sites  in the promoters of these genes using the fimo motif search tool of the meme suite. the initial predicted tfbss were filtered to confirm the final numbers of predicted tfbss to be  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> in arabidopsis, brachypodium, wheat and barley, respectively. these tfbss were mapped onto the ph, ve and pi pathways to infer about the regulation of gene expression in arabidopsis and cereal species. the gc contents in promoters, untranslated regions , coding sequences and introns were higher in the three cereal species than those in arabidopsis. the predicted tfbss were most abundant for two transcription factor  families: mads-box and csd . the analysis of publicly available gene expression data showed that genes with similar numbers of mads-box and csd tfbss exhibited similar expression patterns across several different tissues and developmental stages. the intra-specific tajima d-statistics of tfbs motif diversity showed different binding specificity among different tf families. the inter-specific tajima d-statistics suggested faster tfbs divergence in tfbss than in coding sequences and introns. mapping tfbss onto the ph, ve and pi pathways showed the predominance of mads-box and csd tfbss in most genes of the four species, and the difference in the pathway regulations between arabidopsis and the three cereal species.


CONCLUSIONS
our approach to associating the key flowering genes with their potential tfs through prediction of putative tfbss provides a framework to explore regulatory mechanisms of photoperiod and vernalization responses in flowering plants. the predicted tfbss in the promoters of the flowering genes provide a basis for molecular characterization of transcription regulation in the large, complex genomes of important crop species, wheat and barley.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cereal plantsphotoperiodposition weight matricestranscription factor binding sitestranscription regulationvernalizationflowering genesgrowing forward  <dig> research opportunities and innovation internal initiatives of alberta agriculture and forestryry1215974yang rong-cai issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

