BACKGROUND
mycoplasma hyopneumoniae is the causative agent of porcine enzootic pneumonia , a mild, chronic pneumonia of swine. despite presenting with low direct mortality, ep is responsible for major economic losses in the pig industry. to identify the virulence-associated determinants of m. hyopneumoniae, we determined the whole genome sequence of m. hyopneumoniae strain  <dig> and its attenuated high-passage strain 168-l and carried out comparative genomic analyses.


RESULTS
we performed the first comprehensive analysis of m. hyopneumoniae strain  <dig> and its attenuated strain and made a preliminary survey of coding sequences  that may be related to virulence. the 168-l genome has a highly similar gene content and order to that of  <dig>  but is  <dig>  bp smaller because there are  <dig> insertions and  <dig> deletions in 168-l. besides these indels,  <dig> single nucleotide variations  were identified. we further investigated the variants that affected cdss, and compared them to reported virulence determinants. notably, almost all of the reported virulence determinants are included in these variants affected cdss. in addition to variations previously described in mycoplasma adhesins , cell envelope proteins , cell surface antigens , secreted proteins and chaperone protein , mutations in genes related to metabolism and growth may also contribute to the attenuated virulence in 168-l. furthermore, many mutations were located in the previously described repeat motif, which may be of primary importance for virulence.


CONCLUSIONS
we studied the virulence attenuation mechanism of m. hyopneumoniae by comparative genomic analysis of virulent strain  <dig> and its attenuated high-passage strain 168-l. our findings provide a preliminary survey of cdss that may be related to virulence. while these include reported virulence-related genes, other novel virulence determinants were also detected. this new information will form the foundation of future investigations into the pathogenesis of m. hyopneumoniae and facilitate the design of new vaccines.

mycoplasma hyopneumoniaegenetic variationvirulence attenuationsequence analysisrepetitive sequencesvirulence factors

