BACKGROUND
advanced selection technologies have been developed and continually optimized to improve traits of agricultural importance; however, these methods have been primarily applied without knowledge of underlying biological changes that may be induced by selection. this study aims to characterize the biological basis of differences between chickens with low and high feed efficiency  with a long-term goal of improving the ability to select for fe.


RESULTS
high-throughput rna sequencing was performed on  <dig> breast muscle samples from commercial broiler chickens with extremely high  and low  fe. an average of  <dig> million paired-end reads  were produced for each sample, 80% of which were properly mapped to the chicken reference genome . differential expression analysis identified  <dig>  genes  that significantly divergently expressed in breast muscle between the high- and low-fe chickens. gene function analysis revealed that genes involved in muscle remodeling, inflammatory response and free radical scavenging were mostly up-regulated in the high-fe birds. additionally, growth hormone and igfs/pi3k/akt signaling pathways were enriched in differentially expressed genes, which might contribute to the high breast muscle yield in high-fe birds and partly explain the fe advantage of high-fe chickens.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides novel insights into transcriptional differences in breast muscle between high- and low-fe broiler chickens. our results show that feed efficiency is associated with breast muscle growth in these birds; furthermore, some physiological changes, e.g., inflammatory response and oxidative stress, may occur in the breast muscle of the high-fe chickens, which may be of concern for continued selection for both of these traits together in modern broiler chickens.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqdifferential expression analysischicken feed efficiencybreast musclemuscle remodelingigfs/pi3k/akt signaling pathwayissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

