BACKGROUND
next-generation sequencing  technologies are arguably the most revolutionary technical development to join the list of tools available to molecular biologists since pcr. for researchers working with nonconventional model organisms one major problem with the currently dominant ngs platform  stems from the obligatory fragmentation of nucleic acid material that occurs prior to sequencing during library preparation. this step creates a significant bioinformatic challenge for accurate de novo assembly of novel transcriptome data. this challenge becomes apparent when a variety of modern assembly tools  are applied to the same raw ngs dataset. with the same assembly parameters these tools can generate markedly different assembly outputs.


RESULTS
in this study we present an approach that generates an optimized consensus de novo assembly of eukaryotic coding transcriptomes. this approach does not represent a new assembler, rather it combines the outputs of a variety of established assembly packages, and removes redundancy via a series of clustering steps. we test and validate our approach using illumina datasets from six phylogenetically diverse eukaryotes  and two simulated datasets derived from metazoan reference genome annotations. all of these datasets were assembled using three currently popular assembly packages . in addition, we experimentally demonstrate that transcripts unique to one particular assembly package are likely to be bioinformatic artefacts. for all eight datasets our pipeline generates more concise transcriptomes that in fact possess more unique annotatable protein domains than any of the three individual assemblers we employed. another measure of assembly completeness  also confirmed that our approach yields more information.


CONCLUSIONS
our approach yields coding transcriptome assemblies that are more likely to be closer to biological reality than any of the three individual assembly packages we investigated. this approach  will be of use to researchers working with species for which there is little or no reference data against which the assembly of a transcriptome can be performed.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomede novo assemblyeukaryoteprotein codingmergeredundanthttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftja 2108/1-2jackson daniel j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

