BACKGROUND
radish  is a major root vegetable crop especially in eastern asia. radish root contains various nutritions which play an important role in strengthening immunity. repetitive elements are primary components of the genomic sequence and the most important factors in genome size variations in higher eukaryotes. to date, studies about repetitive elements of radish are still limited. to better understand genome structure of radish, we undertook a study to evaluate the proportion of repetitive elements and their distribution in radish.


RESULTS
we conducted genome-wide characterization of repetitive elements in radish with low coverage genome sequencing followed by similarity-based cluster analysis. results showed that about 31% of the genome was composed of repetitive sequences. satellite repeats were the most dominating elements of the genome. the distribution pattern of three satellite repeat sequences  on radish chromosomes was characterized using fluorescence in situ hybridization . cl <dig> was predominantly located at the centromeric region of all chromosomes, cl <dig> located at the subtelomeric region, and cl <dig> was a telomeric satellite. fish signals of two satellite repeats, cl <dig> and cl <dig>  together with 5s rdna and 45s rdna, provide useful cytogenetic markers to identify each individual somatic metaphase chromosome. the centromere-specific histone h <dig>  has been used as a marker to identify centromere dna sequences. one putative cenh <dig>  was characterized and cloned from radish. its deduced amino acid sequence shares high similarities to those of the cenh3s in brassica species. an antibody against b. rapa cenh <dig>  specifically stained radish centromeres. immunostaining and chromatin immunoprecipitation  tests with anti-brcenh <dig> antibody demonstrated that both the centromere-specific retrotransposon  and satellite repeat  are directly associated with rscenh <dig> in radish.


CONCLUSIONS
proportions of repetitive elements in radish were estimated and satellite repeats were the most dominating elements. fine karyotyping analysis was established which allow us to easily identify each individual somatic metaphase chromosome. immunofluorescence- and chip-based assays demonstrated the functional significance of satellite and centromere-specific retrotransposon at centromeres. our study provides a valuable basis for future genomic studies in radish.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
radishrepetitive dnasatellitekaryotypingcenh3centromereissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

