BACKGROUND
transcription factors , essential for many cellular processes, generally work coordinately to induce transcriptional change in response to internal and external signals. disrupted cooperation between tfs, leading to dysregulation of target genes, contributes to the pathogenesis of many diseases, including cancer. although the aberrant activation of individual tfs and the functional effects have been widely studied, the perturbation of tf cooperativity in cancer has rarely been explored.


RESULTS
we used tf co-expression as proxy as cooperativity and performed a large-scale study on disrupted tf cooperation across seven cancer types. while the connectivity of downstream effectors, like metabolic genes and tf targets, were more or similarly disrupted than/with non-tfs, the cooperativity of tfs  were consistently less disturbed in all studied cancer types. highly coordinated tfs in normal, however, generally lost that cooperation in cancer. although different types of cancer shared very few tf pairs with highly disrupted cooperation, the cooperativity of interferon regulatory factors  was highly disrupted in six cancer types. specifically, the cooperativity of irf <dig> was highly perturbed in lung cancer, which was further validated by two independent lung squamous cell carcinoma  and lung adenocarcinoma  datasets. more interestingly, the cooperativity of irf <dig> was markedly associated with tumor progression and even contributed to the patient survival independent of tumor stage.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings underscore the far more important role of tf cooperativity in tumorigenesis than previously appreciated. disrupted cooperation of tfs provides potential clinical utility as prognostic markers for predicting the patient survival.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcription factorstf cooperationcooperation disruptionpan-cancerco-expressionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000054national cancer institute5u <dig> ca163056-05shyr yu cancer center support grant2p <dig> ca068485-19shyr yu robert j. kleberg, jr. and helen c. kleberg foundationcqs pilot project fy2016liu qi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

