BACKGROUND
sepsis is a serious and potentially life-threatening condition and early diagnosis and appropriate treatment is crucial for survival. pyometra is one of the most common diseases in intact female dogs. the disease often leads to sepsis . diagnostic markers for detecting sepsis are gaining increasing interest in veterinary medicine. acute phase proteins  such as c-reactive protein  are useful for detecting systemic inflammation in dogs. serum amyloid a  is another major app in dogs that is not yet as widely used. albumin is regarded as a negative app and has earlier been evaluated for prediction of prognosis in septic dogs. the aim of the present study was to determine saa, crp and albumin concentrations in dogs with sepsis and pyometra and to evaluate whether these inflammatory markers are associated with length of postoperative hospitalization.


RESULTS
thirty-one surgically treated bitches with pyometra were included, whereof  <dig> septic  and eight non-septic . albumin concentrations were analyzed by routine automated methods. saa and crp analyses were performed with previously validated commercially available assays .

mean  serum concentrations of saa were significantly higher in septic  compared to non-septic bitches . using a cut-off value for saa of  <dig>  mg/l , the sensitivity and specificity for detecting sepsis was 74% and 50%, respectively. serum albumin concentrations were not significantly different in septic compared to non-septic bitches . crp concentrations were also not significantly different in septic  compared to non-septic bitches . none of these inflammatory markers were associated with the outcome as measured by length of hospitalization.


CONCLUSIONS
saa concentrations were increased in dogs with sepsis induced by pyometra and may be useful as an adjunctive diagnostic marker for sepsis. to evaluate the full potential of saa as a marker for sepsis also in other diseases, further studies are warranted.

keywords
saacrpsirsbitchacute phase proteinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

