BACKGROUND
copy number variation  is a major source of genome polymorphism that directly contributes to phenotypic variation such as resistance to infectious diseases. lines  <dig> and  <dig> are two highly inbred experimental chicken lines that differ greatly in susceptibility to marek’s disease , and have been used extensively in efforts to identify the genetic and molecular basis for genetic resistance to md. using next generation sequencing, we present a genome-wide assessment of cnvs that are potentially associated with genetic resistance to md.

methods
three chickens randomly selected from each line were sequenced to an average depth of 20×. two popular software, cnvnator and pindel, were used to call genomic cnvs separately. the results were combined to obtain a union set of genomic cnvs in the two chicken lines. 


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  cnv regions  were identified after merging the two datasets, of which  <dig>  and  <dig>  were specific to the md resistant or susceptible line, respectively. over half of the line-specific cnvrs were shared by  <dig> or more chickens, reflecting the reduced diversity in both inbred lines. the cnvrs fixed in the susceptible lines were significantly enriched in genes involved in mapk signaling pathway. we also found  <dig> cnvrs overlapping with  <dig> genes previously shown to be strong candidates of the underlying genes responsible for the susceptibility to md.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings provide new insights into the genetic architecture of the two chicken lines and additional evidence that mapk signaling pathway may play an important role in host response to md virus infection. the rich source of line-specific cnvs is valuable for future disease-related association studies in the two chicken lines.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
copy number variationchickensusceptibilitymarek’s diseasemapk signaling pathwaynext generation sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

