BACKGROUND
soybean  merr.) is a short day plant. its flowering and maturity time are controlled by genetic and environmental factors, as well the interaction between the two factors. previous studies have shown that both genetic and environmental factors, mainly photoperiod and temperature, control flowering time of soybean. additionally, these studies have reported gene × gene and gene × environment interactions on flowering time. however, the effects of quantitative trait loci  in response to photoperiod and temperature have not been well evaluated. the objectives of the current study were to identify the effects of loci associated with flowering time under different photo-thermal conditions and to understand the effects of interaction between loci and environment on soybean flowering.

methods
different photoperiod and temperature combinations were obtained by adjusting sowing dates  or day-length . association mapping was performed on  <dig> soybean cultivars from different maturity groups  using  <dig> ssr markers and  <dig> snps from the illumina soysnp6k iselectbeadchip. the effects of the interaction between qtl and environments on flowering time were also analysed using the qtxnetwork.


RESULTS
large-effect loci were detected on gm  <dig>  gm  <dig> and gm  <dig> as in previous reports. most loci associated with flowering time are sensitive to photo-thermal conditions. number of loci associated with flowering time was more under the long day  than under the short day  condition. the variation of flowering time among the soybean cultivars mostly resulted from the epistasis × environment and additive × environment interactions. among the three candidate loci, i.e. gm04_ <dig> , gm16_ <dig>  and gm19_ <dig> , the gm04_ <dig> may be the key locus interacting with other loci for controlling soybean flowering time.


CONCLUSIONS
the effects of loci associated with the flowering time of soybean were dependent upon the photo-thermal conditions. this study facilitates the understanding of the genetic mechanism of soybean flowering and molecular breeding for the improvement of soybean adaptability to specific and/or broad regions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
soybean genetic architecturegene by environment interactionflowering timephoto-thermal conditionchina agriculture research systemcars-04caas agricultural science and technology innovation project.issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

