BACKGROUND
transcription factor  networks play a key role in controlling the transfer of genetic information from gene to mrna. much progress has been made on understanding and reverse-engineering tf network topologies using a range of experimental and theoretical methodologies. less work has focused on using these models to examine how tf networks respond to changes in the cellular environment.

methods
in this paper, we have developed a simple, pragmatic methodology, tigeri , to model the response of an inferred tf network to changes in cellular environment. the methodology was tested using publicly available data comparing gene expression profiles of a mouse p38α  knock-out line to the original wild-type.


RESULTS
using the model, we have examined changes in the tf network resulting from the presence or absence of p38α. a part of this network was confirmed by experimental work in the original paper. additional relationships were identified by our analysis, for example between p38α and hnf <dig>  and between p38α and sox <dig>  and these are strongly supported by published evidence. fxr and myc were also discovered in our analysis as two novel links of p38α. to provide a computational methodology to the biomedical communities that has more user-friendly interface, we also developed a standalone gui  software for tigeri and it is freely available at https://github.com/namshik/tigeri/.


CONCLUSIONS
we therefore believe that our computational approach can identify new members of networks and new interactions between members that are supported by published data but have not been integrated into the existing network models. moreover, ones who want to analyze their own data with tigeri could use the software without any command line experience. this work could therefore accelerate researches in transcriptional gene regulation in higher eukaryotes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
machine learningtranscriptional regulatory networktranscription factor binding sitegene expressiondtmbio 2016: the tenth international workshop on data and text mining in biomedical informatics dtmbio 2016indianapolis, in, usa 24- <dig> october  <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

