BACKGROUND
crambe abyssinica  is a non-food oil seed crop. its seed oil is widely used in the chemical industry because of the high erucic acid content. furthermore, it is a potential platform for various feedstock oils for industrial uses based on genetic modification. here, we describe the development of a series of protocols for all steps required in the process of generating genetically modified crambe.


RESULTS
different explant types from crambe seedlings were tested for shoot regeneration using different hormone-combinations. cotyledonary nodes on basic medium with  <dig>  μm naa and  <dig>  μm bap gave the highest regeneration percentages. for propagation by tissue culture, explants of stems, petioles, leaves and axillary buds of in vitro plantlets were tested using the optimized medium. axillary buds showed the highest shoot proliferation efficiency. cotyledonary nodes were used to test the proper concentration of kanamycin for selection of transformation events, and  <dig> to 25 mg · l- <dig> were identified as effective. the cotyledonary nodes and cotyledons from 7-day-old seedlings were used in agrobacterium-mediated transformations with two kinds of selection strategies, shifting or consistent. using the shifting selection method  cotyledonary nodes gave 10% transformation frequency, and cotyledons 4%, while with the consistent method  lower frequencies were found, 1% for cotyledonary nodes and 0% for cotyledons). later, in vitro plant axillary buds were tried as explants for transformation, however, transformation frequency was low ranging from  <dig>  to 2%. overall, testing six different vectors and two kinds of agrobacterium strains, the average transformation frequency using the shifting method was  <dig> %. determining t-dna insertion numbers by southern blotting showed that approximately 50% of the transgenic lines had a single-copy insertion.


CONCLUSIONS
present research revealed the potential of using crambe meristematic tissue for genetic transformation and in vitro propagation. the most efficient method of transformation used cotyledonary node explants from 7-days-old seedlings with a shifting kanamycin selection. meristematic tissues  had the highest ability for shoot proliferation. single-copy t-dna insert lines could be efficiently and reproducibly generated.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
crambeoilseed croppropagationregenerationgenetic modificationmeristematic tissueefficiencyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

