BACKGROUND
the olive fly, bactrocera oleae, is the most devastating pest of cultivated olives. its control has been traditionally based on insecticides, mainly organophosphates and pyrethroids. in recent years, the naturalyte spinosad is used against the olive fly. as with other insecticides, spinosad is subject to selection pressures that have led to resistance development. mutations in the α <dig> subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor  have been implicated in spinosad resistance in several species  but excluded in others . yet, additional mechanisms involving enhanced metabolism of detoxification enzymes  have also been reported. in order to clarify the spinosad resistance mechanisms in the olive fly, we searched for mutations in the α6-subunit of the nachr and for up-regulated genes in the entire transcriptome of spinosad resistant olive flies.


RESULTS
the olive fly α6-subunit of the nachr was cloned from the laboratory sensitive strain and a spinosad selected resistant line. the differences reflected silent nucleotide substitutions or conserved amino acid changes. additionally, whole transcriptome analysis was performed in the two strains in order to reveal any underlying resistance mechanisms. comparison of over  <dig>  genes showed that in spinosad resistant flies nine genes were significantly over-expressed, whereas ~ <dig> were under-expressed. further functional analyses of the nine over-expressed and eleven under-expressed loci were performed. four of these loci  showed consistently higher expression both in the spinosad resistant strain and in wild flies from a resistant california population. on the other side, two storage protein genes  and two heat-shock protein genes  were unfailingly under-expressed in resistant flies.


CONCLUSIONS
the observed nucleotide differences in the nachr-α <dig> subunit between the sensitive and spinosad resistant olive fly strains did not advocate for the involvement of receptor mutations in spinosad resistance. instead, the transcriptome comparison between the two strains indicated that several immune system loci as well as elevated energy requirements of the resistant flies might be necessary to lever the detoxification process.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
insecticide tolerancespinosynsnext generation sequencingexpression analysisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

