BACKGROUND
induced aboveground plant defenses against pathogens can have negative effects on belowground microbial symbionts. while a considerable number of studies have utilized chemical elicitors to experimentally induce such defenses, there is surprisingly little evidence that actual aboveground pathogens affect root-associated microbes. we report here that an aboveground fungal pathogen of common bean  induces a defense response that inhibits both the belowground formation of root nodules elicited by rhizobia and the colonization with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi .


RESULTS
foliage of plants inoculated with either rhizobia or amf was treated with both live colletotrichum gloeosporioides—a generalist hemibiotrophic plant pathogen—and c. gloeosporioides fragments. polyphenol oxidase , chitinase and β- <dig> -glucanase activity in leaves and roots, as well as the number of rhizobia nodules and the extent of amf colonization, were measured after pathogen treatments. both the live pathogen and pathogen fragments significantly increased ppo, chitinase and β- <dig> -glucanase activity in the leaves, but only ppo activity was increased in roots. the number of rhizobia nodules and the extent of amf colonization was significantly reduced in treatment plants when compared to controls.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that aboveground fungal pathogens can affect belowground mutualism with two very different types of microbial symbionts—rhizobia and amf. our results suggest that systemically induced ppo activity is functionally involved in this above-belowground interaction. we predict that the top-down effects we show here can drastically impact plant performance in soils with limited nutrients and water; abiotic stress conditions usually mitigated by microbial belowground mutualists.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
colletotrichum gloeosporioidesinduced responseplant defenseplant–pathogen interactionpolyphenol oxidasetradeoffissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

