BACKGROUND
protein n-glycosylation occurs in the three domains of life. oligosaccharyltransferase  transfers an oligosaccharide chain to the asparagine residue in the n-glycosylation sequons. the catalytic subunits of the ost enzyme are stt <dig> in eukaryotes, aglb in archaea and pglb in eubacteria. the genome of a hyperthermophilic archaeon, archaeoglobus fulgidus, encodes three paralogous aglb proteins. we previously solved the crystal structures of the c-terminal globular domains of two paralogs, aglb-short  <dig> and aglb-short  <dig> 


RESULTS
we determined the crystal structure of the c-terminal globular domain of the third aglb paralog, aglb-long, at  <dig> ʁ resolutions. the crystallization of the fusion protein with maltose binding protein  afforded high quality protein crystals. two mbp-aglb-l molecules formed a swapped dimer in the crystal. since the fusion protein behaved as a monomer upon gel filtration, we reconstituted the monomer structure from the swapped dimer by exchanging the swapped segments. the c-terminal domain of a. fulgidus aglb-l includes a structural unit common to aglb-s <dig> and aglb-s <dig>  this structural unit contains the evolutionally conserved wwdyg and dk motifs. the present structure revealed that a. fulgidus aglb-l contained a variant type of the dk motif with a short insertion, and confirmed that the second signature residue, lys, of the dk motif participates in the formation of a pocket that binds to the serine and threonine residues at the + <dig> position of the n-glycosylation sequon.


CONCLUSIONS
the structure of a. fulgidus aglb-l, together with the two previously solved structures of aglb-s <dig> and aglb-s <dig>  provides a complete overview of the three aglb paralogs encoded in the a. fulgidus genome. all three aglbs contain a variant type of the dk motif. this finding supports a previously proposed rule: the stt3/aglb/pglb paralogs in one organism always contain the same type of ser/thr-binding pocket. the present structure will be useful as a search model for molecular replacement in the structural determination of the full-length a. fulgidus aglb-l.

aglbarchaeoglobus fulgiduscrystal structuren-glycosylationmbp fusionoligosaccharyltransferase

