BACKGROUND
macrostomum lignano is a small free-living flatworm capable of regenerating all body parts posterior of the pharynx and anterior to the brain. we quantified the cellular composition of the caudal-most body region, the tail plate, and investigated regeneration of the tail plate in vivo and in semithin sections labeled with bromodeoxyuridine, a marker for stem cells  in s-phase.


RESULTS
the tail plate accomodates the male genital apparatus and consists of about  <dig>  cells, about half of which are epidermal cells. a distinct regeneration blastema, characterized by a local accumulation of rapidly proliferating neoblasts and consisting of about  <dig> cells , was formed  <dig> hours after amputation. differentiated cells in the blastema were observed two days after amputation , while the male genital apparatus required four to five days for full differentiation. at all time points, mitoses were found within the blastema. at the place of organ differentiation, neoblasts did not replicate or divide. after three days, the blastema was made of about  <dig> cells and gradually transformed into organ primordia, while the proliferation rate decreased. the cell number of the tail plate, including about  <dig> epidermal cells, was restored to 75% at this time point.


CONCLUSIONS
regeneration after artificial amputation of the tail plate of adult specimens of macrostomum lignano involves wound healing and the formation of a regeneration blastema. neoblasts undergo extensive proliferation within the blastema. proliferation patterns of s-phase neoblasts indicate that neoblasts are either determined to follow a specific cell fate not before, but after going through s-phase, or that they can be redetermined after s-phase. in pulse-chase experiments, dispersed distribution of label suggests that s-phase labeled progenitor cells of the male genital apparatus undergo further proliferation before differentiation, in contrast to progenitor cells of epidermal cells. mitotic activity and proliferation within the blastema is a feature of m. lignano shared with many other regenerating animals.

