BACKGROUND
as development proceeds the human embryo attains an ever more complex three dimensional  structure. analyzing the gene expression patterns that underlie these changes and interpreting their significance depends on identifying the anatomical structures to which they map and following these patterns in developing 3d structures over time. the difficulty of this task greatly increases as more gene expression patterns are added, particularly in organs with complex 3d structures such as the brain. optical projection tomography  is a new technology which has been developed for rapidly generating digital 3d models of intact specimens. we have assessed the resolution of unstained neuronal structures within a carnegie stage  <dig> opt model and tested its use as a framework onto which anatomical structures can be defined and gene expression data mapped.


RESULTS
resolution of the opt models was assessed by comparison of digital sections with physical sections stained, either with haematoxylin and eosin  or by immunocytochemistry for gap <dig> or pax <dig>  to identify specific anatomical features. despite the 3d models being of unstained tissue, peripheral nervous system structures from the trigeminal ganglion  to the rootlets of cranial nerve xii  were clearly identifiable, as were structures in the developing neural tube such as the zona limitans intrathalamica . fourteen anatomical domains have been identified and visualised within the cs <dig> model. two 3d gene expression domains, known to be defined by pax <dig> expression in the mouse, were clearly visible when pax <dig> data from 2d sections were mapped to the cs <dig> model. the feasibility of applying the opt technology to all stages from cs <dig> to cs <dig>  which encompasses the major period of organogenesis for the human developing central nervous system, was successfully demonstrated.


CONCLUSIONS
in the cs <dig> model considerable detail is visible within the developing nervous system at a minimum resolution of ~ <dig> μm and 3d anatomical and gene expression domains can be defined and visualised successfully. the opt models and accompanying technologies for manipulating them provide a powerful approach to visualising and analysing gene expression and morphology during early human brain development.

