BACKGROUND
tall fescue  is major cool-season forage and turf grass species worldwide, but high-temperature is a major environmental stress that dramatically threaten forage production and turf management of tall fescue. however, very little is known about the whole-genome molecular mechanisms contributing to thermotolerance. the objectives of this study were to analyzed genome-wide gene expression profiles in the leaves of two tall fescue genotypes, heat tolerant ‘pi578718’ and heat sensitive ‘pi234881’ using high-throughput rna sequencing.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> million high-quality paired-end reads were generated and assembled into  <dig>  unigenes with an average length of  <dig>  bp. of these,  <dig>  unigenes showed different expression patterns in response to heat stress and were categorized into  <dig> gene ontology functional subcategories. in addition, the variance of enrichment degree in each functional subcategory between pi <dig> and pi <dig> increased with increasing treatment time. cell division and cell cycle genes showed a massive increase in transcript abundance in heat-stressed plants and more activated genes were detected in pi  <dig> by kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes pathways analysis. low molecular weight heat shock protein  showed activated in two stressed genotypes and high molecular weight hsp  just in pi <dig>  assimilation such as photosynthesis, carbon fixation, ch <dig>  n, s metabolism decreased along with increased dissimilation such as oxidative phosphorylation.


CONCLUSIONS
the assembled transcriptome of tall fescue could serve as a global description of expressed genes and provide more molecular resources for future functional characterization analysis of genomics in cool-season turfgrass in response to high-temperature. increased cell division, lmw/hmw-hsp, dissimilation and antioxidant transcript amounts in tall fescue were correlated with successful resistance to high temperature stress.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
high-temperature stressrna sequencingcell cycleenergy metabolismtall fescueissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

