BACKGROUND
single cell genomics has revolutionized microbial sequencing, but complete coverage of genomes in complex microbiomes is imperfect due to enormous variation in organismal abundance and amplification bias. empirical methods that complement rapidly improving bioinformatic tools will improve characterization of microbiomes and facilitate better genome coverage for low abundance microbes.

methods
we describe a new approach to sequencing individual species from microbiomes that combines antibody phage display against intact bacteria with fluorescence activated cell sorting . single chain  antibodies are selected using phage display against a bacteria or microbial community, resulting in species-specific antibodies that can be used in facs for relative quantification of an organism in a community, as well as enrichment or depletion prior to genome sequencing.


RESULTS
we selected antibodies against lactobacillus acidophilus and demonstrate a facs-based approach for identification and enrichment of the organism from both laboratory-cultured and commercially derived bacterial mixtures. the ability to selectively enrich for l. acidophilus when it is present at a very low abundance  leads to complete  de novo genome coverage whereas the standard single-cell sequencing approach is incomplete . we show that specific antibodies can be selected against l. acidophilus when the monoculture is used as antigen as well as when a community of  <dig> closely related species is used demonstrating that in principal antibodies can be generated against individual organisms within microbial communities.


CONCLUSIONS
the approach presented here demonstrates that phage-selected antibodies against bacteria enable identification, enrichment of rare species, and depletion of abundant organisms making it tractable to virtually any microbe or microbial community. combining antibody specificity with facs provides a new approach for characterizing and manipulating microbial communities prior to genome sequencing.

phage antibodiesgenome completionsingle cell genomicsmdaflow cytometry

