BACKGROUND
the transition from vegetative to floral state in shoot apical meristems  is a key event in plant development and is of crucial importance for reproductive success. in perennial plants, this event is recurrent during tree life and subject to both within-tree and between-years heterogeneity. in the present study, our goal was to identify candidate processes involved in the repression or induction of flowering in apical buds of adult apple trees.


RESULTS
genes differentially expressed  were examined between trees artificially set in either ‘on’ or ‘off’ situation, and in which floral induction  was shown to be inhibited or induced in most buds, respectively, using qrt-pcr and microarray analysis. from the period of fi through to flower differentiation, gde belonged to four main biological processes  response to stimuli, including response to oxidative stress;  cellular processes,  cell wall biogenesis, and  metabolic processes including carbohydrate biosynthesis and lipid metabolic process. several key regulator genes, especially tempranillo , floral transition at meristem  and squamosa promoter binding protein-like  were found differentially expressed. moreover, homologs of spl and leucine-rich repeat proteins were present under qtl zones previously detected for biennial bearing.


CONCLUSIONS
this data set suggests that apical buds of ‘on’ and ‘off’ trees were in different physiological states, resulting from different metabolic, hormonal and redox status which are likely to contribute to fi control in adult apple trees. investigations on carbohydrate and hormonal fluxes from sources to sam and on cell detoxification process are expected to further contribute to the identification of the underlying physiological mechanisms of fi in adult apple trees.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
malus x domesticafloral inductionfloral inhibitionmicroarrayqrt-pcralternate bearinginra bap departmentnew zeland horticultural genomics programme issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

