BACKGROUND
symbiotic relationships between insects and bacteria are found across almost all insect orders, including hymenoptera. however there are still many remaining questions about these associations including what factors drive host-associated bacterial composition. to better understand the evolutionary significance of this association in nature, further studies addressing a diversity of hosts across locations and evolutionary history are necessary. ants of the genus polyrhachis  are distributed across the old world and exhibit generalist diets and habits. using next generation sequencing  and bioinformatics tools, this study explores the microbial community of > <dig> species of polyrhachis distributed across the old world and compares the microbiota of samples and related hosts across different biogeographic locations and in the context of their phylogenetic history.


RESULTS
the predominant bacteria across samples were enterobacteriaceae , followed by wolbachia , lactobacillus, thiotrichaceae, acinetobacter, nocardia, sodalis, and others. we recovered some exclusive strains of enterobacteriaceae as specific to some subgenera of polyrhachis, corroborating the idea of coevolution between host and bacteria for this bacterial group. our correlation results  found that host phylogeny can influence the overall bacterial community, but that geographic location had no effect.


CONCLUSIONS
our work is revealing important aspects of the biology of hosts in structuring the diversity and abundance of these host-associated bacterial communities including the role of host phylogeny and shared evolutionary history.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
blochmanniawolbachialactobacillusngsmicrobesamplicon sequencinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100006363national geographic society9451-14moreau corrie saux capes foundation 007343/2014-00ramalho manuela oliveira issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

