BACKGROUND
cells contain several inositol pyrophosphates , which play pivotal roles in cellular and organismic homeostasis. it has been proposed that determining mechanisms of compartmentation of the synthesis of a particular pp-insp is key to understanding how each of them may exert a specific function. human ppip5k <dig> , one of the key enzymes that synthesizes pp-insps, contains a putative consensus sequence for a nuclear localization signal . however, such in silico analysis has limited predictive power, and may be complicated by phosphorylation events that can dynamically modulate nls function. we investigated if this candidate nls is functional and regulated, using the techniques of cell biology, mutagenesis and mass spectrometry.


RESULTS
multiple sequence alignments revealed that the metazoan ppip5k <dig> family contains a candidate nls within a strikingly well-conserved  <dig> amino-acid domain. by analyzing the distribution of hppip5k2-gfp in hek293t cells with the techniques of confocal microscopy and imaging flow cytometry, we found that a distinct pool of hppip5k <dig> is present in the nucleus. imaging flow cytometry yielded particular insight into the characteristics of the nuclear hppip5k <dig> sub-pool, through a high-throughput, statistically-robust analysis of many hundreds of cells. mutagenic disruption of the candidate nls in hppip5k <dig> reduced its degree of nuclear localization. proximal to the nls is a ser residue  that mass spectrometry data indicate is phosphorylated inside cells. the degree of nuclear localization of hppip5k <dig> was increased when s <dig> was rendered non-phosphorylatable by its mutation to ala. conversely, a s1006d phosphomimetic mutant of hppip5k <dig> exhibited a lower degree of nuclear localization.


CONCLUSIONS
the current study describes for the first time the functional significance of an nls in the conserved ppip5k <dig> family. we have further demonstrated that there is phosphorylation of a ser residue that is proximal to the nls of hppip5k <dig>  these conclusions draw attention to nuclear compartmentation of ppip5k <dig> as being a physiologically relevant and covalently-regulated event. our study also increases general insight into the consensus sequences of other nlss, the functions of which might be similarly regulated.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cell-signalingnuclear translocationinositol phosphate kinasetraffickingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

