BACKGROUND
chlamydia pneumoniae  are obligate intracellular bacteria that cause acute infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract and have been implicated in chronic inflammatory diseases. although of significant clinical relevance, complete genome sequences of only four clinical cpn strains have been obtained. all of them were isolated from the respiratory tract and shared more than 99% sequence identity. here we investigate genetic differences on the whole-genome level that are related to cpn tissue tropism and pathogenicity.


RESULTS
we have sequenced the genomes of  <dig> clinical isolates from different anatomical sites  of diseased patients, and one animal isolate. in total  <dig>  snp loci and  <dig> indels have been identified in the genomes of all clinical cpn isolates. these are distributed throughout the whole chlamydial genome and enriched in highly variable regions. the genomes show clear evidence of recombination in at least one potential region but no phage insertions. the tyrp gene was always encoded as single copy in all vascular isolates. phylogenetic reconstruction revealed distinct evolutionary lineages containing primarily non-respiratory cpn isolates. in one of these, clinical isolates from coronary arteries and blood monocytes were closely grouped together. they could be distinguished from all other isolates by characteristic nssnps in genes involved in rb to eb transition, inclusion membrane formation, bacterial stress response and metabolism.


CONCLUSIONS
this study substantially expands the genomic data of cpn and elucidates its evolutionary history. the translation of the observed cpn genetic differences into biological functions and the prediction of novel pathogen-oriented diagnostic strategies have to be further explored.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chlamydia pneumoniaegenome assemblycomparative genomicstissue tropismsnpsindelsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

