BACKGROUND
tuberous sclerosis complex  is an autosomal dominant hamartoma disorder with variable expression for which treatment options are limited. tsc is caused by a mutation in either the tsc <dig> or tsc <dig> genes, whose products, hamartin and tuberin, function as negative regulators in the highly-conserved mammalian target of rapamycin  signaling pathway. rapamycin , an mtor inhibitor, has been shown to reduce disease severity in rodent models of tsc and is currently being evaluated in clinical trials in human populations. the cytokine interferon-gamma  is also a potential therapeutic agent for tsc. a high-expressing ifn-γ allele has been associated with reduced disease severity in human tsc patients and it has been shown in mouse models that treatment with exogenous ifn-γ reduces disease severity.


RESULTS
here, we examine the effects of treating tsc2+/- mice at different time points with a rapamycin analog  as a single agent or with a combination of cci- <dig> and ifn-γ. we observed that administering a short course of cci- <dig> or cci- <dig> plus ifn-γ reduced the severity of kidney lesions if administered after such lesions develop. as long as treatment is given after lesions arise, altering the time period during which treatment was given did not significantly impact the effect of the treatment on disease severity. we did not observe a significant benefit of combination therapy relative to treatment with a rapamycin analog alone in tsc2+/- mice. we also compared timing of treatment and two mtor inhibitors  in nude mice bearing tsc2-/- tumors.


CONCLUSIONS
preventing the genesis of tsc-related kidney lesions in tsc2+/- mice is not an effective treatment strategy; rather, the presence of growing tumors appears to be the most important factor when determining an appropriate treatment schedule. treatment with rapamycin was more effective in reducing tumor growth and improving survival in nude mice bearing tsc2-/- tumors and also resulted in higher rapamycin levels in blood, brain, and kidney tissue than treatment with an equal milligram dose of cci- <dig>  we anticipate these results will influence future preclinical and clinical trials for tsc.

