BACKGROUND
secondary structure in the target is a property not usually considered in software applications for design of optimal custom oligonucleotide probes. it is frequently assumed that eliminating self-complementarity, or screening for secondary structure in the probe, is sufficient to avoid interference with hybridization by stable secondary structures in the probe binding site. prediction and thermodynamic analysis of secondary structure formation in a genome-wide set of transcripts from brucella suis  <dig> demonstrates that the properties of the target molecule have the potential to strongly influence the rate and extent of hybridization between transcript and tethered oligonucleotide probe in a microarray experiment.


RESULTS
despite the relatively high hybridization temperatures and 1m monovalent salt imposed in the modeling process to approximate hybridization conditions used in the laboratory, we find that parts of the target molecules are likely to be inaccessible to intermolecular hybridization due to the formation of stable intramolecular secondary structure. for example, at 65°c,  <dig> ± 7% of the average cdna target sequence is predicted to be inaccessible to hybridization. we also analyzed the specific binding sites of a set of 70mer probes previously designed for brucella using a freely available oligo design software package.  <dig> ± 13% of the nucleotides in each probe binding site are within a double-stranded structure in over half of the folds predicted for the cdna target at 65°c. the intramolecular structures formed are more stable and extensive when an rna target is modeled rather than cdna. when random shearing of the target is modeled for fragments of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> nt, an overall destabilization of secondary structure is predicted, but shearing does not eliminate secondary structure.


CONCLUSIONS
secondary structure in the target is pervasive, and a significant fraction of the target is found in double stranded conformations even at high temperature. stable structure in the target has the potential to interfere with hybridization and should be a factor in interpretation of microarray results, as well as an explicit criterion in array design. inclusion of this property in an oligonucleotide design procedure would change the definition of an optimal oligonucleotide significantly.

