BACKGROUND
serine proteases  are crucial proteolytic enzymes responsible for digestion and other processes including signal transduction and immune responses in insects. serine protease homologs  lack catalytic activity but are involved in innate immunity. this study presents a genome-wide investigation of sps and sphs in the diamondback moth, plutella xylostella , a globally-distributed destructive pest of cruciferous crops.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> putative sps and  <dig> putative sphs were identified in the p. xylostella genome by bioinformatics analysis. based on the features of trypsin,  <dig> sps were putatively designated as trypsin genes. the distribution, transcription orientation, exon-intron structure and sequence alignments suggested that the majority of trypsin genes evolved from tandem duplications. among the  <dig> sp/sph genes, ten sp and three sph genes with one or more clip domains were predicted and designated as pxclips. phylogenetic analysis of clips in p. xylostella, two other lepidoptera species , and two more distantly related insects  showed that seven of the  <dig> pxclips were clustered with homologs of the lepidoptera rather than other species. expression profiling of the p. xylostella sp and sph genes in different developmental stages and tissues showed diverse expression patterns, suggesting high functional diversity with roles in digestion and development.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first genome-wide investigation on the sp and sph genes in p. xylostella. the characterized features and profiled expression patterns of the p. xylostella sps and sphs suggest their involvement in digestion, development and immunity of this species. our findings provide a foundation for further research on the functions of this gene family in p. xylostella, and a better understanding of its capacity to rapidly adapt to a wide range of environmental variables including host plants and insecticides.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
digestive enzymeexpression patterntrypsinchymotrypsinlepidopterahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 3132010392231230061you minsheng national key project of fundamental scientific research  in china2011cb100404you minsheng issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

