BACKGROUND
we have previously shown that lipophilic components  of the brown seaweed ascophyllum nodosum  improved freezing tolerance in arabidopsis thaliana. however, the mechanism of this induced freezing stress tolerance is largely unknown. here, we investigated lpc induced changes in the transcriptome and metabolome of a. thaliana undergoing freezing stress.


RESULTS
gene expression studies revealed that the accumulation of proline was mediated by an increase in the expression of the proline synthesis genes p5cs <dig> and p5cs <dig> and a marginal reduction in the expression of the proline dehydrogenase  gene. moreover, lpc application significantly increased the concentration of total soluble sugars in the cytosol in response to freezing stress. arabidopsis sfr <dig> mutant plants, defective in the accumulation of free sugars, treated with lpc, exhibited freezing sensitivity similar to that of untreated controls. the 1h nmr metabolite profile of lpc-treated arabidopsis plants exposed to freezing stress revealed a spectrum dominated by chemical shifts  representing soluble sugars, sugar alcohols, organic acids and lipophilic components like fatty acids, as compared to control plants. additionally, 2d nmr spectra suggested an increase in the degree of unsaturation of fatty acids in lpc treated plants under freezing stress. these results were supported by global transcriptome analysis. transcriptome analysis revealed that lpc treatment altered the expression of  <dig> genes  in comparison with untreated plants. a total of  <dig> genes  were up regulated while  <dig> genes  were down regulated.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, the results of the experiments presented in this paper provide evidence to support lpc mediated freezing tolerance enhancement through a combination of the priming of plants for the increased accumulation of osmoprotectants and alteration of cellular fatty acid composition.

arabidopsis thalianaascophyllum nodosumfreezing tolerancechemical primingsoluble sugarsmetabolite profilingmicroarray analysis

