BACKGROUND
corals are capable of launching diverse immune defenses at the site of direct contact with pathogens, but the molecular mechanisms of this activity and the colony-wide effects of such stressors remain poorly understood. here we compared gene expression profiles in eight healthy acropora hyacinthus colonies against eight colonies exhibiting tissue loss commonly associated with white syndromes, all collected from a natural reef environment near palau. two types of tissues were sampled from diseased corals: visibly affected and apparently healthy.


RESULTS
tag-based rna-seq followed by weighted gene co-expression network analysis identified groups of co-regulated differentially expressed genes between all health states . differences between healthy and diseased tissues indicate activation of several innate immunity and tissue repair pathways accompanied by reduced calcification and the switch towards metabolic reliance on stored lipids. unaffected parts of diseased colonies, although displaying a trend towards these changes, were not significantly different from fully healthy samples. still, network analysis identified a group of genes, suggestive of altered immunity state, that were specifically up-regulated in unaffected parts of diseased colonies.


CONCLUSIONS
similarity of fully healthy samples to apparently healthy parts of diseased colonies indicates that systemic effects of white syndromes on a. hyacinthus are weak, which implies that the coral colony is largely able to sustain its physiological performance despite disease. the genes specifically up-regulated in unaffected parts of diseased colonies, instead of being the consequence of disease, might be related to the originally higher susceptibility of these colonies to naturally occurring white syndromes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
innate immunitynetwork analysisgene expressioncoral diseaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

