BACKGROUND
coagulase-positive  and coagulase-negative  staphylococci are normal commensals of the skin and mucosa, but are also opportunist pathogens. meticillin-resistant  and multidrug-resistant  isolates are increasing in human and veterinary healthcare. healthy humans and other animals harbour a variety of staphylococci, including mr-cops and mr-cons. the main aims of the study were to characterise the population and antimicrobial resistance profiles of staphylococci from healthy non-vet visiting and non-antimicrobial treated labrador retrievers in the uk.


RESULTS
nasal and perineal samples were collected from  <dig> labrador retrievers; staphylococci isolated and identified using phenotypic and biochemical methods. they were also confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry , pcr of the nuc gene and pcr and sequencing of the tuf gene. disc diffusion and minimum inhibitory concentration  susceptibility tests were determined for a range of antimicrobials. in total,  <dig> cops  and  <dig> cons isolates were detected from 99% of dogs in this study. in 52% of dogs cons only were detected, with both cons and cops detected in 43% dogs and cops only detected in 4% of dogs. antimicrobial resistance was not common among cops, but at least one mdr-cons isolate was detected in 34% of dogs. mr-cons were detected from 42% of dogs but no mr-cops were isolated. s. epidermidis  was the most common cons found followed by s. warneri  and s. equorum , with another  <dig> cons species isolated from ≤ 15% of dogs. s. pseudintermedius and s. aureus were detected in 44% and 8% of dogs respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
mr- and mdr-cops were rare. however a high prevalence of mr- and mdr-cons were found in these dogs, even though they had no prior antimicrobial treatment or admission to veterinary premises. these findings are of concern due to the potential for opportunistic infections, zoonotic transmission and transmission of antimicrobial resistant determinants from these bacteria to coagulase positive staphylococci.

coagulase-postive staphylococcicoagulase-negative staphylococcimeticillin-resistantdogsmaldi-tof-mstuf genenuc geneantimicrobial-susceptibility

