BACKGROUND
the distributions of species and their responses to climate change are in part determined by their thermal tolerances. however, little is known about how thermal tolerance evolves. to test whether evolutionary extension of thermal limits is accomplished through enhanced cellular stress response , constitutively elevated expression of protective genes  or a shift from damage resistance to passive mechanisms of thermal stability , we conducted an analysis of the reactionome: the reaction norm for all genes in an organism’s transcriptome measured across an experimental gradient. we characterized thermal reactionomes of two common ant species in the eastern u.s, the northern cool-climate aphaenogaster picea and the southern warm-climate aphaenogaster carolinensis, across  <dig> temperatures that spanned their entire thermal breadth.


RESULTS
we found that at least 2 % of all genes changed expression with temperature. the majority of upregulation was specific to exposure to low temperatures. the cool-adapted a. picea induced expression of more genes in response to extreme temperatures than did a. carolinensis, consistent with the enhanced response hypothesis. in contrast, under high temperatures the warm-adapted a. carolinensis downregulated many of the genes upregulated in a. picea, and required more extreme temperatures to induce down-regulation in gene expression, consistent with the tolerance hypothesis. we found no evidence for a trade-off between constitutive and inducible gene expression as predicted by the genetic assimilation hypothesis.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that increases in upper thermal limits may require an evolutionary shift in response mechanism away from damage repair toward tolerance and prevention.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aphaenogastergene expressionplasticityreactionometranscriptomehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> / <dig> gotelli nicholas j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

