BACKGROUND
the clinical course of chronic lymphocytic leukemia  is highly variable; some patients follow an indolent course, but others progress to a more advanced stage. the mutational status of rearranged immunoglobulin heavy chain variable  genes in cll is a feature that is widely recognized for dividing patients into groups that are related to their prognoses. however, the regulatory programs associated with the igvh statuses are poorly understood, and markers that can precisely predict survival outcomes have yet to be identified.

methods
in this study,  we reconstructed gene regulatory networks in cll by applying an information-theoretic approach to the expression profiles of  <dig> cohorts.  we applied master regulator analysis  to these networks to identify transcription factors  that regulate an igvh mutational status signature. the igvh mutational status signature was developed by searching for differentially expressed genes between the igvh mutational statuses in numerous cll cohorts.  to evaluate the biological implication of the inferred regulators, prognostic values were determined using time to treatment  and overall survival  in two different cohorts.


RESULTS
a robust igvh expression signature was obtained, and various tfs emerged as regulators of the signature in most of the reconstructed networks. the tf targets expression profiles exhibited significant differences with respect to survival, which allowed the definition of a reduced profile with a high value for os. tcf <dig> and its targets stood out for their roles in progression.


CONCLUSIONS
tfs and their targets, which were obtained merely from inferred regulatory associations, have prognostic implications and reflect a regulatory context for prognosis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
clligvh mutational statusregulatory networksissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

