BACKGROUND
anthocyanidins are synthesized by the flavonoid biosynthesis pathway with multi-layered regulatory control. methods for the analysis of the flavonoid composition in plants are well established for different purposes. however, they typically compromise either on speed or on depth of analysis.


RESULTS
in this work we combined and optimized different protocols to enable the analysis of the flavonoid biosynthesis pathway with as little as possible biological material. we chose core substances of this metabolic pathway that serve as a fingerprint to recognize alterations in the main branches of the pathway. we used a simplified sample preparation, two deuterated internal standards, a short and efficient lc separation, highly sensitive detection with tandem ms in multiple reaction monitoring  mode and hydrolytic release of the core substances to reduce complexity. the method was optimized for arabidopsis thaliana seeds and seedlings. we demonstrate that one col- <dig> seed/seedling is sufficient to obtain a fingerprint of the core substances of the flavonoid biosynthesis pathway. for comparative analysis of different genotypes, we suggest the use of  <dig> seed. the analysis of arabidopsis thaliana mutants affecting steps in the pathway revealed foreseen and unexpected alterations of the pathway. for example, hy <dig> was found to differentially regulate kaempferol in seeds vs. seedlings. furthermore, our results suggest that cop <dig> is a master regulator of flavonoid biosynthesis in seedlings but not of flavonoid deposition in seeds.


CONCLUSIONS
when sample numbers are high and the plant material is limited, this method effectively facilitates metabolic fingerprinting with one seed, revealing shifts and differences in the pathway. moreover the combination of extracted non-hydrolysed, extracted hydrolysed and non-extracted hydrolysed samples proved useful to deduce the class of derivative from which the individual flavonoids have been released.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
anthocyanidinproanthocyanidinflavonoidsseedseedlingdeuterated internal standardlc-mshydrolysisarabidopsis thalianahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftceplas, exc 1028ceplas, exc 1028hoecker ute imprsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

