BACKGROUND
this study aimed to investigate the possible serum protein changes after endotoxin administration in healthy and choline-treated calves using proteomics. these results are expected to contribute to the understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms of endotoxemia and the beneficial effect of choline administration in this clinical situation.

methods
healthy-calves  were divided into  <dig> groups: control, choline treated , lipopolysaccharide administered , and lps + c. control calves received  <dig>  % nacl injection. calves in c and lps + c groups received choline chloride . endotoxin  was injected  to the calves in lps and lps + c groups. serum samples were collected before and after the treatments. differentially expressed proteins  were identified by lc-ms/ms.


RESULTS
after lps administration,  <dig> proteins increased, and  <dig> proteins decreased within 48 h as compared to controls. in the lps group, there were significant increases in serum levels of ragulator complex protein  and galectin-3-binding protein , but transcription factor maff and corticosteroid binding globulin were down regulated . as compared with the lps group, in lps + c group, fibrinogen gamma-b-chain and antithrombin were up-regulated, while hemopexin and histone h <dig> were down-regulated. choline treatment attenuated actin alpha cardiac muscle- <dig> overexpression after lps.


CONCLUSIONS
lps administration produces changes in serum proteins associated with lipid metabolism, immune and inflammatory response, protein binding/transport, cell adhesion, venous thrombosis, cardiac contractility and blood coagulation. the administration of choline is associated with changes in proteins which can be related with its beneficial effect in this clinical situation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
calvescholineendotoxemiaproteomicsepsistÜbtak111o026issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

