BACKGROUND
n-arachidonoyl glycine  is an endogenous signaling lipid with a wide variety of biological activity whose biosynthesis is poorly understood. two primary biosynthetic pathways have been proposed. one suggests that nagly is formed via an enzymatically regulated conjugation of arachidonic acid  and glycine. the other suggests that nagly is an oxidative metabolite of the endogenous cannabinoid, anandamide , through an alcohol dehydrogenase. here using both in vitro and in vivo assays measuring metabolites with lc/ms/ms we test the hypothesis that both pathways are present in mammalian cells.


RESULTS
the metabolic products of deuterium-labeled aea, d4aea , indicated that nagly is formed by the oxidation of the ethanolamine creating a d2nagly product in both raw  <dig>  and c <dig> glioma cells. significantly, d4aea produced a d0nagly product only in c <dig> glioma cells suggesting that the hydrolysis of aea yielded aa that was used preferentially in a conjugation reaction. addition of the fatty acid amide  inhibitor urb  <dig> blocked the production of d0nagly in these cells. incubation with d8aa in c <dig> glioma cells likewise produced d8nagly; however, with significantly less efficacy leading to the hypothesis that faah-initiated aea-released aa conjugation with glycine predominates in these cells. furthermore, the levels of aea in the brain were significantly increased, whereas those of nagly were significantly decreased after systemic injection of urb  <dig> in rats and in faah ko mice further supporting a role for faah in endogenous nagly biosynthesis. incubations of nagly and recombinant faah demonstrated that nagly is a significantly less efficacious substrate for faah with only ~50% hydrolysis at  <dig> minutes compared to 100% hydrolysis of aea. co-incubations of aea and glycine with recombinant faah did not, however, produce nagly.


CONCLUSIONS
these data support the hypothesis that the signaling lipid nagly is a metabolic product of aea by both oxidative metabolism of the aea ethanolamine moiety and through the conjugation of glycine to aa that is released during aea hydrolysis by faah.

