BACKGROUND
apricot  exhibits a gametophytic self-incompatibility  system and it is mostly considered as a self-incompatible species though numerous self-compatible exceptions occur. these are mainly linked to the mutated s
c-haplotype carrying an insertion in the s-locus f-box gene that leads to a truncated protein. however, two s-locus unlinked pollen-part mutations  termed m and m’ have also been reported to confer self-compatibility  in the apricot cultivars ‘canino’ and ‘katy’, respectively. this work was aimed to explore whether other additional mutations might explain sc in apricot as well.


RESULTS
a set of  <dig> cultivars/accessions with different geographic origins were analyzed by pcr-screening of the s- and m-loci genotypes, contrasting results with the available phenotype data. up to 20 s-alleles, including  <dig> new ones, were detected and sequence analysis revealed interesting synonymies and homonymies in particular with s-alleles found in chinese cultivars. haplotype analysis performed by genotyping and determining linkage-phases of  <dig> ssr markers, showed that the m and m’ ppms are linked to the same m
0−haplotype. results indicate that m
0-haplotype is tightly associated with sc in apricot germplasm being quite frequent in europe and north-america. however, its prevalence is lower than that for s
c in terms of frequency and geographic distribution. structures of  <dig> additional m-haplotypes were inferred and analyzed to depict phylogenetic relationships and m
1– <dig> was found to be the closest haplotype to m
 <dig>  genotyping results showed that four cultivars classified as self-compatible do not have neither the s
c- nor the m
0-haplotype.


CONCLUSIONS
according to apricot germplasm s-genotyping, a loss of genetic diversity affecting the s-locus has been produced probably due to crop dissemination. genotyping and phenotyping data support that self-compatibility in apricot relies mainly on the s- but also on the m-locus. regarding this latter, we have shown that the m
0-haplotype associated with sc is shared by ‘canino’, ‘katy’ and many other cultivars. its origin is still unknown but phylogenetic analysis supports that m
 <dig> arose later in time than s
c from a widely distributed m-haplotype. lastly, other mutants putatively carrying new mutations conferring sc have also been identified deserving future research.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
apricotprunusself-compatibilitys-locuss-allelesmodifiersm-locushttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003329ministerio de economía y competitividadagl19018-2010romero carlos instituto nacional de investigación y tecnología agraria y alimentaria rf2011-00020-c02-02romero carlos issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

