BACKGROUND
the gastrointestinal peptide hormones cholecystokinin and gastrin exert their biological functions via cholecystokinin receptors cck1r and cck2r respectively. gastrin, a central regulator of gastric acid secretion, is involved in growth and differentiation of gastric and colonic mucosa, and there is evidence that it is pro-carcinogenic. cholecystokinin is implicated in digestion, appetite control and body weight regulation, and may play a role in several digestive disorders.


RESULTS
we performed a detailed analysis of the literature reporting experimental evidence on signaling pathways triggered by cck1r and cck2r, in order to create a comprehensive map of gastrin and cholecystokinin-mediated intracellular signaling cascades. the resulting signaling map captures  <dig> reactions involving  <dig> molecular species, and incorporates the currently available knowledge into one integrated signaling network. the decomposition of the signaling map into sub-networks revealed  <dig> modules that represent higher-level structures of the signaling map. these modules allow a more compact mapping of intracellular signaling reactions to known cell behavioral outcomes such as proliferation, migration and apoptosis. the integration of large-scale protein-protein interaction data to this literature-based signaling map in combination with topological analyses allowed us to identify  <dig> proteins able to increase the compactness of the map. these proteins represent experimentally testable hypotheses for gaining new knowledge on gastrin- and cholecystokinin receptor signaling. the cckr map is freely available both in a downloadable, machine-readable sbml-compatible format and as a web resource through payao .


CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated how a literature-based cckr signaling map together with its protein interaction extensions can be analyzed to generate new hypotheses on molecular mechanisms involved in gastrin- and cholecystokinin-mediated regulation of cellular processes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cholecystokinin receptormapmodelmodulesnetworkprotein-protein interactionsignaling pathwaygastrinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

