BACKGROUND
important clues to the function of novel and uncharacterized proteins can be obtained by identifying their ability to translocate in the nucleus. in addition, a comprehensive definition of the nuclear proteome undoubtedly represents a key step toward a better understanding of the biology of this organelle. although several high-throughput experimental methods have been developed to explore the sub-cellular localization of proteins, these methods tend to focus on the predominant localizations of gene products and may fail to provide a complete catalog of proteins that are able to transiently locate into the nucleus.


RESULTS
we have developed a method for examining the nuclear localization potential of human gene products at the proteome scale by adapting a mammalian two-hybrid system we have previously developed. our system is composed of three constructs co-transfected into a mammalian cell line. first, it contains a pcr construct encoding a fusion protein composed of a tested protein, the pdz-protein tip- <dig>  and the transactivation domain of tnnc <dig> . second, our system contains a pcr construct encoding a fusion protein composed of the dna binding domain of gal <dig> and the pdz binding domain of rhotekin . third, a gal4-responsive luciferase reporter is used to detect the reconstitution of a transcriptionally active bind-act complex through the interaction of tip- <dig> and rhotekin, which indicates the ability of the tested protein to translocate into the nucleus. we validated our method in a small-scale feasibility study by comparing it to green fluorescent protein  fusion-based sub-cellular localization assays, sequence-based computational prediction of protein sub-cellular localization, and current sub-cellular localization data available from the literature for  <dig> gene products.


CONCLUSIONS
our reporter-based system can rapidly screen gene products for their ability to be translocated to the nucleus. large-scale applications of the system presented herein should provide invaluable information for a more complete biological atlas.

