BACKGROUND
dehydrins  protect plant cells from desiccation damage during environmental stress, and also participate in host resistance to various pathogens. in this study, we aimed to identify and characterize the dhn gene families from vitis vinifera and wild v. yeshanensis, which is tolerant to both drought and cold, and moderately resistant to powdery mildew.


RESULTS
four dhn genes were identified in both v. vinifera and v. yeshanensis, which shared a high sequence identity between the two species but little homology between the genes themselves. these genes were designated dhn <dig>  dhn <dig>  dhn <dig> and dhn <dig>  all four of the dhn proteins were highly hydrophilic and were predicted to be intrinsically disordered, but they differed in their isoelectric points, kinase selectivities and number of functional motifs. also, the expression profiles of each gene differed appreciably from one another. grapevine dhn <dig> was not expressed in vegetative tissues under normal growth conditions, but was induced by drought, cold, heat, embryogenesis, as well as the application of abscisic acid , salicylic acid , and methyl jasmonate . it was expressed earlier in v. yeshanensis under drought conditions than in v. vinifera, and also exhibited a second round of up-regulation in v. yeshanensis following inoculation with erysiphe necator, which was not apparent in v. vinifera. like dhn <dig>  dhn <dig> was induced by cold, heat, embryogenesis and aba; however, it exhibited no responsiveness to drought, e. necator infection, sa or meja, and was also expressed constitutively in vegetative tissues under normal growth conditions. conversely, dhn <dig> was only expressed during seed development at extremely low levels, and dhn <dig> was expressed specifically during late embryogenesis. neither dhn <dig> nor dhn <dig> exhibited responsiveness to any of the treatments carried out in this study. interestingly, the presence of particular cis-elements within the promoter regions of each gene was positively correlated with their expression profiles.


CONCLUSIONS
the grapevine dhn family comprises four divergent members. while it is likely that their functions overlap to some extent, it seems that dhn <dig> provides the main stress-responsive function. in addition, our results suggest a close relationship between expression patterns, physicochemical properties, and cis-regulatory elements in the promoter regions of the dhn genes.

grapevinedehydrinstress-induced expressionpowdery mildewpromoter

