BACKGROUND
drug repositioning offers an opportunity to revitalize the slowing drug discovery pipeline by finding new uses for currently existing drugs. our hypothesis is that drugs sharing similar side effect profiles are likely to be effective for the same disease, and thus repositioning opportunities can be identified by finding drug pairs with similar side effects documented in u.s. food and drug administration  approved drug labels. the safety information in the drug labels is usually obtained in the clinical trial and augmented with the observations in the post-market use of the drug. therefore, our drug repositioning approach can take the advantage of more comprehensive safety information comparing with conventional de novo approach.

method
a probabilistic topic model was constructed based on the terms in the medical dictionary for regulatory activities  that appeared in the boxed warning, warnings and precautions, and adverse reactions sections of the labels of  <dig> drugs. fifty-two unique topics, each containing a set of terms, were identified by using topic modeling. the resulting probabilistic topic associations were used to measure the distance  between drugs. the success of the proposed model was evaluated by comparing a drug and its nearest neighbor  for common indications found in the indications and usage section of the drug labels.


RESULTS
given a drug with more than three indications, the model yielded a 75% recall, meaning 75% of drug pairs shared one or more common indications. this is significantly higher than the 22% recall rate achieved by random selection. additionally, the recall rate grows rapidly as the number of drug indications increases and reaches 84% for drugs with  <dig> indications. the analysis also demonstrated that  <dig> drugs with a boxed warning, which indicates significant risk of serious and possibly life-threatening adverse effects, might be replaced with safer alternatives that do not have a boxed warning. in addition, we identified two therapeutic groups of drugs  where over 80% of the drugs have a potential replacement with high significance.


CONCLUSIONS
topic modeling can be a powerful tool for the identification of repositioning opportunities by examining the adverse event terms in fda approved drug labels. the proposed framework not only suggests drugs that can be repurposed, but also provides insight into the safety of repositioned drugs.

17- <dig> february  <dig> proceedings of the ninth annual mcbios conference. dealing with the omics data deluge oxford, ms, usa

