BACKGROUND
in temperate regions, the time lag between vegetative bud burst and bud set determines the duration of the growing season of trees . dormancy, the period during which the plant is not growing, allows trees to avoid cold injury resulting from exposure to low temperatures. an understanding of the molecular machinery controlling the shift between these two phenological states is of key importance in the context of climatic change. the objective of this study was to identify genes upregulated during endo- and ecodormancy, the two main stages of bud dormancy. sessile oak is a widely distributed european white oak species. a forcing test on young trees was first carried out to identify the period most likely to correspond to these two stages. total rna was then extracted from apical buds displaying endo- and ecodormancy. this rna was used for the generation of cdna libraries, and in-depth transcriptome characterization was performed with  <dig> flx pyrosequencing technology.


RESULTS
pyrosequencing produced a total of  <dig>  reads. the data were cleaned, duplicated reads removed, and sequences were mapped onto the oak unigene data. digital gene expression analysis was performed, with both r statistics and the r-bioconductor packages , on  <dig>  contigs with read numbers ≥  <dig> within any contigs. the number of sequences displaying significant differences in expression level  between endo- and ecodormancy conditions ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  depending on the algorithm used.  <dig> genes displaying significant differences between conditions were selected for further analysis, and  <dig> of these genes, including those for glutathione-s-transferase  and dehydrin xero <dig>  were validated by quantitative pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
the identification and functional annotation of differentially expressed genes involved in the “response to abscisic acid”, “response to cold stress” and “response to oxidative stress” categories constitutes a major step towards characterization of the molecular network underlying vegetative bud dormancy, an important life history trait of long-lived organisms.

