BACKGROUND
long-lived strains of dwarf mice carry mutations that suppress growth hormone  and insulin-like growth factor i  signaling. the downstream effects of these endocrine abnormalities, however, are not well understood and it is unclear how these processes interact with aging mechanisms. this study presents a comparative analysis of microarray experiments that have measured hepatic gene expression levels in long-lived strains carrying one of four mutations  and describes how the effects of these mutations relate to one another at the transcriptional level. points of overlap with the effects of calorie restriction , cr mimetic compounds, low fat diets, gender dimorphism and aging were also examined.


RESULTS
all dwarf mutations had larger and more consistent effects on igf-i expression than dietary treatments. in comparison to dwarf mutations, however, the transcriptional effects of cr  overlapped more strongly with those of aging. surprisingly, the ghrhrlit/lit mutation had much larger effects on gene expression than the ghr-ko mutation, even though both mutations affect the same endocrine pathway. several genes potentially regulated or co-regulated with the igf-i transcript in liver tissue were identified, including a dna repair gene  that is upregulated in proportion to igf-i inhibition. a total of  <dig> genes exhibiting parallel differential expression patterns among all four strains of long-lived dwarf mice were identified, in addition to  <dig> genes with matching differential expression patterns in multiple long-lived dwarf strains and under cr.


CONCLUSIONS
comparative analysis of microarray datasets can identify patterns and consistencies not discernable from any one dataset individually. this study implements new analytical approaches to provide a detailed comparison among the effects of life-extending mutations, dietary treatments, gender and aging. this comparison provides insight into a broad range of issues relevant to the study of mammalian aging. in this context,  <dig> longevity-associated genes are identified and individual genes with the highest level of support among all microarray experiments are highlighted. these results provide promising targets for future experimental investigation as well as potential clues for understanding the functional basis of lifespan extension in mammalian systems.

