BACKGROUND
little is known about the interplay between n- <dig> fatty acids and genetic variants for diabetes-related traits at the genome-wide level. the present study aimed to examine variance contributions of genotype by environment  interactions for different erythrocyte n- <dig> fatty acids and genetic variants for diabetes-related traits at the genome-wide level in a non-hispanic white population living in the u.s.a. . a tool for genome-wide complex trait analysis  was used to estimate the genome-wide gxe variance contribution of four diabetes-related traits: homa-insulin resistance , fasting plasma insulin, glucose and adiponectin. a gxe genome-wide association study  was conducted to further elucidate the gcta results. replication was conducted in the participants of the boston puerto rican health study  without diabetes .


RESULTS
in goldn, docosapentaenoic acid  contributed the most significant gxe variance to the total phenotypic variance of both homa-ir  and fasting insulin . the ratio of arachidonic acid to eicosapentaenoic acid + docosahexaenoic acid contributed the most significant gxe variance to the total variance of fasting glucose . gxe variance of the arachidonic acid/eicosapentaenoic acid ratio showed a marginally significant contribution to the adiponectin variance . none of the gcta results were significant after bonferroni correction . for each trait, the gxe gwas identified a far larger number of significant single-nucleotide polymorphisms  for the significant e factor  than a control e factor . in the bprhs, dpa contributed a marginally significant gxe variance to the phenotypic variance of homa-ir  and fasting insulin .


CONCLUSIONS
erythrocyte n- <dig> fatty acids contributed a significant gxe variance to diabetes-related traits at the genome-wide level.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

