BACKGROUND
wheat  is a major dietary component for many populations across the world. bread-making quality of wheat is mainly determined by glutenin subunits, but it remains challenging to elucidate the composition and variation of low-molecular-weight glutenin subunits  genes, the major components for glutenin subunits in hexaploid wheat. this problem, however, can be greatly simplified by characterizing the lmw-gs genes in triticum urartu, the a-genome donor of hexaploid wheat. in the present study, we exploited the high-throughput molecular marker system, gene cloning, proteomic methods and molecular evolutionary genetic analysis to reveal the composition, variation, expression and evolution of lmw-gs genes in a t. urartu population from the fertile crescent region.


RESULTS
eight lmw-gs genes, including four m-type, one s-type and three i-type, were characterized in the t. urartu population. six or seven genes, the highest number at the glu-a <dig> locus, were detected in each accession. three i-type genes, each containing more than six allelic variants, were tightly linked because of their co-segregation in every accession. only 2- <dig> allelic variants were detected for each m- and s-type gene. the m-type gene, tua3- <dig>  for which homologs were previously characterized only at glu-d <dig> locus in common wheat and aegilops tauschii, was detected at glu-a <dig> locus in t. urartu. tua3- <dig> was the first s-type gene identified at glu-a <dig> locus. proteomic analysis showed 1- <dig> genes, mainly i-type, expressed in individual accessions. about 62% accessions had three active i-type genes, rather than one or two in common wheat. southeastern turkey might be the center of origin and diversity for t. urartu due to its abundance of lmw-gs genes/genotypes. phylogenetic reconstruction demonstrated that the characterized t. urartu might be the direct donor of the glu-a <dig> locus in common wheat varieties.


CONCLUSIONS
compared with the glu-a <dig> locus in common wheat, a large number of highly diverse lmw-gs genes and active genes were characterized in t. urartu, demonstrating that this progenitor might provide valuable genetic resources for lmw-gs genes to improve the quality of common wheat. the phylogenetic analysis provided molecular evidence and confirmed that t. urartu was the a-genome donor of hexaploid wheat.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
low-molecular-weight glutenin subunitstriticum urartuglu-a3proteomicsevolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

