BACKGROUND
correct species identification is crucial in different fields of biology, and in conservation. the endemic west african frog family odontobatrachidae currently contains a single described species, odontobatrachus natator. from western guinea to western côte d'ivoire it inhabits forests around waterfalls or cascades. based on more than  <dig> specimens from  <dig> localities, covering the entire distribution, we investigated the molecular diversity of these frogs.


RESULTS
our analyses included mitochondrial and nuclear genes, with a concatenated alignment of  <dig> base pairs. we detected high level of genetic differentiation with five distinct lineages or operational taxonomic units . these otus were also identified by two different species delimitation approaches, generalized mixed yule coalescent  and cluster algorithm. all otus occur in parapatry in the upper guinean forests. one otu, assigned to the “true” odontobatrachus natator, covers the largest distribution, ranging from the border region of western sierra leone-guinea to eastern liberia. two otus are restricted to western guinea , while two others occur in eastern guinea and the border region of guinea-liberia-côte d'ivoire. the otu representing o. natator consists of two divergent subclades: one restricted to the freetown peninsula  and the other covering all populations further inland. environmental niche models indicated that the restricted freetown peninsula population is separated by unsuitable habitat from remaining populations.


CONCLUSIONS
geographic isolation of otus and molecular differences comparable to species level differentiation in other frog families indicate that o. natator contains cryptic species diversity. respective distribution patterns most probably resulted from repeated changes of forest cover  over evolutionary timescales. the survival within forest refugia that have persisted through multiple drier periods and subsequent dispersal during wetter times may best explain the observed geographic distributions of otus. according to the iucn red list range criteria each otu should be classified as “endangered.” if the freetown peninsula “natator” population is recognized as a distinct species it would warrant recognition as “critically endangered.” the identification of cryptic lineages highlights the urgent need to protect these frogs, all of which are endemic to small areas within the upper guinean biodiversity hotspot.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

