BACKGROUND
scab, caused by the fungus venturia inaequalis, is one of the most important diseases of cultivated apple. while a few scab resistance genes  governing qualitative resistance have been isolated and characterized, the biological roles of genes governing quantitative resistance, supposed to be more durable, are still unknown. this study aims to investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in the partial resistance of the old belgian apple cultivar ‘président roulin’ against v. inaequalis.


RESULTS
a global gene expression analysis was conducted in ‘président roulin’  and in ‘gala’  challenged by v. inaequalis by using the cdna-aflp method . transcriptome analysis revealed significant modulation  of  <dig> out of approximately  <dig>  transcript derived fragments  in ‘président roulin’ 48 hours after inoculation. sequence annotation revealed similarities to several genes encoding for proteins belonging to the nbs-lrr and lrr-rlk classes of plant r genes and to other defense-related proteins. differentially expressed genes were sorted into functional categories according to their gene ontology annotation and this expression signature was compared to published apple cdna libraries by gene enrichment analysis. the first comparison was made with two cdna libraries from malus x domestica uninfected leaves, and revealed in both libraries a signature of enhanced expression in ‘président roulin’ of genes involved in response to stress and photosynthesis. in the second comparison, the pathogen-responsive tdfs from the partially resistant cultivar were compared to the cdna library from inoculated leaves of rvi <dig> -transformed ‘gala’ lines  and revealed both common physiological events, and notably differences in the regulation of defense response, the regulation of hydrolase activity, and response to dna damage. tdfs were in silico mapped on the ‘golden delicious’ apple reference genome and significant co-localizations with major scab r genes, but not with quantitative trait loci  for scab resistance nor resistance gene analogues  were found.


CONCLUSIONS
this study highlights possible candidate genes that may play a role in the partial scab resistance mechanisms of ‘président roulin’ and increase our understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in the partial resistance against apple scab.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cdna-aflppartial resistanceapple scabventuria inaequalisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

