BACKGROUND

symplocos paniculata, asiatic sweetleaf or sapphire berry, is a widespread shrub or small tree from symplocaceae with high oil content and excellent fatty acid composition in fruit. it has been used as feedstocks for biodiesel and cooking oil production in china. little transcriptome information is available on the regulatory molecular mechanism of oil accumulation at different fruit development stages.


RESULTS
the transcriptome at four different stages of fruit development  of s. paniculata were analyzed. approximately  <dig> million high quality clean reads were generated. these reads were trimmed and assembled into  <dig>  non-redundant putative transcripts with a mean length of  <dig>  bp and n <dig> length of 785 bp, respectively. based on the functional annotation through basic local alignment search tool  with public protein database, the key enzymes involved in lipid metabolism were identified, and a schematic diagram of the pathway and temporal expression patterns of lipid metabolism was established. about  <dig>  differentially expressed unigenes  were screened out using differentially expressed sequencing  method. the transcriptional regulatory patterns of the identified enzymes were highly related to the dynamic oil accumulation along with the fruit development of s. paniculata. in addition, quantitative real-time pcr  of six vital genes was significantly correlated with deseq data.


CONCLUSIONS
the transcriptome sequences obtained and deposited in ncbi would enrich the public database and provide an unprecedented resource for the discovery of the genes associated with lipid metabolism pathway in s. paniculata. results in this study will lay the foundation for exploring transcriptional regulatory profiles, elucidating molecular regulatory mechanisms, and accelerating genetic engineering process to improve the yield and quality of seed oil of s. paniculata.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
differentially expressed profileoil accumulationsymplocos paniculatatranscriptome analysishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004543china scholarship council201508430158liu qiang issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

