BACKGROUND
camp signaling produces dramatic changes in astrocyte morphology and physiology. however, its involvement in phenotype acquisition and the transcriptionally mediated mechanisms of action are largely unknown.


RESULTS
here we analyzed the global transcriptome of cultured astroglial cells incubated with activators of camp pathways. a bulk of astroglial transcripts,  <dig> annotated genes, were differentially regulated by camp signaling. camp analogs strongly upregulated genes involved in typical functions of mature astrocytes, such as homeostatic control, metabolic and structural support to neurons, antioxidant defense and communication, whereas they downregulated a considerable number of proliferating and immaturity-related transcripts. moreover, numerous genes typically activated in reactive cells, such as scar components and immunological mediators, were repressed by camp. gsea analysis contrasting gene expression profiles with transcriptome signatures of acutely isolated astrocytes and in situ evaluation of protein levels in these cells showed that camp signaling conferred mature and in vivo–like transcriptional features to cultured astrocytes.


CONCLUSIONS
these results indicate that camp signaling is a key pathway promoting astrocyte maturation and restricting their developmental and activation features. therefore, a positive modulation of camp signaling may promote the normal state of differentiated astrocytes and favor the protection and function of neuronal networks.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
antioxidant defenseastrocytescampdifferentiationreactive gliatranscriptomicbrainnr2chttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003329ministerio de economía y competitividadbfu2010-22132bfu2013-48822-raguado fernando http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002809catalonian government2014sgr-01178aguado fernando issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

