BACKGROUND
cytoplasmic male sterility  provides crucial breeding materials that facilitate hybrid seed production in various crops, and thus plays an important role in the study of hybrid vigor , in plants. however, the cms regulatory network in soybean remains unclear. micrornas  play crucial roles in flower and pollen development by targeting genes that regulate their expression in plants. to identify the mirnas and their targets that exist in the soybean cms line njcms1a and its maintainer njcms1b, high-throughput sequencing and degradome analysis were conducted in this study.


RESULTS
two small rna libraries were constructed from the flower buds of the soybean cms line njcms1a and its maintainer njcms1b. a total of  <dig> new mirnas present on the other arm of known pre-mirnas,  <dig> new mirna members,  <dig> novel mirnas and  <dig> high-confidence soybean mirnas were identified using high-throughput sequencing. among the identified mirnas,  <dig> differentially expressed mirnas with greater than two-fold changes between njcms1a and njcms1b were discovered. the different expression levels of selected mirnas were confirmed by stem-loop quantitative real-time pcr. a degradome analysis showed that  <dig> targets were predicted to be targeted by  <dig> mirnas, including a squamosa promoter-binding protein-like transcription factor family protein, a pentatricopeptide repeat-containing protein, and an auxin response factor, which were previously shown to be involved in floral organ or anther development in plants. additionally, some targets, including a mads-box transcription factor, nadp-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase and nadh-ubiquinone oxidoreductase 24 kda subunit, were identified, and they may have some relationship with the programmed cell death, reactive oxygen species accumulation and energy deficiencies, which might lead to soybean male sterility.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study is the first to use deep sequencing technology to identify mirnas and their targets in the flower buds of the soybean cms line njcms1a and its maintainer njcms1b. the results revealed that the mirnas might participate in flower and pollen development, which could facilitate our understanding of the molecular mechanisms behind cms in soybean.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
soybean  merr.)cytoplasmic male sterilitymicrornahigh-throughput sequencingdegradome analysisthe national hightech r & d program of china2011aa10a105yang shouping the national transgene science and technology major program of china2011zx08004- <dig>  2013zx08004- <dig>  2014zx08004-005yang shouping the national key basic research program of china2011cb109301yang shouping the program for changjiang scholars and innovative research team in universitypcsirt13073yang shouping jiangsu collaborative innovation center for modern crop productionjcic-mcpyang shouping issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

