BACKGROUND
in dogs in the western world neoplasia constitutes the most frequently diagnosed cause of death. although there appear to be similarities between canine and human cancers, rather little is known about the cytogenetic and molecular alterations in canine tumours. different dog breeds are susceptible to different types of cancer, but the genetic basis of the great majority of these predispositions has yet to be discovered. in some retriever breeds there is a high incidence of soft tissue sarcomas and we have previously reported alterations of chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> in two poorly differentiated fibrosarcomas. here we extend our observations and present a case report on detail rearrangements on chromosome  <dig> as well as genetic variations in a tumour suppressor gene in normal dogs.


RESULTS
bac hybridisations on metaphases of two fibrosarcomas showed complex rearrangements on chromosome  <dig>  and loss of parts of this chromosome. microsatellite markers on a paired tumour and blood dna pointed to loss of heterozygosity on chromosome  <dig> in the cdkn2b-cdkn2a tumour suppressor gene cluster region. pcr and sequencing revealed the homozygous loss of coding sequences for these genes, except for exon 1β of cdkn2a, which codes for the n-terminus of p14arf. for cdkn2b exon  <dig>  two alleles were observed in dna from blood; one of them identical to the sequence in the dog reference genome and containing  <dig> copies of a  <dig> bp repeat found only in the canine gene amongst all species so far sequenced; the other allele was shorter due to a missing copy of the repeat. sequencing of this exon in  <dig> dogs from  <dig> different breeds revealed a polymorphic region involving a ggc triplet repeat and a ggggacggcggc repeat. seven alleles were recorded and sixteen of the eighteen breeds showed heterozygosity.


CONCLUSIONS
complex chromosome rearrangements were observed on chromosome  <dig> in two labrador retriever fibrosarcomas. the chromosome alterations were reflected in the loss of sequences corresponding to two tumour suppressor genes involved in cell-cycle progression. sequencing of cdkn2b across many different breeds revealed a widespread polymorphism within the first exon of the gene, immediately before the ankyrin coding sequences.

