BACKGROUND
the g protein-coupled receptor  signaling pathway plays an essential role in signal transmission and response to external stimuli in mammalian cells. protein components of this pathway have been characterized in plants and simpler eukaryotes such as yeast, but their presence and role in unicellular photosynthetic eukaryotes have not been determined. we use a comparative genomics approach using whole genome sequences and gene expression libraries of four diatoms  to search for evidence of gpcr signaling pathway proteins that share sequence conservation to known gpcr pathway proteins.


RESULTS
the majority of the core components of gpcr signaling were well conserved in all four diatoms, with protein sequence similarity to gpcrs, human g protein α- and β-subunits and downstream effectors. there was evidence for the gγ-subunit and thus a full heterotrimeric g protein only in t. pseudonana. phylogenetic analysis of putative diatom gpcrs indicated similarity but deep divergence to the class c gpcrs, with branches basal to the gabab receptor subfamily. the extracellular and intracellular regions of these putative diatom gpcr sequences exhibited large variation in sequence length, and seven of these sequences contained the necessary ligand binding domain for class c gpcr activation. transcriptional data indicated that a number of the putative gpcr sequences are expressed in diatoms under various stress conditions in culture, and that many of the gpcr-activated signaling proteins, including the g protein, are also expressed.


CONCLUSIONS
the presence of sequences in all four diatoms that code for the proteins required for a functional mammalian gpcr pathway highlights the highly conserved nature of this pathway and suggests a complex signaling machinery related to environmental perception and response in these unicellular organisms. the lack of evidence for some gpcr pathway proteins in one or more of the diatoms, such as the gγ-subunit, may be due to differences in genome completeness and genome coverage for the four diatoms. the high divergence of putative diatom gpcr sequences to known class c gpcrs suggests these sequences may represent another, potentially ancestral, subfamily of class c gpcrs.

cell signalingdiatomenvironmentg protein-coupled receptorhuman healthocean

