BACKGROUND
in an era of ubiquitous electronic collection of animal health data, multivariate surveillance systems  should have a greater probability of detecting disease events than univariate systems. however, despite their limitations, univariate aberration detection algorithms are used in most active syndromic surveillance  systems because of their ease of application and interpretation. on the other hand, a stochastic modelling-based approach to multivariate surveillance offers more flexibility, allowing for the retention of historical outbreaks, for overdispersion and for non-stationarity. while such methods are not new, they are yet to be applied to animal health surveillance data. we applied an example of such stochastic model, held and colleagues’ two-component model, to two multivariate animal health datasets from switzerland.


RESULTS
in our first application, multivariate time series of the number of laboratories test requests were derived from swiss animal diagnostic laboratories. we compare the performance of the two-component model to parallel monitoring using an improved farrington algorithm and found both methods yield a satisfactorily low false alarm rate. however, the calibration test of the two-component model on the one-step ahead predictions proved satisfactory, making such an approach suitable for outbreak prediction. in our second application, the two-component model was applied to the multivariate time series of the number of cattle abortions and the number of test requests for bovine viral diarrhea . we found that there is a two days lagged effect from the number of abortions to the number of test requests. we further compared the joint modelling and univariate modelling of the number of laboratory test requests time series. the joint modelling approach showed evidence of superiority in terms of forecasting abilities.


CONCLUSIONS
stochastic modelling approaches offer the potential to address more realistic surveillance scenarios through, for example, the inclusion of times series specific parameters, or of covariates known to have an impact on syndrome counts. nevertheless, many methodological challenges to multivariate surveillance of animal sys data still remain. deciding on the amount of corroboration among data streams that is required to escalate into an alert is not a trivial task given the sparse data on the events under consideration .

keywords
applied statisticsanimal healthlaboratorysyndromic surveillancemultivariatetemporal aberration detectionoutbreak detectionoutbreak predictionprospective surveillancehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001711schweizerische nationalfonds zur förderung der wissenschaftlichen forschung 137919wei wei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

