BACKGROUND
modern flamingos  occupy a highly specialized ecology unique among birds and represent a potentially powerful model system for informing the mechanisms by which a lineage of birds adapts and radiates. however, despite a rich fossil record and well-studied feeding morphology, molecular investigations of the evolutionary progression among modern flamingos have been limited. here, using three mitochondrial  markers, we present the first dna sequence-based study of population genetic variation in the widely distributed chilean flamingo and, using two mtdna and  <dig> nuclear  markers, recover the species tree and divergence time estimates for the six extant species of flamingos. phylogenetic analyses include likelihood and bayesian frameworks and account for potential gene tree discordance. analyses of divergence times are fossil calibrated at the divergence of mirandornithes  and the divergence of crown grebes.


RESULTS
mtdna sequences confirmed the presence of a single metapopulation represented by two minimally varying mtdna barcodes in chilean flamingos. likelihood and bayesian methods recovered identical phylogenies with flamingos falling into shallow-keeled  and deep-keeled  sub-clades. the initial divergence among flamingos occurred at or shortly after the mio-pliocene boundary  followed by quick consecutive divergences throughout the plio-pleistocene. there is significant incongruence between the ages recovered by the mtdna and ndna datasets, likely due to mutational saturation occurring in the mtdna loci.


CONCLUSIONS
the finding of a single metapopulation in the widespread chilean flamingo confirms similar findings in other widespread flamingo species. the robust species phylogeny is congruent with previous classifications of flamingos based on feeding morphology. modern phoenicopterids likely originated in the new world with each sub-clade dispersing across the atlantic at least once. our divergence time estimates place flamingos among the youngest families of birds, counter to the classical notion of flamingos as among the oldest based on biogeography and the fossil record. finally, we designate ‘phoeniconaias’ as a junior synonym of ‘phoenicoparrus’ and redefine the latter genus as containing all flamingos more closely related to phoenicoparrus andinus than phoenicopterus roseus.

flamingophylogenydivergence timebiogeographyfossilbillfilter feeding

