BACKGROUND
qtls controlling individual sugars and acids  in grape berries have not yet been identified. the present study aimed to construct a high-density, high-quality genetic map of a winemaking grape cross with a complex parentage  ×  × v. vinifera), using next-generation restriction site-associated dna sequencing, and then to identify loci related to phenotypic variability over three years.


RESULTS
in total,  <dig>  <dig> snp-based markers were developed. of these,  <dig> markers were assembled into  <dig> linkage groups  for the maternal map,  <dig> for the paternal map, and  <dig>  <dig> for the integrated map. markers showed good linear agreement on most chromosomes between our genetic maps and the previously published v. vinifera reference sequence. however marker order was different in some chromosome regions, indicating both conservation and variation within the genome. despite the identification of a range of qtls controlling the traits of interest, these qtls explained a relatively small percentage of the observed phenotypic variance. although they exhibited a large degree of instability from year to year, qtls were identified for all traits but tartaric acid and titratable acidity in the three years of the study; however only the qtls for malic acid and β ratio  were stable in two years. qtls related to sugars were located within ten lgs , and those related to acids within three lgs . overlapping qtls in lg <dig> were observed for fructose, glucose and total sugar. malic acid, total acid and β ratio each had several qtls in lg <dig>  and malic acid also had a qtl in lg <dig>  a set of  <dig> genes underlying these qtls may be involved in determining the malic acid content of berries.


CONCLUSIONS
the genetic map constructed in this study is potentially a high-density, high-quality map, which could be used for qtl detection, genome comparison, and sequence assembly. it may also serve to broaden our understanding of the grape genome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
berry qualitygenetic mapnext-generation sequencing qtl analysisquantitative trait locirestriction-site associated dna vitisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

