BACKGROUND
the genus clavibacter harbors economically important plant pathogens infecting agricultural crops such as potato and tomato. although the vast majority of clavibacter strains are pathogenic, there is an increasing number of non-pathogenic isolates reported. non-pathogenic clavibacter strains isolated from tomato seeds are particularly problematic because they affect the current detection and identification tests for clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis , which is regulated with a zero tolerance in tomato seed. their misidentification as pathogenic cmm hampers a clear judgment on the seed quality and health.


RESULTS
to get more insight in the genetic features linked to the lifestyle of these bacteria, a whole-genome sequence of the tomato seed-borne non-pathogenic clavibacter lmg  <dig> was determined. to gain a better understanding of the molecular determinants of pathogenicity, the genome sequence of lmg  <dig> was compared with that of the pathogenic cmm strain . the comparative analysis revealed that lmg  <dig> does not contain plasmids pcm <dig> and pcm <dig> and also lacks the majority of important virulence factors described so far for pathogenic cmm. this explains its apparent non-pathogenic nature in tomato plants. moreover, the genome analysis of lmg  <dig> detected sequences from a plasmid originating from a member of enterobacteriaceae/klebsiella relative. genes received that way and coding for antibiotic resistance may provide a competitive advantage for survival of lmg  <dig> in its ecological niche. genetically, lmg  <dig> was the most similar to the pathogenic cmm ncppb  <dig> but contained more mobile genetic elements. the genome of this non-pathogenic clavibacter strain contained also a high number of transporters and regulatory genes.


CONCLUSIONS
the genome sequence of the non-pathogenic clavibacter strain lmg  <dig> and the comparative analyses with other pathogenic clavibacter strains provided a better understanding of the genetic bases of virulence and adaptation mechanisms present in the genus clavibacter.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
non-pathogenic clavibacterbacterial wilt and cankertomato seedsgenome sequencingquarantineplant pathogenissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

