BACKGROUND
duchenne muscular dystrophy  is a fatal muscle wasting disorder caused by mutations in the dystrophin gene. dmd has a complex and as yet incompletely defined molecular pathophysiology hindering development of effective ameliorative approaches. transcriptomic studies so far conducted on dystrophic cells and tissues suffer from non-specific changes and background noise due to heterogeneous comparisons and secondary pathologies. a study design in which a perfectly matched control cell population is used as reference for transcriptomic studies will give a much more specific insight into the effects of dystrophin deficiency and dmd pathophysiology.


RESULTS
using rna interference  to knock down dystrophin in myotubes from c57bl <dig> mice, we created a homogenous model to study the transcriptome of dystrophin-deficient myotubes. we noted significant differences in the global gene expression pattern between these myotubes and their matched control cultures. in particular, categorical analyses of the dysregulated genes demonstrated significant enrichment of molecules associated with the components of muscle cell contractile unit, ion channels, metabolic pathways and kinases. additionally, some of the dysregulated genes could potentially explain conditions and endophenotypes associated with dystrophin deficiency, such as dysregulation of calcium homeostasis , or cardiomyopathy . in addition to be validated by qpcr, our data gains another level of validity by affirmatively reproducing several independent studies conducted previously at genes and/or protein levels in vivo and in vitro.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that in striated muscles, dystrophin is involved in orchestrating proper development and organization of myofibers as contractile units, depicting a novel pathophysiology for dmd where the absence of dystrophin results in maldeveloped myofibers prone to physical stress and damage. therefore, it becomes apparent that any gene therapy approaches for dmd should target early stages in muscle development to attain a maximum clinical benefit. with a clear and specific definition of the transcriptome of dystrophin deficiency, manipulation of identified dysregulated molecules downstream of dystrophin may lead to novel ameliorative approaches for dmd.

