BACKGROUND
members of the heat shock protein  <dig>  class of proteins are evolutionarily conserved molecular chaperones. they are involved in protein folding, assembly, stabilization, activation, and degradation in many normal cellular processes and under stress conditions. unlike many other well-characterized molecular chaperones, hsp90s play key roles in signal transduction, cell-cycle control, genomic silencing, and protein trafficking. however, no systematic analysis of genome organization, gene structure, and expression compendium has been performed in the populus model tree genus to date.


RESULTS
we performed a comprehensive analysis of the populus hsp <dig> gene family and identified  <dig> populus hsp <dig> genes, which were phylogenetically clustered into two major groups. gene structure and motif composition are relatively conserved in each group. in populus trichocarpa, we identified three paralogous pairs, among which the pthsp90-5a/pthsp90-5b paralogous pair might be created by duplication of a genome segment. subcellular localization analysis shows that pthsp <dig> members are localized in different subcellular compartments. pthsp90- <dig> is localized both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm, pthsp90-5a and pthsp90-5b are in chloroplasts, and pthsp90- <dig> is in the endoplasmic reticulum . furthermore, microarray and semi-quantitative real-time rt-pcr analyses show that a number of populus hsp <dig> genes are differentially expressed upon exposure to various stresses.


CONCLUSIONS
the gene structure and motif composition of pthsp90s are highly conserved among group members, suggesting that members of the same group may also have conserved functions. microarray and rt-pcr analyses show that most pthsp90s were induced by various stresses, including heat stress. collectively, these observations lay the foundation for future efforts to unravel the biological roles of pthsp <dig> genes.

expression analysisgene familygene structurehsp90phylogenetic analysispopulus

