BACKGROUND
as a major economic trait in chickens, egg weight  receives widespread interests in breeding, production and consumption. however, limited information is available for underlying genetic architecture of longitudinal trend in ew. herein, we measured ews at nine time points from onset of laying to  <dig> week of age, and conducted comprehensive genome-wide association studies  in  <dig>  f <dig> hens derived from reciprocal crosses between white leghorn and dongxiang chickens.


RESULTS
egg weights at all ages except the first egg weight  exhibited high snp-based heritability estimates . strong pair-wise genetic correlations  were found among all ews. nine separate univariate genome-wide screens suggested  <dig> signals showing significant associations with longitudinal ews. after multivariate and conditional analyses, four variants on three chromosomes remained independent contributions. the minor alleles at two loci exerted consistent and positive substitution effects on ews, and other two were negative. the four loci together accounted for  <dig>  % of the phenotypic variance for few and  <dig>  ~  <dig>  % for ews from  <dig> to  <dig> week of age. we obtained five candidate genes, of which ncapg harbors a non-synonymous snp  causing a valine-to-alanine amino-acid substitution. genome partitioning analysis indicated a strong linear correlation between the variance explained by each chromosome and its length, which provided evidence that ew follows a highly polygenic nature of inheritance.


CONCLUSIONS
identification of significant genetic causes that together implicate ews at different ages will greatly advance our understanding of the genetic basis behind longitudinal ews, and would be helpful to illuminate the future breeding direction on how to select desired egg size.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
longitudinal egg weightsgwassnp-based heritabilitypolygenechickenissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

