BACKGROUND
genetic ablation of target cells is a powerful tool to study the origins and functions of cells, tissue regeneration, or pathophysiology in a human disease model in vivo. several methods for selective cell ablation by inducing apoptosis have been established, using exogenous toxins or endogenous proapoptotic genes. however, their application is limited to cells with intact apoptotic machinery.


RESULTS
herein, we established a method for inducing rapid and selective cell necrosis by the pore-forming bacterial toxin cry1aa, which is specifically active in cells expressing the cry1aa receptor  derived from the silkworm bombyx mori. we demonstrated that overexpressing cryr in drosophila melanogaster tissues induced rapid cell death of cryr-expressing cells only, in the presence of cry1aa toxin. cry/cryr system was effective against both proliferating cells in imaginal discs and polyploid postmitotic cells in the fat body. live imaging analysis of cell ablation revealed swelling and subsequent osmotic lysis of cryr-positive cells after  <dig> min of incubation with cry1aa toxin. osmotic cell lysis was still triggered when apoptosis, jnk activation, or autophagy was inhibited, suggesting that cry1aa-induced necrotic cell death occurred independently of these cellular signaling pathways. injection of cry1aa into the body cavity resulted in specific ablation of cryr-expressing cells, indicating the usefulness of this method for in vivo cell ablation.


CONCLUSIONS
with cry toxins from bacillus thuringiensis, we developed a novel method for genetic induction of cell necrosis. our system provides a “proteinous drill” for killing target cells through physical injury of the cell membrane, which can potentially be used to ablate any cell type in any organisms, even those that are resistant to apoptosis or jnk-dependent programmed cell death.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacillus thuringiensisbombyx moricry toxindrosophila melanogastergenetic ablationnecrosisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

