BACKGROUND
abscisic acid  regulates various developmental processes and stress responses over both short  and longer  time frames. to elucidate the transcriptional regulation of early responses of grapevine  responding to aba, different organs of grape  were treated with 10 μm --aba for 2 h. nimblegen whole genome microarrays of vitis vinifera were used to determine the effects of aba on organ-specific mrna expression patterns.


RESULTS
transcriptomic analysis revealed  <dig> genes whose transcript abundances varied significantly in a specific organ in response to aba treatment. no single gene exhibited the same changes in transcript abundance across all organs in response to aba. the biochemical pathways affected by aba were identified using the cytoscape program with the bingo plug-in software. the results indicated that these  <dig> genes were involved in several biological processes such as flavonoid metabolism, response to reactive oxygen species, response to light, and response to temperature stimulus. aba affected ion and water transporters, particularly in the root. the protein amino acid phosphorylation process was significantly overrepresented in shoot tips and roots treated with aba. aba affected mrna abundance of genes  associated with aba degradation, conjugation, and the aba signaling pathway. aba also significantly affected the expression of several transcription factors . the greatest number of significantly differentially expressed genes was observed in the roots followed by cell cultures, leaves, berries, and shoot tips, respectively. each organ had a unique set of gene responses to aba.


CONCLUSIONS
this study examined the short-term effects of aba on different organs of grapevine. the responses of each organ were unique indicating that aba signaling varies with the organ. understanding the aba responses in an organ-specific manner is crucial to fully understand hormone action and plant responses to water deficit.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
abscisic acid signalingorgan-specificitytranscriptomicsvitis vinifera lnevada agriculture experiment stationnev00345cramer grant r. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

