BACKGROUND
the large yellow croaker  is an economically important marine fish in china suffering from severe outbreaks of infectious disease caused by marine bacteria such as aeromonas hydrophila , resulting in great economic losses. however, the mechanisms involved in the immune response of this fish to bacterial infection are not fully understood. to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the immune response to such pathogenic bacteria, we used high-throughput deep sequencing technology to investigate the transcriptome and comparative expression profiles of the large yellow croaker infected with a. hydrophila.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> , <dig> reads were obtained and assembled into  <dig>  scaffolds in transcriptional responses of the a. hydrophila-infected large yellow croaker. via annotation to the ncbi database, we obtained  <dig> identified unigenes. in total,  <dig>  unigenes were classified into gene ontology, and  <dig> unigenes were found in  <dig> kegg categories. these genes included representatives from almost all functional categories. by using solexa/illumina's deepsage,  <dig> differentially expressed genes  were detected in comparative analysis of the expression profiles between a. hydrophila-infected fish and control fish, including  <dig> remarkably upregulated genes and  <dig> remarkably downregulated genes. dramatic differences were observed in genes involved in the inflammatory response. bacterial infection affected the gene expression of many components of signaling cascades, including the toll-like receptor, jak-stat, and mapk pathways. genes encoding factors involved in t cell receptor  signaling were also revealed to be regulated by infection in these fish.


CONCLUSIONS
based on our results, we conclude that the inflammatory response may play an important role in the early stages of infection. the signaling cascades such as the toll-like receptor, jak-stat, and mapk pathways are regulated by a. hydrophila infection. interestingly, genes encoding factors involved in tcr signaling were revealed to be downregulated by infection, indicating that tcr signaling was suppressed at this early period. these results revealed changes of multiple signaling pathways involved in immunity during a. hydrophila infection, which will facilitate our comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms involved in the immune response to bacterial infection in the large yellow croaker.

