BACKGROUND
seizures are common in dogs and can be caused by non-epileptic conditions or epilepsy. the clinical course of newly diagnosed epilepsy is sparsely documented.

the objective of this study was to prospectively investigate causes for seizures  in a cohort of dogs with new-onset untreated seizures, and for those dogs with newly diagnosed epilepsy to investigate epilepsy type, seizure type and the course of disease over time, including the risk of seizure recurrence. untreated client-owned dogs experiencing new-onset seizures were prospectively enrolled in a longitudinal observational study including clinical investigations and long-term monitoring at the copenhagen university hospital for companion animals. a baseline clinical assessment was followed by investigator/owner contact every eight weeks from inclusion to death or end of study. inclusion of dogs was conducted from november  <dig> to september  <dig>  and the study terminated in june  <dig> 


RESULTS
one hundred and six dogs were included in the study. seventy-nine dogs  were diagnosed with epilepsy:  <dig> dogs  with idiopathic epilepsy,  <dig> dogs  with structural epilepsy and five dogs  with suspected structural epilepsy. a non-epileptic cause for seizures was identified in  <dig> dogs and suspected in  <dig> dogs. four dogs in which no cause for seizures was identified experienced only one seizure during the study. in dogs with idiopathic epilepsy 60% had their second epileptic seizure within three months of seizure onset. twenty-six dogs with idiopathic epilepsy  completed the study without receiving antiepileptic treatment. the natural course of idiopathic epilepsy  was illustrated by highly individual and fluctuating seizure patterns, including long periods of remission. cluster seizures motivated early treatment. in a few dogs with a high seizure frequency owners declined treatment against the investigators advice.


CONCLUSIONS
epilepsy is the most likely diagnosis in dogs presenting with new-onset seizures. the course of idiopathic epilepsy is highly individual and might not necessarily require long-term treatment. this must be considered when advising owners about what to expect with regard to treatment and prognosis.

keywords
canine epilepsyidiopathic epilepsyepileptic seizure recurrenceepilepsy remissionnon-epileptic seizuresissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

