BACKGROUND
sequence data and other characters from mitochondrial genomes  are useful in phylogenetic studies among metazoan animals from population to phylum level. moreover, the comparison of complete mitochondrial sequences gives valuable information about the evolution of small genomes, e.g. about different mechanisms of gene translocation, gene duplication and gene loss, or concerning nucleotide frequency biases.

the peracarida  comprise about  <dig>  species of crustaceans, living in many environments from deep sea floor to arid terrestrial habitats. ligia oceanica is a terrestrial isopod living at rocky seashores of the european north sea and atlantic coastlines.


RESULTS
the study reveals the first complete mitochondrial dna sequence from a peracarid crustacean. the mitochondrial genome of ligia oceanica is a circular double-stranded dna molecule, with a size of  <dig>  bp. it shows several changes in mitochondrial gene order compared to other crustacean species. an overview about mitochondrial gene order of all crustacean taxa yet sequenced is also presented. the largest non-coding part  of the mitochondrial genome of ligia oceanica is unexpectedly not at-rich compared to the remainder of the genome. it bears two repeat regions , and a gc-rich hairpin-like secondary structure. some of the transfer rnas show secondary structures which derive from the usual cloverleaf pattern. while some trna genes are putative targets for rna editing, trnr could not be localized at all.


CONCLUSIONS
gene order is not conserved among peracarida, not even among isopods. the two isopod species ligia oceanica and idotea baltica show a similarly derived gene order, compared to the arthropod ground pattern and to the amphipod parhyale hawaiiensis, suggesting that most of the translocation events were already present the last common ancestor of these isopods. beyond that, the positions of three trna genes differ in the two isopod species. strand bias in nucleotide frequency is reversed in both isopod species compared to other malacostraca. this is probably due to a reversal of the replication origin, which is further supported by the fact that the hairpin structure typically found in the control region shows a reversed orientation in the isopod species, compared to other crustaceans.

