BACKGROUND
enterococci are among the leading causes of hospital-acquired infections in the united states and europe, with enterococcus faecalis and enterococcus faecium being the two most common species isolated from enterococcal infections. in the last decade, the proportion of enterococcal infections caused by e. faecium has steadily increased compared to other enterococcus species. although the underlying mechanism for the gradual replacement of e. faecalis by e. faecium in the hospital environment is not yet understood, many studies using genotyping and phylogenetic analysis have shown the emergence of a globally dispersed polyclonal subcluster of e. faecium strains in clinical environments. systematic study of the molecular epidemiology and pathogenesis of e. faecium has been hindered by the lack of closed, complete e. faecium genomes that can be used as references.


RESULTS
in this study, we report the complete genome sequence of the e. faecium strain tx <dig>  also known as do, which belongs to multilocus sequence type   <dig>  and was the first e. faecium strain ever sequenced. whole genome comparison of the tx <dig> genome with  <dig> e. faecium draft genomes confirmed that most clinical, outbreak, and hospital-associated  strains , in addition to strains of non-hospital origin, group in the same clade  and are evolutionally considerably more closely related to each other by phylogenetic and gene content similarity analyses than to isolates in the community-associated  clade with approximately a 3–4% average nucleotide sequence difference between the two clades at the core genome level. our study also revealed that many genomic loci in the tx <dig> genome are unique to the ha clade.  <dig> orfs in tx <dig> are ha-clade specific and antibiotic resistance genes are enriched in ha-clade strains. mobile elements such as is <dig> and transposons were also found almost exclusively in ha strains, as previously reported.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings along with other studies show that ha clonal lineages harbor specific genetic elements as well as sequence differences in the core genome which may confer selection advantages over the more heterogeneous ca e. faecium isolates. which of these differences are important for the success of specific e. faecium lineages in the hospital environment remain to be determined.

