BACKGROUND
the pyrethroid class of insecticides, including deltamethrin, is being used as substitutes for organochlorines and organophosphates in pest-control programs because of their low environmental persistence and toxicity. this study was aimed to investigate the impact of commonly used pesticides  on the blood and tissue oxidative stress level in catfish ; in addition to the protective effect of α-tocopherol on deltamethrin induced oxidative stress.

catfish were divided into three groups, 1st control group include  <dig> fish divided into two tanks each one contain  <dig> fish, 2nd deltamethrin group, where fish exposed to deltamethrin in a concentration  and 3rd vitamin e group, fish exposed to deltamethrin and vitamin e at a dose of 12 μg/l for successive 4 days.

serum, liver, kidney and gills were collected for biochemical assays. tissue oxidative stress biomarkers malondialdhyde  and catalase activity in liver, kidney and gills tissues, serum liver enzymes , serum albumin, total protein, urea and creatinine were analysed.


RESULTS
our results showed that 48 h. exposure to  <dig>  μg/l deltamethrin significantly  increased lipid peroxidation  in the liver, kidney and gills while catalase activity was significantly decreased in the same tissues. this accompanied by significant increase in serum alt, ast activity, urea and creatinine and a marked decrease in serum albumin and total proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
it could be concluded that deltamethrin is highly toxic to catfish even in very low concentration . moreover the effect of deltamethrin was pronounced in the liver of catfish in comparison with kidneys and gills. moreover fish antioxidants and oxidative stress could be used as biomarkers for aquatic pollution, thus helping in the diagnosis of pollution. adminstration of 12 μg/l α-tocopherol restored the quantified tissue and serum parameters, so supplementation of α-tocopherol consider an effective way to counter the toxicity of deltamethrin in the catfish.

deltamethrinclarias gariepinusegyptoxidative biomarkerscatalasemalondialdhydeα-tocopherol

