BACKGROUND
nuclear receptors  are a large superfamily of proteins defined by a dna-binding domain  and a ligand-binding domain . they function as transcriptional regulators to control expression of genes involved in development, homeostasis, and metabolism. the number of nrs differs from species to species, because of gene duplications and/or lineage-specific gene losses during metazoan evolution. many nrs in arthropods interact with the ecdysteroid hormone and are involved in ecdysone-mediated signaling in arthropods. the nuclear receptor superfamily complement has been reported in several arthropods, including crustaceans, but not in copepods. we identified the entire nr repertoire of the copepod tigriopus japonicus, which is an important marine model species for ecotoxicology and environmental genomics.


RESULTS
using whole genome and transcriptome sequences, we identified a total of  <dig> nuclear receptors in the genome of t. japonicus. nomenclature of the nuclear receptors was determined based on the sequence similarities of the dna-binding domain  and ligand-binding domain . the  <dig> subfamilies of nrs separate into five major clades . although the repertoire of nr members in, t. japonicus was similar to that reported for other arthropods, there was an expansion of the nr <dig> subfamily in tigriopus japonicus. the twelve unique nuclear receptors identified in t. japonicus are members of nr1l. this expansion may be a unique lineage-specific feature of crustaceans. interestingly, e <dig> and hr <dig>  which are present in other arthropods, were absent from the genomes of t. japonicus and two congeneric copepod species , suggesting copepod lineage-specific gene loss.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified all nr receptors present in the copepod, t. japonicus. knowledge of the copepod nuclear receptor repertoire will contribute to a better understanding of copepod- and crustacean-specific nr evolution.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nuclear receptorcopepodecdysone signalingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

