BACKGROUND
exercise exerts remarkably powerful effects on metabolism and health, with anti-disease and anti-aging outcomes. pharmacological manipulation of exercise benefit circuits might improve the health of the sedentary and the aging populations. still, how exercised muscle signals to induce system-wide health improvement remains poorly understood. with a long-term interest in interventions that promote animal-wide health improvement, we sought to define exercise options for caenorhabditis elegans.


RESULTS
here, we report on the impact of single swim sessions on c. elegans physiology. we used microcalorimetry to show that c. elegans swimming has a greater energy cost than crawling. animals that swam continuously for 90 min specifically consumed muscle fat supplies and exhibited post-swim locomotory fatigue, with both muscle fat depletion and fatigue indicators recovering within 1 hour of exercise cessation. quantitative polymerase chain reaction  transcript analyses also suggested an increase in fat metabolism during the swim, followed by the downregulation of specific carbohydrate metabolism transcripts in the hours post-exercise. during a 90 min swim, muscle mitochondria matrix environments became more oxidized, as visualized by a localized mitochondrial reduction-oxidation-sensitive green fluorescent protein reporter. qpcr data supported specific transcriptional changes in oxidative stress defense genes during and immediately after a swim. consistent with potential antioxidant defense induction, we found that a single swim session sufficed to confer protection against juglone-induced oxidative stress inflicted 4 hours post-exercise.


CONCLUSIONS
in addition to showing that even a single swim exercise bout confers physiological changes that increase robustness, our data reveal that acute swimming-induced changes share common features with some acute exercise responses reported in humans. overall, our data validate an easily implemented swim experience as c. elegans exercise, setting the foundation for exploiting the experimental advantages of this model to genetically or pharmacologically identify the exercise-associated molecules and signaling pathways that confer system-wide health benefits.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
exercisec. elegansmuscleoxidative stressmetabolismhttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000049national institute on agingr21ag050503http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000049national institute on agingr01ag051995simons foundation fellow of the life sciences research foundationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

