BACKGROUND
despite the high prevalence of genotype 1b hepatitis c virus  among patients, a cell culture system that permits entire viral life cycle of genotype 1b isolates is limited. to develop a cell-cultured hepatitis c virus  of genotype 1b, the proper combination of hcv genomic variants and host cells is essential. hcv genomes isolated from patients with distinctive symptoms may provide the variants required to establish an hcvcc of genotype 1b.


RESULTS
we first established subgenomic replicons in huh <dig> cells using hcv cdnas isolated from two patients: one with fulminant hepatitis after liver transplantation  and another with acute hepatitis and moderate symptoms . replicons established from tpf <dig> and sah showed mutations in ns4b and in ns <dig> and ns5a, respectively. using these replication machineries, we constructed hcv genomic rnas for each isolate. virus infectivity was evaluated by a focus-forming assay, which is dependent on the intracellular expression of core antigen, and production of virus particles was assessed by density-gradient centrifugation. infectious virus was only observed in the culture medium of cells transfected with tfp <dig> hcv rna. a chimeric genome with the structural segment  from sah and the replication machinery  from tpf <dig> exhibited greater infectivity than did tfp <dig>  despite formation of deficient virus particles in sah, suggesting that this genomic segment potentiates virus particle formation. to identify the responsible variants, infectious virus formation was assessed in a chimeric genome carrying parts of the sah structural segment of the tpf <dig> genome. a variant in ns <dig>  was identified that enhanced infectious virus formation. hcvcc carrying an ns <dig> gene encoding the m170t substitution and adaptive mutations in ns4b  infected naïve cured huh <dig> cells in a cd81-dependent manner.


CONCLUSIONS
we established a novel hcvcc of genotype 1b in huh <dig> cells by introducing an amino acid variant in ns <dig> and adaptive mutations in ns4b from hcv genomic rna isolated from a patient with fulminant hcv after liver transplantation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hcvhcvccgenotype 1bns2ns4badapted mutationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

