BACKGROUND
stroke remains one of the most common diseases with a serious impact on quality of life but few effective treatments exist. mild hypothermia  is a promising neuroprotective therapy in stroke management. this study investigated whether a delayed short mild hypothermic treatment is still beneficial as neuroprotective strategy in the endothelin- <dig>  rat model for a transient focal cerebral ischemia. two hours of mild hypothermia  was induced  <dig>   <dig> or 120 minutes after et- <dig> infusion. during the experiment the cerebral blood flow  was measured via laser doppler flowmetry in the striatum, which represents the core of the infarct. functional outcome and infarct volume were assessed 24 hours after the insult. in this sub-acute phase following stroke induction, the effects of the hypothermic treatment on apoptosis, phagocytosis and astrogliosis were assessed as well. apoptosis was determined using caspase- <dig> immunohistochemistry, phagocytic cells were visualized by cd- <dig> expression and astrogliosis was studied by glial fibrillary acidic protein  staining.


RESULTS
cooling could be postponed up to 1 hour after the onset of the insult without losing its positive effects on neurological deficit and infarct volume. these results correlated with the caspase- <dig> staining. in contrast, the increased cd- <dig> expression post-stroke was reduced in the core of the insult with all treatment protocols. hypothermia also reduced the increased levels of gfap staining, even when it was delayed up to 2 hours after the insult. the study confirmed that the induction of the hypothermia treatment in the et- <dig> model does not affect the cbf.


CONCLUSIONS
these data indicate that in the et- <dig> rat model, a short mild hypothermic treatment delayed for 1 hour is still neuroprotective and correlates with apoptosis. at the same time, hypothermia also establishes a lasting inhibitory effect on the activation of astrogliosis.

hypothermiacerebral ischemiaendothelin-1caspase-3gliosisphagocytosis

