BACKGROUND
the global area under brinjal cultivation is expected to be  <dig>  million hectare with total fruit production about  <dig> million metric tons . brinjal cultivars are susceptible to a variety of stresses that significantly limit productivity. the most important biotic stress is caused by the brinjal fruit and shoot borer  forcing farmers to deploy high doses of insecticides; a matter of serious health concern. therefore, to control the adverse effect of insecticides on the environment including the soil, transgenic technology has emerged as the effective alternative. however, the reports, regarding the nature of interaction of transgenic crops with the native microbial community are inconsistent. the effect of a bt transgenic brinjal expressing the bio-insecticidal protein  on the rhizospheric community of actinomycetes has been assessed and compared with its non-transgenic counterpart.


RESULTS
significant variation in the organic carbon observed between the crops  may be due to changes in root exudates quality and composition mediated by genetic attributes of bt transgenic brinjal. real time quantitative pcr indicated significant differences in the actinomycetes- specific 16s rrna gene copy numbers between the non-bt  × 1011 g- <dig> dws and bt brinjal planted soil  × 1011 g- <dig> dws. phylogenetic analysis indicated  <dig> and  <dig>  actinomycetes related groups in soil with non-bt and bt brinjal crop, respectively. micrococaceaea and nocardiodaceae were the dominant groups in pre-vegetation, branching, flowering, maturation and post-harvest stage. however, promicromonosporaceae, streptosporangiaceae, mycobacteriaceae, geodermatophilaceae, frankiaceae, kineosporaceae, actisymmetaceae and streptomycetaceae were exclusively detected in a few stages in non-bt brinjal rhizosphere soil while nakamurellaceae, corynebactericeae, thermomonosporaceae and pseudonocardiaceae in bt brinjal counterpart.


CONCLUSIONS
field trails envisage that cultivation of bt transgenic brinjal had negative effect on organic carbon which might be attributed to genetic modifications in the plant. changes in the organic carbon also affect the actinomycetes population size and diversity associated with rhizospheric soils of both the crops. further long-term study is required by taking account the natural cultivar apart from the bt brinjal and its near-isogenic non-bt brinjal with particular reference to the effects induced by the bt transgenic brinjal across different plant growth stages.

actinomycetescommunity structurerhizospherebt brinjalcry1ac gene

