BACKGROUND
trypanosoma vivax is the earliest branching african trypanosome. this crucial phylogenetic position makes t. vivax a fascinating model to tackle fundamental questions concerning the origin and evolution of several features that characterize african trypanosomes, such as the variant surface glycoproteins  upon which antibody clearing and antigenic variation are based. other features like gene content and trans-splicing patterns are worth analyzing in this species for comparative purposes.


RESULTS
we present a rna-seq analysis of the bloodstream stage of t. vivax from data obtained using two complementary sequencing technologies .

assembly of  <dig> reads yielded  <dig> contigs corresponding to proteins coding genes . these sequences, their annotation and other features are available through an online database presented herein. among these sequences, about  <dig> were found to be species specific and  <dig> exclusive of the t. vivax strain analyzed here. expression patterns and levels were determined for vsgs and the remaining genes. interestingly, vsg expression level, although being high, is considerably lower than in trypanosoma brucei. indeed, the comparison of surface protein composition between both african trypanosomes , shows that they are substantially different, being vsg absolutely predominant in t. brucei, while in t. vivax it represents only about 55%. this raises the question concerning the protective role of vsgs in t. vivax, hence their ancestral role in immune evasion.

it was also found that around  <dig> genes have their unique  trans-splice site very close  the start codon. gene ontology analysis shows that this group is enriched in proteins related to the translation machinery .


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first rna-seq data study in trypanosomes outside the model species t. brucei, hence it provides the possibility to conduct comparisons that allow drawing evolutionary and functional inferences. this analysis also provides several insights on the expression patterns and levels of protein coding sequences , trans-splicing, codon patterns and regulatory mechanisms. an online t. vivax rna-seq database described herein could be a useful tool for parasitologists working with trypanosomes.

