BACKGROUND
plant natural products have been co-opted for millennia by humans for various uses such as flavor, fragrances, and medicines. these compounds often are only produced in relatively low amounts and are difficult to chemically synthesize, limiting access. while elucidation of the underlying biosynthetic processes might help alleviate these issues , investigation of this is hindered by the low levels of relevant gene expression and expansion of the corresponding enzymatic gene families. however, the often-inducible nature of such metabolic processes enables selection of those genes whose expression pattern indicates a role in production of the targeted natural product.


RESULTS
here, we combine metabolomics and transcriptomics to investigate the inducible biosynthesis of the bioactive diterpenoid tanshinones from the chinese medicinal herb, salvia miltiorrhiza . untargeted metabolomics investigation of elicited hairy root cultures indicated that tanshinone production was a dominant component of the metabolic response, increasing at later time points. a transcriptomic approach was applied to not only define a comprehensive transcriptome , but also its response to induction, revealing  <dig>  genes that exhibited differential expression, with significant enrichment for up-regulation of genes involved in stress, stimulus and immune response processes. consistent with our metabolomics analysis, there appears to be a slower but more sustained increased in transcript levels of known genes from diterpenoid and, more specifically, tanshinone biosynthesis. among the co-regulated genes were  <dig> transcription factors and  <dig> cytochromes p <dig>  providing targets for future investigation.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate a biphasic response of danshen terpenoid metabolism to elicitation, with early induction of sesqui- and tri- terpenoid biosynthesis, followed by later and more sustained production of the diterpenoid tanshinones. our data provides a firm foundation for further elucidation of tanshinone and other inducible natural product metabolism in danshen.

