BACKGROUND
while growing in natural environments yeasts can be affected by osmotic stress provoked by high glucose concentrations. the response to this adverse condition requires the hog pathway and involves transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms initiated by the phosphorylation of this protein, its translocation to the nucleus and activation of transcription factors. one of the genes induced to respond to this injury is yhr087w. it encodes for a protein structurally similar to the n-terminal region of human sbds whose expression is also induced under other forms of stress and whose deletion determines growth defects at high glucose concentrations.


RESULTS
in this work we show that yhr087w expression is regulated by several transcription factors depending on the particular stress condition, and hot1p is particularly relevant for the induction at high glucose concentrations. in this situation, hot1p, together to sko1p, binds to yhr087w promoter in a hog1p-dependent manner. several evidences obtained indicate yhr087wp’s role in translation. firstly, and according to tap purification experiments, it interacts with proteins involved in translation initiation. besides, its deletion mutant shows growth defects in the presence of translation inhibitors and displays a slightly slower translation recovery after applying high glucose stress than the wild type strain. analyses of the association of mrnas to polysome fractions reveals a lower translation in the mutant strain of the mrnas corresponding to genes gpd <dig>  hsp <dig> and hsp <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
the data demonstrates that expression of yhr087wp under high glucose concentration is controlled by hot1p and sko1p transcription factors, which bind to its promoter. yhr087wp has a role in translation, maybe in the control of the synthesis of several stress response proteins, which could explain the lower levels of some of these proteins found in previous proteomic analyses and the growth defects of the deletion strain.

saccharomyces cerevisiaehigh glucose osmotic stressgene yhr087wgene expressiontranslationhot1phog1ppolysomes

