BACKGROUND
xiangjiang river  has been contaminated with heavy metal for several decades by surrounding factories. however, little is known about the influence of a gradient of heavy metal contamination on the diversity, structure of microbial functional gene in sediment. to deeply understand the impact of heavy metal contamination on microbial community, a comprehensive functional gene array  has been used to study the functional genes structure, composition, diversity and metabolic potential of microbial community from three heavy metal polluted sites of xiangjiang river.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> functional genes involved in different biogeochemical processes have been detected in three sites, and different diversities and structures of microbial functional genes were observed. the analysis of gene overlapping, unique genes, and various diversity indices indicated a significant correlation between the level of heavy metal contamination and the functional diversity. plentiful resistant genes related to various metal were detected, such as copper, arsenic, chromium and mercury. the results indicated a significantly higher abundance of genes involved in metal resistance including sulfate reduction genes  in studied site with most serious heavy metal contamination, such as cueo, mer, metc, merb, tehb and terc gene. with regard to the relationship between the environmental variables and microbial functional structure, s, cu, cd, hg and cr were the dominating factor shaping the microbial distribution pattern in three sites.


CONCLUSIONS
this study suggests that high level of heavy metal contamination resulted in higher functional diversity and the abundance of metal resistant genes. these variation therefore significantly contribute to the resistance, resilience and stability of the microbial community subjected to the gradient of heavy metals contaminant in xiangjiang river.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
geochipmicrobial functional geneheavy metal contaminationmetal resistancexiangjiang rivernatural science foundation of china51174239zhu jianyu issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

