BACKGROUND
many reptiles exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination . the initial cue in tsd is incubation temperature, unlike genotypic sex determination  where it is determined by the presence of specific alleles . we used patterns of gene expression to identify candidates for genes with a role in tsd and other developmental processes without making a priori assumptions about the identity of these genes . we identified genes with sexually dimorphic mrna accumulation during the temperature sensitive period of development in the red-eared slider turtle , a turtle with tsd. genes with differential mrna accumulation in response to estrogen  exposure and developmental stages were also identified.


RESULTS
sequencing  <dig> clones from three suppression-subtractive hybridization libraries yielded a total of  <dig> unique sequences. screening a macroarray with a subset of those sequences revealed a total of  <dig> genes that exhibited differential mrna accumulation:  <dig> female biased and  <dig> male biased. additional analyses revealed that c16orf <dig>  and malat <dig>  exhibited increased mrna accumulation at the male producing temperature relative to the female producing temperature during embryonic sexual development. finally, we identified four genes  that exhibited a stage effect and five genes  showed a response to e <dig> exposure.


CONCLUSIONS
here we report a survey of genes identified using patterns of mrna accumulation during embryonic development in a turtle with tsd. many previous studies have focused on examining the turtle orthologs of genes involved in mammalian development. although valuable, the limitations of this approach are exemplified by our identification of two genes  that are sexually dimorphic during embryonic development. malat <dig> is a noncoding rna that has not been implicated in sexual differentiation in other vertebrates and c16orf <dig> has an unknown function. our results revealed genes that are candidates for having roles in turtle embryonic development, including tsd, and highlight the need to expand our search parameters beyond protein-coding genes.

