BACKGROUND
rna-seq has spurred important gene fusion discoveries in a number of different cancers, including lung, prostate, breast, brain, thyroid and bladder carcinomas. gene fusion discovery can potentially lead to the development of novel treatments that target the underlying genetic abnormalities.


RESULTS
in this study, we provide comprehensive view of gene fusion landscape in  <dig> glioblastoma multiforme patients from two independent cohorts. fusions occur in approximately 30-50% of gbm patient samples. in the ivy center cohort of  <dig> patients, 33% of samples harbored fusions that were validated by qpcr and sanger sequencing. we were able to identify high-confidence gene fusions from rna-seq data in 53% of the samples in a tcga cohort of  <dig> patients. we identified  <dig> cases  with fusions retaining a tyrosine kinase domain in the tcga cohort and one case in the ivy center cohort. ours is the first study to describe recurrent fusions involving non-coding genes. genomic locations 7p <dig> and 12q14- <dig> harbor majority of the fusions. fusions on 7p <dig> are formed in focally amplified egfr locus whereas 12q14- <dig> fusions are formed by complex genomic rearrangements. all the fusions detected in this study can be further visualized and analyzed using our website: http://ivygap.swedish.org/fusions.


CONCLUSIONS
our study highlights the prevalence of gene fusions as one of the major genomic abnormalities in gbm. the majority of the fusions are private fusions, and a minority of these recur with low frequency. a small subset of patients with fusions of receptor tyrosine kinases can benefit from existing fda approved drugs and drugs available in various clinical trials. due to the low frequency and rarity of clinically relevant fusions, rna-seq of gbm patient samples will be a vital tool for the identification of patient-specific fusions that can drive personalized therapy.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gene fusionglioblastomarna-seqegfr fusionsntrk1ros1fgfr3-tacc3pik3c2bnon-coding gene fusionsissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013

