BACKGROUND
within onion, allium cepa l., the availability of disease resistance is limited. the identification of sources of resistance in related species, such as allium roylei and allium fistulosum, was a first step towards the improvement of onion cultivars by breeding. snp markers linked to resistance and polymorphic between these related species and onion cultivars are a valuable tool to efficiently introgress disease resistance genes. in this paper we describe the identification and validation of snp markers valuable for onion breeding.


RESULTS
transcriptome sequencing resulted in  <dig> million rna seq reads from the interspecific f <dig> hybrid between a. roylei and a. fistulosum  and nine onion cultivars. after assembly, reliable snps were discovered in about 36 % of the contigs. for genotyping of the interspecific three-way cross population, derived from a cross between an onion cultivar and the rf ,  <dig> snps that are polymorphic in rf and monomorphic in the onion cultivars  were selected for the development of kasp assays. a molecular linkage map based on  <dig> rf-snp markers was constructed for ccxrf. in addition, kasp assays were developed for  <dig> onion-snps . a second linkage map was constructed for an f <dig> of onion x a. roylei ) that consisted of  <dig> onion-snps and  <dig> rf-snps, and  <dig> previously mapped markers. markers co-segregating in both the f <dig> and the ccxrf population were used to assign the linkage groups of rf to onion chromosomes. to validate usefulness of these snp markers, qtl mapping was applied in the ccxrf population that segregates for resistance to botrytis squamosa and resulted in a qtl for resistance on chromosome  <dig> of a. roylei.


CONCLUSIONS
our research has more than doubled the publicly available marker sequences of expressed onion genes and two onion-related species. it resulted in a detailed genetic map for the interspecific ccxrf population. this is the first paper that reports the detection of a qtl for resistance to b. squamosa in a. roylei.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
allium cepaa. royleia. fistulosuminterspecific hybridstranscriptome sequencingbotrytis squamosatti-gg and companiesproject 25scholten olga e. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

