BACKGROUND
pentatricopeptide repeat  proteins are encoded by a large gene family of approximately  <dig> members in arabidopsis and  <dig> in rice, which characterized by tandem repetitions of a degenerate  <dig> amino acid characteristic sequence motifs. a large majority of the ppr genes in the higher plants are localized in organelles. their functions remain as yet largely unknown. the majority of characterized ppr proteins have been found to function in modulating the expression plastid and mitochondrial genes in plants.


RESULTS
here, a genome-wide identification and comparison of the ppr genes from  <dig> organisms was performed, including the moss physcomitrella patens, the lycophyte selaginella moellendorffii, the eudicot arabidopsis, and the monocots rice and foxtail millet. it appears that the expansion of this gene family prior to the divergence of the euphyllophytes and the lycophytes in land plants. the duplication and divergence rates of the foxtail millet ppr genes  showed that the expansion period of this gene family around  <dig> mya, and indicated that genome segmental duplication was very likely the primary mechanism underlying the expansion of the ppr gene family in vascular plants. an analysis of a complete set of sippr genes/proteins that included classification, chromosomal location, orthologous relationships, duplication analysis, and auxiliary motifs is presented. expression analysis of the sippr genes under stress conditions revealed that the expression of  <dig> sippr genes was responsive to abiotic stress. subcellular localization analysis of  <dig> ppr proteins indicated that  <dig> proteins were localized to chloroplasts, that  <dig> were localized to mitochondria, and that  <dig> were localized to the cytoplasm.


CONCLUSIONS
our results contribute to a more comprehensive understanding the roles of ppr proteins and will be useful in the prioritization of particular ppr proteins for subsequent functional validation studies in foxtail millet.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
foxtail milletpentatricopeptide repeat  proteinsgenome segmental duplicationphylogenesisresponsive mechanismsubcellular localization the national natural science foundation of china31371620ma you-zhi the national transgenic key project of the chinese ministry of agriculture2014zx0800916bma you-zhi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

