BACKGROUND
in contrast to wild species, which have typically evolved phenotypes over long periods of natural selection, domesticates rapidly gained human-preferred agronomic traits in a relatively short-time frame via artificial selection. under domesticated conditions, many traits can be observed that cannot only be due to environmental alteration. in the case of silkworms, aside from genetic divergence, whether epigenetic divergence played a role in domestication is an unanswered question. the silkworm is still an enigma in that it has two dna methyltransferases  but their functionality is unknown. even in particular the functionality of the widely distributed dnmt <dig> remains unknown in insects in general.


RESULTS
by embryonic rna interference, we reveal that knockdown of silkworm dnmt <dig> caused decreased hatchability, providing the first direct experimental evidence of functional significance of insect dnmt <dig>  in the light of this fact and those that dna methylation is correlated with gene expression in silkworms and some agronomic traits in domesticated organisms are not stable, we comprehensively compare silk gland methylomes of  <dig> domesticated  and  <dig> wild  silkworms to identify differentially methylated genes between the two. we observed 2-fold more differentiated methylated cytosinces  in domesticated silkworms as compared to their wild counterparts, suggesting a trend of increasing dna methylation during domestication. further study of more domesticated and wild silkworms narrowed down the domesticates’ epimutations, and we were able to identify a number of differential genes. one such gene showing demethyaltion in domesticates correspondently displays lower gene expression, and more interestingly, has experienced selective sweep. a methylation-increased gene seems to result in higher expression in domesticates and the function of its drosophila homolog was previously found to be essential for cell volume regulation, indicating a possible correlation with the enlargement of silk glands in domesticated silkworms.


CONCLUSIONS
our results imply epigenetic influences at work during domestication, which gives insight into long time historical controversies regarding acquired inheritance.

dnmt1comparative methylomicssilkwormdomestication

