BACKGROUND
genes and gene products are frequently annotated with gene ontology concepts based on the evidence provided in genomics articles. manually locating and curating information about a genomic entity from the biomedical literature requires vast amounts of human effort. hence, there is clearly a need forautomated computational tools to annotate the genes and gene products with gene ontology concepts by computationally capturing the related knowledge embedded in textual data.


RESULTS
in this article, we present an automated genomic entity annotation system, geann, which extracts information about the characteristics of genes and gene products in article abstracts from pubmed, and translates the discoveredknowledge into gene ontology  concepts, a widely-used standardized vocabulary of genomic traits. geann utilizes textual "extraction patterns", and a semantic matching framework to locate phrases matching to a pattern and produce gene ontology annotations for genes and gene products.

in our experiments, geann has reached to the precision level of 78% at therecall level of 61%. on a select set of gene ontology concepts, geann either outperforms or is comparable to two other automated annotation studies. use of wordnet for semantic pattern matching improves the precision and recall by 24% and 15%, respectively, and the improvement due to semantic pattern matching becomes more apparent as the gene ontology terms become more general.


CONCLUSIONS
geann is useful for two distinct purposes:  automating the annotation of genomic entities with gene ontology concepts, and  providing existing annotations with additional "evidence articles" from the literature. the use of textual extraction patterns that are constructed based on the existing annotations achieve high precision. the semantic pattern matching framework provides a more flexible pattern matching scheme with respect to "exactmatching" with the advantage of locating approximate pattern occurrences with similar semantics. relatively low recall performance of our pattern-based approach may be enhanced either by employing a probabilistic annotation framework based on the annotation neighbourhoods in textual data, or, alternatively, the statistical enrichment threshold may be adjusted to lower values for applications that put more value on achieving higher recall values.

