BACKGROUND
pectin methylesterase  is a hydrolytic enzyme that utilizes pectin as substrates, and plays a significant role in regulating pectin reconstruction thereby regulating plant growth. pectin is one of the important components of the plant cell wall, which forms the main structural material of cotton fiber. in this research, cotton genome information was used to identify pmes.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig>  pme genes from diploid g. arboreum ,  <dig>  pme genes from g. raimondii , and  <dig>  pme genes from tetraploid cotton g. hirsutum . we further analyzed their gene structure, conserved domain, gene expression, and systematic evolution to lay the foundation for deeper research on the function of pmes. phylogenetic data indicated that members from the same species demonstrated relatively high sequence identities and genetic similarities. analysis of gene structures showed that most of the pmes genes had 2– <dig> exons, with a few having a variable number of exons from  <dig> to  <dig>  there are nearly no differences in the gene structure of pmes among the three  cotton species. selective pressure analysis showed that the ka/ks value for each of the three cotton species pme families was less than one.


CONCLUSIONS
conserved domain analysis showed that pmes members had a relatively conserved c-terminal pectinesterase domain  while the n-terminus was less conserved. moreover, some of the family members contained a pectin methylesterase inhibitor  domain. the ka/ks ratios suggested that the duplicated pmes underwent purifying selection after the duplication events. this study provided an important basis for further research on the functions of cotton pmes. results from qrt-pcr indicated that the expression level of different pmes at various fiber developmental stages was different. moreover, some of the pmes showed fiber predominant expression in secondary wall thickening indicating tissue-specific expression patterns.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cottonpectin methylesterases gene familygene structurephylogenyexpression patternsnational natural science foundation of china 31471538shang haihong national high technology research and development program of china2013aa102601zou changsong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

