BACKGROUND
thorough understanding of seed starch biosynthesis and accumulation mechanisms is of great importance for agriculture and crop improvement strategies. we conducted the first comprehensive study of the dynamic development of starch granules and the regulation of starch biosynthesis in brachypodium distachyon and compared the findings with those reported for common wheat  and aegilops peregrina.


RESULTS
only b-granules were identified in brachypodium bd <dig>  and the shape variation and development of starch granules were similar in the b-granules of cs and bd <dig>  phylogenetic analysis showed that most of the bd <dig> starch synthesis-related genes were more similar to those in wheat than in rice. early expression of key genes in bd <dig> starch biosynthesis mediate starch synthesis in the pericarp; intermediate-stage expression increases the number and size of starch granules. in contrast, these enzymes in cs and ae. peregrina were mostly expressed at intermediate stages, driving production of new b-granules and increasing the granule size, respectively. immunogold labeling showed that granule-bound starch synthase  was mainly present in starch granules: at lower levels in the b-granules of bd <dig> than in cs. furthermore, gbssi was phosphorylated at threonine  <dig> and tyrosine  <dig> in the starch synthase catalytic domain in cs and ae. peregrina, but neither site was phosphorylated in bd <dig>  suggesting gbssi phosphorylation could improve amylose biosynthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
bd <dig> contains only b-granules, and the expression of key genes in the three studied genera is consistent with the dynamic development of starch granules. gbssi is present in greater amounts in the b-granules of cs than in bd21; two phosphorylation sites  were found in triticum and aegilops; these sites were not phosphorylated in bd <dig>  gbssi phosphorylation may reflect its importance in amylose synthesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
brachypodium bd21b-granulesstarch biosynthesisexpression profilinggbssiphosphorylationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

