BACKGROUND
methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus  is a major cause of hospital-associated infection, but there is growing awareness of the emergence of multidrug-resistant lineages in community settings around the world. one such lineage is st772-mrsa-v, which has disseminated globally and is increasingly prevalent in india. here, we present the complete genome sequence of dar <dig>  a strain of the st772-mrsa-v lineage from india, and investigate its genomic characteristics in regards to antibiotic resistance and virulence factors.


RESULTS
sequencing using single-molecule real-time technology resulted in the assembly of a single continuous chromosomal sequence, which was error-corrected, annotated and compared to nine draft genome assemblies of st772-mrsa-v from australia, malaysia and india. we discovered numerous and redundant resistance genes associated with mobile genetic elements  and known core genome mutations that explain the highly antibiotic resistant phenotype of dar <dig>  staphylococcal toxins and superantigens, including the leukotoxin panton-valentinin leukocidin, were predominantly associated with genomic islands and the phage φ-ind772pvl. some of these mobile resistance and virulence factors were variably present in other strains of the st772-mrsa-v lineage.


CONCLUSIONS
the genomic characteristics presented here emphasize the contribution of mges to the emergence of multidrug-resistant and highly virulent strains of community-associated mrsa. antibiotic resistance was further augmented by chromosomal mutations and redundancy of resistance genes. the complete genome of dar <dig> provides a valuable resource for future investigations into the global dissemination and phylogeography of st772-mrsa-v.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
staphylococcus aureusmrsast772antibiotic resistancemobile genetic elementscomplete genomedar4145indiaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

