BACKGROUND
ixodes scapularis, commonly known as the blacklegged or deer tick, is the main vector of lyme disease in the united states. recent progress in transcriptome research has uncovered hundreds of different proteins expressed in the salivary glands of hard ticks, the majority of which have no known function, and include many novel protein families. we recently identified transcripts coding for two putative cytosolic sulfotransferases in these ticks which recognized phenolic monoamines as their substrates. in this current study, we characterize the genetic expression of these two cytosolic sulfotransferases throughout the tick life cycle as well as the enzymatic properties of the corresponding recombinant proteins. interestingly, the resultant recombinant proteins showed sulfotransferase activity against both neurotransmitters dopamine and octopamine.


RESULTS
the two sulfotransferase genes were coded as ixosc sult  <dig> &  <dig> and corresponding proteins were referred as ixosc sult  <dig> and  <dig>  using gene-specific primers, the sulfotransferase transcripts were detected throughout the blacklegged tick life cycle, including eggs, larvae, nymphs, adult salivary glands and adult midgut. notably, the mrna and protein levels were altered upon feeding during both the larval and nymphal life stages. quantitative pcr results confirm that ixosc sult <dig> was statistically increased upon blood feeding while ixosc sult  <dig> was decreased. this altered expression led us to further characterize the function of these proteins in the ixodid tick. the sulfotransferase genes were cloned and expressed in a bacterial expression system, and purified recombinant proteins ixosc sult  <dig> and  <dig> showed sulfotransferase activity against neurotransmitters dopamine and octopamine as well as the common sulfotransferase substrate p-nitrophenol. thus, dopamine- or octopamine-sulfonation may be involved in altering the biological signal for salivary secretion in i. scapularis.


CONCLUSIONS
collectively, these results suggest that a function of ixosc sult  <dig> and sult  <dig> in ixodid tick salivary glands may include inactivation of the salivation signal via sulfonation of dopamine or octopamine.

