BACKGROUND
despite the importance of abnormalities in lipoprotein metabolism in clinical canine medicine, the fact that most previously used methods for lipoprotein profiling are rather laborious and time-consuming has been a major obstacle to the wide clinical application and use of lipoprotein profiling in this species. the aim of the present study was to assess the feasibility of a continuous lipoprotein density profile  generated within a bismuth sodium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid  density gradient to characterize and compare the lipoprotein profiles of healthy dogs of various breeds, healthy miniature schnauzers, and miniature schnauzers with primary hypertriacylglycerolemia. a total of  <dig> healthy dogs of various breeds with serum triacylglycerol  and cholesterol concentrations within their respective reference intervals were selected for use as a reference population. thirty-one miniature schnauzers with serum tag and cholesterol concentrations within their respective reference intervals and  <dig> miniature schnauzers with hypertriacylglyceridemia were also included in the study.


RESULTS
the results suggest that clpdp using nabiedta provides unique diagnostic information in addition to measurements of serum tag and cholesterol concentrations and that it is a useful screening method for dogs with suspected lipoprotein metabolism disorders. using the detailed and continuous density distribution information provided by the clpdp, important differences in lipoprotein profiles can be detected even among dogs that have serum tag and cholesterol concentrations within the reference interval. miniature schnauzers with serum tag and cholesterol concentrations within the reference interval had significantly different lipoprotein profiles than dogs of various other breeds. in addition, it was further established that specific lipoprotein fractions are associated with hypertriacylglyceridemia in miniature schnauzers.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of the present study suggest that density gradient ultracentrifugation using nabiedta is a useful screening method for the study of lipoprotein profiles in dogs. therefore, this method could potentially be used for diagnostic purposes for the separation of dogs suspected of having lipoprotein abnormalities from healthy dogs.

caninehypertriglyceridemialipemialipoprotein fingerprintingnabiedtanabiyultracentrifugationdisease

