BACKGROUND
ariids or sea catfishes are one of the two otophysan fish families  that inhabit mainly marine and brackish waters . the group includes over  <dig> species placed in ~ <dig> genera and two subfamilies . despite their global distribution, ariids are largely restricted to the continental shelves due in part to their specialized reproductive behavior . thus, among marine fishes, ariids offer an excellent opportunity for inferring historical biogeographic scenarios. phylogenetic hypotheses available for ariids have focused on restricted geographic areas and comprehensive phylogenies are still missing. this study inferred phylogenetic hypotheses for  <dig> ariid species in  <dig> genera from different biogeographic provinces using both mitochondrial and nuclear sequences .


RESULTS
while the topologies obtained support the monophyly of basal groups, up to ten genera validated in previous morphological studies were incongruent with the molecular topologies. new world ariines were recovered as paraphyletic and old world ariines were grouped into a well-supported clade that was further divided into subclades mainly restricted to major gondwanan landmasses. a general area cladogram derived from the area cladograms of ariines and three other fish groups was largely congruent with the geological area cladogram of gondwana. nonetheless, molecular clock estimations provided variable results on the timing of ariine diversification .


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the most comprehensive phylogeny of sea catfishes to date and highlights the need for re-assessment of their classification. while from a topological standpoint the evolutionary history of ariines is mostly congruent with vicariance associated with the sequence of events during gondwanan fragmentation, ambiguous divergence time estimations hinders assessing the vicariant hypothesis on a temporal framework. further examination of ariid fossils might provide the basis for more accurate inferences on the timing of ariine diversification.

