BACKGROUND
the shell of the pearl-producing bivalve pinctada margaritifera is composed of an organic cell-free matrix that plays a key role in the dynamic process of biologically-controlled biomineralization. in order to increase genomic resources and identify shell matrix proteins implicated in biomineralization in p. margaritifera, high-throughput expressed sequence tag  pyrosequencing was undertaken on the calcifying mantle, combined with a proteomic analysis of the shell.


RESULTS
we report the functional analysis of  <dig>  <dig> sequences, leading to the constitution of an unprecedented catalog of  <dig> p. margaritifera biomineralization-related mantle protein sequences. components of the current "chitin-silk fibroin gel-acidic macromolecule" model of biomineralization processes were found, in particular a homolog of a biomineralization protein  recently discovered in p. fucata. among these sequences, we could show the localization of two other biomineralization protein transcripts, pmarg-aspein and pmarg-pearlin, in two distinct areas of the outer mantle epithelium, suggesting their implication in calcite and aragonite formation. finally, by combining the est approach with a proteomic mass spectrometry analysis of proteins isolated from the p. margaritifera shell organic matrix, we demonstrated the presence of  <dig> sequences containing almost all of the shell proteins that have been previously described from shell matrix protein analyses of the pinctada genus. the integration of these two methods allowed the global composition of biomineralizing tissue and calcified structures to be examined in tandem for the first time.


CONCLUSIONS
this est study made on the calcifying tissue of p. margaritifera is the first description of pyrosequencing on a pearl-producing bivalve species. our results provide direct evidence that our est data set covers most of the diversity of the matrix protein of p. margaritifera shell, but also that the mantle transcripts encode proteins present in p. margaritifera shell, hence demonstrating their implication in shell formation. combining transcriptomic and proteomic approaches is therefore a powerful way to identify proteins involved in biomineralization. data generated in this study supply the most comprehensive list of biomineralization-related sequences presently available among protostomian species, and represent a major breakthrough in the field of molluskan biomineralization.

