BACKGROUND
typhoid cases need to be diagnosed accurately for early antibiotic therapy and reducing mortality. identification of salmonella typhi  in blood culture is conclusive, but has poor sensitivity. detection of s. typhi by pcr from blood sample has shown promise. real-time quantitative pcr  has been widely used in diagnostics for its rapidity and reliability. in the present study, the performance of molecular methods like conventional pcr , nested pcr  and q-pcr were investigated and compared by targeting s. typhi specific flagellar flic-d gene directly in blood samples for typhoid diagnosis.


RESULTS
analytical sensitivities and specificities of the pcr assays were determined under laboratory condition followed by diagnostic performances were demonstrated in  <dig> clinically diagnosed typhoid fever  cases included as study subjects. the dna detection limit of c-pcr was observed 3 ×  <dig> copies/reaction; those of n-pcr and q-pcr  were  <dig> copies/reaction. the c-pcr was not further evaluated since it showed negative results with all clinical samples due to low sensitivity. low isolation rate  of s. typhi by blood culture did not reflect the true burden of typhoid fever among the study subjects. hence diagnostic performances of n-pcr and q-pcr were determined considering cdtf cases positive by any of the diagnostic assay methods  as true positives. laboratory confirmed non-typhoidal cases  were included as true negatives. on comparison, although both the assays were 100 % specific; sensitivity  and efficiency  of q-pcr were better, but statistically not significant  than n-pcr. the positive and negative likelihood ratios of q-pcr were ∞ and  <dig>  which indicated the potential clinical utility of q-pcr for typhoid diagnosis. q-pcr was more rapid than n-pcr  in obtaining test results.


CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates for the first time that taqman-based q-pcr assay performs more favorably than n-pcr for direct detection of s. typhi dna in blood samples. direct and quantitative blood q-pcr is a rapid and reliable method for diagnosis of typhoid fever.

keywords
typhoiddiagnosticspcrflic-d genehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001411indian council of medical research im/sd-1/07-08/18dutta shanta issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

