BACKGROUND
the main olfactory epithelium  in mammals is a specialized organ to detect odorous molecules in the external environment. the moe consists of four types of cells: olfactory sensory neurons, supporting cells, basal cells, and microvillous cells. among these, development and function of microvillous cells remain largely unknown. recent studies have shown that a population of microvillous cells expresses the monovalent cation channel trpm <dig> . to examine functional differentiation of trpm5-expressing microvillous cells in the moe, we investigated the expression and function of skn-1a, a pou  transcription factor required for functional differentiation of trpm5-expressing sweet, umami, and bitter taste bud cells in oropharyngeal epithelium and solitary chemosensory cells in nasal respiratory epithelium.


RESULTS
skn-1a is expressed in a subset of basal cells and apical non-neuronal cells in the moe of embryonic and adult mice. two-color in situ hybridization revealed that a small population of skn-1a-expressing cells was co-labeled with mash1/ascl <dig> and that most skn-1a-expressing cells coexpress trpm <dig>  to investigate whether skn-1a has an irreplaceable role in the moe, we analyzed skn-1a-deficient mice. in the absence of skn-1a, olfactory sensory neurons differentiate normally except for a limited defect in terminal differentiation in ectoturbinate  <dig> of some of moes examined. in contrast, the impact of skn-1a deficiency on trpm5-expressing microvillous cells is much more striking: trpm <dig>  villin, and choline acetyltransferase, cell markers previously shown to identify trpm5-expressing microvillous cells, were no longer detectable in skn-1a-deficient mice. in addition, quantitative analysis demonstrated that the density of superficial microvillous cells was significantly decreased in skn-1a-deficient mice.


CONCLUSIONS
skn-1a is expressed in a minority of mash1-positive olfactory progenitor cells and a majority of trpm5-expressing microvillous cells in the main olfactory epithelium. loss-of-function mutation of skn-1a resulted in complete loss of trpm5-expressing microvillous cells, whereas most of olfactory sensory neurons differentiated normally. thus, skn-1a is a critical regulator for the generation of trpm5-expressing microvillous cells in the main olfactory epithelium in mice.

