BACKGROUND
primary auditory cortex  neurons show qualitatively distinct response features to successive acoustic signals depending on the inter-stimulus intervals . such isi-dependent ai responses are believed to underlie, at least partially, categorical perception of click trains  and stop consonant-vowel syllables .

methods
single unit recordings were conducted on  <dig> ai neurons in awake cats. rectangular clicks were presented either alone  or in a train fashion with variable isi  . response features of ai neurons were quantified as a function of isi: one measure was related to the degree of stimulus locking  and another measure was based on firing rate . an additional modeling study was performed to gain insight into neurophysiological bases of the observed responses.


RESULTS
in the click-train paradigm, the majority of the ai neurons  showed stimulus-locking responses at long isis. the shorter cutoff isi for stimulus-locking responses was on average ~ <dig> ms and was level tolerant in accordance with the perceptual boundary of click trains and of consonant-vowel syllables. the shape of tmtf of those neurons was either band-pass or low-pass. the single click paradigm revealed, at maximum, four response periods in the following order: 1st excitation, 1st suppression, 2nd excitation then 2nd suppression. the 1st excitation and 1st suppression was found exclusively in the synchronization type, implying that the temporal interplay between excitation and suppression underlies stimulus-locking responses. among these neurons, those showing the 2nd suppression had band-pass tmtf whereas those with low-pass tmtf never showed the 2nd suppression, implying that tmtf shape is mediated through the 2nd suppression. the recovery time course of excitability suggested the involvement of short-term plasticity. the observed phenomena were well captured by a single cell model which incorporated ampa, gabaa, nmda and gabab receptors as well as short-term plasticity of thalamocortical synaptic connections.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, it was suggested that isi-dependent responses of the majority of ai neurons are configured through the temporal interplay of excitation and suppression  along with short-term plasticity.

