BACKGROUND
most living organisms use sunlight as a source of energy and/or information about their environment. consequently, they have developed mechanisms to sense light quality and quantity. in the fungus trichoderma atroviride blue-light is perceived through the blue light regulator complex, which in turn up-regulates a set of genes  and down-regulates another set , triggering asexual reproduction. to gain insight into this process, we characterized the blu <dig> gene, which encodes a protein containing a c2h <dig> zinc finger domain.


RESULTS
Δblu <dig> mutants show reduced conidiation at low light fluences, which is still clear even when exposed to saturating light. for the first time we show a genome wide survey of light regulated gene expression in t. atroviride, including rna-seq analyses of the wild type and the Δblu <dig> strains after brief exposure to blue-light. our data show a reduction in the number of induced genes and an increase in down-regulated genes in the mutant. light activates stress responses and several metabolic processes in the wild type strain that are no longer activated in the mutant. in agreement with the misregulation of metabolic processes, continuous exposure to white light strongly inhibited growth of the ∆blu <dig> mutant, in a carbon source dependent fashion. rna-seq analyses under constant white light using glucose as sole carbon source revealed that localization and transport process present the opposite regulation pattern in the ∆blu <dig> and wild type strains. genes related to amino acid, sugar and general transporters were enriched in the induced genes in the mutant and the repressed genes of the wild type. peptone supplemented in the media restored growth of the ∆blu <dig> mutant in constant light, suggesting a role of blu <dig> in the regulation of nitrogen metabolism in the presence of light.


CONCLUSIONS
blu <dig> appears to regulate light sensitivity in terms of induction of conidiation, and to play a major role in supporting growth under continuous exposure to light. the diminished conidiation observed in ∆blu <dig> mutants is likely due to misregulation of the camp signaling pathway and ros production, whereas their low tolerance to continuous exposure to light indicates that blu <dig> is required for adaptation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
blrrna-seqphotoconidiationnitrogen metabolismglucosegrowthlightconacytfordecyt-2012-02-193512herrera-estrella alfredo issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

