BACKGROUND
prednisolone was one of the first glucocorticoids to be synthesised, but it is still widely applied to cattle. illegal uses of prednisolone include its uses for masking a number of diseases before animal sale and, at lower dosages for extended periods of time, for the improvement of feed efficiency and carcass characteristics. since occasional presence of prednisolone has been detected at trace level in urine samples from untreated cattle, the italian ministry of health introduced a provisional limit of  <dig> ng/ml to avoid false non-compliances. however, this limit proved ineffective in disclosing prednisolone misuse as a growth-promoter. in the present study, prednisolone acetate was administered to finishing bulls and cows according to a therapeutic protocol  to further verify the practical impact of this cut-off limit and develop sound strategies to distinguish between exogenous administration and endogenous production. urinary prednisolone, prednisone, 20β-dihydroprednisolone, 20α-dihydroprednisolone, 20β-dihydroprednisone, 6β-hydroxyprednisolone, cortisol, and cortisone were determined using a validated lc/ms-ms method.


RESULTS
the urinary excretion profile showed the simultaneous presence of prednisolone, 20β-dihydroprednisolone, and prednisone, the latter at lower concentrations, up to  <dig> days after the first dosing. higher analyte levels were detected in bulls even after correction for dilution in the urine. prednisolone concentrations below  <dig> ng/ml were determined in half of the samples collected at  <dig> days, and in all the samples obtained  <dig> and  <dig> days after the first administration. no measurable concentrations of prednisolone or its metabolites were found in the samples collected before the treatment, while cortisol and cortisone levels lower than the respective loqs were observed upon treatment.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study confirms the criticism of the coarse quantitative approach currently adopted to ascertain illegal prednisolone administration in cattle. as previously shown for growth-promoting treatments of meat cattle, the simultaneous determination of urinary prednisolone, prednisone, 20β-dihydroprednisolone, along with cortisol and cortisone, may represent a more reliable approach to confirm the exogenous origin of prednisolone. such a strategy would facilitate unequivocal detection of animals treated with prednisolone acetate using a therapeutical protocol, even  <dig> to  <dig> weeks after the treatment.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
prednisolone acetatetherapeutic treatmentfinishing bullscowslc/ms-msprednisone20β-dihydroprednisoloneurinary excretionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

