BACKGROUND
effectors of type iii secretion system  play a pivotal role in establishing and maintaining pathogenicity in the host and therefore the identification of these effectors is important in understanding virulence. however, the effectors display high level of sequence diversity, therefore making the identification a difficult process. there is a need to collate and annotate existing effector sequences in public databases to enable systematic analyses of these sequences for development of models for screening and selection of putative novel effectors from bacterial genomes that can be validated by a smaller number of key experiments.


RESULTS
herein, we present t3sedb http://effectors.bic.nus.edu.sg/t3sedb, a specialized database of annotated t3ss effector  sequences containing  <dig> records from  <dig> bacterial species compiled from the literature and public protein databases. procedures have been defined for i) comprehensive annotation of experimental status of effectors, ii) submission and curation review of records by users of the database, and iii) the regular update of t3sedb existing and new records. keyword fielded and sequence searches  are supported for both experimentally verified and hypothetical t3ses. more than  <dig> clusters of t3ses were detected based on sequence identity comparisons . owing to this high level of sequence diversity of t3ses, the t3sedb provides a large number of experimentally known effector sequences with wide species representation for creation of effector predictors. we created a reliable effector prediction tool, integrated into the database, to demonstrate the application of the database for such endeavours.


CONCLUSIONS
t3sedb is the first specialised database reported for t3ss effectors, enriched with manual annotations that facilitated systematic construction of a reliable prediction model for identification of novel effectors. the t3sedb represents a platform for inclusion of additional annotations of metadata for future developments of sophisticated effector prediction models for screening and selection of putative novel effectors from bacterial genomes/proteomes that can be validated by a small number of key experiments.

26– <dig> september  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  ninth international conference on bioinformatics  tokyo, japan

