BACKGROUND
the properties of ca2+ signaling mediated by purinergic receptors are intrinsically linked with functional activity of astrocytes. at present little is known concerning ca2+-dependent purinergic responses in adult human astrocytes. this work has examined effects of purinergic stimulation to alter levels of intracellular ca2+ in adult human astrocytes. ca2+-sensitive spectrofluorometry was carried out to determine mobilization of intracellular ca2+ following adenosine triphosphate  or 3′-o-benzoyl-atp  stimulation of adult human astrocytes. in some experiments pharmacological modulation of ca2+ pathways was applied to help elucidate mechanisms of ca2+ signaling. rt-pcr was also performed to confirm human astrocyte expression of specific purinoceptors which were indicated from imaging studies.


RESULTS
the endogenous p <dig> receptor agonist atp  applied in physiological saline solution  evoked a rapid increase of i to a peak amplitude with the decay phase of response exhibiting two components. the two phases of decay consisted of an initial rapid component which was followed by a secondary slower component. in the presence of ca2+-free solution, the secondary phase of decay was absent indicating this prolonged component was due to influx of ca2+. this prolonged phase of decay was also attenuated with the store-operated channel  inhibitor gadolinium  added to standard pss, suggesting this component was mediated by soc activation. these results are consistent with atp activation of p2y receptor  in adult human astrocytes leading to respective rapid i mobilization from intracellular stores followed by ca2+ entry through soc. an agonist for p2x <dig> receptor , bzatp induced a very different response compared with atp whereby bzatp  elicited a slowly rising increase in i to a plateau level which was sustained in duration. the bzatp-induced increase in i was not enhanced with lipopolysaccharide pre-treatment of cells as previously found for p2x7r mediated response in human microglia. rt-pcr analysis showed that adult human astrocytes in vitro constitutively express mrna for p2y1r, p2y2r and p2x7r.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that activation of metabotropic p2yr  and ionotropic p2x7r could mediate purinergic responses in adult human astrocytes.

adult human astrocytesp <dig> receptorsintracellular calcium signalingatp3′-o-benzoyl-atp

