BACKGROUND
parasite-vector interactions are fundamental in the transmission of vector-borne diseases such as leishmaniasis. leishmania development in the vector sand fly is confined to the digestive tract, where sand fly midgut molecules interact with the parasites. in this work we sequenced and analyzed two midgut-specific cdna libraries from sugar fed and blood fed female phlebotomus perniciosus and compared the transcript expression profiles.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> high quality sequences were obtained from the two libraries and assembled into  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons. molecules with putative roles in blood meal digestion, peritrophic matrix formation, immunity and response to oxidative stress were identified, including proteins that were not previously reported in sand flies. these molecules were evaluated relative to other published sand fly transcripts. comparative analysis of the two libraries revealed transcripts differentially expressed in response to blood feeding. molecules up regulated by blood feeding include a putative peritrophin , two chymotrypsin-like proteins , a putative trypsin  and four putative microvillar proteins . additionally, several transcripts were more abundant in the sugar fed midgut, such as two putative trypsins , a chymotrypsin  and a microvillar protein . we performed a detailed temporal expression profile analysis of the putative trypsin transcripts using qpcr and confirmed the expression of blood-induced and blood-repressed trypsins. trypsin expression was measured in leishmania infantum-infected and uninfected sand flies, which identified the l. infantum-induced down regulation of ppertryp <dig> at  <dig> hours post-blood meal.


CONCLUSIONS
this midgut tissue-specific transcriptome provides insight into the molecules expressed in the midgut of p. perniciosus, an important vector of visceral leishmaniasis in the old world. through the comparative analysis of the libraries we identified molecules differentially expressed during blood meal digestion. additionally, this study provides a detailed comparison to transcripts of other sand flies. moreover, our analysis of putative trypsins demonstrated that l. infantum infection can reduce the transcript abundance of trypsin ppertryp <dig> in the midgut of p. perniciosus.

