BACKGROUND
macrophages are the primary effector cells responsible for killing mycobacterium tuberculosis  through various mechanisms, including apoptosis. however, mtb can evade host immunity to create a favorable environment for intracellular replication. mtb-infected human macrophages produce interleukin- <dig> . il- <dig> is a pro-inflammatory cytokine and has several isoforms. we previously found that il-32γ reduced the burden of mtb in human macrophages, in part, through the induction of caspase-3-dependent apoptosis. however, based on our previous studies, we hypothesized that caspase-3-independent death pathways may also mediate il- <dig> control of mtb infection. herein, we assessed the potential roles of cathepsin-mediated apoptosis, caspase-1-mediated pyroptosis, and apoptosis-inducing factor  in mediating il-32γ control of mtb infection in thp- <dig> cells.


RESULTS
differentiated human thp- <dig> macrophages were infected with mtb h37rv alone or in the presence of specific inhibitors to caspase- <dig>  cathepsin b/d, or cathepsin l for up to four days, after which tunel-positive cells were quantified; in addition, mtb was quantified by culture as well as by the percentage of thp- <dig> cells that were infected with green fluorescent protein -labeled mtb as determined by microscopy. aif expression was inhibited using sirna technology. inhibition of cathepsin b/d, cathepsin l, or caspase- <dig> activity significantly abrogated the il-32γ-mediated reduction in the number of intracellular mtb and of the percentage of gfp-mtb-infected macrophages. furthermore, inhibition of caspase- <dig>  cathepsin b/d, or cathepsin l in the absence of exogenous il-32γ resulted in a trend toward an increased proportion of mtb-infected thp- <dig> cells. inhibition of aif activity in the absence of exogenous il-32γ also increased intracellular burden of mtb. however, since il-32γ did not induce aif and because the relative increases in mtb with inhibition of aif were similar in the presence or absence of il-32γ, our results indicate that aif does not mediate the host-protective effect of il-32γ against mtb.


CONCLUSIONS
the anti-mtb effects of il-32γ are mediated through classical caspase-3-dependent apoptosis as well as caspase-3-independent apoptosis.

keywords
mycobacterium tuberculosisinterleukin-32apoptosisprogrammed cell deathcaspase-1cathepsinsapoptosis-inducing factorissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

