BACKGROUND
meiotic recombination is a major source of genetic variation in eukaryotes. the role of recombination in evolution is recognized but little is known about how evolutionary forces affect the recombination pathway itself. although the recombination pathway is fundamentally conserved across different species, genetic variation in recombination components and outcomes has been observed. theoretical predictions and empirical studies suggest that changes in the recombination pathway are likely to provide adaptive abilities to populations experiencing directional or strong selection pressures, such as those occurring during species domestication. we hypothesized that adaptive changes in recombination may be associated with adaptive evolution patterns of genes involved in meiotic recombination.


RESULTS
to examine how maize evolution and domestication affected meiotic recombination genes, we studied patterns of sequence polymorphism and divergence in eleven genes controlling key steps in the meiotic recombination pathway in a diverse set of maize inbred lines and several accessions of teosinte, the wild ancestor of maize. we discovered that, even though the recombination genes generally exhibited high sequence conservation expected in a pathway controlling a key cellular process, they showed substantial levels and diverse patterns of sequence polymorphism. among others, we found differences in sequence polymorphism patterns between tropical and temperate maize germplasms. several recombination genes displayed patterns of polymorphism indicative of adaptive evolution.


CONCLUSIONS
despite their ancient origin and overall sequence conservation, meiotic recombination genes can exhibit extensive and complex patterns of molecular evolution. changes in these genes could affect the functioning of the recombination pathway, and may have contributed to the successful domestication of maize and its expansion to new cultivation areas.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genetic variationrecombinationmeiosismolecular evolutiondomesticationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000153division of biological infrastructuredbi-0702454http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000154division of integrative organismal systemsios-1025881http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100006031united states - israel binational agricultural research and development fundus-4828-15issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

