BACKGROUND
the objectives were to determine and assess the reliability of criteria for identification of aortic valve prolapse  using echocardiography in the horse.


RESULTS
opinion of equine cardiologists indicated that a long-axis view of the aortic valve  was most commonly used for identification of avp . there was consensus that avp could be mimicked by ultrasound probe malignment. this was confirmed in  <dig> healthy horses, where the appearance of avp could be induced by malalignment. in a study of a further  <dig> healthy horses  examined daily for  <dig> days, by two echocardiographers standardized imaging guidelines gave good to excellent agreement for the assessment of avp  and good agreement between days and observers . the technique allowed for assessment of the degree of prolapse and measurement of the prolapse distance that provided excellent agreement between echocardiographers, days and observers . assessments made using real-time zoomed images provided similar measurements to the standard views , with agreement for the identification of avp .

short axis views of the aov were used for identification of avp by fewer respondents , however provided less agreement for the identification of avp  and only adequate agreement with observations made in long axis , with avp being identified more often in short axis  compared to long axis .

orthogonal views were used by 31% of respondents to identify the presence of avp, and 85% to identify cusp. its identification on both views on  <dig> days was used to categorise horses as having avp, providing a positive predictive value of 79% and negative predictive value of 18%. only the non-coronary cusp  of the aov was observed to prolapse in these studies. prolapse of the ncc was confirmed during the optimisation study using four-dimensional echocardiography, which concurred with the findings of two-dimensional echocardiography.


CONCLUSIONS
this study has demonstrated reliable diagnostic criteria for the identification and assessment of avp that can be used for longitudinal research studies to better define the prevalence and natural history of this condition.

cardiologyequineechocardiographyrepeatabilityreproducibility

