BACKGROUND
bioluminescent proteins  widely exist in many living organisms. as blps are featured by the capability of emitting lights, they can be served as biomarkers and easily detected in biomedical research, such as gene expression analysis and signal transduction pathways. therefore, accurate identification of blps is important for disease diagnosis and biomedical engineering. in this paper, we propose a novel accurate sequence-based method named predblp  to predict blps.


RESULTS
we collect a series of sequence-derived features, which have been proved to be involved in the structure and function of blps. these features include amino acid composition, dipeptide composition, sequence motifs and physicochemical properties. we further prove that the combination of four types of features outperforms any other combinations or individual features. to remove potential irrelevant or redundant features, we also introduce fisher markov selector together with sequential backward selection strategy to select the optimal feature subsets. additionally, we design a lineage-specific scheme, which is proved to be more effective than traditional universal approaches.


CONCLUSIONS
experiment on benchmark datasets proves the robustness of predblp. we demonstrate that lineage-specific models significantly outperform universal ones. we also test the generalization capability of predblp based on independent testing datasets as well as newly deposited blps in uniprot. predblp is proved to be able to exceed many state-of-art methods. a web server named predblp, which implements the proposed method, is free available for academic use.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bioluminescent proteinssequence-derivedfeature analysislineage-specificfundamental research funds for the central universities14zz2240http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china61603087http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007847natural science foundation of jilin province20160101253jcissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

