BACKGROUND
integrin-mediated cell adhesion and spreading is dramatically enhanced by activation of the small gtpase, r-ras. moreover, r-ras localizes to the leading edge of migrating cells, and regulates membrane protrusion. the exact mechanisms by which r-ras regulates integrin function are not fully known. nor is much known about the spatiotemporal relationship between these two molecules, an understanding of which may provide insight into r-ras regulation of integrins.


RESULTS
gfp-r-ras localized to the plasma membrane, most specifically in membrane ruffles, in cos- <dig> cells. gfp-r-ras was endocytosed from these ruffles, and trafficked via multiple pathways, one of which involved large, acidic vesicles that were positive for rab <dig>  cells transfected with a dominant negative form of gfp-r-ras did not form ruffles, had decreased cell spreading, and contained numerous, non-trafficking small vesicles. conversely, cells transfected with the constitutively active form of gfp-r-ras contained a greater number of ruffles and large vesicles compared to wild-type transfected cells. ruffle formation was inhibited by knock-down of endogenous r-ras with sirna, suggesting that activated r-ras is not just a component of, but also an architect of ruffle formation. importantly, β1-integrin co-localized with endogenous r-ras in ruffles and endocytosed vesicles. expression of dominant negative r-ras or knock down of r-ras by sirna prevented integrin accumulation into ruffles, impaired endocytosis of β1-integrin, and decreased β1-integrin-mediated adhesion. knock-down of r-ras also perturbed the dynamics of another membrane-localized protein, gfp-vsvg, suggesting a more global role for r-ras on membrane dynamics. however, while r-ras co-internalized with integrins, it did not traffic with vsvg, which instead moved laterally out of ruffles within the plane of the membrane, suggesting multiple levels of regulation of and by r-ras.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that integrin function involves integrin trafficking via a cycle of membrane protrusion, ruffling, and endocytosis regulated by r-ras, providing a novel mechanism by which integrins are linked to r-ras through control of membrane dynamics.

