BACKGROUND
cadherins are calcium-dependent cell-to-cell adhesion glycoproteins playing a critical role in the formation and maintenance of normal tissue architecture. in normal mammary gland, e-cadherin is expressed by luminal epithelial cells, while p-cadherin is restricted to myoepithelial cells. changes in the expression of classical e- and p-cadherins have been observed in mammary lesions and related to mammary carcinogenesis. p-cadherin and e-cadherin expressions were studied in a series of feline normal mammary glands, hyperplastic/dysplastic lesions, benign and malignant tumours by immunohistochemistry and double-label immunofluorescence.


RESULTS
in normal tissue and in the majority of hyperplastic/dysplastic lesions and benign tumours, p-cadherin was restricted to myoepithelial cells, while 80% of the malignant tumours expressed p-cadherin in luminal epithelial cells. p-cadherin expression was significantly related to high histological grade of carcinomas , tumour necrosis , infiltrative growth , and presence of neoplastic emboli . moreover, p-cadherin positive carcinomas had an eightfold likelihood of developing neoplastic emboli than negative tumours. cadherins expression profile in high grade and in infiltrative tumours was similar, the majority expressing p-cadherin, regardless of e-cadherin expression status. the two cadherins were found to be co-expressed in carcinomas with aberrant p-cadherin expression and preserved e-cadherin.


CONCLUSIONS
the results demonstrate a relationship between p-cadherin expression and aggressive biological behaviour of feline mammary carcinomas, suggesting that p-cadherin may be considered an indicator of poor prognosis in this animal species. moreover, it indicates that, in queens, the aberrant expression of p-cadherin is a better marker of mammary carcinomas aggressive behaviour than the reduction of e-cadherin expression. further investigation with follow-up studies in feline species should be conducted in order to evaluate the prognostic value of p-cadherin expression in e-cadherin positive carcinomas.

keywords
feline mammary tumoursinvasionp-cadherine-cadherinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

