BACKGROUND
co-evolutionary arms-races result in spatio-temporally dynamic relationships between interacting species, e.g., brood parasites and their avian hosts. however, majority of avian co-evolutionary studies are limited to “snap-shots” of a single breeding season in an open-nesting host. in a long-term study , we explored a unique system between the brood parasitic common cuckoo  and its host, the common redstart  which is exceptional among all cuckoo hosts due to being a cavity nester. conditions in cavities are different from open nests, e.g., lower risks of predation, more favourable microclimate, increased risks of unsuccessful eviction of host offspring by the cuckoo nestling. different conditions in cavities thus can be expected to shape parasite-host coevolution differently from what is typically studied in open nesting hosts.


RESULTS
in our highly parasitised nest-box population  only  <dig> % of cuckoo eggs were laid into the nest cup and incubated by redstarts. host nests shifted availability to later into the breeding season from  <dig> to  <dig> and cuckoos followed this trend by also shifting their timing of parasitism. although previous studies revealed that redstarts selectively eject experimental non-mimetic eggs , the hosts never ejected naturally-laid cuckoo eggs or cuckoo eggs cross-fostered into naturally non-parasitised nests. we solve the long-standing debate about the origin of cuckoo eggs found on the nest rim: we gained the first direct video-recording evidence that eggs found on the nest rim were mislaid by parasites and not ejected by hosts. naturally-parasitised nests were deserted more often  than control non-parasitized nests  or nests artificially parasitised by us . this suggests that the sight of the laying cuckoo female is the primary cue that triggers egg rejection  in this host. review of data from this and other study sites  demonstrates high variability in rejection rates and shows that populations facing higher parasitism rates reject parasitic eggs with higher frequencies. surprisingly, cuckoo chicks either growing solitarily or with redstart chicks did not differ in their fledging success.


CONCLUSIONS
we suggest that the redstart is an ideal model system to study the flexibility and limits of brood parasite-host co-evolution in an extreme ecological setting.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
arms-racesco-evolutiondefencemimicryhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100004412human frontier science programrgy69/2007rgy83/2012czech science foundationp506/12/2404issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

