BACKGROUND
the work was undertaken to expand the tools available for researching burkholderia pseudomallei , the etiological agent of the tropical disease melioidosis. melioidosis has the potential to pose a severe threat to public health and safety. in the united states, bp is listed as a tier- <dig> select agent by the centers for disease control and prevention , thus requiring high levels of regulation and biosafety level  <dig>  facilities for experimental manipulation of live organisms. an avirulent ∆purm derivative of strain 1026b  has proven to be a valuable tool for biosafe research as a select-agent excluded strain, but the high level of genetic diversity between bp strains necessitates an expansion of the biosafe toolset.


RESULTS
the ∆purm mutation was recapitulated in the bp 576a strain, a serotype b background. an important difference between strains 1026b and 576a is the lipopolysaccharide , a major virulence factor and protective antigen. polyclonal sera from 1026b–challenged non-human primates showed no cross reactivity with strain 576a lps and low reactivity with whole cell lysate. strain 576a replicates to higher levels in mouse organs and induces more tnf-α in the lungs of balb/c mice compared to 1026b. the newly created bp 576a ∆purm strain, designated 576mn, was auxotrophic for adenine in minimal media, capable of wild-type growth in rich media with addition of adenine, and auxotrophy was abrogated with single-copy complementation. bp 576mn was unable to replicate in human cells and was avirulent in balb/c mice following high-dose intranasal inoculation, similar to bp <dig>  organ loads indicated a significant reduction in bacterial replication.


CONCLUSIONS
in this work, the new biosafe strain 576mn with atypical type b lps was generated. this strain should prove a valuable addition to the toolkit for biosafe studies of bp and development of therapeutic and preventative strategies aimed at combatting melioidosis. strain 576mn is an ideal candidate for select-agent exclusion.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008287science and technology directoratehshqdc-10-c-00135tuanyok apichai http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007698university of floridaepi 16-3norris michael h. university of floridaepi startup fundstuanyok apichai issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

