BACKGROUND
talins are large, modular cytoskeletal proteins found in animals and amoebozoans such as dictyostelium discoideum. since the identification of a second talin gene in vertebrates, it has become increasingly clear that vertebrate talin <dig> and talin <dig> have non-redundant roles as essential links between integrins and the actin cytoskeleton in distinct plasma membrane-associated adhesion complexes. the conserved c-terminal i/lweq module is important for talin function. this structural element mediates the interaction of talins with f-actin. the i/lweq module also targets mammalian talin <dig> to focal adhesion complexes, which are dynamic multicomponent assemblies required for cell adhesion and cell motility. although talin <dig> is essential for focal adhesion function, talin <dig> is not targeted to focal adhesions. the nonvertebrate chordate ciona intestinalis has only one talin gene, but alternative splicing of the talin mrna produces two proteins with different c-terminal i/lweq modules. thus, c. intestinalis contains two talins, talin-a and talin-b, with potentially different activities, despite having only one talin gene.


RESULTS
we show here that, based on their distribution in cdna libraries, talin-a and talin-b are differentially expressed during c. intestinalis development. the i/lweq modules of the two proteins also have different affinities for f-actin. consistent with the hypothesis that talin-a and talin-b have different roles in cell adhesion, the distinct i/lweq modules of talin-a and talin-b possess different subcellular targeting determinants. the i/lweq module of talin-a is targeted to focal adhesions, where it most likely serves as the link between integrin and the actin cytoskeleton. the talin-b i/lweq module is not targeted to focal adhesions, but instead preferentially labels f-actin stress fibers. these different properties of c. intestinalis the talin-a and talin-b i/lweq modules mimic the differences between mammalian talin <dig> and talin <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
vertebrates and d. discoideum contain two talin genes that encode proteins with different functions. the urochordate c. intestinalis has a single talin gene but produces two separate talins by alternative splicing that vary in a domain crucial for talin function. this suggests that multicellular organisms require multiple talins as components of adhesion complexes. in c. intestinalis, alternative splicing, rather than gene duplication followed by neo-functionalization, accounts for the presence of multiple talins with different properties. given that c. intestinalis is an excellent model system for chordate biology, the study of talin-a and talin-b will lead to a deeper understanding of cell adhesion in the chordate lineage and how talin functions have been parceled out to multiple proteins during metazoan evolution.

