BACKGROUND
drosophila suzukii differs from other melanogaster group members in their proclivity for laying eggs in fresh fruit rather than in fermenting fruits. olfaction and gustation play a critical role during insect niche formation, and these senses are largely mediated by two important receptor families: olfactory and gustatory receptors . earlier work from our laboratory has revealed how the olfactory landscape of d. suzukii is dominated by volatiles derived from its unique niche. signaling and reception evolve in synchrony, since the interaction of ligands and receptors together mediate the chemosensory behavior. here, we manually annotated the ors and grs in d. suzukii and two close relatives, d. biarmipes and d. takahashii, and compared these repertoires to those in other melanogaster group drosophilids to identify candidate chemoreceptors associated with d. suzukii’s unusual niche utilization.


RESULTS
our comprehensive annotations of the chemosensory genomes in three species, and comparative analysis with other melanogaster group members provide insights into the evolution of chemosensation in the pestiferous d. suzukii. we annotated a total of  <dig> or genes in d. suzukii, with nine of those being pseudogenes . alternative splicing of two genes brings the total to  <dig> genes encoding  <dig> ors. duplications of or23a and or67a expanded d. suzukii’s or repertoire, while pseudogenization of or74a, or85a, and or98b reduced the number of functional ors to roughly the same as other annotated species in the melanogaster group. seventy-one intact gr genes and three pseudogenes were annotated in d. suzukii. alternative splicing in three genes brings the total number of grs to  <dig>  we identified signatures of positive selection in two ors and three grs at nodes leading to d. suzukii, while three copies in the largest expanded or lineage, or67a, also showed signs of positive selection at the external nodes.


CONCLUSIONS
our analysis of d. suzukii’s chemoreceptor repertoires in the context of nine melanogaster group drosophilids, including two of its closest relatives , revealed several candidate receptors associated with the adaptation of d. suzukii to its unique ecological niche.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
olfactiongustationodorant receptorsgustatory receptorsniche utilizationadaptionmolecular evolutionepisodic selectioncalifornia cherry marketing and research boardg00001951syed zainulabeuddin uc davis-notre dame research agreement award201224810syed zainulabeuddin usda national institute for food and agriculture  specialty crops research initiative  award2015-51181- <dig> syed zainulabeuddin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

