BACKGROUND
seasonality of ovulatory activity is observed in european sheep and goat breeds, whereas tropical breeds show almost continuous ovulatory activity. it is not known if these tropical breeds are sensitive or not to temperate photoperiod. this study was therefore designed to determine whether tropical creole goats and black-belly ewes are sensitive to temperate photoperiod. two groups of adult females in each species, either progeny or directly born from imported embryos, were used and maintained in light-proof rooms under simulated temperate  or tropical  photoperiods. ovulatory activity was determined by blood progesterone assays for more than two years. the experiment lasted  <dig> months in goats and  <dig> months in ewes.


RESULTS
marked seasonality of ovulatory activity appeared in the temperate group of creole female goats. the percentage of female goats experiencing at least one ovulation per month dramatically decreased from may to september for the three years . tropical female goats demonstrated much less seasonality, as the percentage of goats experiencing at least one ovulation per month never went below 56%. these differences were significant.

both groups of temperate and tropical black-belly ewes experienced a marked seasonality in their ovulatory activity, with only a slightly significant difference between groups. the percentage of ewes experiencing at least one ovulation per month dropped dramatically in april and rose again in august  or september . the percentage of ewes experiencing at least one ovulation per month never went below 8% and 17%  during the spring and summer months.


CONCLUSIONS
an important seasonality in ovulatory activity of tropical creole goats was observed when females were exposed to a simulated temperate photoperiod. an unexpected finding was that black-belly ewes and, to a lesser extent, creole goats exposed to a simulated tropical photoperiod also showed seasonality in their ovulatory activity. such results indicate that both species are capable of showing seasonality under the photoperiodic changes of the temperate zone even though they do not originate from these regions.

