BACKGROUND
selection programs for growth and stress traits in cultured fish are fundamental to the improvement of aquaculture production. the gilthead sea bream  is the main aquacultured species in the mediterranean area and there is considerable interest in the genetic improvement of this species. with the aim of increasing the genomic resources in gilthead sea bream and identifying genes and mechanisms underlying the physiology of the stress response, we developed a cdna microarray for gilthead sea bream that is enriched by suppression substractive hybridization with stress and immunorelevant genes. this microarray is used to analyze the dynamics of gilthead sea bream liver expression profile after confinement exposure.


RESULTS
groups of confined and control juvenile fish were sampled at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> h post exposure. genespring analyses identified  <dig> annotated genes that appeared differentially expressed at least at one sampling time . gene expression results were validated by quantitative pcr of  <dig> target genes, and k-means clustering of differently expressed genes identified four major temporal gene expression profiles. set  <dig> encompassed a rapid metabolic readjustment with enhanced uptake and intracellular transport of fatty acids as metabolic fuels. set  <dig> was associated with a wide variety of tissue repair and remodeling processes that were mostly mediated by the stress response of the endoplasmic reticulum . sets  <dig> and  <dig> encompassed the re-establishment of cellular homeostasis with increased intracellular trafficking and scavenging of reactive oxygen species , accompanied by a bidirectional regulation of the immune system and a general decline of ros production.


CONCLUSIONS
collectively, these findings show the complex nature of the adaptive stress response with a clear indication that the er is an important control point for homeostatic adjustments. the study also identifies metabolic pathways which could be analyzed in greater detail to provide new insights regarding the transcriptional regulation of the stress response in fish.

