BACKGROUND
processes driving ploidal diversity at the population level are virtually unknown. their identification should use a combination of large-scale screening of ploidy levels in the field, pairwise crossing experiments and mathematical modelling linking these two types of data. we applied this approach to determine the drivers of frequencies of coexisting cytotypes in mixed-ploidy field populations of the fully sexual plant species pilosella echioides. we examined fecundity and ploidal diversity in seeds from all possible pairwise crosses among 2x, 3x and 4x plants. using these data, we simulated the dynamics of theoretical panmictic populations of individuals whose progeny structure is identical to that determined by the hybridization experiment.


RESULTS
the seed set differed significantly between the crossing treatments, being highest in crosses between diploids and tetraploids and lowest in triploid-triploid crosses. the number of progeny classes  ranged from three in the 2x-2x cross to eleven in the 3x-3x cross. our simulations demonstrate that, provided there is no difference in clonal growth and/or survival between cytotypes, it is a clear case of minority cytotype exclusion depending on the initial conditions with two stable states, neither of which corresponds to the ploidal structure in the field:  with prevalent diploids and lower proportions of other ploidies, and  with prevalent tetraploids and 9% of hexaploids. by contrast, if clonal growth differs between cytotypes, minority cytotype exclusion occurs only if the role of sexual reproduction is high; otherwise differences in clonal growth are sufficient to maintain triploid prevalence  independently of initial conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
the projections of our model suggest that the ploidal structure observed in the field can only be reached via a relatively high capacity for clonal growth  in all cytotypes combined with higher clonal growth in the prevailing cytotype .

keywords
polyploidycytotype diversitymating interactionspilosella echioidesminority cytotype exclusiontriploid bridgenational academy of sciences of armenia kjb601110813trávníček pavel academy of sciences of the czech republic rvo 67985939czech science foundationp506/10/136313-18610ptrávníček pavel charles university in prague1207/2007trávníček pavel ministry of culture of the czech republicdkrvo national museum, praguerosenbaumová radka ministry of education, youth and sports of the czech republicmsm 0021620828trávníček pavel ministry of education, youth and sports of the czech republic msm 6007665806trávníček pavel eu education for competitiveness operational programme postdoc usb, reg. no. cz. <dig> / <dig> .00/ <dig> trávníček pavel issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

