BACKGROUND
recently, several tools have been designed for human leukocyte antigen  typing using single nucleotide polymorphism  array and next-generation sequencing  data. these tools provide high-throughput and cost-effective approaches for identifying hla types. therefore, tools for downstream association analysis are highly desirable. although several tools have been designed for multi-allelic marker association analysis, they were designed only for microsatellite markers and do not scale well with increasing data volumes, or they were designed for large-scale data but provided a limited number of tests.


RESULTS
we have developed a python package called pyhla, which implements several methods for hla association analysis, to fill the gap. pyhla is a tailor-made, easy to use, and flexible tool designed specifically for the association analysis of the hla types imputed from genome-wide genotyping and ngs data. pyhla provides functions for association analysis, zygosity tests, and interaction tests between hla alleles and diseases. monte carlo permutation and several methods for multiple testing corrections have also been implemented.


CONCLUSIONS
pyhla provides a convenient and powerful tool for hla analysis. existing methods have been integrated and desired methods have been added in pyhla. furthermore, pyhla is applicable to small and large sample sizes and can finish the analysis in a timely manner on a personal computer with different platforms. pyhla is implemented in python. pyhla is a free, open source software distributed under the gplv <dig> license. the source code, tutorial, and examples are available at https://github.com/felixfan/pyhla.


keywords
hlaassociationinteractionmulti-allelichttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china81271226song you-qiang rgc general research fund17117715song you-qiang http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100005847health and medical research fundrrg-0804152256song you-qiang issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

