BACKGROUND
conifer populations appear disproportionately threatened by global change. most examples are, however, drawn from the northern hemisphere and long-term rates of population decline are not well documented as historical data are often lacking. we use a large and long-term  repeat photography dataset together with environmental data and fire records to account for the decline of the critically endangered widdringtonia cedarbergensis. eighty-seven historical and repeat photo-pairs were analysed to establish 20th century changes in w. cedarbergensis demography. a generalized linear mixed-effects model was fitted to determine the relative importance of environmental factors and fire-return interval on mortality for the species.


RESULTS
from an initial total of  <dig> live trees in historical photographs, 74% had died and only  <dig>  had recruited in the repeat photographs, leaving  <dig> live individuals. juveniles  had decreased  from 27%  to 8%  over the intervening period. our model demonstrates that mortality is related to greater fire frequency, higher temperatures, lower elevations, less rocky habitats and aspect .


CONCLUSIONS
our results show that w. cedarbergensis populations have declined significantly over the recorded period, with a pronounced decline in the last 30 years. individuals that established in open habitats at lower, hotter elevations and experienced a greater fire frequency appear to be more vulnerable to mortality than individuals growing within protected, rocky environments at higher, cooler locations with less frequent fires. climate models predict increasing temperatures for our study area . if these predictions are realised, further declines in the species can be expected. urgent management interventions, including seedling out-planting in fire-protected high elevation sites, reducing fire frequency in higher elevation populations, and assisted migration, should be considered.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
temperatureconiferrepeat photographypopulation changeclimate changefirecederbergissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

