BACKGROUND
the prevalence of invasive fungal infections  has increased steadily worldwide in the last few decades. particularly, there has been a global rise in the number of infections among immunosuppressed people. these patients present severe clinical forms of the infections, which are commonly fatal, and they are more susceptible to opportunistic fungal infections than non-immunocompromised people. ifis have historically been associated with high morbidity and mortality, partly because of the limitations of available antifungal therapies, including side effects, toxicities, drug interactions and antifungal resistance. thus, the search for alternative therapies and/or the development of more specific drugs is a challenge that needs to be met. genomics has created new ways of examining genes, which open new strategies for drug development and control of human diseases.


RESULTS
in silico analyses and manual mining selected initially  <dig> potential drug targets, based on  <dig> genes experimentally confirmed as essential for candida albicans or aspergillus fumigatus and other  <dig> genes  relevant for fungal survival within the host. orthologs for those  <dig> potential targets were also identified in eight human fungal pathogens . of those,  <dig> genes were present in all pathogenic fungi analyzed and absent in the human genome. we focused on four candidates: trr <dig> that encodes for thioredoxin reductase, rim <dig> that encodes for a protein involved in the proteolytic activation of a transcriptional factor in response to alkaline ph, kre <dig> that encodes for α- <dig> -mannosyltransferase and erg <dig> that encodes for Δ-sterol c-methyltransferase.


CONCLUSIONS
our data show that the comparative genomics analysis of eight fungal pathogens enabled the identification of four new potential drug targets. the preferred profile for fungal targets includes proteins conserved among fungi, but absent in the human genome. these characteristics potentially minimize toxic side effects exerted by pharmacological inhibition of the cellular targets. from this first step of post-genomic analysis, we obtained information relevant to future new drug development.

