BACKGROUND
various enzyme inhibitors act on key insect gut digestive hydrolases, including alpha-amylases and proteinases. alpha-amylase inhibitors have been widely investigated for their possible use in strengthening a plant's defense against insects that are highly dependent on starch as an energy source. we attempted to unravel the diversity of monomeric alpha-amylase inhibitor genes of israeli and golan heights' wild emmer wheat with different ecological factors . population methods that analyze the nature and frequency of allele diversity within a species and the codon analysis method  were used to detect natural selection.


RESULTS
three hundred and forty-eight sequences encoding monomeric alpha-amylase inhibitors  were obtained from  <dig> populations of wild emmer wheat. the frequency of snps in wmai genes was  <dig> out of  <dig>  bases, where  <dig> snps were detected in the coding sequence. the results of purifying and the positive selection hypothesis  showed that the sequences of wmai were contributed by both natural selection and co-evolution, which ensured conservation of protein function and inhibition against diverse insect amylases. the majority of amino acid substitutions occurred at the c-terminal , which ensured the stability of wmai. snps in this gene could be classified into several categories associated with water, temperature, and geographic factors, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
great diversity at the wmai locus, both between and within populations, was detected in the populations of wild emmer wheat. it was revealed that wmai were naturally selected for across populations by a ratio of dn/ds as expected. ecological factors, singly or in combination, explained a significant proportion of the variations in the snps. a sharp genetic divergence over very short geographic distances compared to a small genetic divergence between large geographic distances also suggested that the snps were subjected to natural selection, and ecological factors had an important evolutionary role in polymorphisms at this locus. according to population and codon analysis, these results suggested that monomeric alpha-amylase inhibitors are adaptively selected under different environmental conditions.

