BACKGROUND
plant secondary metabolites are critical to various biological processes. however, the regulations of these metabolites are complex because of regulatory rewiring or crosstalk. to unveil how regulatory behaviors on secondary metabolism reshape biological processes, we constructed and analyzed a dynamic regulatory network of secondary metabolic pathways in arabidopsis.


RESULTS
the dynamic regulatory network was constructed through integrating co-expressed gene pairs and regulatory interactions. regulatory interactions were either predicted by conserved transcription factor binding sites  or proved by experiments. we found that integrating two data  enhanced the number of highly confident regulatory interactions by over 10% compared with using single data. the dynamic changes of regulatory network systematically manifested regulatory rewiring to explain the mechanism of regulation, such as in terpenoids metabolism, the regulatory crosstalk of rav <dig>  and athb <dig>  on hmg <dig> ; and regulation of rav <dig> on epoxysqualene biosynthesis and sterol biosynthesis. besides, we investigated regulatory rewiring with expression, network topology and upstream signaling pathways. regulatory rewiring was revealed by the variability of genes’ expression: pathway genes and transcription factors  were significantly differentially expressed under different conditions . both network topology and signaling pathways supported regulatory rewiring. for example, we discovered correlation among the numbers of pathway genes, tfs and network topology: one-gene pathways  were regulated by a fewer tfs, and were not critical to metabolic network because of their low degrees in topology. upstream signaling pathways of  <dig> tfs were identified to comprehend the underlying mechanism of tfs’ regulatory rewiring.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, this dynamic regulatory network largely improves the understanding of perplexed regulatory rewiring in secondary metabolism in arabidopsis.

regulatory networkrewiringsecondary metabolismarabidopsis

