BACKGROUND
knowledge of protein-dna interactions at the structural-level can provide insights into the mechanisms of protein-dna recognition and gene regulation. although over  <dig> protein-dna complex structures have been deposited into protein data bank , the structural details of protein-dna interactions are generally not available. in addition, current approaches to comparison of protein-dna complexes are mainly based on protein sequence similarity while the dna sequences are not taken into account. with the number of experimentally-determined protein-dna complex structures increasing, there is a need for an automatic program to analyze the protein-dna complex structures and to provide comprehensive structural information for the benefit of the whole research community.


RESULTS
we developed an automatic and comprehensive protein-dna complex structure analysis program, pda . pda takes pdb files as inputs and performs structural analysis that includes 1) whole protein-dna complex structure restoration, especially the reconstruction of double-stranded dna structures; 2) an efficient new approach for dna base-pair detection; 3) systematic annotation of protein-dna interactions; and 4) extraction of dna subsequences involved in protein-dna interactions and identification of protein-dna binding units. protein-dna complex structures in current pdb were processed and analyzed with our pda program and the analysis results were stored in a database. a dataset useful for studying protein-dna interactions involved in gene regulation was generated using both protein and dna sequences as well as the contact information of the complexes. webpda was developed to provide a web interface for using pda and for data retrieval.


CONCLUSIONS
pda is a computational tool for structural annotations of protein-dna complexes. it provides a useful resource for investigating protein-dna interactions. data from the pda analysis can also facilitate the classification of protein-dna complexes and provide insights into rational design of benchmarks. the pda program is freely available at .

14– <dig> july  <dig> the  <dig> international conference on bioinformatics & computational biology  las vegas, nv, usa

