BACKGROUND
plant natriuretic peptides  are a class of systemically mobile molecules distantly related to expansins. while several physiological responses to pnps have been reported, their biological role has remained elusive. here we use a combination of expression correlation analysis, meta-analysis of gene expression profiles in response to specific stimuli and in selected mutants, and promoter content analysis to infer the biological role of the arabidopsis thaliana pnp, atpnp-a.


RESULTS
a gene ontology analysis of atpnp-a and the  <dig> most expression correlated genes revealed a significant over representation of genes annotated as part of the systemic acquired resistance  pathway. transcription of these genes is strongly induced in response to salicylic acid  and its functional synthetic analogue benzothiadiazole s-methylester , a number of biotic and abiotic stresses including many sa-mediated sar-inducing conditions, as well as in the constitutive sar expressing mutants cpr <dig> and mpk <dig> which have elevated sa levels. furthermore, the expression of atpnp-a was determined to be significantly correlated with the sar annotated transcription factor, wrky  <dig>  and the promoters of atpnp-a and the correlated genes contain an enrichment in the core wrky binding w-box cis-elements. in constitutively expressing wrky  <dig> lines the expression of atpnp-a and the correlated genes, including the sar marker genes, pr- <dig> and pr- <dig>  were determined to be strongly induced.


CONCLUSIONS
the co-expression analyses, both in wild type and mutants, provides compelling evidence that suggests atpnp-a may function as a component of plant defence responses and sar in particular. the presented evidence also suggests that the expression of atpnp-a is controlled by wrky transcription factors and wrky  <dig> in particular. atpnp-a shares many characteristics with pr proteins in that its transcription is strongly induced in response to pathogen challenges, it contains an n-terminal signalling peptide and is secreted into the extracellular space and along with pr- <dig>  pr- <dig> and pr- <dig> proteins it has been isolated from the arabidopsis apoplast. based on these findings we suggest that atpnp-a could be classified as a newly identified pr protein.

