BACKGROUND
among secondary metabolites, flavonoids are particularly crucial for plant growth, development, and reproduction, as well as beneficial for maintenance of human health. as a flowering plant, safflower has synthesized a striking variety of flavonoids with various pharmacologic properties. however, far less research has been carried out on the genes involved in the biosynthetic pathways that generate these amazing flavonoids, especially characterized quinochalcones. in this study, we first cloned and investigated the participation of a presumed flavanone 3-hydroxylase gene  from safflower  in a flavonoid biosynthetic pathway.


RESULTS
bioinformation analysis showed that ctf3h shared high conserved residues and confidence with f3h from other plants. subcellular localization uncovered the nuclear and cytosol localization of ctf3h in onion epidermal cells. the functional expressions of ctf3h in escherichia coli bl21plyss cells in the pmal-c5x vector led to the production of dihydrokaempferol when naringenin was the substrate. furthermore, the transcriptome expression of ctf3h showed a diametrically opposed expression pattern in a quinochalcone-type safflower line  and a flavonol-type safflower line  under external stimulation by methyl jasmonate , which has been identified as an elicitor of flavonoid metabolites. further metabolite analysis showed the increasing tendency of quinochalcones and flavonols, such as hydroxysafflor yellow a, kaempferol-3-o-β-d-glucoside, kaempferol-3-o-β-rutinoside, rutin, carthamin, and luteolin, in the quinochalcone-type safflower line. also, the accumulation of kaempferol-3-o-β-rutinoside and kaempferol-3-o-β-d-glucoside in flavonols-typed safflower line showed enhanced accumulation pattern after meja treatment. however, other flavonols, such as kaempferol, dihydrokaempferol and quercetin-3-o-β-d-glucoside, in flavonols-typed safflower line presented down accumulation respond to meja stimulus.


CONCLUSIONS
our results showed that the high expression of ctf3h in quinochalcone-type safflower line was associated with the accumulation of both quinochalcones and flavonols, whereas its low expression did not affect the increased accumulation of glycosylated derivatives  in flavonols-typed safflower line but affect the upstream precursors , which partly revealed the function of ctf3h in different phenotypes and chemotypes of safflower lines.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
flavanone 3-hydroxylase genefunctional characterizationflavonoid accumulationmethyl jasmonatesafflower http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china8117348481473300guo meili http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007219natural science foundation of shanghai13zr1448200gao yue issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

