BACKGROUND
mucin type o-glycosylation is one of the most common types of post-translational modifications that impacts stability and biological functions of many mammalian proteins. a large family of udp-galnac polypeptide:n-acetyl-α-galactosaminyltransferases  catalyzes the first step of mucin type o-glycosylation by transferring galnac to serine and/or threonine residues of acceptor polypeptides. plants do not have the enzyme machinery to perform this process, thus restricting their use as bioreactors for production of recombinant therapeutic proteins.


RESULTS
the present study demonstrates that an isoform of the human galnac-ts family, galnac-t <dig>  retains its localization and functionality upon expression in n. benthamiana l. plants. the recombinant enzyme resides in the golgi as evidenced by the fluorescence distribution pattern of the galnac-t2:gfp fusion and alteration of the fluorescence signature upon treatment with brefeldin a. a galnac-t2-specific acceptor peptide, the 113- <dig> aa fragment of chorionic gonadotropin β-subunit, is glycosylated in vitro by the plant-produced enzyme at the "native" galnac attachment sites, ser- <dig> and ser- <dig>  ectopic expression of galnac-t <dig> is sufficient to "arm" tobacco cells with the ability to perform galnac-glycosylation, as evidenced by the attachment of galnac to thr- <dig> of the endogenous enzyme endochitinase. however, glycosylation of highly expressed recombinant glycoproteins, like magnicon-expressed e. coli enterotoxin b subunit:h. sapiens mucin  <dig> tandem repeat-derived peptide fusion protein , is limited by the low endogenous udp-galnac substrate pool and the insufficient translocation of udp-galnac to the golgi lumen. further genetic engineering of the galnac-t <dig> plants by co-expressing y. enterocolitica udp-glcnac 4-epimerase gene and c. elegans udp-glcnac/udp-galnac transporter gene overcomes these limitations as indicated by the expression of the model ltbmuc <dig> protein exclusively as a glycoform.


CONCLUSIONS
plant bioreactors can be engineered that are capable of producing tn antigen-containing recombinant therapeutics.

