BACKGROUND
high-density oligonucleotide arrays are effective tools for genotyping numerous loci simultaneously. in small genome species , whole-genome dna hybridization to expression arrays has been used for various applications. in large genome species, transcript hybridization to expression arrays has been used for genotyping. although rice is a fully sequenced model plant of medium genome size , there are a few examples of the use of rice oligonucleotide array as a genotyping tool.


RESULTS
we compared the single feature polymorphism  detection performance of whole-genome and transcript hybridizations using the affymetrix genechip® rice genome array, using the rice cultivars with full genome sequence, japonica cultivar nipponbare and indica cultivar 93- <dig>  both genomes were surveyed for all probe target sequences. only completely matched 25-mer single copy probes of the nipponbare genome were extracted, and sfps between them and 93- <dig> sequences were predicted. we investigated optimum conditions for sfp detection in both whole genome and transcript hybridization using differences between perfect match and mismatch probe intensities of non-polymorphic targets, assuming that these differences are representative of those between mismatch and perfect targets. several statistical methods of sfp detection by whole-genome hybridization were compared under the optimized conditions. causes of false positives and negatives in sfp detection in both types of hybridization were investigated.


CONCLUSIONS
the optimizations allowed a more than 20% increase in true sfp detection in whole-genome hybridization and a large improvement of sfp detection performance in transcript hybridization. significance analysis of the microarray for log-transformed raw intensities of pm probes gave the best performance in whole genome hybridization, and  <dig>  true sfps were detected with  <dig> % false positives by whole genome hybridization. for transcript hybridization, stable sfp detection was achieved for highly expressed genes, and about  <dig>  sfps were detected at a high sensitivity  in both shoot and young panicle transcripts. high sfp detection performances of both genome and transcript hybridizations indicated that microarrays of a complex genome  can be effectively utilized for whole genome genotyping to conduct mutant mapping and analysis of quantitative traits such as gene expression levels.

