BACKGROUND
epistasis plays an essential rule in understanding the regulation mechanisms and is an essential component of the genetic architecture of the gene expressions. however, interaction analysis of gene expressions remains fundamentally unexplored due to great computational challenges and data availability. due to variation in splicing, transcription start sites, polyadenylation sites, post-transcriptional rna editing across the entire gene, and transcription rates of the cells, rna-seq measurements generate large expression variability and collectively create the observed position level read count curves. a single number for measuring gene expression which is widely used for microarray measured gene expression analysis is highly unlikely to sufficiently account for large expression variation across the gene. simultaneously analyzing epistatic architecture using the rna-seq and whole genome sequencing  data poses enormous challenges.

methods
we develop a nonlinear functional regression model  with functional responses where the position-level read counts within a gene are taken as a function of genomic position, and functional predictors where genotype profiles are viewed as a function of genomic position, for epistasis analysis with rna-seq data. instead of testing the interaction of all possible pair-wises snps, the frgm takes a gene as a basic unit for epistasis analysis, which tests for the interaction of all possible pairs of genes and use all the information that can be accessed to collectively test interaction between all possible pairs of snps within two genome regions.


RESULTS
by large-scale simulations, we demonstrate that the proposed frgm for epistasis analysis can achieve the correct type  <dig> error and has higher power to detect the interactions between genes than the existing methods. the proposed methods are applied to the rna-seq and wgs data from the  <dig> genome project. the numbers of pairs of significantly interacting genes after bonferroni correction identified using frgm, rpkm and deseq were  <dig> ,  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, from the  <dig> european samples.


CONCLUSIONS
the proposed frgm for epistasis analysis of rna-seq can capture isoform and position-level information and will have a broad application. both simulations and real data analysis highlight the potential for the frgm to be a good choice of the epistatic analysis with sequencing data.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gene-gene interactionmultivariate functional regressionfunctional regression modelsrna-seqnext-generation sequencingassociation studieseqtlhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of health1r01ar057120–011r01hl106034-01xiong momiao the national natural science foundation of china 31330038jin li nsf china31521003jin li issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

