BACKGROUND
variations associated with sex, age, velocity, breed and body geometry should be considered in the determination of kinematic parameters for a gait considered normal.

therefore, this study aimed to evaluate kinematic patterns of forelimbs and hind limbs in clinically normal sheep from two different age groups walking at a constant velocity. the hypothesis was that the age may influence sagittal plane kinematic patterns. fourteen clinically healthy female sheep were divided into group  <dig> – seven animals aged from  <dig> to 12 months, and group  <dig> - seven animals aged above 5 years. before starting data collection, the sheep were trained to be conducted for walking in a pre-determined space at constant velocity. a minimum of  <dig> valid trials were obtained from the right and left sides of each sheep. data were analyzed by use of a motion-analysis program. flexion and extension joint angles , and angular velocity  were determined for the shoulder, elbow, carpal, hip, stifle, and tarsal joints.


RESULTS
within each group, no significant differences were observed between the right and left limbs in all kinematic variables. significant differences were observed in the following kinematic parameters between g <dig> and g2: minimum angle , angular displacement , maximum angular velocity , minimum angular velocity  of the carpus; angular displacement , minimum angular velocity  of the shoulder; minimum angle , angular displacement  of the tarsus; maximum angular velocity  of the stifle; maximum angular velocity g1 > g <dig> of the hip. the lengths of both forelimbs and hind limbs differed between groups . the froude number differed between groups for forelimbs and hind limbs.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, sheep of two different ages walking at a constant velocity present, within the same group, similar kinematic data between sides, and exhibit some differences in kinematic variables that may be age-related or body size. further studies using sheep walking at similar froude numbers are necessary to exclude the body size.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

