BACKGROUND
the aim of the study was to examine the intestinal cellular localization of proliferating cell nuclear antigen  and cytochrome p <dig> a <dig>  expression in atlantic salmon salmo salar l. exposed to a model toxicant. the stress response was induced by intraperitoneal injection of four salmon with a single dose  of the cyp1a inducer β-naphthoflavone  and intestinal tissue  was sampled seven days later. samples for histology and gene transcription analysis were collected from four exposed fish and four control fish. pcna was assessed by immunohistochemistry, cyp1a mrna was studied by in situ hybridization  and finally the transcription of five genes was quantified by real-time quantitative rt-pcr ; two detoxifying genes , a stress marker gene , pcna and a gene marker of apoptosis .


RESULTS
pcna protein and cyp1a mrna were successfully localized in the intestinal cells  of both experimental groups. at the cellular level, bnf significantly lowered intestinal cell proliferation and increased the cyp1a mrna levels compared to the control group. the real-time rt-pcr data, which showed an increased mrna expression both in the mi and di of 139- and 62-fold, respectively, confirmed the increased cellular cyp1a mrna levels detected using ish. hsp <dig> expression was also up-regulated in the exposed fish. the other examined genes did not show any differential regulation in the experimental fish group.


CONCLUSIONS
this study showed that cyp1a mrna had a specific intestinal cellular transcription pattern in atlantic salmon exposed to bnf. at the cellular level cyp1a mrna expression was always observed at or around the cell nucleus close to the basolateral cell membrane and at the tissue level cyp1a mrna expression was most frequently observed in the basal and apex area of the intestinal folds. taken together, a link between the intestinal detoxification system  and cell renewal system  is indicated with these two processes being inversely correlated in bnf exposed fish.

