BACKGROUND
flow cytometry -based computer-aided diagnostics is an emerging technique utilizing modern multiparametric cytometry systems.

the major difficulty in using machine-learning approaches for classification of fc data arises from limited access to a wide variety of anomalous samples for training. in consequence, any learning with an abundance of normal cases and a limited set of specific anomalous cases is biased towards the types of anomalies represented in the training set. such models do not accurately identify anomalies, whether previously known or unknown, that may exist in future samples tested. although one-class classifiers trained using only normal cases would avoid such a bias, robust sample characterization is critical for a generalizable model. owing to sample heterogeneity and instrumental variability, arbitrary characterization of samples usually introduces feature noise that may lead to poor predictive performance. herein, we present a non-parametric bayesian algorithm called aspire  that identifies phenotypic differences across a batch of samples in the presence of random effects. our approach involves simultaneous clustering of cellular measurements in individual samples and matching of discovered clusters across all samples in order to recover global clusters using probabilistic sampling techniques in a systematic way.


RESULTS
we demonstrate the performance of the proposed method in identifying anomalous samples in two different fc data sets, one of which represents a set of samples including acute myeloid leukemia  cases, and the other a generic 5-parameter peripheral-blood immunophenotyping. results are evaluated in terms of the area under the receiver operating characteristics curve . aspire achieved aucs of  <dig>  and  <dig>  on the aml and generic blood immunophenotyping data sets, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate that anomalous samples can be identified by aspire with almost perfect accuracy without a priori access to samples of anomalous subtypes in the training set. the aspire approach is unique in its ability to form generalizations regarding normal and anomalous states given only very weak assumptions regarding sample characteristics and origin. thus, aspire could become highly instrumental in providing unique insights about observed biological phenomena in the absence of full information about the investigated samples.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
anomaly detectionsample characterizationclusteringcluster matchingrandom effectsmeta clustersnon-parametric bayesianissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

