BACKGROUND
hepatitis c is a major public health problem in the united states and worldwide. outbreaks of hepatitis c virus  infections associated with unsafe injection practices, drug diversion, and other exposures to blood are difficult to detect and investigate. molecular analysis has been frequently used in the study of hcv outbreaks and transmission chains; helping identify a cluster of sequences as linked by transmission if their genetic distances are below a previously defined threshold. however, hcv exists as a population of numerous variants in each infected individual and it has been observed that minority variants in the source are often the ones responsible for transmission, a situation that precludes the use of a single sequence per individual because many such transmissions would be missed.

the use of next-generation sequencing immensely increases the sensitivity of transmission detection but brings a considerable computational challenge because all sequences need to be compared among all pairs of samples.

methods
we developed a three-step strategy that filters pairs of samples according to different criteria:  a k-mer bloom filter,  a levenhstein filter and  a filter of identical sequences. we applied these three filters on a set of samples that cover the spectrum of genetic relationships among hcv cases, from being part of the same transmission cluster, to belonging to different subtypes.


RESULTS
our three-step filtering strategy rapidly removes  <dig> % of all the pairwise sample comparisons and  <dig> % of all pairwise sequence comparisons, accurately establishing which pairs of hcv samples are below the relatedness threshold.


CONCLUSIONS
we present a fast and efficient three-step filtering strategy that removes most sequence comparisons and accurately establishes transmission links of any threshold-based method. this highly efficient workflow will allow a faster response and molecular detection capacity, improving the rate of detection of viral transmissions with molecular data.

fifth ieee international conference on computational advances in bio and medical sciences  miami, fl, usa 15- <dig> october  <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

