BACKGROUND
g protein-coupled receptors  play a central role in eukaryotic signal transduction. however, the gpcr component of this signalling system, at the early origins of metazoans is not fully understood. here we aim to identify and classify gpcrs in amphimedon queenslandica , a member of an earliest diverging metazoan lineage . furthermore, phylogenetic comparisons of sponge gpcrs with eumetazoan and bilaterian gpcrs will be essential to our understanding of the gpcr system at the roots of metazoan evolution.


RESULTS
we present a curated list of  <dig> gpcrs in the sponge genome after excluding incomplete sequences and false positives from our initial dataset of  <dig> predicted gpcr sequences obtained using pfam search. phylogenetic analysis reveals that the sponge genome contains members belonging to four of the five major grafs families including glutamate , rhodopsin , adhesion  and frizzled . interestingly, the sponge rhodopsin family sequences lack orthologous relationships with those found in eumetazoan and bilaterian lineages, since they clustered separately to form sponge specific groups in the phylogenetic analysis. this suggests that sponge rhodopsins diverged considerably from that found in other basal metazoans. a few sponge adhesions clustered basal to adhesion subfamilies commonly found in most vertebrates, suggesting some adhesion subfamilies may have diverged prior to the emergence of bilateria. furthermore, at least eight of the sponge adhesion members have a hormone binding motif  in their n-termini, although hormones have yet to be identified in sponges. we also phylogenetically clarified that sponge has homologs of metabotropic glutamate  and gaba receptors.


CONCLUSIONS
our phylogenetic comparisons of sponge gpcrs with other metazoan genomes suggest that sponge contains a significantly diversified set of gpcrs. this is evident at the family/subfamily level comparisons for most gpcr families, in particular for the rhodopsin family of gpcrs. in summary, this study provides a framework to perform future experimental and comparative studies to further verify and understand the roles of gpcrs that predates the divergence of bilaterian and eumetazoan lineages.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
neurotransmittersg protein-coupled receptorsadhesionsignal transductionporiferaeumetazoaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

