BACKGROUND
shoot branching is an important determinant of plant architecture and influences various aspects of growth and development. selection on branching has also played an important role in the domestication of crop plants, including sunflower . here, we describe an investigation of the genetic basis of variation in branching in sunflower via association mapping in a diverse collection of cultivated sunflower lines.


RESULTS
detailed phenotypic analyses revealed extensive variation in the extent and type of branching within the focal population. after correcting for population structure and kinship, association analyses were performed using a genome-wide collection of snps to identify genomic regions that influence a variety of branching-related traits. this work resulted in the identification of multiple previously unidentified genomic regions that contribute to variation in branching. genomic regions that were associated with apical and mid-apical branching were generally distinct from those associated with basal and mid-basal branching. homologs of known branching genes from other study systems  were also identified from the draft assembly of the sunflower genome and their map positions were compared to those of associations identified herein. numerous candidate branching genes were found to map in close proximity to significant branching associations.


CONCLUSIONS
in sunflower, variation in branching is genetically complex and overall branching patterns  were found to be influenced by distinct genomic regions. moreover, numerous candidate branching genes mapped in close proximity to significant branching associations. although the sunflower genome exhibits localized islands of elevated linkage disequilibrium , these non-random associations are known to decay rapidly elsewhere. the subset of candidate genes that co-localized with significant associations in regions of low ld represents the most promising target for future functional analyses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
apical dominanceassociation mappingbranchinghelianthus annuuslinkage disequilibriumplant architecturesunflowerissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

