BACKGROUND
the polyglutamine expansion in huntingtin  protein is a cause of huntington's disease . htt is an essential gene as deletion of the mouse htt gene homolog  is embryonic lethal in mice. therefore, in addition to elucidating the mechanisms responsible for polyq-mediated pathology, it is also important to understand the normal function of htt protein for both basic biology and for hd.


RESULTS
to systematically search for a mouse htt function, we took advantage of the hdh +/- and hdh-floxed mice and generated four mouse embryonic fibroblast  cells lines which contain a single copy of the hdh gene  and four mef lines in which the hdh gene was deleted . the function of htt in calcium  signaling was analyzed in ca2+ imaging experiments with generated cell lines. we found that the cytoplasmic ca2+ spikes resulting from the activation of inositol  <dig> ,5-trisphosphate receptor  and the ensuing mitochondrial ca2+ signals were suppressed in the hdh-ko cells when compared to hdh-het cells. furthermore, in experiments with permeabilized cells we found that the insp3-sensitivity of ca2+ mobilization from endoplasmic reticulum was reduced in hdh-ko cells. these results indicated that htt plays an important role in modulating insp3r-mediated ca2+ signaling. to further evaluate function of htt, we performed genome-wide transcription profiling of generated hdh-het and hdh-ko cells by microarray. our results revealed that  <dig> unique transcripts were downregulated by more than two-fold with p <  <dig>  and  <dig> unique transcripts were upregulated at least two-fold with p <  <dig>  in hdh-ko cells when compared to hdh-het cells. the microarray results were confirmed by quantitative real-time pcr for a number of affected transcripts. several signaling pathways affected by hdh gene deletion were identified from annotation of the microarray results.


CONCLUSIONS
functional analysis of generated htt-null mef cells revealed that htt plays a direct role in ca2+ signaling by modulating insp3r sensitivity to insp <dig>  the genome-wide transcriptional profiling of htt-null cells yielded novel and unique information about the normal function of htt in cells, which may contribute to our understanding and treatment of hd.

