BACKGROUND
recent studies suggest there is a relationship between intervertebral disc herniation and vertebral shape. the nature of this relationship is unclear, however. humans are more commonly afflicted with spinal disease than are non-human primates and one suggested explanation for this is the stress placed on the spine by bipedalism. with this in mind, we carried out a study of human, chimpanzee, and orangutan vertebrae to examine the links between vertebral shape, locomotion, and schmorl’s nodes, which are bony indicators of vertical intervertebral disc herniation. we tested the hypothesis that vertical disc herniation preferentially affects individuals with vertebrae that are towards the ancestral end of the range of shape variation within homo sapiens and therefore are less well adapted for bipedalism.


RESULTS
the study employed geometric morphometric techniques. two-dimensional landmarks were used to capture the shapes of the superior aspect of the body and posterior elements of the last thoracic and first lumbar vertebrae of chimpanzees, orangutans, and humans with and without schmorl’s nodes. these data were subjected to multivariate statistical analyses.

canonical variates analysis indicated that the last thoracic and first lumbar vertebrae of healthy humans, chimpanzees, and orangutans can be distinguished from each other , but vertebrae of pathological humans and chimpanzees cannot . the procrustes distance between pathological humans and chimpanzees was found to be smaller than the one between pathological and healthy humans. this was the case for both vertebrae. pair-wise manovas of principal component scores for both the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae found significant differences between all pairs of taxa , except pathological humans vs chimpanzees . together, these results suggest that human vertebrae with schmorl’s nodes are closer in shape to chimpanzee vertebrae than are healthy human vertebrae.


CONCLUSIONS
the results support the hypothesis that intervertebral disc herniation preferentially affects individuals with vertebrae that are towards the ancestral end of the range of shape variation within h. sapiens and therefore are less well adapted for bipedalism. this finding not only has clinical implications but also illustrates the benefits of bringing the tools of evolutionary biology to bear on problems in medicine and public health.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
back paindisc herniationvertebral shapebipedalismgeometric morphometricsschmorl’s nodesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

