BACKGROUND
nematode-trapping fungi are soil-living fungi that capture and kill nematodes using special hyphal structures called traps. they display a large diversity of trapping mechanisms and differ in their host preferences. to provide insights into the genetic basis for this variation, we compared the transcriptome expressed by three species of nematode-trapping fungi  during infection of two different plant-pathogenic nematode hosts .


RESULTS
the divergence in gene expression between the fungi was significantly larger than that related to the nematode species being infected. transcripts predicted to encode secreted proteins and proteins with unknown function  were overrepresented among the highly expressed transcripts in all fungi. genes that were highly expressed in all fungi encoded endopeptidases, such as subtilisins and aspartic proteases; cell-surface proteins containing the carbohydrate-binding domain wsc; stress response proteins; membrane transporters; transcription factors; and transcripts containing the ricin-b lectin domain. differentially expressed transcripts among the fungal species encoded various lectins, such as the fungal fruit-body lectin and the d-mannose binding lectin; transcription factors; cell-signaling components; proteins containing a wsc domain; and proteins containing a duf <dig> domain. a small set of transcripts were differentially expressed in infections of different host nematodes, including peptidases, wsc domain proteins, tyrosinases, and small secreted proteins with unknown function.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study on the variation of infection-related gene expression patterns in nematode-trapping fungi infecting different host species. a better understanding of these patterns will facilitate the improvements of these fungi in biological control programs, by providing molecular markers for screening programs and candidates for genetic manipulations of virulence and host preferences.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
comparative transcriptomicsheterodera schachtiimeloidogyne haplanematode-trapping fungiissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

