BACKGROUND
bacteria employ complex transcriptional networks involving multiple genes in response to stress, which is not limited to gene and protein networks but now includes small rnas . these regulatory rna molecules are increasingly shown to be able to initiate regulatory cascades and modulate the expression of multiple genes that are involved in or required for survival under environmental challenge. despite mounting evidence for the importance of srnas in stress response, their role upon antibiotic exposure remains unknown. in this study, we sought to determine firstly, whether differential expression of srnas occurs upon antibiotic exposure and secondly, whether these srnas could be attributed to microbial tolerance to antibiotics.


RESULTS
a small scale srna cloning strategy of salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium sl <dig> challenged with half the minimal inhibitory concentration of tigecycline identified four srnas  which were reproducibly upregulated in the presence of either tigecycline or tetracycline. the coding sequences of the four srnas were found to be conserved across a number of species. genome analysis found that syj <dig> and syj <dig> mapped between the 16s and 23s rrna encoding genes. syj <dig>  is encoded upstream of the tbpayabkyabj operon and is classed as a riboswitch, whilst its role in antibiotic stress-response appears independent of its riboswitch function. syj <dig> is encoded between genes that are involved in enterobactin transport and metabolism. additionally we find that the genetic deletion of syj <dig> rendered a reduced viability phenotype in the presence of tigecycline, which was recovered when complemented. the upregulation of some of these srnas were also observed when s. typhimurium was challenged by ampicillin ; or when klebsiella pneumoniae was challenged by tigecycline .


CONCLUSIONS
small rnas are overexpressed as a result of antibiotic exposure in s. typhimurium where the same molecules are upregulated in a related species or after exposure to different antibiotics. syj <dig>  a riboswitch, appears to possess a trans-regulatory srna role in antibiotic tolerance. these findings imply that the srna mediated response is a component of the bacterial response to antibiotic challenge.

