BACKGROUND
rhynchocypris oxycephalus is a cold water fish with a wide geographic distribution including the relatively warm temperate regions of southern china. it also occurs in second- and third-step geomorphic areas in china. previous studies have postulated that high-altitude populations of r. oxycephalus in southern china are quaternary glacial relics. in this study, we used the mitochondrial gene cytb and the nuclear gene rag <dig> to investigate the species phylogeographical patterns and to test two biogeographic hypotheses:  that divergence between lineages supports the three-step model and  climatic fluctuations during the quaternary resulted in the present distribution in southern china.


RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis detected three major matrilines ; with matrilines b and c being further subdivided into two submatrilines. based on genetic distances and morphological differences, matriline a potentially represents a cryptic subspecies. the geographic division between matrilines b and c coincided with the division of the second and third geomorphic steps in china, suggesting a historical vicariance event. pliocene climatic fluctuations might have facilitated the southwards dispersal of r. oxycephalus in matriline c, with the subsequent warming resulting in its split into submatrilines c <dig> and c <dig>  leaving submatriline c <dig> as a relic in southern china.


CONCLUSIONS
our study demonstrates that geological events  and climate fluctuations during the pliocene were important factors in shaping phylogeographical patterns in r. oxycephalus. notably, no genetic diversity was detected in several populations, all of which possessed unique genotypes. this indicates the uniqueness of local populations and calls for a special conservation plan for the whole species at the population level.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
phylogeographycryptic subspeciesthree stepsneogene climate fluctuationsconservationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

