BACKGROUND
gene silencing using exogenous small interfering rnas  is now a widespread molecular tool for gene functional study and new-drug target identification. the key mechanism in this technique is to design efficient sirnas that incorporated into the rna-induced silencing complexes  to bind and interact with the mrna targets to repress their translations to proteins. although considerable progress has been made in the computational analysis of sirna binding efficacy, few joint analysis of different rnai experiments conducted under different experimental scenarios has been done in research so far, while the joint analysis is an important issue in cross-platform sirna efficacy prediction. a collective analysis of rnai mechanisms for different datasets and experimental conditions can often provide new clues on the design of potent sirnas.


RESULTS
an elegant multi-task learning paradigm for cross-platform sirna efficacy prediction is proposed. experimental studies were performed on a large dataset of sirna sequences which encompass several rnai experiments recently conducted by different research groups. by using our multi-task learning method, the synergy among different experiments is exploited and an efficient multi-task predictor for sirna efficacy prediction is obtained. the  <dig> most popular biological features for sirna according to their jointly importance in multi-task learning were ranked. furthermore, the hypothesis is validated out that the sirna binding efficacy on different messenger rnas have different conditional distribution, thus the multi-task learning can be conducted by viewing tasks at an "mrna"-level rather than at the "experiment"-level. such distribution diversity derived from sirnas bound to different mrnas help indicate that the properties of target mrna have important implications on the sirna binding efficacy.


CONCLUSIONS
the knowledge gained from our study provides useful insights on how to analyze various cross-platform rnai data for uncovering of their complex mechanism.

