BACKGROUND
the analysis of inter-alu pcr patterns obtained from human genomic dna samples is a promising technique for a simultaneous analysis of many genomic loci flanked by alu repetitive sequences in order to detect the presence of genetic polymorphisms. inter-alu pcr products may be separated and analyzed by capillary electrophoresis using an automatic sequencer that generates a complex pattern of peaks. we propose an algorithmic method based on the haar-walsh wavelet packet transformation  for an efficient detection of fingerprint-type patterns generated by pcr-based methodologies. we have tested our algorithmic approach on inter-alu patterns obtained from the genomic dna of three couples of monozygotic twins, expecting that the inter-alu patterns of each twins couple will show differences due to unavoidable experimental variability. on the contrary the differences among samples of different twins are supposed to originate from genetic variability. our goal is to automatically detect regions in the inter-alu pattern likely associated to the presence of genetic polymorphisms.


RESULTS
we show that the wpt algorithm provides a reliable tool to identify sample to sample differences in complex peak patterns, reducing the possible errors and limits associated to a subjective evaluation. the redundant decomposition of the wpt algorithm allows for a procedure of best basis selection which maximizes the pattern differences at the lowest possible scale. our analysis points out few classifying signal regions that could indicate the presence of possible genetic polymorphisms.


CONCLUSIONS
the wpt algorithm based on the haar-walsh wavelet is an efficient tool for a non-supervised pattern classification of inter-alu signals provided by a genetic analyzer, even if it was not possible to estimate the power and false positive rate due to the lacking of a suitable data base. the identification of non-reproducible peaks is usually accomplished comparing different experimental replicates of each sample. moreover, we remark that, albeit we developed and optimized an algorithm able to analyze patterns obtained through inter-alu pcr, the method is theoretically applicable to whatever fingerprint-type pattern obtained analyzing anonymous dna fragments through capillary electrophoresis, and it could be usefully applied on a wide range of fingerprint-type methodologies.

