BACKGROUND
plant lipid transfer proteins  assemble a family of small  ubiquitous cationic proteins with an ability to bind and transport lipids as well as participate in various physiological processes including defense against phytopathogens. they also form one of the most clinically relevant classes of plant allergens. nothing is known to date about correlation between lipid-binding and ige-binding properties of ltps. the garden pea pisum sativum is widely consumed crop and important allergenic specie of the legume family. this work is aimed at isolation of a novel ltp from pea seeds and characterization of its structural, functional, and allergenic properties.


RESULTS
three novel lipid transfer proteins, designated as ps-ltp1- <dig>  were found in the garden pea pisum sativum, their cdna sequences were determined, and mrna expression levels of all the three proteins were measured at different pea organs. ps-ltp <dig> was isolated for the first time from the pea seeds, and its complete amino acid sequence was determined. the protein exhibits antifungal activity and is a membrane-active compound that causes a leakage from artificial liposomes. the protein binds various lipids including bioactive jasmonic acid. spatial structure of the recombinant uniformly 13c,15n-labelled ps-ltp <dig> was solved by heteronuclear nmr spectroscopy. in solution the unliganded protein represents the mixture of two conformers  which are interconnected by exchange process with characteristic time ~  <dig> ms. hydrophobic residues of major conformer form a relatively large internal tunnel-like lipid-binding cavity . the minor conformer probably corresponds to the protein with the partially collapsed internal cavity.


CONCLUSIONS
for the first time conformational heterogeneity in solution was shown for an unliganded plant lipid transfer protein. heat denaturation profile and simulated gastrointestinal digestion assay showed that ps-ltp <dig> displayed a high thermal and digestive proteolytic resistance proper for food allergens. the reported structural and immunological findings seem to describe ps-ltp <dig> as potential cross-reactive allergen in ltp-sensitized patients, mostly pru p 3+ ones. similarly to allergenic ltps the potential ige-binding epitope of ps-ltp <dig> is located near the proposed entrance into internal cavity and could be involved in lipid-binding.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
allergenantimicrobial activitydifferential gene expressiongarden peaheteronuclear nmr spectroscopylipid bindinglipid transfer proteinpisum sativumrecombinant expressionspatial structurehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006769russian science foundation14-50-00131ovchinnikova tatiana v. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

