BACKGROUND
massively parallel dna sequencing technologies have enabled the sequencing of several individual human genomes. these technologies are also being used in novel ways for mrna expression profiling, genome-wide discovery of transcription-factor binding sites, small rna discovery, etc. the multitude of sequencing platforms, each with their unique characteristics, pose a number of design challenges, regarding the technology to be used and the depth of sequencing required for a particular sequencing application. here we describe a number of analytical and empirical results to address design questions for two applications: detection of structural variations from paired-end sequencing and estimating mrna transcript abundance.


RESULTS
for structural variation, our results provide explicit trade-offs between the detection and resolution of rearrangement breakpoints, and the optimal mix of paired-read insert lengths. specifically, we prove that optimal detection and resolution of breakpoints is achieved using a mix of exactly two insert library lengths. furthermore, we derive explicit formulae to determine these insert length combinations, enabling a 15% improvement in breakpoint detection at the same experimental cost. on empirical short read data, these predictions show good concordance with illumina  <dig> bp and  <dig> kbp insert length libraries. for transcriptome sequencing, we determine the sequencing depth needed to detect rare transcripts from a small pilot study. with only  <dig> million reads, we derive corrections that enable almost perfect prediction of the underlying expression probability distribution, and use this to predict the sequencing depth required to detect low expressed genes with greater than 95% probability.


CONCLUSIONS
together, our results form a generic framework for many design considerations related to high-throughput sequencing. we provide software tools http://bix.ucsd.edu/projects/ngs-designtools to derive platform independent guidelines for designing sequencing experiments  for novel applications of next generation sequencing.

