BACKGROUND
dietary intervention studies are required to deeper understand the variability of gut microbial ecosystem in healthy dogs under different feeding conditions and to improve diet formulations. the aim of the study was to investigate in dogs the influence of a raw based diet supplemented with vegetable foods on faecal microbiome in comparison with extruded food.

methods
eight healthy adult boxer dogs were recruited and randomly divided in two experimental blocks of  <dig> individuals. dogs were regularly fed a commercial extruded diet  and starting from the beginning of the trial, one group received the raw based diet  and the other group continued to be fed with the rd diet  for a fortnight. after 14 days, the two groups were inverted, the cd group shifted to the md and the md shifted to the cd, for the next 14 days. faeces were collected at the beginning of the study , after 14 days  before the change of diet and at the end of experimental period  for dna extraction and analysis of metagenome by sequencing 16srrna v <dig> and v <dig> regions, short chain fatty acids , lactate and faecal score.


RESULTS
a decreased proportion of lactobacillus, paralactobacillus  and prevotella  genera was observed in the md group while shannon biodiversity index significantly increased  in comparison to the rd group . the md diet significantly  decreased the faecal score and increased the lactic acid concentration in the feces in comparison to the rd treatment . faecal acetate was negatively correlated with escherichia/shigella and megamonas , whilst butyrate was positively correlated with blautia and peptococcus . positive correlations were found between lactate and megamonas , escherichia/shigella  and lactococcus .


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that the diet composition modifies faecal microbial composition and end products of fermentation. the administration of md diet promoted a more balanced growth of bacterial communities and a positive change in the readouts of healthy gut functions in comparison to rd diet.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dogdietraw meatfecesmicrobiomeshort chain fatty acidslactic acidissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

