BACKGROUND
rna polymerase  iii transcribes a unique class of genes with intra-genic promoters and high transcriptional activity. the major contributors to the pol iii transcriptome, trnas genes are found scattered on all chromosomes of yeast. a prototype tdna of < <dig> bp length, is generally considered nucleosome-free while some pol iii-transcribed genes have been shown to have nucleosome-positioning properties.


RESULTS
using high resolution chip-chip and chip-seq methods, we found several unique features associated with nucleosome profiles on all trna genes of budding yeast, not seen on nucleosome-dense counterparts in fission yeast and resting human cd4+ t cells. the nucleosome-free region  on all but three yeast tdnas is found bordered by an upstream  nucleosome strongly positioned at − <dig> bp position and a downstream  nucleosome at variable positions with respect to the gene terminator. perturbation in this nucleosomal arrangement interferes with the trna production. three different chromatin remodelers generate and maintain the nfr by targeting different gene regions. isw <dig> localizes to the gene body and makes it nucleosome-depleted, isw <dig> maintains periodicity in the upstream nucleosomal array, while rsc targets the downstream nucleosome. direct communication of pol iii with rsc serves as a stress-sensory mechanism for these genes. in its absence, the downstream nucleosome moves towards the gene terminator. levels of trnas from different families are found to vary considerably as different pol iii levels are seen even on isogenes within a family. pol iii levels show negative correlation with the nucleosome occupancies on different genes.


CONCLUSIONS
budding yeast trna genes maintain an open chromatin structure, which is not due to sequence-directed nucleosome positioning or high transcription activity of genes. unlike 5′ nfr on pol ii-transcribed genes, the tdna nfr, which facilitates tdna transcription, results from action of chromatin remodeler isw <dig>  aided by isw <dig> and rsc. the rsc-regulated nucleosome dynamics at the 3′ gene-end serves as a novel regulatory mechanism for pol iii transcription in vivo, probably by controlling terminator-dependent facilitated recycling of pol iii. salient features of yeast tdna chromatin structure reported in this study can explain the basis of the novel non-transcriptional roles ascribed to tdnas.

chromatinisw1isw2nucleosomesrna polymerase iiirsctranscriptionyeast trna

