BACKGROUND
in the era of dna throughput sequencing, assembling and understanding gymnosperm mega-genomes remains a challenge. although drafts of three conifer genomes have recently been published, this number is too low to understand the full complexity of conifer genomes. using techniques focused on specific genes, gene models can be established that can aid in the assembly of gene-rich regions, and this information can be used to compare genomes and understand functional evolution.


RESULTS
in this study, gene capture technology combined with bac isolation and sequencing was used as an experimental approach to establish de novo gene structures without a reference genome. probes were designed for  <dig> maritime pine transcripts to sequence genes captured from genomic dna. the gene models were constructed using geneassembler, a new bioinformatic pipeline, which reconstructed over 82 % of the gene structures, and a high proportion  of the captured gene models contained sequences from the promoter regulatory region. in a parallel experiment, the p. pinaster bac library was screened to isolate clones containing genes whose cdna sequence were already available. bac clones containing the asparagine synthetase, sucrose synthase and xyloglucan endotransglycosylase gene sequences were isolated and used in this study. the gene models derived from the gene capture approach were compared with the genomic sequences derived from the bac clones. this combined approach is a particularly efficient way to capture the genomic structures of gene families with a small number of members.


CONCLUSIONS
the experimental approach used in this study is a valuable combined technique to study genomic gene structures in species for which a reference genome is unavailable. it can be used to establish exon/intron boundaries in unknown gene structures, to reconstruct incomplete genes and to obtain promoter sequences that can be used for transcriptional studies. a bioinformatics algorithm  is also provided as a ruby gem for this class of analyses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacbioinformatic pipelinegene capturegene model constructgene structuremaritime pinepromoter studieshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004963seventh framework progfp-kbbe-2011-5http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003329ministerio de economía y competitividadbio2012-33797cánovas francisco m. junta de andaluciap10-cvi-6075seoane-zonjic pedro issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

