BACKGROUND
functional and morphological studies of tandem dna repeats, that combine high portion of most genomes, are mostly limited due to the incomplete characterization of these genome elements. we report here a genome wide analysis of the large tandem repeats  found in the mouse genome assemblies.


RESULTS
using a bioinformatics approach, we identified large tr with array size more than  <dig> kb in two mouse whole genome shotgun  assemblies. large tr were classified based on sequence similarity, chromosome position, monomer length, array variability, and gc content; we identified four superfamilies, eight families, and  <dig> subfamilies - including  <dig> not previously described. 1) the superfamily of centromeric minor satellite is only found in the unassembled part of the reference genome. 2) the pericentromeric major satellite is the most abundant superfamily and reveals high order repeat structure. 3) transposable elements related superfamily contains two families. 4) the superfamily of heterogeneous tandem repeats includes four families. one family is found only in the wgs, while two families represent tandem repeats with either single or multi locus location. despite multi locus location, trpc-21a-mm is placed into a separated family due to its abundance, strictly pericentromeric location, and resemblance to big human satellites.

to confirm our data, we next performed in situ hybridization with three repeats from distinct families. trpc-21a-mm probe hybridized to chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  multi locus tr-22a-mm probe hybridized to ten chromosomes, and single locus tr-54b-mm probe hybridized with the long loops that emerge from chromosome ends. in addition to in silico predicted several extra-chromosomes were positive for tr by in situ analysis, potentially indicating inaccurate genome assembly of the heterochromatic genome regions.


CONCLUSIONS
chromosome-specific tr had been predicted for mouse but no reliable cytogenetic probes were available before. we report new analysis that identified in silico and confirmed in situ 3/ <dig> chromosome-specific probe trpc-21-mm. thus, the new classification had proven to be useful tool for continuation of genome study, while annotated tr can be the valuable source of cytogenetic probes for chromosome recognition.

