BACKGROUND
photoperiodism refers to the ability of plants to measure day length to determine the season. this ability enables plants to coordinate internal biological activities with external changes to ensure normal growth. however, the influence of the photoperiod on maize flowering and stress responses under long-day  conditions has not been analyzed by comparative transcriptome sequencing. the zmcct gene was previously identified as a homolog of the rice photoperiod response regulator ghd <dig>  and associated with the major quantitative trait locus  responsible for gibberella stalk rot resistance in maize. however, its regulatory mechanism has not been characterized.


RESULTS
we mapped the zmcct-associated qtl , which is approximately 130 kb long and regulates photoperiod responses and resistance to gibberella stalk rot and drought in maize. to investigate the effects of zmcct-aq under ld conditions, the transcriptomes of the photoperiod-insensitive inbred line huangzao <dig>  and its near-isogenic line  containing zmcct-aq were sequenced. a set of genes identified by rna-seq exhibited higher basal expression levels in hz4-nil than in hz <dig>  these genes were associated with responses to circadian rhythm changes and biotic and abiotic stresses. the differentially expressed genes in the introgressed regions of hz4-nil conferred higher drought and heat tolerance, and stronger disease resistance relative to hz <dig>  co-expression analysis and the diurnal expression rhythms of genes related to stress responses suggested that zmcct and one of the circadian clock core genes, zmcca <dig>  are important nodes linking the photoperiod to stress tolerance responses under ld conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
our study revealed that the photoperiod influences flowering and stress responses under ld conditions. additionally, zmcct and zmcca <dig> are important functional links between the circadian clock and stress tolerance. the establishment of this particular molecular link has uncovered a new relationship between plant photoperiodism and stress responses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
photoperiodflowering timestress toleranceco-expression networkmaizethe national natural science foundation of china31371628chen yanhui the national hi-tech research and development program of china2012aa10a307chen yanhui the project of preeminent youth fund of henan provincekey base research project of henan provincethe state key laboratory of wheat and maize crop science skl2014zh-02chen yanhui issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

