BACKGROUND
multiple sclerosis  varies considerably in its incidence and progression in females and males. in spite of clinical evidence, relatively few studies have explored molecular mechanisms possibly involved in gender-related differences. the present study describes possible cellular- and molecular-involved markers which are differentially regulated in male and female rats and result in gender-dependent eae evolution and progression. attention was focused on markers of myelination  and neuronal distress and/or damage , in two cns areas, i.e. spinal cord and cerebellum, which are respectively severely and mildly affected by inflammation and demyelination. tissues were sampled during acute, relapse/remission and chronic phases and results were analysed by two-way anova.


RESULTS
 <dig>  a strong gender-dependent difference in myelin  and myelin precursor  marker mrna expression levels is observed in control animals in the spinal cord, but not in the cerebellum. this is the only gender-dependent difference in the expression level of the indicated markers in healthy animals;  <dig>  both pdgfαr and mbp mrnas in the spinal cord and mbp in the cerebellum are down-regulated during eae in gender-dependent manner;  <dig>  in the cerebellum, the expression profile of neuron-associated markers  is characterized by a substantial down-regulation during the inflammatory phase of the disease, which does not differ between male and female rats ;  <dig>  there is an up-regulation of ngf, trka and p <dig> mrna expression in the early phases of the disease , which is not different between male and female.


CONCLUSIONS
it is reported herein that the regulation of markers involved in demyelination and neuroprotection processes occurring during eae, a well-established ms animal model, is gender- and time-dependent. these findings might contribute to gender- and phase disease-based therapy strategies.

experimental allergic encephalomyelitisgender-relatedratspinal cordcerebellumneurotrophins and related receptors

