BACKGROUND
identifying relatedness among diseases could help deepen understanding for the underlying pathogenic mechanisms of diseases, and facilitate drug repositioning projects. a number of methods for computing disease similarity had been developed; however, none of them were designed to utilize information of the entire protein interaction network, using instead only those interactions involving disease causing genes. most of previously published methods required gene-disease association data, unfortunately, many diseases still have very few or no associated genes, which impeded broad adoption of those methods. in this study, we propose a new method  for computing disease similarity by integrating medical literature and protein interaction network. mednetsim consists of a network-based method , which employs the entire protein interaction network, and a medline-based method , which computes disease similarity by mining the biomedical literature.


RESULTS
among function-based methods, netsim achieved the best performance. its average auc  reached  <dig>  %. medsim, whose performance was even comparable to some function-based methods, acquired the highest average auc in all semantic-based methods. integration of medsim and netsim  further improved the average auc to  <dig>  %. we further studied the effectiveness of different data sources. it was found that quality of protein interaction data was more important than its volume. on the contrary, higher volume of gene-disease association data was more beneficial, even with a lower reliability. utilizing higher volume of disease-related gene data further improved the average auc of mednetsim and netsim to  <dig>  % and  <dig>  %, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
integrating biomedical literature and protein interaction network can be an effective way to compute disease similarity. lacking sufficient disease-related gene data, literature-based methods such as medsim can be a great addition to function-based algorithms. it may be beneficial to steer more resources torward studying gene-disease associations and improving the quality of protein interaction data. disease similarities can be computed using the proposed methods at http://www.digintelli.com:8000/.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
disease similaritymedsimnetsimmednetsimrandom walk with restarthttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china61179008yu jingkai issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

