BACKGROUND
the genome of campylobacter jejuni contains two iron activated fur-family transcriptional regulators, cjfur and cjperr, which are primarily responsible for regulating iron homeostasis and oxidative stress respectively. both transcriptional regulators have been previously implicated in regulating diverse functions beyond their primary roles in c. jejuni. to further characterize their regulatory networks, rna-seq was used to define the transcriptional profiles of c. jejuni nctc <dig> wild type, Δfur, Δperr and ΔfurΔperr isogenic deletion mutants under both iron-replete and iron-limited conditions.


RESULTS
it was found that  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in at least one mutant under iron-replete conditions and  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in at least one mutant under iron-limited conditions. the cjfur and cjperr transcriptomes characterized in this study were compared to those previously identified using microarray profiling and found to be more extensive than previously understood. interestingly, our results indicate that cjfur/cjperr appear to co-regulate the expression of flagellar biogenesis genes in an opposing and iron-independent fashion. moreover the ΔfurΔperr isogenic deletion mutant revealed that cjfur and cjperr can compensate for each other in certain cases, suggesting that both regulators may compete for binding to specific promoters.


CONCLUSIONS
the cjfur and cjperr transcriptomes are larger than previously reported. in particular, deletion of perr results in the differential expression of a large group of genes in the absence of iron, suggesting that cjperr may also regulate genes in an iron-independent manner, similar to what has already been demonstrated with cjfur. moreover, subsets of genes were found which are only differentially expressed when both cjfur and cjperr are deleted and includes genes that appear to be simultaneously activated by cjfur and repressed by cjperr. in particular the iron-independent co-regulation of flagellar biogenesis by cjfur/cjperr represents a potentially novel regulatory function for these proteins. these findings represent additional modes of co-regulation by these two transcriptional regulators in c. jejuni.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
furperrco-regulationiron-independent regulationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

