BACKGROUND
elucidating the sequence of molecular events underlying breast cancer formation is of enormous value for understanding this disease and for design of an effective treatment. gene expression measurements have enabled the study of transcriptome-wide changes involved in tumorigenesis. this usually occurs through identification of differentially expressed genes or pathways.


RESULTS
we propose a novel approach that is able to delineate new cancer-related cellular processes and the nature of their involvement in tumorigenesis. first, we define modules as densely interconnected and functionally enriched areas of a protein interaction network. second, 'differential expression' and 'differential co-expression' analyses are applied to the genes in these network modules, allowing for identification of processes that are up- or down-regulated, as well as processes disrupted  or invoked  in different tumor stages. finally, we propose a strategy to identify regulatory mirnas potentially responsible for the observed changes in module activities. we demonstrate the potential of this analysis on expression data from a mouse model of mammary gland tumor, monitored over three stages of tumorigenesis. network modules enriched in adhesion and metabolic processes were found to be inactivated in tumor cells through the combination of dysregulation and down-regulation, whereas the activation of the integrin complex and immune system response modules is achieved through increased co-regulation and up-regulation. additionally, we confirmed a known mirna involved in mammary gland tumorigenesis, and present several new candidates for this function.


CONCLUSIONS
understanding complex diseases requires studying them by integrative approaches that combine data sources and different analysis methods. the integration of methods and data sources proposed here yields a sensitive tool, able to pinpoint new processes with a role in cancer, dissect modulation of their activity and detect the varying assignments of genes to functional modules over the course of a disease.

