BACKGROUND
nanopore transduction detection  offers prospects for a number of highly sensitive and discriminative applications, including:  single nucleotide polymorphism  detection;  targeted dna re-sequencing;  protein isoform assaying; and  biosensing via antibody or aptamer coupled molecules. nanopore event transduction involves single-molecule biophysics, engineered information flows, and nanopore cheminformatics. the ntd nanoscope has seen limited use in the scientific community, however, due to lack of information about potential applications, and lack of availability for the device itself. meta logos inc. is developing both pre-packaged device platforms and component-level  kit platforms . in both cases a lipid bi-layer workstation is first established, then augmentations and operational protocols are provided to have a nanopore transduction detector. in this paper we provide an overview of the ntd nanoscope applications and implementations. the ntd nanoscope kit, in particular, is a component-level reproduction of the standard ntd device used in previous research papers.


RESULTS
the ntd nanoscope method is shown to functionalize a single nanopore with a channel current modulator that is designed to transduce events, such as binding to a specific target. to expedite set-up in new lab settings, the calibration and troubleshooting for the ntd nanoscope kit components and signal processing software, the ntd nanoscope kit, is designed to include a set of test buffers and control molecules based on experiments described in previous ntd papers . the description of the server-interfacing for advanced signal processing support is also briefly mentioned.


CONCLUSIONS
snp assaying, snp discovery, dna sequencing and rna-seq methods are typically limited by the accuracy of the error rate of the enzymes involved, such as methods involving the polymerase chain reaction  enzyme. the ntd nanoscope offers a means to obtain higher accuracy as it is a single-molecule method that does not inherently involve use of enzymes, using a functionalized nanopore instead.

1- <dig> april  <dig> eighth annual mcbios conference. computational biology and bioinformatics for a new decade college station, tx, usa

