BACKGROUND
histone variants alter the composition of nucleosomes and play crucial roles in transcription, chromosome segregation, dna repair, and sperm compaction. modification of metazoan histone variant lineages occurs on a background of genome architecture that shows global similarities from sponges to vertebrates, but the urochordate, oikopleura dioica, a member of the sister group to vertebrates, exhibits profound modification of this ancestral architecture.


RESULTS
we show that a histone complement of  <dig> gene loci encodes  <dig> histone variants, grouped in distinct sets of developmental expression profiles throughout the life cycle. a particularly diverse array of  <dig> male-specific histone variants was uncovered, including a testes-specific h4t, the first metazoan h <dig> sequence variant reported. universal histone variants h <dig> , cenh <dig>  and h2a.z are present but o. dioica lacks homologs of macroh2a and h2ax. the genome encodes many h2a and h2b variants and the repertoire of h2a.z isoforms is expanded through alternative splicing, incrementally regulating the number of acetylatable lysine residues in the functionally important n-terminal "charge patch". mass spectrometry identified  <dig> acetylation, methylation and ubiquitylation posttranslational modifications  and showed that hallmark ptms of "active" and "repressive" chromatin were present in o. dioica. no obvious reduction in silent heterochromatic marks was observed despite high gene density in this extraordinarily compacted chordate genome.


CONCLUSIONS
these results show that histone gene complements and their organization differ considerably even over modest phylogenetic distances. substantial innovation among all core and linker histone variants has evolved in concert with adaptation of specific life history traits in this rapidly evolving chordate lineage.

histone complementdna repairurochordateposttranslational modificationendocyclegametogenesistestesh2a.zalternative splicing

