BACKGROUND
acidithiobacillus thiooxidans , a chemolithoautotrophic extremophile, is widely used in the industrial recovery of copper . the organism grows and survives by autotrophically utilizing energy derived from the oxidation of elemental sulfur and reduced inorganic sulfur compounds . however, the lack of genetic manipulation systems has restricted our exploration of its physiology. with the development of high-throughput sequencing technology, the whole genome sequence analysis of a. thiooxidans has allowed preliminary models to be built for genes/enzymes involved in key energy pathways like sulfur oxidation.


RESULTS
the genome of a. thiooxidans a <dig> was sequenced and annotated. it contains key sulfur oxidation enzymes involved in the oxidation of elemental sulfur and riscs, such as sulfur dioxygenase , sulfide quinone reductase , thiosulfate:quinone oxidoreductase , tetrathionate hydrolase , sulfur oxidizing protein  system and their associated electron transport components. also, the sulfur oxygenase reductase  gene was detected in the draft genome sequence of a. thiooxidans a <dig>  and multiple sequence alignment was performed to explore the function of groups of related protein sequences. in addition, another putative pathway was found in the cytoplasm of a. thiooxidans, which catalyzes sulfite to sulfate as the final product by phosphoadenosine phosphosulfate  reductase and adenylylsulfate  kinase. this differs from its closest relative acidithiobacillus caldus, which is performed by sulfate adenylyltransferase . furthermore, real-time quantitative pcr analysis showed that most of sulfur oxidation genes were more strongly expressed in the s <dig> medium than that in the na2s2o <dig> medium at the mid-log phase.


CONCLUSIONS
sulfur oxidation model of a. thiooxidans a <dig> has been constructed based on previous studies from other sulfur oxidizing strains and its genome sequence analyses, providing insights into our understanding of its physiology and further analysis of potential functions of key sulfur oxidation genes.

acidithiobacillus thiooxidanswhole genome sequencebioinformatics analysisreal-time quantitative pcrsulfur oxidation model

