BACKGROUND
chronic wasting disease  is a contagious, fatal prion disease affecting cervids in a growing number of regions across north america. projected deer population declines and concern about potential spread of cwd to other species warrant strategies to manage this disease. control efforts to date have been largely unsuccessful, resulting in continuing spread and increasing prevalence. this systematic review summarizes peer-reviewed published reports describing field-applicable cwd control strategies in wild deer populations in north america using systematic review methods. ten databases were searched for peer-reviewed literature. following deduplication, relevance screening, full-text appraisal, subject matter expert review and qualitative data extraction, nine references were included describing four distinct management strategies.


RESULTS
six of the nine studies used predictive modeling to evaluate control strategies. all six demonstrated one or more interventions to be effective but results were dependant on parameters and assumptions used in the model. three found preferential removal of cwd infected deer to be effective in reducing cwd prevalence; one model evaluated a test and slaughter strategy, the other selective removal of infected deer by predators and the third evaluated increased harvest of the sex with highest prevalence . three models evaluated non-selective harvest of deer. there were only three reports that examined primary data collected as part of observational studies. two of these studies supported the effectiveness of intensive non-selective culling; the third study did not find a difference between areas that were subjected to culling and those that were not. seven of the nine studies were conducted in the united states.


CONCLUSIONS
this review highlights the paucity of evaluated, field-applicable control strategies for cwd in wild deer populations. knowledge gaps in the complex epidemiology of cwd and the intricacies inherent to prion diseases currently pose significant challenges to effective control of this disease in wild deer in north america.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chronic wasting diseasecontrolwild deernorth americaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

