BACKGROUND
interspecies somatic cell nuclear transfer  has been regarded as a potential alternative for rescuing highly endangered species and can be used as a model for studying nuclear–cytoplasmic interactions. however, iscnt embryos often fail to produce viable offspring. the alterations in normal molecular mechanisms contributing to extremely poor development are for the most part unknown.


RESULTS
przewalski’s gazelle–bovine iscnt embryos  were produced by transferring przewalski’s gazelle fibroblast nuclei into enucleated bovine oocytes. the percentages of pbnt embryos that developed to morula/blastocyst stages were extremely low even with the use of various treatments that included different scnt protocols and treatment of embryos with small molecules. transcriptional microarray analyses of the cloned embryos showed that the upregulation of reprogramming-associated genes in bovine–bovine scnt  embryos was significantly higher than those observed in pbnt embryos . in all,  <dig> transcripts related to various transcription regulation factors  were unsuccessfully activated in the iscnt embryos. maternal degradation profiles showed that  <dig> genes were uniquely downregulated in the bbnt embryos, while  <dig> genes were downregulated in the pbnt embryos. incompatibilities between mitochondrial dna  and nuclear dna revealed that the tomm /timm  complex-associated genes in bbnt embryos had the highest expression levels, while the pbnt embryos exhibited much lower expression rates.


CONCLUSIONS
improper degradation of maternal transcripts, incomplete activation of tfs and abnormal expression of genes associated with mitochondrial function in pbnt embryos likely contributed to incomplete reprogramming of the donor cell nuclei and therefore led to the developmental failure of these cloned embryos.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
interspecies somatic cell nuclear transfer transcriptome reprogrammingembryonic genome activationtranscriptional regulationmitochondrial dnaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

