BACKGROUND
multidrug-  and extensively drug resistant  tuberculosis  presents a challenge to disease control and elimination goals. in lisbon, portugal, specific and successful xdr-tb strains have been found in circulation for almost two decades.


RESULTS
in the present study we have genotyped and sequenced the genomes of 56 mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates recovered mostly from lisbon. the genotyping data revealed three major clusters associated with mdr-tb, two of which are associated with xdr-tb. whilst the genomic data contributed to elucidate the phylogenetic positioning of circulating mdr-tb strains, showing a high predominance of a single snp cluster group  <dig>  furthermore, a genome-wide phylogeny analysis from these strains, together with  <dig> publicly available genomes of mycobacterium tuberculosis clinical isolates, revealed two major clades responsible for m/xdr-tb in the region: lisboa <dig> and q <dig> .

the data presented by this study yielded insights on microevolution and identification of novel compensatory mutations associated with rifampicin resistance in rpob and rpoc. the screening for other structural variations revealed putative clade-defining variants. one deletion in ppe <dig>  found among lisboa <dig> isolates, is proposed to contribute to immune evasion and as a selective advantage. insertion sequence  mapping has also demonstrated the role of is <dig> as a major driver in mycobacterial evolution by affecting gene integrity and regulation.


CONCLUSIONS
globally, this study contributes with novel genome-wide phylogenetic data and has led to the identification of new genomic variants that support the notion of a growing genomic diversity facing both setting and host adaptation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
whole genome sequencingmdr-tbxdr-tblisboa familymicroevolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

