BACKGROUND
mathematical and computational models showed to be a very important support tool for the comprehension of the immune system response against pathogens. models and simulations allowed to study the immune system behavior, to test biological hypotheses about diseases and infection dynamics, and to improve and optimize novel and existing drugs and vaccines.

continuous models, mainly based on differential equations, usually allow to qualitatively study the system but lack in description; conversely discrete models, such as agent based models and cellular automata, permit to describe in detail entities properties at the cost of losing most qualitative analyses. petri nets  are a graphical modeling tool developed to model concurrency and synchronization in distributed systems. their use has become increasingly marked also thanks to the introduction in the years of many features and extensions which lead to the born of “high level” pn.


RESULTS
we propose a novel methodological approach that is based on high level pn, and in particular on colored petri nets , that can be used to model the immune system response at the cellular scale. to demonstrate the potentiality of the approach we provide a simple model of the humoral immune system response that is able of reproducing some of the most complex well-known features of the adaptive response like memory and specificity features.


CONCLUSIONS
the methodology we present has advantages of both the two classical approaches based on continuous and discrete models, since it allows to gain good level of granularity in the description of cells behavior without losing the possibility of having a qualitative analysis. furthermore, the presented methodology based on cpn allows the adoption of the same graphical modeling technique well known to life scientists that use pn for the modeling of signaling pathways. finally, such an approach may open the floodgates to the realization of multi scale models that integrate both signaling pathways  models and cellular  models built upon the same technique and software.

keywords
computational modelingsystems biologypetri netsimmunityimmune systemdesign methodologyhumoral response15th international conference on bioinformatics  incob 2016queenstown, singapore 21- <dig> september  <dig> http://incob <dig> apbionet.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

