BACKGROUND
sulfate-reducing bacteria  are key players of the carbon- and sulfur-cycles in the sediments of the world’s oceans. habitat relevant srbs are often members of the desulfosarcina-desulfococcus clade belonging to the deltaproteobacterial family of desulfobacteraceae. despite this environmental recognition, their molecular  physiology and their potential to contribute to organic carbon mineralization as well as to adapt to changing environmental conditions have been scarcely investigated. a metabolically versatile representative of this family is desulfococcus multivorans that is able to completely oxidize  a variety of organic acids, including fatty acids up to c <dig>  as well as aromatic compounds.


RESULTS
in this study the complete  <dig>  mbp and manually annotated genome of metabolically versatile desulfococcus multivorans dsm  <dig> is presented with particular emphasis on a proteomics-driven metabolic reconstruction. proteomic profiling covered  <dig> substrate adaptation conditions  and comprised 2d dige, shotgun proteomics and analysis of the membrane protein-enriched fractions. this comprehensive proteogenomic dataset allowed for reconstructing a metabolic network of degradation pathways and energy metabolism that consists of  <dig> proteins . peripheral degradation routes feed via central benzoyl-coa,  β-oxidation or methylmalonyl-coa pathways into the wood-ljungdahl pathway for complete oxidation of acetyl-coa to co <dig>  dissimilatory sulfate reduction is fueled by a complex electron transfer network composed of cytoplasmic components  and diverse membrane redox complexes . overall, a high degree of substrate-specific formation of catabolic enzymes was observed, while most complexes involved in electron transfer appeared to be constitutively formed.


CONCLUSIONS
a highly dynamic genome structure in combination with substrate-specifically formed catabolic subproteomes and a constitutive subproteome for energy metabolism and electron transfer appears to be a common trait of desulfobacteraceae members.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genomeproteomemetabolic reconstructiondegradation pathwaysenergy metabolismmembrane proteinssulfate-reducing bacteriadesulfococcus multivoransdesulfobacteraceaeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

