BACKGROUND
the primary goal of pathway analysis using transcriptome data is to find significantly perturbed pathways. however, pathway analysis is not always successful in identifying pathways that are truly relevant to the context under study. a major reason for this difficulty is that a single gene is involved in multiple pathways. in the kegg pathway database, there are  <dig> genes, each of which is involved in more than  <dig> pathways. thus activation of even a single gene will result in activation of many pathways. this complex relationship often makes the pathway analysis very difficult. while we need much more powerful pathway analysis methods, a readily available alternative way is to incorporate the literature information.


RESULTS
in this study, we propose a novel approach for prioritizing pathways by combining results from both pathway analysis tools and literature information. the basic idea is as follows. whenever there are enough articles that provide evidence on which pathways are relevant to the context, we can be assured that the pathways are indeed related to the context, which is termed as relevance in this paper. however, if there are few or no articles reported, then we should rely on the results from the pathway analysis tools, which is termed as significance in this paper. we realized this concept as an algorithm by introducing context score and impact score and then combining the two into a single score. our method ranked truly relevant pathways significantly higher than existing pathway analysis tools in experiments with two data sets.


CONCLUSIONS
our novel framework was implemented as contexttrap by utilizing two existing tools, trap and best. contexttrap will be a useful tool for the pathway based analysis of gene expression data since the user can specify the context of the biological experiment in a set of keywords. the web version of contexttrap is available at http://biohealth.snu.ac.kr/software/contexttrap.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
literature informationpathwaypathway analysispathway prioritizationtime seriesthe 27th international conference on genome informatics shanghai, china 3- <dig> october  <dig> http://admis.fudan.edu.cn/giw2016/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

