BACKGROUND
there is a frequent need to obtain sets of functionally equivalent homologous proteins  from different species. while it is usually the case that orthology implies functional equivalence, this is not always true; therefore datasets of orthologous proteins are not appropriate. the information relevant to extracting feps is contained in databanks such as uniprotkb/swiss-prot and a manual analysis of these data allow feps to be extracted on a one-off basis. however there has been no resource allowing the easy, automatic extraction of groups of feps – for example, all instances of protein c.

we have developed fosta, an automatically generated database of feps annotated as having the same function in uniprotkb/swiss-prot which can be used for large-scale analysis. the method builds a candidate list of homologues and filters out functionally diverged proteins on the basis of functional annotations using a simple text mining approach.


RESULTS
large scale evaluation of our fep extraction method is difficult as there is no gold-standard dataset against which the method can be benchmarked. however, a manual analysis of five protein families confirmed a high level of performance. a more extensive comparison with two manually verified functional equivalence datasets also demonstrated very good performance.


CONCLUSIONS
in summary, fosta provides an automated analysis of annotations in uniprotkb/swiss-prot to enable groups of proteins already annotated as functionally equivalent, to be extracted. our results demonstrate that the vast majority of uniprotkb/swiss-prot functional annotations are of high quality, and that fosta can interpret annotations successfully. where fosta is not successful, we are able to highlight inconsistencies in uniprotkb/swiss-prot annotation. most of these would have presented equal difficulties for manual interpretation of annotations. we discuss limitations and possible future extensions to fosta, and recommend changes to the uniprotkb/swiss-prot format, which would facilitate text-mining of uniprotkb/swiss-prot.

