BACKGROUND
while the genomic era is accumulating a tremendous amount of data, the question of how genomics can describe a bacterial species remains to be fully addressed. the recent sequencing of the genome of the mycoplasma agalactiae type strain has challenged our general view on mycoplasmas by suggesting that these simple bacteria are able to exchange significant amount of genetic material via horizontal gene transfer. yet, events that are shaping mycoplasma genomes and that are underlining diversity within this species have to be fully evaluated. for this purpose, we compared two strains that are representative of the genetic spectrum encountered in this species: the type strain pg <dig> which genome is already available and a field strain,  <dig>  which was fully sequenced and annotated in this study.


RESULTS
the two genomes differ by ca.  <dig> kbp with that of  <dig> being the largest . the make up of this additional genetic material mainly corresponds  to mobile genetic elements and  to expanded repertoire of gene families that encode putative surface proteins and display features of highly-variable systems. more specifically, three entire copies of a previously described integrative conjugative element are found in  <dig> that accounts for ca.  <dig> kbp. other mobile genetic elements, found in  <dig> but not in pg <dig>  are the more classical insertion sequences which are related to those found in two other ruminant pathogens, m. bovis and m. mycoides subsp. mycoides sc. in  <dig>  repertoires of gene families encoding surface proteins are larger due to gene duplication. comparative proteomic analyses of the two strains indicate that the additional coding capacity of  <dig> affects the overall architecture of the surface and suggests the occurrence of new phase variable systems based on single nucleotide polymorphisms.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, comparative analyses of two m. agalactiae strains revealed a very dynamic genome which structure has been shaped by gene flow among ruminant mycoplasmas and expansion-reduction of gene repertoires encoding surface proteins, the expression of which is driven by localized genetic micro-events.

