BACKGROUND
biological systems respond to changes in both the earth's magnetic and gravitational fields, but as experiments in space are expensive and infrequent, earth-based simulation techniques are required. a high gradient magnetic field can be used to levitate biological material, thereby simulating microgravity and can also create environments with a reduced or an enhanced level of gravity , although special attention should be paid to the possible effects of the magnetic field  itself.


RESULTS
using diamagnetic levitation, we exposed arabidopsis thaliana in vitro callus cultures to five environments with different levels of effective gravity and magnetic field strengths. the environments included levitation, i.e. simulated μg* , intermediate g*  and enhanced gravity levels  plus an internal  <dig> g* control . the asterisk denotes the presence of the background magnetic field, as opposed to the effective gravity environments in the absence of an applied magnetic field, created using a random position machine  and a large diameter centrifuge .

microarray analysis indicates that changes in the overall gene expression of cultured cells exposed to these unusual environments barely reach significance using an fdr algorithm. however, it was found that gravitational and magnetic fields produce synergistic variations in the steady state of the transcriptional profile of plants. transcriptomic results confirm that high gradient magnetic fields  have a significant effect, mainly on structural, abiotic stress genes and secondary metabolism genes, but these subtle gravitational effects are only observable using clustering methodologies.


CONCLUSIONS
a detailed microarray dataset analysis, based on clustering of similarly expressed genes , can detect underlying global-scale responses, which cannot be detected by means of individual gene expression techniques using raw or corrected p values . a subtle, but consistent, genome-scale response to hypogravity environments was found, which was opposite to the response in a hypergravity environment.

