BACKGROUND
the development of a more refined prognostic methodology for early non-small cell lung cancer  is an unmet clinical need. an accurate prognostic tool might help to select patients at early stages for adjuvant therapies.


RESULTS
a new integrated bioinformatics searching strategy, that combines gene copy number alterations and expression, together with clinical parameters was applied to derive two prognostic genomic signatures. the proposed methodology combines data from patients with and without clinical data with a priori information on the ability of a gene to be a prognostic marker. two initial candidate sets of  <dig> and  <dig> genes for lung adenocarcinoma  and squamous cell carcinoma , respectively, were generated by identifying genes which have both: a) significant correlation between copy number and gene expression, and b) significant prognostic value at the gene expression level in external databases. from these candidates, two panels of  <dig>  and  <dig>  genes were further identified via semi-supervised learning. these panels, together with clinical data , were used to construct the adc and scc hazard scores combining clinical and genomic data. the signatures were validated in two independent datasets , confirming that the prognostic value of both clinical-genomic models is robust, statistically significant  and outperforms both the clinical models  and the genomic models applied separately .


CONCLUSIONS
the present work provides a methodology to generate a robust signature using copy number data that can be potentially used to any cancer. using it, we found new prognostic scores based on tumor dna that, jointly with clinical information, are able to predict overall survival  in patients with early-stage adc and scc.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
early stage lung cancerprognosiscopy number profilinggene filteringsemi-supervised learningissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

