BACKGROUND
rapid improvements in the development of new sequencing technologies have led to the availability of genome sequences of more than  <dig> organisms today. thanks to bioinformatic analyses, prediction of gene models and protein-coding transcripts has become feasible. various reverse and forward genetics strategies have been followed to determine the functions of these gene models and regulatory sequences. using t-dna or transposons as tags, significant progress has been made by using "knock-in" approaches  in different plant species but not in perennial plants species, e.g. long-lived trees. here, large scale gene tagging resources are still lacking.


RESULTS
we describe the first application of an inducible transposon-based activation tagging system for a perennial plant species, as example a poplar hybrid . four activation-tagged populations comprising a total of  <dig>  individuals derived from  <dig> independent "activation tagging ds"  transgenic lines were produced and phenotyped. to date,  <dig> putative variants have been isolated and new atds genomic positions were successfully determined for  <dig> of those. sequences obtained were blasted against the publicly available genome sequence of p. trichocarpa v <dig>   revealing possible transcripts for  <dig> variants.

in a second approach,  <dig> randomly selected individuals without any obvious phenotypic alterations were screened for atds excision. for one third of those transposition of atds was confirmed and in about 5% of these cases genes were tagged.


CONCLUSIONS
the novel strategy of first genotyping and then phenotyping a tagging population as proposed here is, in particular, applicable for long-lived, difficult to transform plant species. we could demonstrate the power of the atds transposon approach and the simplicity to induce atds transposition in vitro. since a transposon is able to pass chromosomal boundaries, only very few primary transposon-carrying transgenic lines are required for the establishment of large transposon tagging populations. in contrast to t-dna-based activation tagging, which is plagued by a lack of transformation efficiency and its time consuming nature, this for the first time, makes it feasible one day to tag  every gene within a perennial plant genome.

functional genomicspopulusmutanttree genomicstransgenic aspentransposition

