BACKGROUND
brucellosis is a major cause of infertility and reproductive failure in livestock. while cattle in the eastern indonesian archipelago suffers from reproductive problems information on bovine brucellosis in the region is fragmentary. the control of brucellosis requires a major and prolonged effort and confirmation of the infection by isolation with detailed knowledge of the spread of the infection is essential when planning a control program.


RESULTS
serological investigation of brucella infection in beef cattle tended under extensive farming conditions revealed a high seroprevalence  in the compliment fixation tests. the results of a rapid and simple field test correlated well with the rose bengal test  and indicated an acceptable sensitivity  and specificity  compared with the complement fixation test. reproductive failure was reported for  <dig> % of the cows with a loss of calves due to abortion or early death amounting to  <dig> %. past reproductive failure did not, however, correlate with seropositivity in the complement fixation test . b. abortus biovar  <dig> was freshly isolated from the hygromas of two cows and together with thirty banked isolates collected since  <dig> from different parts of sulawesi and timor eight related genotypes could be distinguished with one genotype being identical to that of an isolate  from switzerland. the indonesian genotypes formed together with bfr <dig> and one african and one north american isolate a distinct branch on the b. abortus biovar  <dig> dendogram.


CONCLUSIONS
bovine brucellosis appears to be widespread in the eastern indonesian archipelago and calls for urgent intervention. the fresh isolation of the pathogen together with the observed high seroprevalence demonstrates the presence and frequent exposure of cattle in the area to the pathogen. the application of a rapid and simple field test for brucellosis could be very useful for the quick screening of cattle at the pen side.

brucellosisabortiongenotypingreproductionfertilityprevalencepen-side diagnosticsindonesialivestockproductivitycattle

