BACKGROUND
dysregulation of the autonomic nervous system is frequent in subjects with cardiovascular disease. the contribution of different forms of renovascular hypertension and the mechanisms contributing to autonomic dysfunction in hypertension are incompletely understood. here, murine models of renovascular hypertension with preserved  and reduced  kidney mass were studied with regard to autonomic nervous system regulation  and baroreflex sensitivity of heart rate by spontaneous, concomitant changes of systolic blood pressure and pulse interval. involvement of the renin-angiotensin system and the rho-kinase pathway were determined by application of inhibitors.


RESULTS
c57bl6n mice  with reduced kidney mass  or with preserved kidney mass  developed a similar degree of hypertension. in comparison to control mice, both models presented with a significantly increased sympathetic tone and lower baroreflex sensitivity of heart rate. however, only 2k1c animals had a lower parasympathetic tone, whereas urinary norepinephrine excretion was reduced in the 1k1c model. rho kinase inhibition given to a subset of 1k1c and 2k1c animals improved baroreflex sensitivity of heart rate selectively in the 1k1c model. rho kinase inhibition had no additional effects on autonomic nervous system in either model of renovascular hypertension and did not change the blood pressure. blockade of at <dig> receptors  normalized the sympathetic tone, decreased resting heart rate, improved baroreflex sensitivity of heart rate and parasympathetic tone.


CONCLUSIONS
regardless of residual renal mass, blood pressure and sympathetic tone are increased, whereas baroreflex sensitivity is depressed in murine models of renovascular hypertension. reduced norepinephrine excretion and/or degradation might contribute to sympathoactivation in renovascular hypertension with reduced renal mass . overall, the study helps to direct research to optimize medical therapy of hypertension.

arterial hypertensionsympathetic nervous systembaroreflexirbesartan

