BACKGROUND
in male drosophila melanogaster, the male specific lethal  complex is somehow responsible for a two-fold increase in transcription of most x-linked genes, which are enriched for histone h <dig> acetylated at lysine  <dig> . this acetylation requires mof, a histone acetyltransferase that is a component of the msl complex. mof also associates with the non-specific lethal or nsl complex. the msl complex is bound within active genes on the male x chromosome with a 3' bias. in contrast, the nsl complex is enriched at promoter regions of many autosomal and x-linked genes in both sexes. in this study we have investigated the role of mof as a transcriptional activator.


RESULTS
mof was fused to the dna binding domain of gal <dig> and targeted to the promoter region of uas-reporter genes in drosophila. we found that expression of a uas-red fluorescent protein  reporter gene was strongly induced by gal4-mof. however, dsred rna levels were about seven times higher in female than male larvae. immunostaining of polytene chromosomes showed that gal4-mof co-localized with msl <dig> to many sites on the x chromosome in male but not female nuclei. however, in female nuclei that express msl <dig>  gal4-mof co-localized with msl <dig> to many sites on polytene chromosomes but dsred expression was reduced. mutation of conserved active site residues in mof  reduced hat activity in vitro and uas-dsred activation in drosophila. in the presence of gal4-mof, h4k16ac levels were enriched over uas-lacz and uas-arm-lacz reporter genes. the latter utilizes the constitutive promoter from the arm gene to drive lacz expression. in contrast to the strong induction of uas-dsred expression, uas-arm-lacz expression increased by about 2-fold in both sexes.


CONCLUSIONS
targeting mof to reporter genes led to transcription enhancement and acetylation of histone h <dig> at lysine  <dig>  histone acetyltransferase activity was required for the full transcriptional response. incorporation of gal4-mof into the msl complex in males led to a lower transcription enhancement of uas-dsred but not uas-arm-lacz genes. we discuss how association of gal4-mof with the msl or nsl proteins could explain our results.

