BACKGROUND
the membrane protein cd <dig>  a ubiquitous cell surface pathogen receptor, can bind streptococcus to trigger cell autophagy, which is a critical step in the control of infection.


RESULTS
in this study, we found a new splice variant designated cd <dig> transcript variant . the splice variant is characterized by the retention of a 48 bp sequence from intron  <dig> of the bovine cd <dig> gene, which encodes a putative protein enlarged by  <dig> amino acids. cd46-tv mrna was found to be over expressed in mastitis-infected mammary gland tissues relative to healthy tissues. a single nucleotide polymorphism  in the exonic splicing enhancer  motif region was shown to result in the cd46-tv aberrant splice variant through constructing alternative alleles using the pspl <dig> exon capturing vector and transfecting these into 293 t cells. allelic frequency in  <dig>  individuals belonging to  <dig> bos taurus, bos indicus, bos javanicus, bos grunniens and bos mutus, etc. suggests that the c allele  is the ancestral allele. association analysis found that the mean genomic estimated breeding values  for milk somatic cell score and the occurrence of clinical mastitis, as well as the milk somatic cell score of chinese holsteins with the ct genotype was lower than those of individuals with either the cc or tt genotypes. the mean gebv for udder health synthesis for the tt genotype was greater than those for the cc or ct genotypes.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings suggest that the cd <dig> gene likely plays a critical role in the risk of mastitis caused by streptococcus in dairy cows via an alternative splicing mechanism caused by a functional mutation in intron  <dig>  our data also underline the importance of variation within eses in regulating transcript processing.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cd46alternative splicingfunctional snpcattlemini-gene systemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

