BACKGROUND
listeria monocytogenes is a food-borne pathogen that causes infections with a high-mortality rate and has served as an invaluable model for intracellular parasitism. here, we report complete genome sequences for two l. monocytogenes strains belonging to serotype 4a  and 4b , and transcriptomes of representative strains from lineages i, ii, and iii, thereby permitting in-depth comparison of genome- and transcriptome -based data from three lineages of l. monocytogenes. lineage iii, represented by the 4a l <dig> genome is known to contain strains less virulent for humans.


RESULTS
the genome analysis of the weakly pathogenic l <dig> serotype 4a provides extensive evidence of virulence gene decay, including loss of several important surface proteins. the 4b clip <dig> genome, unlike the previously sequenced 4b f <dig> genome harbours an intact inlb invasion gene. these lineage i strains are characterized by the lack of prophage genes, as they share only a single prophage locus with other l. monocytogenes genomes 1/2a egd-e and 4a l <dig>  comparative transcriptome analysis during intracellular growth uncovered adaptive expression level differences in lineages i, ii and iii of listeria, notable amongst which was a strong intracellular induction of flagellar genes in strain 4a l <dig> compared to the other lineages. furthermore, extensive differences between strains are manifest at levels of metabolic flux control and phosphorylated sugar uptake. intriguingly, prophage gene expression was found to be a hallmark of intracellular gene expression. deletion mutants in the single shared prophage locus of lineage ii strain egd-e 1/2a, the lma operon, revealed severe attenuation of virulence in a murine infection model.


CONCLUSIONS
comparative genomics and transcriptome analysis of l. monocytogenes strains from three lineages implicate prophage genes in intracellular adaptation and indicate that gene loss and decay may have led to the emergence of attenuated lineages.

listeria monocytogeneslineagecomparative genomicsgene decaycomparative transcriptomicsflagellaprophagemonocinisogenic deletion mutantsmurine infection

