BACKGROUND
soya and its derivatives represent nutritionally high quality food products whose major drawback is their high content of α-galacto-oligosaccharides. these are not digested in the small intestine due to the natural absence of tissular α-galactosidase in mammals. the passage of these carbohydrates to the large intestine makes them available for fermentation by gas-producing bacteria leading to intestinal flatulence. the aim of the work reported here was to assess the ability of α-galactosidase-producing lactobacilli to improve the digestibility of α-galacto-oligosaccharides in situ.


RESULTS
gnotobiotic rats were orally fed with soy milk and placed in respiratory chambers designed to monitor fermentative gas excretion. the validity of the animal model was first checked using gnotobiotic rats monoassociated with a clostridium butyricum hydrogen -producing strain. ingestion of native soy milk by these rats caused significant h <dig> emission while ingestion of α-galacto-oligosaccharide-free soy milk did not, thus validating the experimental system. when native soy milk was fermented using the α-galactosidase-producing lactobacillus fermentum crl <dig> strain, the resulting product failed to induce h <dig> emission in rats thus validating the bacterial model. when l. fermentum crl <dig> was coadministered with native soy milk, a significant reduction  in h <dig> emission was observed, showing that α-galactosidase from l. fermentum crl <dig> remained active in situ, in the gastrointestinal tract of rats monoassociated with c. butyricum. in human-microbiota associated rats, l. fermentum crl <dig> also induced a significant reduction of h <dig> emission .


CONCLUSIONS
these results strongly suggest that l. fermentum α-galactosidase is able to partially alleviate α-galactosidase deficiency in rats. this offers interesting perspectives in various applications in which lactic acid bacteria could be used as a vector for delivery of digestive enzymes in man and animals.

