BACKGROUND
domestication of atlantic salmon for commercial aquaculture has resulted in farmed salmon displaying substantially higher growth rates than wild salmon under farming conditions. in contrast, growth differences between farmed and wild salmon are much smaller when compared in the wild. the mechanisms underlying this contrast between environments remain largely unknown. it is possible that farmed salmon have adapted to the high-energy pellets developed specifically for aquaculture, contributing to inflated growth differences when fed on this diet. we studied growth and survival of  <dig> families of farmed, wild and f <dig> hybrid salmon fed three contrasting diets under hatchery conditions; a commercial salmon pellet diet, a commercial carp pellet diet, and a mixed natural diet consisting of preserved invertebrates commonly found in norwegian rivers.


RESULTS
for all groups, despite equal numbers of calories presented by all diets, overall growth reductions as high  <dig> and 83%, relative to the salmon diet was observed in the carp and natural diet treatments, respectively. farmed salmon outgrew hybrid  and wild salmon in all treatments. the relative growth difference between wild and farmed fish was highest in the carp diet , intermediate in the salmon diet  and lowest in the natural diet . however, this trend was non-significant, and all groups displayed similar growth reaction norms and plasticity towards differing diets across the treatments.


CONCLUSIONS
no indication of genetic-based adaptation to the form or nutritional content of commercial salmon diets was detected in the farmed salmon. therefore, we conclude that diet alone, at least in the absence of other environmental stressors, is not the primary cause for the large contrast in growth differences between farmed and wild salmon in the hatchery and wild. additionally, we conclude that genetically-increased appetite is likely to be the primary reason why farmed salmon display higher growth rates than wild salmon when fed ad lib rations under hatchery conditions. our results contribute towards an understanding of the potential genetic changes that have occurred in farmed salmon in response to domestication, and the potential mechanisms underpinning genetic and ecological interactions between farmed escapees and wild salmonids.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
domesticationfarm escapesgenetic interactionhybridisationreaction normssurvivalsalmonidspelletsnatural dietfeed utilisationappetitehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100005416norges forskningsrådhttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007601horizon 2020kbbe-311920issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

