BACKGROUND
studies of de novo mutations offer great promise to improve our understanding of human disease. after a causal gene has been identified, it is natural to hypothesize that disease relevant mutations accumulate within a sub-sequence of the gene – for example, an exon, a protein domain, or at cpg sites. these assessments are typically qualitative, because we lack methodology to assess the statistical significance of sub-gene mutational burden ultimately to infer disease-relevant biology.

methods
to address this issue, we present a generalized algorithm to grade the significance of de novo mutational burden within a gene ascertained from affected probands, based on our model for mutation rate informed by local sequence context.


RESULTS
we applied our approach to  <dig> newly identified de novo germline mutations by re-sequencing the coding exons and flanking intronic regions of rb <dig> in  <dig> sporadic, bilateral probands affected with retinoblastoma . we confirm enrichment of loss-of-function mutations, but demonstrate that previously noted ‘hotspots’ of nonsense mutations in rb <dig> are compatible with the elevated mutation rates expected at cpg sites, refuting a rb specific pathogenic mechanism. our approach demonstrates an enrichment of splice-site donor mutations of exon  <dig> and  <dig> but depletion at exon  <dig>  indicative of previously unappreciated heterogeneity in penetrance within this class of substitution. we demonstrate the enrichment of missense mutations to the pocket domain of rb <dig>  which contains the known arg661trp low-penetrance mutation.


CONCLUSIONS
our approach is generalizable to any phenotype, and affirms the importance of statistical interpretation of de novo mutations found in human genomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mutation rateretinoblastomade novo mutationsvariability in mutation ratevariant prioritizationamerican heart association 13sdg14330006national institutes of health r01dk101478national institutes of health r01ca118580ganguly arupa http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100006108national center for advancing translational sciencesul1tr000003issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

