BACKGROUND
dynamic visualisation interfaces are required to explore the multiple microbial genome data now available, especially those obtained by high-throughput sequencing — a.k.a. “next-generation sequencing”  — technologies; they would also be useful for “standard” annotated genomes whose chromosome organizations may be compared. although various software systems are available, few offer an optimal combination of feature-rich capabilities, non-static user interfaces and multi-genome data handling.


RESULTS
we developed syntview, a comparative and interactive viewer for microbial genomes, designed to run as either a web-based tool  or a desktop application . the basis of the program is a generic genome browser with sub-maps holding information about genomic objects . the software is characterised by the presentation of syntenic organisations of microbial genomes and the visualisation of polymorphism data  along these genomes; these features are accessible to the user in an integrated way. a variety of specialised views are available and are all dynamically inter-connected . syntview is not linked to any particular database, allowing the user to plug his own data into the system seamlessly, and use external web services for added functionalities. syntview has now been used in several genome sequencing projects to help biologists make sense out of huge data sets.


CONCLUSIONS
the most important assets of syntview are:  the interactivity due to the flash technology;  the capabilities for dynamic interaction between many specialised views; and  the flexibility allowing various user data sets to be integrated. it can thus be used to investigate massive amounts of information efficiently at the chromosome level. this innovative approach to data exploration could not be achieved with most existing genome browsers, which are more static and/or do not offer multiple views of multiple genomes. documentation, tutorials and demonstration sites are available at the url: http://genopole.pasteur.fr/syntview.

genome browsermicrobial genomicssyntenynext-generation sequencing single nucleotide polymorphism flashinteractive graphical user interface

