BACKGROUND
the quality of chemically synthesized oligonucleotides falls with the length of the oligonucleotide, not least due to depurinations and premature termination during production. this limits the use of long oligonucleotides in assays where long high-quality oligonucleotides are needed . another problem with chemically synthesized oligonucleotides is that secondary structures contained within an oligonucleotide reduce the efficiency of hplc and/or page purification. additionally, ligation of chemically synthesized oligonucleotides is less efficient than the ligation of enzymatically produced dna molecules.


RESULTS
chemically synthesized oligonucleotides with hairpin structures were acquired from our standard supplier. the stem of the hairpin contained recognition sequences for the nt. alw i nicking enzyme and the mly i restriction enzyme. these double stranded regions were positioned in a way to allow self-templated circularization of the oligonucleotide. following ligation, tandem repeats of the complementary sequence of the circular oligonucleotide could be produced through rolling circle dna synthesis. by running successive rounds of ligation, rolling circle dna synthesis, and nicking, the original oligonucleotide could be amplified as either the -strand or the -strand. alternatively, the hairpin structure could be removed by cleavage with the mly i restriction enzyme, thereby releasing the oligonucleotide sequence contained within the hairpin structure from the hairpin.


CONCLUSIONS
we present here a method for the enzymatic production through dna amplification of oligonucleotides with freely designable 5'-ends and 3'-ends, using hairpin-containing self-templating oligonucleotides. the hairpin comprises recognition sequences for a nicking enzyme and a restriction enzyme. the oligonucleotides are amplified by successive rounds of ligation, rolling circle dna synthesis and nicking. furthermore, the hairpin can be removed by cleavage with the mly i restriction enzyme. we have named such hairpin structures "suicide cassettes".

