BACKGROUND
phylogenetic heterogeneity across pseudomonas genus is complemented by its diverse genome architecture enriched by accessory genetic elements  conferring resistance across this genus. here, we sequenced a stress tolerant genotype i.e. pseudomonas sp. strain rl isolated from a hexachlorocyclohexane  contaminated pond  and further compared its gene repertoire with  <dig> reference ecotypes belonging to p. stutzeri, p. mendocina, p. aeruginosa, p. psychrotolerans and p. denitrificans, representing metabolically diverse ecosystems . metagenomic data from hch contaminated pond sediment and similar hch contaminated sites were further used to analyze the pan-genome dynamics of pseudomonas genotypes enriched across increasing hch gradient.


RESULTS
although strain rl demonstrated clear species demarcation  from the rest of its phylogenetic relatives, it was found to be closest to p. stutzeri clade which was further complemented functionally. comparative functional analysis elucidated strain specific enrichment of metabolic pathways like α-linoleic acid degradation and carbazole degradation in pseudomonas sp. strain rl and p. stutzeri xldn-r, respectively. composition based methods  further highlighted the significance of horizontal gene transfer  in evolution of nitrogen metabolism, two-component system  and methionine metabolism across the pseudomonas genomes used in this study. an intact mobile class-i integron  with a captured gene cassette encoding for dihydrofolate reductase  was detected in strain rl, distinctly demarcated from other integron harboring species . mobility of this integron was confirmed by its association with tnp21-like transposon  suggesting stress specific mobilization across hch contaminated sites. metagenomics data from pond sediment and recently surveyed hch adulterated soils revealed the in situ enrichment of integron associated transposase gene  across increasing hch contamination .


CONCLUSIONS
unlocking the potential of comparative genomics supplemented with metagenomics, we have attempted to resolve the environment and strain specific demarcations across  <dig> pseudomonas gene complements. pan-genome analyses of these strains indicate at astoundingly diverse metabolic strategies and provide genetic basis for the cosmopolitan existence of this taxon.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pseudomonasintegroncomparative genomicsmetagenomicshorizontal gene transferselective pressuresissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

