BACKGROUND
zoysia matrella, widely used in lawns and sports fields, is of great economic and ecological value. z. matrella is an allotetraploid species  in the genus zoysia under the subfamily chloridoideae. despite its ecological impacts and economic importance, the subfamily chloridoideae has received little attention in genomics studies. as a result, limited genetic and genomic information are available for this subfamily, which have impeded progress in understanding evolutionary history of grasses in this important lineage. the lack of a high-resolution genetic map has hampered efforts to improve zoysiagrass using molecular genetic tools.


RESULTS
we used restriction site-associated dna sequencing  approach and a segregating population developed from the cross between z. matrella cultivars ‘diamond’ and ‘cavalier’ to construct high-resolution genetic maps of z. matrella. the genetic map of diamond consists of  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphism  markers mapped on  <dig> linkage groups  with a total length of  <dig>  cm and an average distance between adjacent markers at  <dig>  cm. the genetic map of cavalier contains  <dig>  snp markers on  <dig> lgs, covering  <dig>  cm, with an average distance between adjacent markers at  <dig>  cm. a higher level of genome collinearity between z. matrella and rice than that between z. matrella and sorghum was revealed by comparative genomic analysis. pairwise comparison revealed that two independent nested chromosome fusion events occurred after z. matrella and sorghum split from a common ancestor. the high-resolution linkage maps were applied into mapping qtls associated with fall armyworm  resistance and six loci located on lgs  <dig> and  <dig> were detected to be significantly associated with faw resistance.


CONCLUSIONS
the high-resolution linkage maps provide anchor points for comparative genomics analysis between z. matrella and other grass species. our comparative genomic analysis suggested that the chromosome number reduction from  <dig> to  <dig> had occurred independently via a single-step in the subfamilies chloridoideae and panicoideae. the high-resolution genetic maps provide an essential framework for mapping qtls associated with economically and agronomically important traits. the major qtls mapped on lg <dig> of the cavalier map provide a starting point for cloning faw resistance genes and further studies for a better understanding of faw resistance in zoysiagrass.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
zoysiachloridoideaegenetic mapresistance to fall armywormrestriction site-associated dna sequencing national institute of food and agriculture  – specialty crop research initiative grant 2010-51181-21064grant 2010-51181-21064chandra ambika yu qingyi usda national institute of food and agriculture hatch projecttex0-1-9374yu qingyi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

