BACKGROUND
automated assignment of functions to unknown proteins is one of the most important task in computational biology. the development of experimental methods for genome scale analysis of molecular interaction networks offers new ways to infer protein function from protein-protein interaction  network data. existing techniques for collective classification  usually increase accuracy for network data, wherein instances are interlinked with each other, using a large amount of labeled data for training. however, the labeled data are time-consuming and expensive to obtain. on the other hand, one can easily obtain large amount of unlabeled data. thus, more sophisticated methods are needed to exploit the unlabeled data to increase prediction accuracy for protein function prediction.


RESULTS
in this paper, we propose an effective markov chain based cc algorithm  to tackle the label deficiency problem in cc for interrelated proteins from ppi networks. our idea is to model the problem using two distinct markov chain classifiers to make separate predictions with regard to attribute features from protein data and relational features from relational information. the icam learning algorithm combines the results of the two classifiers to compute the ranks of labels to indicate the importance of a set of labels to an instance, and uses an ica framework to iteratively refine the learning models for improving performance of protein function prediction from ppi networks in the paucity of labeled data.


CONCLUSIONS
experimental results on the real-world yeast protein-protein interaction datasets show that our proposed icam method is better than the other ica-type methods given limited labeled training data. this approach can serve as a valuable tool for the study of protein function prediction from ppi networks.

protein function predictionprotein-protein interaction networkcollective classification17- <dig> january  <dig> the twelfth asia pacific bioinformatics conference  shanghai, china

