BACKGROUND
after bovine spongiform encephalopathy  emerged in european cattle livestock in  <dig> a fundamental question was whether the agent established also in the small ruminants' population. in switzerland transmissible spongiform encephalopathies  in small ruminants have been monitored since  <dig>  while in the most recent tse cases a bse infection could be excluded, for historical cases techniques to discriminate scrapie from bse had not been available at the time of diagnosis and thus their status remained unclear. we herein applied state-of-the-art techniques to retrospectively classify these animals and to re-analyze the affected flocks for secondary cases. these results were the basis for models, simulating the course of tses over a period of  <dig> years. the aim was to come to a statistically based overall assessment of the tse situation in the domestic small ruminant population in switzerland.


RESULTS
in sum  <dig> tse cases were identified in small ruminants in switzerland since  <dig>  of which eight were atypical and six were classical scrapie. in two animals retrospective analysis did not allow any further classification due to the lack of appropriate tissue samples. we found no evidence for an infection with the bse agent in the cases under investigation. in none of the affected flocks, secondary cases were identified. a bayesian prevalence calculation resulted in most likely estimates of one case of bse, five cases of classical scrapie and  <dig> cases of atypical scrapie per 100' <dig> small ruminants. according to our models none of the tses is considered to cause a broader epidemic in switzerland. in a closed population, they are rather expected to fade out in the next decades or, in case of a sporadic origin, may remain at a very low level.


CONCLUSIONS
in summary, these data indicate that despite a significant epidemic of bse in cattle, there is no evidence that bse established in the small ruminant population in switzerland. classical and atypical scrapie both occur at a very low level and are not expected to escalate into an epidemic. in this situation the extent of tse surveillance in small ruminants requires reevaluation based on cost-benefit analysis.

