BACKGROUND
protein translocation to the proper cellular destination may be guided by various classes of sorting signals recognizable in the primary sequence. detection in some genomes, but not others, may reveal sorting system components by comparison of the phylogenetic profile of the class of sorting signal to that of various protein families.


RESULTS
we describe a short c-terminal homology domain, sporadically distributed in bacteria, with several key characteristics of protein sorting signals. the domain includes a near-invariant motif pro-glu-pro . this possible recognition or processing site is followed by a predicted transmembrane helix and a cluster rich in basic amino acids. we designate this domain pep-cterm. it tends to occur multiple times in a genome if it occurs at all, with a median count of eight instances; verrucomicrobium spinosum has sixty-five. pep-cterm-containing proteins generally contain an n-terminal signal peptide and exhibit high diversity and little homology to known proteins. all bacteria with pep-cterm have both an outer membrane and exopolysaccharide  production genes. by a simple heuristic for screening phylogenetic profiles in the absence of pre-formed protein families, we discovered that a homolog of the membrane protein epsh  occurs in a species when pep-cterm domains are found. the epsh family contains invariant residues consistent with a transpeptidase function. most pep-cterm proteins are encoded by single-gene operons preceded by large intergenic regions. in the proteobacteria, most of these upstream regions share a dna sequence, a probable cis-regulatory site that contains a sigma- <dig> binding motif. the phylogenetic profile for this dna sequence exactly matches that of three proteins: a sigma-54-interacting response regulator , a transmembrane histidine kinase , and a tpr protein .


CONCLUSIONS
these findings are consistent with the hypothesis that pep-cterm and epsh form a protein export sorting system, analogous to the lpxtg/sortase system of gram-positive bacteria, and correlated to eps expression. it occurs preferentially in bacteria from sediments, soils, and biofilms. the novel method that led to these findings, partial phylogenetic profiling, requires neither global sequence clustering nor arbitrary similarity cutoffs and appears to be a rapid, effective alternative to other profiling methods.

