BACKGROUND

cucurbita pepo is a cucurbit with growing economic importance worldwide. zucchini morphotype is the most important within this highly variable species. recently, transcriptome and simple sequence repeat - and single nucleotide polymorphism -based medium density maps have been reported, however further genomic tools are needed for efficient molecular breeding in the species. our objective is to combine currently available complete transcriptomes and the zucchini genome sequence with high throughput genotyping methods, mapping population development and extensive phenotyping to facilitate the advance of genomic research in this species.


RESULTS
we report the genotyping-by-sequencing analysis of a ril population developed from the inter subspecific cross zucchini x scallop . several thousands of snp markers were identified and genotyped, followed by the construction of a high-density linkage map based on  <dig>  snps  covering  <dig> .6 cm of the whole genome, which is a great improvement with respect to previous maps. a qtl analysis was performed using phenotypic data obtained from the ril population from three environments. in total,  <dig> consistent qtls for vine, flowering and fruit quality traits were detected on the basis of a multiple-environment analysis, distributed in  <dig> independent positions in  <dig> lgs, and each qtl explained  <dig> – <dig> % of the phenotypic variance. eight major qtls, which could explain greater than 20% of the phenotypic variation were detected and the underlying candidate genes identified.


CONCLUSIONS
here we report the first snp saturated map in the species, anchored to the physical map. additionally, several consistent qtls related to early flowering, fruit shape and length, and rind and flesh color are reported as well as candidate genes for them. this information will enhance molecular breeding in c. pepo and will assist the gene cloning underlying the studied qtls, helping to reveal the genetic basis of the studied processes in squash.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cucurbita peporilgbscartographyphenotypingcandidate genesinstituto nacional de investigación y tecnología agraria y alimentaria  cofunded with feder funds . rta2011-00044-c02-1/2inia cofunded with feder fundse-rta2013-00020-c04-03issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

