BACKGROUND
the clustering of genes in a pathway and the co-location of functionally related genes is widely recognized in prokaryotes. we used these characteristics to predict the metabolic involvement for a transcriptional regulator  of unknown function, identified and confirmed its biological activity.


RESULTS
a software tool that identifies the genes encoded within a defined genomic neighborhood for the subject tr and its homologs was developed. the output lists of genes in the genetic neighborhoods, their annotated functions, the reactants/products, and identifies the metabolic pathway in which the encoded-proteins function. when a set of trs of known function was analyzed, we observed that their homologs frequently had conserved genomic neighborhoods that co-located the metabolically related genes regulated by the subject tr. we postulate that tr effectors are metabolites in the identified pathways; indeed the known effectors were present. we analyzed bxe_b <dig> from burkholderia xenovorans, a tr of unknown function and predicted that this tr was related to the glycine, threonine and serine degradation. we tested the binding of metabolites in these pathways and for those that bound, their ability to modulate tr binding to its specific dna operator sequence. using rtpcr, we confirmed that methylglyoxal was an effector of bxe_ <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
these studies provide the proof of concept and validation of a systematic approach to the discovery of the biological activity for proteins of unknown function, in this case a tr. bxe_b <dig> is a methylglyoxal responsive tr that controls the expression of an operon composed of a putative efflux system.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
comparative genomicsbxe_b3018methylglyoxaltranscriptional regulatoranisotropyemsafac-msrtpcrburkholderia xenovorans lb400protein function discoveryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

