BACKGROUND
rna-protein interactions  play important roles in a wide variety of cellular processes, ranging from transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression to host defense against pathogens. high throughput experiments to identify rna-protein interactions are beginning to provide valuable information about the complexity of rna-protein interaction networks, but are expensive and time consuming. hence, there is a need for reliable computational methods for predicting rna-protein interactions.


RESULTS
we propose rpiseq, a family of classifiers for predicting rna-protein interactions using only sequence information. given the sequences of an rna and a protein as input, rpiseq predicts whether or not the rna-protein pair interact. the rna sequence is encoded as a normalized vector of its ribonucleotide 4-mer composition, and the protein sequence is encoded as a normalized vector of its 3-mer composition, based on a 7-letter reduced alphabet representation. two variants of rpiseq are presented: rpiseq-svm, which uses a support vector machine  classifier and rpiseq-rf, which uses a random forest classifier. on two non-redundant benchmark datasets extracted from the protein-rna interface database , rpiseq achieved an auc  curve) of  <dig>  and  <dig> . on a third dataset containing only mrna-protein interactions, the performance of rpiseq was competitive with that of a published method that requires information regarding many different features  of the putative rna and protein partners. in addition, rpiseq classifiers trained using the pridb data correctly predicted the majority  of non-coding rna-protein interactions in npinter-derived networks from e. coli, s. cerevisiae, d. melanogaster, m. musculus, and h. sapiens.


CONCLUSIONS
our experiments with rpiseq demonstrate that rna-protein interactions can be reliably predicted using only sequence-derived information. rpiseq offers an inexpensive method for computational construction of rna-protein interaction networks, and should provide useful insights into the function of non-coding rnas. rpiseq is freely available as a web-based server at http://pridb.gdcb.iastate.edu/rpiseq/.

