BACKGROUND
recently copy number variation  has gained considerable interest as a type of genomic/genetic variation that plays an important role in disease susceptibility. advances in sequencing technology have created an opportunity for detecting cnvs more accurately. recently whole exome sequencing  has become primary strategy for sequencing patient samples and study their genomics aberrations. however, compared to whole genome sequencing, wes introduces more biases and noise that make cnv detection very challenging. additionally, tumors’ complexity makes the detection of cancer specific cnvs even more difficult. although many cnv detection tools have been developed since introducing ngs data, there are few tools for somatic cnv detection for wes data in cancer.


RESULTS
in this study, we evaluated the performance of the most recent and commonly used cnv detection tools for wes data in cancer to address their limitations and provide guidelines for developing new ones. we focused on the tools that have been designed or have the ability to detect cancer somatic aberrations. we compared the performance of the tools in terms of sensitivity and false discovery rate  using real data and simulated data. comparative analysis of the results of the tools showed that there is a low consensus among the tools in calling cnvs. using real data, tools show moderate sensitivity , fair specificity  and poor fdrs . also, using simulated data we observed that increasing the coverage more than 10× in exonic regions does not improve the detection power of the tools significantly.


CONCLUSIONS
the limited performance of the current cnv detection tools for wes data in cancer indicates the need for developing more efficient and precise cnv detection methods. due to the complexity of tumors and high level of noise and biases in wes data, employing advanced novel segmentation, normalization and de-noising techniques that are designed specifically for cancer data is necessary. also, cnv detection development suffers from the lack of a gold standard for performance evaluation. finally, developing tools with user-friendly user interfaces and visualization features can enhance cnv studies for a broader range of users.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
copy number variationwhole-exome sequencingsomatic aberrationscancerhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthr00lm011595nabavi sheida issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

