BACKGROUND
the complexity of the wheat genome has resulted from waves of retrotransposable element insertions. gene deletions and disruptions generated by the fast replacement of repetitive elements in wheat have resulted in disruption of colinearity at a micro  level among the cereals. in view of genomic changes that are possible within a given time span, conservation of genes between species tends to imply an important functional or regional constraint that does not permit a change in genomic structure. the ctg <dig> contig completed in this paper was initially studied because it was assigned to the sr <dig> resistance locus region, but detailed mapping studies subsequently assigned it to the long arm of 3b and revealed its unusual features.


RESULTS
bac shotgun sequencing of the hexaploid wheat  genome has been used to assemble a group of  <dig> wheat bacs from the chromosome 3b physical map fpc contig ctg <dig> into a  <dig>  bp genomic sequence. this ctg <dig> sequence was annotated for biological features such as genes and transposable elements. a three-gene island was identified among >80% repetitive dna sequence. using bioinformatics analysis there were no observable similarity in their gene functions. the ctg <dig> gene island also displayed complete conservation of gene order and orientation with syntenic gene islands found in publicly available genome sequences of brachypodium distachyon, oryza sativa, sorghum bicolor and zea mays, even though the intergenic space and introns were divergent.


CONCLUSIONS
we propose that ctg <dig> is located within the heterochromatic c-band region of deletion bin 3bl <dig> based on the identification of heterochromatic tandem repeats and presence of significant matches to chromodomain-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposable elements. we also speculate that this location, among other highly repetitive sequences, may account for the relative stability in gene order and orientation within the gene island.

sequence data from this article have been deposited with the genbank data libraries under accession no. gq422824

