BACKGROUND
micrornas  have critical functions in various biological processes. mirna profiling is an important tool for the identification of differentially expressed mirnas in normal cellular and disease processes. a technical challenge remains for high-throughput mirna expression analysis as the number of mirnas continues to increase with in silico prediction and experimental verification. our study critically evaluated the performance of a novel mirna expression profiling approach, quantitative rt-pcr array , compared to mirna detection with oligonucleotide microchip .


RESULTS
high reproducibility with qpcr-array was demonstrated by comparing replicate results from the same rna sample. pre-amplification of the mirna cdna improved sensitivity of the qpcr-array and increased the number of detectable mirnas. furthermore, the relative expression levels of mirnas were maintained after pre-amplification. when the performance of qpcr-array and microarrays were compared using different aliquots of the same rna, a low correlation between the two methods  indicated considerable variability between the two assay platforms. higher variation between replicates was observed in mirnas with low expression in both assays. finally, a higher false positive rate of differential mirna expression was observed using the microarray compared to the qpcr-array.


CONCLUSIONS
our studies demonstrated high reproducibility of taqman qpcr-array. comparison between different reverse transcription reactions and qpcr-arrays performed on different days indicated that reverse transcription reactions did not introduce significant variation in the results. the use of cdna pre-amplification increased the sensitivity of mirna detection. although there was variability associated with pre-amplification in low abundance mirnas, the latter did not involve any systemic bias in the estimation of mirna expression. comparison between microarray and qpcr-array indicated superior sensitivity and specificity of qpcr-array.

