BACKGROUND
we performed an analysis of the transcriptome during the blastogenesis of the chordate botryllus schlosseri, focusing in particular on genes involved in cell death by apoptosis. the tunicate b. schlosseri is an ascidian forming colonies characterized by the coexistence of three blastogenetic generations: filter-feeding adults, buds on adults, and budlets on buds. cyclically, adult tissues undergo apoptosis and are progressively resorbed and replaced by their buds originated by asexual reproduction. this is a feature of colonial tunicates, the only known chordates that can reproduce asexually.


RESULTS
thanks to a newly developed web-based platform , we compared the transcriptomes of the mid-cycle, the pre-take-over, and the take-over phases of the colonial blastogenetic cycle. the platform is equipped with programs for comparative analysis and allows to select the statistical stringency. we enriched the genome annotation with  <dig>  new genes;  <dig> transcripts were resolved as complete open reading frames, translated in silico into amino acid sequences and then aligned onto the non-redundant sequence database. significant differentially expressed genes were classified within the gene ontology categories. among them, we recognized genes involved in apoptosis activation, de-activation, and regulation.


CONCLUSIONS
with the current work, we contributed to the improvement of the first released b. schlosseri genome assembly and offer an overview of the transcriptome changes during the blastogenetic cycle, showing up- and down-regulated genes. these results are important for the comprehension of the events underlying colony growth and regression, cell proliferation, colony homeostasis, and competition among different generations.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ascidianapoptosisblastogenesisdifferentially expressed genesrnaseqtunicatamiur 2009xf7tytmanni lucia http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003500università degli studi di padova gric120lszgasparini fabio cariparo foundation ᅟballarin loriano issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

