BACKGROUND
species of bryopsidales form ecologically important components of seaweed communities worldwide. these siphonous macroalgae are composed of a single giant tubular cell containing millions of nuclei and chloroplasts, and harbor diverse bacterial communities. little is known about the diversity of chloroplast genomes  in this group, and about the possible consequences of intracellular bacteria on genome composition of the host. we present the complete cpdnas of bryopsis plumosa and tydemania expeditiones, as well as a re-annotated cpdna of b. hypnoides, which was shown to contain a higher number of genes than originally published. chloroplast genomic data were also used to evaluate phylogenetic hypotheses in the chlorophyta, such as monophyly of the ulvophyceae .


RESULTS
both dnas are circular and lack a large inverted repeat. the cpdna of b. plumosa is  <dig>  bp long and contains  <dig> unique genes. a 13 kb region was identified with several freestanding open reading frames  of putative bacterial origin, including a large orf  closely related to bacterial rhs-family genes. the cpdna of t. expeditiones is  <dig>  bp long and contains  <dig> unique genes. as in b. plumosa, several regions were identified with orfs of possible bacterial origin, including genes involved in mobile functions , and orfs showing close similarity with bacterial dna methyltransferases. the cpdna of b. hypnoides differs from that of b. plumosa mainly in the presence of long intergenic spacers, and a large trna region. chloroplast phylogenomic analyses were largely inconclusive with respect to monophyly of the ulvophyceae, and the relationship of the bryopsidales within the chlorophyta.


CONCLUSIONS
the cpdnas of b. plumosa and t. expeditiones are amongst the smallest and most gene dense chloroplast genomes in the core chlorophyta. the presence of bacterial genes, including genes typically found in mobile elements, suggest that these have been acquired through horizontal gene transfer, which may have been facilitated by the occurrence of obligate intracellular bacteria in these siphonous algae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
horizontal gene transferintronsmobile elementsphylogenomicsplastid genomeviridiplantaeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

