BACKGROUND
several in vitro studies document the function of the transcriptional regulator trmbl <dig> of pyrococcus furiosus. these data indicate that the protein can act as repressor or activator and is mainly involved in transcriptional control of sugar uptake and in the switch between glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. the aim of this study was to complement the in vitro data with an in vivo analysis using chip-seq to explore the genome-wide binding profile of trmbl <dig> under glycolytic and gluconeogenic growth conditions.


RESULTS
the chip-seq analysis revealed under gluconeogenic growth conditions  <dig> trmbl <dig> binding sites where the tgm is located upstream of coding regions and no binding sites under glycolytic conditions. the experimental confirmation of the binding sites using qpcr, emsa, dnase i footprinting and in vitro transcription experiments validated the in vivo identified trmbl <dig> binding sites. furthermore, this study provides evidence that trmbl <dig> is also involved in transcriptional regulation of additional cellular processes e.g. amino acid metabolism, transcriptional control or metabolic pathways. in the initial setup we were interested to include the binding analysis of trmb, an additional member of the trmb family, but western blot experiments and the chip-seq data indicated that the corresponding gene is deleted in our pyrococcus strain. a detailed analysis of a new type strain demonstrated that a 16 kb fragment containing the trmb gene is almost completely deleted after the first re-cultivation.


CONCLUSIONS
the identified binding sites in the p. furiosus genome classified trmbl <dig> as a more global regulator as hitherto known. furthermore, the high resolution of the mapped binding positions enabled reliable predictions, if trmbl <dig> activates  or represses transcription  of the corresponding genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
archaeatranscription factortranscription regulationtrmbtrmbl1tgmchip-seqhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftth 422/13-1thomm michael issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

