BACKGROUND
apolipoprotein e  is a molecular scavenger in the blood and brain. aberrant function of the molecule causes formation of protein and lipid deposits or "plaques" that characterize alzheimer's disease  and atherosclerosis. there are three human isoforms of apoe designated ε <dig>  ε <dig>  and ε <dig>  each isoform differentially affects the structure and function of the protein and thus the development of disease. homozygosity for apoe ε <dig> is associated with atherosclerosis and alzheimer's disease whereas apoe ε <dig> and ε <dig> tend to be protective. furthermore, the ε <dig> form may cause forms of hyperlipoproteinemia. therefore, introduction of apoe ε <dig> may be beneficial to patients that are susceptible to or suffering from these diseases. mesenchymal stem cells or multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells  are adult progenitor cells found in numerous tissues. they are easily expanded in culture and engraft into host tissues when administered appropriately. furthermore, mscs are immunosuppressive and have been reported to engraft as allogeneic transplants. in our previous study, mouse mscs  were implanted into the brains of apoe null mice, resulting in production of small amounts of apoe in the brain and attenuation of cognitive deficits. therefore human mscs  are a promising vector for the administration of apoe ε <dig> in humans.


RESULTS
unlike mmscs, hmscs were found not to express apoe in culture; therefore a molecular screen was performed for compounds that induce expression. pparγ agonists, neural stem cell conditioned medium, osteo-inductive media, dexamethasone, and adipo-inductive media  were tested. of the conditions tested, only aim or dexamethasone induced sustained secretion of apoe in mscs and the duration of secretion was only limited by the length of time mscs could be sustained in culture. upon withdrawal of the inductive stimuli, the apoe secretion persisted for a further  <dig> days.


CONCLUSIONS
the data demonstrated that pre-treatment and perhaps co-administration of mscs homozygous for apoe ε <dig> and dexamethasone may represent a novel therapy for severe instances of ad, atherosclerosis and other apoe-related diseases.

