BACKGROUND
hookworms are blood-feeding nematodes that parasitize the small intestines of many mammals, including humans and cattle. these nematodes are of major socioeconomic importance and cause disease, mainly as a consequence of anaemia , resulting in impaired development and sometimes deaths. studying genetic variability within and among hookworm populations is central to addressing epidemiological and ecological questions, thus assisting in the control of hookworm disease. mitochondrial  genes are known to provide useful population markers for hookworms, but mt genome sequence data are scant.


RESULTS
the present study characterizes the complete mt genomes of two species of hookworm, ancylostoma caninum  and bunostomum phlebotomum , each sequenced , following long-pcr amplification from genomic dna  isolated from individual adult worms. these mt genomes were  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp in size, respectively, and each contained  <dig> protein coding,  <dig> transfer rna and  <dig> ribosomal rna genes, typical for other secernentean nematodes. in addition, phylogenetic analysis  of concatenated mt protein sequence data sets for  <dig> nematodes , representing the ascaridida, spirurida and strongylida, was conducted. the analysis yielded maximum statistical support for the formation of monophyletic clades for each recognized nematode order assessed, except for the rhabditida.


CONCLUSIONS
the mt genomes characterized herein represent a rich source of population genetic markers for epidemiological and ecological studies. the strong statistical support for the construction of phylogenetic clades and consistency between the two different tree-building methods employed indicate the value of using whole mt genome data sets for systematic studies of nematodes. the grouping of the spirurida and ascaridida to the exclusion of the strongylida was not supported in the present analysis, a finding which conflicts with the current evolutionary hypothesis for the nematoda based on nuclear ribosomal gene data.

