BACKGROUND
the biological control agent pseudomonas chlororaphis pa <dig> is capable of protecting brassica napus  from the necrotrophic fungus sclerotinia sclerotiorum via direct antagonism. while we have elucidated bacterial genes and gene products responsible biocontrol, little is known about how the host plant responds to bacterial priming on the leaf surface, including global changes in gene activity in the presence and absence of s. sclerotiorum.


RESULTS
application of pa <dig> to the aerial surfaces of canola plants reduced the number of s. sclerotiorum lesion-forming petals by  <dig> %. rna sequencing of the host pathogen interface showed that pretreatment with pa <dig> reduced the number of genes upregulated in response to s. sclerotiorum by 16-fold. by itself, pa <dig> activated unique defense networks indicative of defense priming. genes encoding mamp-triggered immunity receptors detecting flagellin and peptidoglycan were downregulated in pa <dig> only-treated plants, consistent with post-stimulus desensitization. downstream, we observed reactive oxygen species  production involving low levels of h2o <dig> and overexpression of genes associated with glycerol-3-phosphate -mediated systemic acquired resistance . leaf chloroplasts exhibited increased thylakoid membrane structures and chlorophyll content, while lipid metabolic processes were upregulated.


CONCLUSIONS
in addition to directly antagonizing s. sclerotiorum, pa <dig> primes the plant defense response through induction of unique local and systemic defense networks. this study provides novel insight into the effects of biocontrol agents applied to the plant phyllosphere. understanding these interactions will aid in the development of biocontrol systems as an alternative to chemical pesticides for protection of important crop systems.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
biocontrolbrassica napuschloroplastpseudomonas chlororaphis pa23reactive oxygen speciesrna-seqsclerotinia sclerotiorumsystemic acquired resistancehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canadargpin/249559-2012de kievit teresa r. agri-food research and development initiative12-1172de kievit teresa r. canola agronomic research program12-1172de kievit teresa r. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

