BACKGROUND
accurate adjustment for the amplification efficiency  is an important part of real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction  experiments. the most commonly used correction strategy is to estimate the ae by dilution experiments and use this as a plug-in when efficiency correcting the ΔΔcq. currently, it is recommended to determine the ae with high precision as this plug-in approach does not account for the ae uncertainty, implicitly assuming an infinitely precise ae estimate. determining the ae with such precision, however, requires tedious laboratory work and vast amounts of biological material. violation of the assumption leads to overly optimistic standard errors of the ΔΔcq, confidence intervals, and p-values which ultimately increase the type i error rate beyond the expected significance level. as qpcr is often used for validation it should be a high priority to account for the uncertainty of the ae estimate and thereby properly bounding the type i error rate and achieve the desired significance level.


RESULTS
we suggest and benchmark different methods to obtain the standard error of the efficiency adjusted ΔΔcq using the statistical delta method, monte carlo integration, or bootstrapping. our suggested methods are founded in a linear mixed effects model  framework, but the problem and ideas apply in all qpcr experiments. the methods and impact of the ae uncertainty are illustrated in three qpcr applications and a simulation study. in addition, we validate findings suggesting that mgst <dig> is differentially expressed between high and low abundance culture initiating cells in multiple myeloma and that microrna- <dig> is differentially expressed between testicular and nodal lymphomas.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude, that the commonly used efficiency corrected quantities disregard the uncertainty of the ae, which can drastically impact the standard error and lead to increased false positive rates. our suggestions show that it is possible to easily perform statistical inference of ΔΔcq, whilst properly accounting for the ae uncertainty and better controlling the false positive rate.

keywords
qpcramplification efficiencydelta-delta cqΔΔcqerror propagationefficiency adjustedkaren elise jensen fondenmyeloma stem cell network lshc-ct-2006-037602johnsen hans e. chepre2101-07- 0007johnsen hans e. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

