BACKGROUND
rice  is more sensitive to drought stress than other cereals, and large genotypic variation in drought tolerance  exists within the cultivated rice gene pool and its wild relatives. selective introgression of dt donor segments into a drought-sensitive  elite recurrent parent by backcrossing is an effective way to improve drought stress tolerance in rice. to dissect the molecular mechanisms underlying dt in rice, deep transcriptome sequencing was used to investigate transcriptome differences among a dt introgression line h <dig>  the dt donor p <dig>  and the drought-sensitive, recurrent parent hhz under drought stress.


RESULTS
the results revealed constitutively differential gene expression before stress and distinct global transcriptome reprogramming among the three genotypes under a time series of drought stress, consistent with their different genotypes and dt phenotypes. a set of genes with higher basal expression in both h <dig> and p <dig> compared with hhz were functionally enriched in oxidoreductase and lyase activities, implying their positive role in intrinsic dt. gene ontology analysis indicated that common up-regulated genes in all three genotypes under mild drought stress were enriched in signaling transduction and transcription regulation. meanwhile, diverse functional categories were characterized for the commonly drought-induced genes in response to severe drought stress. further comparative transcriptome analysis between h <dig> and hhz under drought stress found that introgression caused wide-range gene expression changes; most of the differentially expressed genes  in h <dig> relative to hhz under drought were beyond the identified introgressed regions, implying that introgression resulted in novel changes in expression. co-expression analysis of these degs represented a complex regulatory network, including the jasmonic acid and gibberellin pathway, involved in drought stress tolerance in h <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
comprehensive gene expression profiles revealed that genotype-specific drought induced genes and genes with higher expression in the dt genotype under normal and drought conditions contribute jointly to dt improvement. the molecular genetic pathways of drought stress tolerance uncovered in this study, as well as the degs co-localized with dt-related qtls and introgressed intervals, will serve as useful resources for further functional dissection of the molecular mechanisms of drought stress response in rice.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
drought toleranceintrogression linerna sequencingja and ga pathwayco-expression networkriceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

