BACKGROUND
an important question of biological relevance is the polymorphism of the double-helical dna structure in its free form, and the changes that it undergoes upon protein-binding. we have analysed a database of free dna crystal structures to assess the inherent variability of the free dna structure and have compared it with a database of protein-bound dna crystal structures to ascertain the protein-induced variations.


RESULTS
most of the dinucleotide steps in free dna display high flexibility, assuming different conformations in a sequence-dependent fashion. with the exception of the aa/tt and ga/tc steps, which are 'a-phobic', and the gg/cc step, which is 'a-philic', the dinucleotide steps show no preference for a or b forms of dna. protein-bound dna adopts the b-conformation most often. however, in certain cases, protein-binding causes the dna backbone to take up energetically unfavourable conformations. at the gross structural level, several protein-bound dna duplexes are observed to assume a curved conformation in the absence of any large distortions, indicating that a series of normal structural parameters at the dinucleotide and trinucleotide level, similar to the ones in free b-dna, can give rise to curvature at the overall level.


CONCLUSIONS
the results illustrate that the free dna molecule, even in the crystalline state, samples a large amount of conformational space, encompassing both the a and the b-forms, in the absence of any large ligands. a-form as well as some non-a, non-b, distorted geometries are observed for a small number of dinucleotide steps in dna structures bound to the proteins belonging to a few specific families. however, for most of the bound dna structures, across a wide variety of protein families, the average step parameters for various dinucleotide sequences as well as backbone torsion angles are observed to be quite close to the free 'b-like' dna oligomer values, highlighting the flexibility and biological significance of this structural form.

