BACKGROUND
the epidemic form of bovine spongiform encephalopathy  is generally considered to have been caused by a single prion strain but at least two strain variants of cattle prion disorders have recently been recognized. an additional neurodegenerative condition, idiopathic brainstem neuronal chromatolysis and hippocampal sclerosis , a rare neurological disease of adult cattle, was also recognised in a sub-set of cattle submitted under the bse orders in which lesions of bse were absent. between the years of  <dig> and  <dig> ibnc occurred in scotland with an incidence of  <dig> cases per  <dig>  beef suckler cows over the age of  <dig> years.


RESULTS
when the brains of  <dig> ibnc cases were each tested by immunohistochemistry, all showed abnormal labelling for prion protein . immunohistological labelling for prp was also present in the retina of a single case available for examination. the pattern of prp labelling in brain is distinct from that seen in other ruminant prion diseases and is absent from brains with other inflammatory conditions and from normal control brains. brains of ibnc cattle do not reveal abnormal prp isoforms when tested by the commercial biorad or idexx test kits and do not reveal prpres when tested by western blotting using stringent proteinase digestion methods. however, some weakly protease resistant isoforms of prp may be detected when tissues are examined using mild proteinase digestion techniques.


CONCLUSIONS
the study shows that a distinctive neurological disorder of cattle, which has some clinical similarities to bse, is associated with abnormal prp labelling in brain but the pathology and biochemistry of ibnc are distinct from bse. the study is important either because it raises the possibility of a significant increase in the scope of prion disease or because it demonstrates that widespread and consistent prp alterations may not be confined to prion diseases. further studies, including transmission experiments, are needed to establish whether ibnc is a condition in which prion protein is abnormally regulated or it is yet a further example of an infectious cattle prion disease.

