BACKGROUND
it is widely accepted that cultivated rice  was domesticated from common wild rice . compared to other studies which concentrate on rice origin, this study is to genetically elucidate the substantially phenotypic and physiological changes from wild rice to cultivated rice at the whole genome level.


RESULTS
instead of comparing two assembled genomes, this study directly compared the dongxiang wild rice  illumina sequencing reads with the nipponbare  complete genome without assembly of the dxwr genome. based on the results from the comparative genomics analysis, structural variations  between dxwr and nipponbare were determined to locate deleted genes which could have been acquired by nipponbare during rice domestication. to overcome the limit of the sv detection, the dxwr transcriptome was also sequenced and compared with the nipponbare transcriptome to discover the genes which could have been lost in dxwr during domestication. both  <dig> nipponbare-acquired genes and  <dig> dxwr-lost transcripts were further analyzed using annotations from multiple sources. the ngs data are available in the ncbi sra database with id srp <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
these results help better understanding the domestication from wild rice to cultivated rice at the whole genome level and provide a genomic data resource for rice genetic research or breeding. one finding confirmed transposable elements contribute greatly to the genome evolution from wild rice to cultivated rice. another finding suggested the photophosphorylation and oxidative phosphorylation system in cultivated rice could have adapted to environmental changes simultaneously during domestication.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dongxiang wild ricewhole genome sequencingtranscriptomecomparative genomics analysisstructural variationfundamental research funds for the central universitieshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 31201191zhang fantao http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 31360327zhang fantao natural science foundation of jiangxi province, china20132bab21400920142bab204012zhang fantao special fund for agro-scientific research in the public interest201103007zhang fantao key projects of jiangxi education departmentkjld12059zhang fantao issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

