BACKGROUND
in recent years, different hiv antigens have been successfully expressed in plants by either stable transformation or transient expression systems. among hiv proteins, nef is considered a promising target for the formulation of a multi-component vaccine due to its implication in the first steps of viral infection. attempts to express nef as a single protein product  in transgenic plants resulted in disappointingly low yields . in this work we describe a transient expression system based on co-agroinfiltration of plant virus gene silencing suppressor proteins in nicotiana benthamiana, followed by a two-step affinity purification protocol of plant-derived nef.


RESULTS
the effect of three gene silencing viral suppressor proteins  on nef transient expression yield was evaluated. the p <dig> protein of artichoke mottled crinckle virus  gave the highest expression yield in vacuum co-agroinfiltration experiments reaching  <dig> % of total soluble protein, a level almost three times higher than that previously reported in stable transgenic plants. the high yield observed in the co-agroinfiltrated plants was correlated to a remarkable decrease of nef-specific small interfering rnas  indicating an effective modulation of rna silencing mechanisms by amcv-p <dig>  interestingly, we also showed that expression levels in top leaves of vacuum co-agroinfiltrated plants were noticeably reduced compared to bottom leaves. moreover, purification of nef from agroinfiltrated tissue was achieved by a two-step immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography protocol with yields of  <dig> ng/g of fresh tissue.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that expression level of hiv- <dig> nef in plant can be improved using a transient expression system enhanced by the amcv-p <dig> gene silencing suppressor protein. moreover, plant-derived nef was purified, with enhanced yield, exploiting a two-step purification protocol. these results represent a first step towards the development of a plant-derived hiv vaccine.

