BACKGROUND
posttranslational modifications of beta amyloid  have been shown to affect its biophysical and neurophysiological properties. one of these modifications is n-terminal pyroglutamate  formation. enzymatic glutaminyl cyclase  activity catalyzes cyclization of truncated aβ, generating pe3-aβ. compared to unmodified aβ, pe3-aβ is more hydrophobic and neurotoxic. in addition, it accelerates aggregation of other aβ species. to directly investigate pe3-aβ formation and toxicity in vivo, transgenic  etna  mice expressing truncated human aβ were generated and comprehensively characterized. to further investigate the role of qc in pe3-aβ formation in vivo, etna mice were intercrossed with tg mice overexpressing human qc  to generate double tg etna-hqc mice.


RESULTS
expression of truncated aβ was detected mainly in the lateral striatum of etna mice, leading to progressive accumulation of pe3-aβ. this ultimately resulted in astrocytosis, loss of darpp- <dig> immunoreactivity, and neuronal loss at the sites of pe3-aβ formation. neuropathology in etna mice was associated with behavioral alterations. in particular, hyperactivity and impaired acoustic sensorimotor gating were detected. double tg etna-hqc mice showed similar aβ levels and expression sites, while pe3-aβ were significantly increased, entailing increased astrocytosis and neuronal loss.


CONCLUSIONS
etna and etna-hqc mice represent novel mouse models for qc-mediated toxicity of truncated and pe-modified aβ. due to their significant striatal neurodegeneration these mice can also be used for analysis of striatal regulation of basal locomotor activity and sensorimotor gating, and possibly for darpp-32-dependent neurophysiology and neuropathology. the spatio-temporal correlation of pe3-aβ and neuropathology strongly argues for an important role of this aβ species in neurodegenerative processes in these models.

etnapyroglutamate aβglutaminyl cyclasealzheimer’s diseasetbaneurodegenerationneuroinflammationstriatum

