BACKGROUND
the porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome  is a devastating disease for the pig industry. in this study, we analysed the genetic variability of prrs virus  as well as the relationship between the genetic variability, the geographical and temporal distribution of the prrsv strains. moreover, we investigated the association between the glycosylation patterns in prrsv sequences and pigs growth.


RESULTS
the data highlight that prrsv strains evolve rapidly on individual farms, and temporal evolution of prrsv is an important factor of genetic variability. analysis of glycosylation sites in the glycoprotein  <dig>  ectodomain revealed that prrsv isolates had seven combinations of putative n-linked glycosylation sites of which the n37/46/ <dig> sites was found in 79% of the sequences. no significant relationship was found between the genetic variation of the prrsv strains and the geographic distance. a significant relationship was found between the genetic variation and time of sampling when farm was considered as a factor in the analysis. furthermore, the commercial semen from artificial insemination centres was not a source of prrs transmission.

the prrsv having the glycosylation site at position n <dig>  were observed to have higher burden on pigs and accordingly the corresponding infected pigs had lower average daily gain  compared with those infected with prrsv lacking the glycosylation at n <dig>  position site. this study showed that the number of piglets by litter infected by prrsv was lower for the landrace breed than for the other studied breeds .


CONCLUSIONS
the prrsv genetic variability which is determined by a local and temporal evolution at the farm level could be considered in a perspective of prevention. moreover, the association between the prrsv glycosylation patterns and its virulence could be of interest for vaccine development. the differences of resistance to prrsv infections among pig breeds might open new horizons for the genetic selection of robustness against prrsv infection.

prrsvorf5orf <dig> sequencesglycosylation

