BACKGROUND
redox enzyme maturation proteins  describe a diverse family of prokaryotic chaperones involved in the biogenesis of anaerobic complex iron sulfur molybdoenzyme  respiratory systems. many remp family studies have focused on narj subfamily members from escherichia coli: narj, narw, dmsd, tord and ycdy. the aim of this bioinformatics study was to expand upon the evolution, distribution and genetic association of these  <dig> remp members within  <dig> genome sequenced taxonomically diverse species representing  <dig> prokaryotic sequences. narj subfamily member diversity was examined at the phylum-species level and at the amino acid/nucleotide level to determine how close their genetic associations were between their respective cism systems within phyla.


RESULTS
this study revealed that narj members possessed unique motifs that distinguished gram-negative from gram-positive/archaeal species and identified a strict genetic association with its nitrate reductase complex  operon compared to all other members. narw appears to be found specifically in gammaproteobacteria. dmsd also showed close associations with the dimethylsulfoxide reductase  operon compared to tord. phylogenetic analysis revealed that ycdy has recently evolved from dmsd and that ycdy has likely diverged into  <dig> subfamilies linked to zn- dependent alkaline phosphatase  operons and a newly identified operon containing part of zn-metallopeptidase ftsh complex component  and nadh-quinone dehydrogenase . tord demonstrated the greatest diversity in operon association. tord was identifed within operons from either trimethylamine-n-oxide reductase  or formate dehydrogenase , where each type of tord had a unique motif. additionally a subgroup of dmsd and tord members were also linked to operons with biotin sulfoxide  and polysulfide reductase  indicating a potential role in the maturation of diverse cism.


CONCLUSIONS
examination of diverse prokaryotic narj subfamily members demonstrates that the evolution and genetic association of each member is uniquely biased by its cism operon association.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
redox enzyme maturation protein system specific chaperonesnarjnarwdmsdtordycdycomplex iron-sulfur molybdoenzymesanaerobic respirationchaperonetwin arginine translocase issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

