BACKGROUND
in literature only one article describes and compares methods of achieving hemostasis in equine mesenteric arteries during jejunal resection and anastomosis, and most textbooks favor ligating-dividing mechanical devices. the latter method cannot always be used, not least because the devices are expensive and in some cases even contra-indicated. various types of knots, including sliding knots, are widely used to provide hemostasis in laparoscopy.

the objective of this study was to compare a triple ligature for mesenteric vessels composed of three sliding knots with a triple ligature composed of a modified transfixing and two surgeon’s knots.

methods
portions of jejunum with associated mesenteric vessels were collected from  <dig> horses at a local abattoir. these were divided into  <dig> specimens containing five mesenteric arteries each. each artery was closed with a triple ligature. in group a, a surgeon’s knot was used to tie the ligatures  while in group b all ligatures  were tied with a parallel alternating sliding knot. both groups were divided ino two subgroups depending on suture material used . time to perform ligatures for every specimen were recorded and compared between groups.

after closure, arteries were cannulated and intraluminal pressures were increased until ligature failure. leaking pressures were recorded and compared between groups.


RESULTS
ligation of mesenteric arteries was significantly faster to perform with sliding knots than with surgeon’s knots, both with monofilament and multifilament suture material. with multifilament suture material, the leaking pressure of sliding knot ligatures was significantly higher than that of surgeon’s knot ligatures. with monofilament suture, there were no statistically significant differences in leaking pressure between ligature methods. both ligating methods were stronger with monofilament suture material than with multifilament suture material.


CONCLUSIONS
regardless of the ligature used, monofilament suture material performed better than multifilament suture material to achieve hemostatic knots. independently of the suture material, the sliding knot is comparable or better than the surgeon’s knot in providing hemostasis, and is faster to perform.

7- <dig> july  <dig> eleventh international equine colic research symposium dublin, ireland

