BACKGROUND
proteomics and bioinformatics may help us better understand the biological adaptations occurring during bovine mastitis. this systems approach also could help identify biomarkers for monitoring clinical and subclinical mastitis. the aim of the present study was to use isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification  to screen potential proteins associated with mastitis at late infectious stage.


RESULTS
healthy and mastitic cows’ mammary gland tissues were analyzed using itraq combined with two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry . bioinformatics analyses of differentially expressed proteins were performed by means of gene ontology, metabolic pathways, transcriptional regulation networks using blast2go software, the dynamic impact approach and ingenuity pathway analysis. at a false discovery rate of 5%, a total of  <dig> proteins were identified from  <dig>  peptides, which were matched with  <dig>  spectra. compared with healthy mammary gland tissue,  <dig> proteins were significantly up-regulated  while  <dig> were significantly down-regulated  in response to mastitis due to natural infections with staphylococci aureus. up-regulation of collagen, type i, alpha  <dig>  and inter-alpha  inhibitor h <dig>  in the mastitis-infected tissue was confirmed by western blotting and immunohistochemistry.


CONCLUSIONS
this paper is the first to show the protein expression in the late response to a mastitic pathogen, thus, revealing mechanisms associated with host tissue damage. the bioinformatics analyses highlighted the effects of mastitis on proteins such as collagen, fibrinogen, fibronectin, casein alpha and heparan sulfate proteoglycan  <dig>  our findings provide additional clues for further studies of candidate genes for mastitis susceptibility. the up-regulated expression of col1a <dig> and itih <dig> in the mastitic mammary gland may be associated with tissue damage and repair during late stages of infection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
itraqproteomicscol1a1itih4dairy cowmastitisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

