BACKGROUND
the symbiotic soil bacterium sinorhizobium meliloti often has to face low ph in its natural habitats. to identify genes responding to ph stress a global transcriptional analysis of s. meliloti strain  <dig> following a ph shift from ph  <dig>  to ph  <dig>  was carried out. in detail, oligo-based whole genome microarrays were used in a time course experiment. the monitoring period covered a time span of about one hour after the ph shift. the obtained microarray data was filtered and grouped by k-means clustering in order to obtain groups of genes behaving similarly concerning their expression levels throughout the time course.


RESULTS
the results display a versatile response of s. meliloti  <dig> represented by distinct expression profiles of subsets of genes with functional relation. the eight generated clusters could be subdivided into a group of four clusters containing genes that were up-regulated and another group of four clusters containing genes that were down-regulated in response to the acidic ph shift. the respective mean expression progression of the four up-regulated clusters could be described as  permanently and strong,  permanently and intermediate,  permanently and progressive, and  transiently up-regulated. the expression profile of the four down-regulated clusters could be characterized as  permanently,  permanently and progressive,  transiently, and  ultra short down-regulated. genes coding for proteins with functional relation were mostly cumulated in the same cluster, pointing to a characteristic expression profile for distinct cellular functions. among the strongest up-regulated genes lpia, degp <dig>  cah, exov and exoh were found. the most striking functional groups responding to the shift to acidic ph were genes of the exopolysaccharide i biosynthesis as well as flagellar and chemotaxis genes. while the genes of the exopolysaccharide i biosynthesis  were up-regulated, the expression level of the flagellar and chemotaxis genes  simultaneously decreased in response to acidic ph. other responding functional groups of genes mainly belonged to nitrogen uptake and metabolism , methionine metabolism  as well as ion transport systems . it is noteworthy, that several genes coding for hypothetical proteins of unknown function could be identified as up-regulated in response to the ph shift.


CONCLUSIONS
it was shown that the short term response to acidic ph stress does not result in a simple induction or repression of genes, but in a sequence of responses varying in their intensity over time. obviously, the response to acidic ph is not based on a few specific genes, but involves whole sets of genes associated with various cellular functions.

