BACKGROUND
imepitoin is a novel antiepileptic drug for the treatment of canine idiopathic epilepsy. the present study was conducted to demonstrate superior antiepileptic activity of a high dose of 30 mg/kg bid over a low dose of 1 mg/kg bid of imepitoin during 12 weeks of treatment under double blind conditions in a field population of dogs with previously untreated epilepsy. in a consecutive 12 weeks open label follow up , all animals received 30 mg/kg bid, to evaluate the persistence of the antiepileptic activity, and to evaluate the effect of a dose step up to 30 mg/kg in the former low-dose animals.


RESULTS
a treatment with 30 mg/kg bid resulted in a significantly greater reduction in monthly seizure frequency relative to baseline data as compared to the 1 mg/kg dose. both generalized and partial seizures but not cluster seizures were significantly less frequent in the high dose group. the antiepileptic activity was maintained during study phase  <dig> in the high dose group. an increase to 30 mg/kg bid in the low- dose animals resulted in a significant reduction in generalized and partial seizures, but not cluster seizures. at the end of study phase  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  % of dogs of the former high and former low-dose groups respectively, remained free of generalized tonic-clonic seizures.

imepitoin was well tolerated. the frequency of dogs with any adverse drug reactions was higher in the 30 mg/kg bid dose , and the main target organ was the central nervous system . the occurrence of cns related adverse reactions was transient and findings were mostly restricted to the first weeks of treatment. no hepatic enzyme increase and no other organ toxicity were observed.


CONCLUSIONS
the administration of imepitoin twice daily at a dose of 30 mg/kg results in significant and persistent antiepileptic effects in patients with newly diagnosed epilepsy and generalized tonic-clonic seizures, as observed over a study period of up to 6 months. imepitoin was well tolerated. most cns related adverse drug reactions were transient. both the antiepileptic activity and the safety profile make the drug suitable for long-term clinical use.

keywords
idiopathic epilepsyantiepilepticanticonvulsanttonic-clonic seizuresclinical field trialissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

