BACKGROUND
until recently, few genomic reagents specific for non-human primate research have been available. to address this need, we have constructed a macaque-specific high-density oligonucleotide microarray by using highly fragmented low-pass sequence contigs from the rhesus genome project together with the detailed sequence and exon structure of the human genome. using this method, we designed oligonucleotide probes to over  <dig>  distinct rhesus/human gene orthologs and increased by four-fold the number of available genes relative to our first-generation expressed sequence tag -derived array.


RESULTS
we constructed a database containing  <dig>  exon sequences from  <dig>  human refseq genes and compared each human exon with its best matching sequence in the january  <dig> version of the rhesus genome project list of  <dig>  dna contigs. best matching rhesus exon sequences for each of the  <dig>  human genes were then concatenated in the proper order and orientation to produce a rhesus "virtual transcriptome." microarray probes were designed, one per gene, to the region closest to the 3' untranslated region  of each rhesus virtual transcript. each probe was compared to a composite rhesus/human transcript database to test for cross-hybridization potential yielding a final probe set representing  <dig>  rhesus/human gene orthologs, including transcript variants, and over  <dig>  distinct genes. we hybridized mrna from rhesus brain and spleen to both the est- and genome-derived microarrays. besides four-fold greater gene coverage, the genome-derived array also showed greater mean signal intensities for genes present on both arrays. genome-derived probes showed  <dig> % identity when compared to  <dig>  rhesus genbank sequence tag site  sequences indicating that early stage low-pass versions of complex genomes are of sufficient quality to yield valuable functional genomic information when combined with finished genome information from a closely related species.


CONCLUSIONS
the number of different genes represented on microarrays for unfinished genomes can be greatly increased by matching known gene transcript annotations from a closely related species with sequence data from the unfinished genome. signal intensity on both est- and genome-derived arrays was highly correlated with probe distance from the 3' utr, information often missing from ests yet present in early-stage genome projects.

