BACKGROUND
in many bird species colour traits influence social dominance and breeding success. in our study we first evaluated whether the colour of the basic plumage , that provides an index of individual quality, influenced winter habitat use by yellow warblers. we then evaluated whether winter habitat use  influenced alternate plumage colouration, after controlling for individual quality using basic plumage colouration. finally, we investigated whether basic and alternate plumage colouration influenced arrival dates, mate acquisition, breeding phenology and reproductive success of yellow warblers breeding in southern  and arctic  canada.


RESULTS
the colour  of tail feathers, grown on the breeding grounds, was not related to subsequent winter habitat use. greater covert and tail feather colour  were correlated, suggesting genetics and/or individual quality played a role in pigment deposition. after controlling for individual difference in tail colour, δ13c values did not explain any variation in greater covert colour, but birds with high δ15n signatures had greater coverts with higher chroma. male arrival dates varied with tail chroma in revelstoke and tail hue in inuvik. males that arrived early paired with older and/or more colourful mates that initiated clutches earlier, and at one site  were more likely to fledge young. in addition, in revelstoke  males with high tail hue also acquired more colourful mates. in contrast, after controlling for individual differences in tail colour, greater covert colour did not affect male arrival date, the quality of the mate obtained or reproductive success in either population.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that plumage colour effects on breeding phenology and mate acquisition result from differences in the intrinsic quality of individuals rather than a carry-over effect of winter habitat use.

carry-over effectsseasonal interactionsbreeding phenologyplumage colourcarotenoid-based colourationyellow warbleramerican redstart

