BACKGROUND
phenotypic plasticity operates across generations, when the parental environment affects phenotypic expression in the offspring. recent studies in invertebrates have reported transgenerational plasticity in phenotypic responses of offspring when the mothers had been previously exposed to either live or heat-killed pathogens. understanding whether this plasticity is adaptive requires a factorial design in which both mothers and their offspring are subjected to either the pathogen challenge or a control, in experimentally matched and mismatched combinations. most prior studies exploring the capacity for pathogen-mediated transgenerational plasticity have, however, failed to adopt such a design. furthermore, it is currently poorly understood whether the magnitude or direction of pathogen-mediated transgenerational responses will be sensitive to environmental heterogeneity. here, we explored the transgenerational consequences of a dual pathogen and stress challenge administered in the maternal generation in the fruit fly, drosophila melanogaster. prospective mothers were assigned to a non-infectious pathogen treatment consisting of an injection with heat-killed bacteria or a procedural control, and a stress treatment consisting of sleep deprivation or control. their daughters and sons were similarly assigned to the same pathogen treatment, prior to measurement of their reproductive success.


RESULTS
we observed transgenerational interactions involving pathogen treatments of mothers and their offspring, on the reproductive success of daughters but not sons. these interactions were unaffected by sleep deprivation.


CONCLUSIONS
the direction of the transgenerational effects was not consistent with that predicted under a scenario of adaptive transgenerational plasticity. instead, they were indicative of expectations based on terminal investment.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
anticipatory effectsmaternal effectsmaternal stressparental effectsphenotypic plasticitytransgenerational effectstransgenerational plasticityaustralian research council dp110104965monash university margaret clayton women in research postdoctoral fellowshipissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

