BACKGROUND
the increasing number of available genomic sequences makes it now possible to study the evolutionary history of specific genes or gene families. transcription factors  involved in regulation of gene-specific expression are key players in the evolution of metazoan development. the low complexity coe  family of transcription factors constitutes a well-suited paradigm for studying evolution of tf structure and function, including the specific question of protein modularity. here, we compare the structure of coe genes within the metazoan kingdom and report on the mechanism behind a vertebrate-specific exon duplication.


RESULTS
coe proteins display a modular organisation, with three highly conserved domains : a coe-specific dna-binding domain , an immunoglobulin/plexin/transcription  domain and an atypical helix-loop-helix  motif. comparison of the splice structure of coe genes between cnidariae and bilateriae shows that the ancestral coe dbd was built from  <dig> separate exons, with no evidence for exon shuffling with other metazoan gene families. it also confirms the presence of an ancestral h1lh <dig> motif present in all coe proteins which partly overlaps the repeated h2d-h2a motif first identified in rodent ebf. electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that formation of coe dimers is mediated by this ancestral motif. the h2d-h2a α-helical repetition appears to be a vertebrate characteristic that originated from a tandem exon duplication having taken place prior to the splitting between gnathostomes and cyclostomes. we put-forward a two-step model for the inclusion of this exon in the vertebrate transcripts.


CONCLUSIONS
three main features in the history of the coe gene family can be inferred from these analyses:  each conserved domain of the ancestral coe gene was built from multiple exons and the same scattered structure has been maintained throughout metazoan evolution.  there exists a single coe gene copy per metazoan genome except in vertebrates. the h2a-h2d duplication that is specific to vertebrate proteins provides an example of a novel vertebrate characteristic, which may have been fixed early in the gnathostome lineage.  this duplication provides an interesting example of counter-selection of alternative splicing.

