BACKGROUND
growth substrates, aerobic/anaerobic conditions, specific growth rate  etc. strongly influence escherichia coli cell physiology in terms of cell size, biomass composition, gene and protein expression. to understand the regulation behind these different phenotype properties, it is useful to know carbon flux patterns in the metabolic network which are generally calculated by metabolic flux analysis . however, rarely is biomass composition determined and carbon balance carefully measured in the same experiments which could possibly lead to distorted mfa results and questionable conclusions. therefore, we carried out both detailed carbon balance and biomass composition analysis in the same experiments for more accurate quantitative analysis of metabolism and mfa.


RESULTS
we applied advanced continuous cultivation methods  to continuously monitor e. coli k- <dig> mg <dig> flux and energy metabolism dynamic responses to change of μ and glucose-acetate co-utilisation. surprisingly, a 36% reduction of atp spilling was detected with increasing μ and carbon wasting to non-co <dig> by-products under constant biomass yield. the apparent discrepancy between constant biomass yield and decline of atp spilling could be explained by the rise of carbon wasting from  <dig> to 11% in the carbon balance which was revealed by the discovered novel excretion profile of e. coli pyrimidine pathway intermediates carbamoyl-phosphate, dihydroorotate and orotate. we found that carbon wasting patterns are dependent not only on μ, but also on glucose-acetate co-utilisation capability. accumulation of these compounds was coupled to the two-phase acetate accumulation profile. acetate overflow was observed in parallel with the reduction of tca cycle and glycolysis fluxes, and induction of pentose phosphate pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
it can be concluded that acetate metabolism is one of the major regulating factors of central carbon metabolism. more importantly, our model calculations with actual biomass composition and detailed carbon balance analysis in steady state conditions with -omics data comparison demonstrate the importance of a comprehensive systems biology approach for more advanced understanding of metabolism and carbon re-routing mechanisms potentially leading to more successful metabolic engineering.

