BACKGROUND
acropora cervicornis, a threatened, keystone reef-building coral has undergone severe declines  throughout the caribbean. these declines could reduce genetic variation and thus hamper the species’ ability to adapt. active restoration strategies are a common conservation approach to mitigate species' declines and require genetic data on surviving populations to efficiently respond to declines while maintaining the genetic diversity needed to adapt to changing conditions. to evaluate active restoration strategies for the staghorn coral, the genetic diversity of a. cervicornis within and among populations was assessed in  <dig> individuals collected from  <dig> locations along the florida reef tract  and in the dominican republic.


RESULTS
genotyping by sequencing  identified  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms . pairwise nucleotide differences  within a population are large  and similar to π across all individuals. this high level of genetic diversity along the frt is similar to the diversity within a small, isolated reef. much of the genetic diversity  exists within a population, yet gbs analysis shows significant variation along the frt, including  <dig> snps with significant fst values and significant divergence relative to distance. there are also significant differences in snp allele frequencies over small spatial scales, exemplified by the large fst values among corals collected within miami-dade county.


CONCLUSIONS
large standing diversity was found within each population even after recent declines in abundance, including significant, potentially adaptive divergence over short distances. the data here inform conservation and management actions by uncovering population structure and high levels of diversity maintained within coral collections among sites previously shown to have little genetic divergence. more broadly, this approach demonstrates the power of gbs to resolve differences among individuals and identify subtle genetic structure, informing conservation goals with evolutionary implications.

keywords
genotyping by sequencingcoral reefspopulation genomicsrestoration geneticsflorida reef tracthttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000152division of molecular and cellular biosciences 1158241oleksiak m. f. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000154ᅟ1147042crawford d. l. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

