BACKGROUND
speciation often occurs in complex or uncertain temporal and spatial contexts. processes such as reinforcement, allopatric divergence, and assortative mating can proceed at different rates and with different strengths as populations diverge. the central american midas cichlid fish species complex is an important case study for understanding the processes of speciation. previous analyses have demonstrated that allopatric processes led to species formation among the lakes of nicaragua as well as sympatric speciation that is occurring within at least one crater lake. however, since speciation is an ongoing process and sampling genetic diversity of such lineages can be biased by collection scheme or random factors, it is important to evaluate the robustness of conclusions drawn on individual time samples.


RESULTS
in order to assess the validity and reliability of inferences based on different genetic samples, we have analyzed fish from several lakes in nicaragua sampled at three different times over  <dig> years. in addition, this time series allows us to analyze the population genetic changes that have occurred between lakes, where allopatric speciation has operated, as well as between different species within lakes, some of which have originated by sympatric speciation. focusing on commonly used genetic markers, we have analyzed both dna sequences from the complete mitochondrial control region as well as nuclear dna variation at ten microsatellite loci from these populations, sampled thrice in a  <dig> year time period, to develop a robust estimate of the population genetic history of these diversifying lineages.


CONCLUSIONS
the conclusions from previous work are well supported by our comprehensive analysis. in particular, we find that the genetic diversity of derived crater lake populations is lower than that of the source population regardless of when and how each population was sampled. furthermore, changes in various estimates of genetic diversity within lakes are minimal and provide no evidence for drastic changes during the last  <dig> years, supporting the hypothesis that the processes which have resulted in rapid speciation are primarily historical. in contrast, there is some evidence for ongoing evolution, particularly selection, in all lakes except crater lake masaya, perhaps reflecting the persistence of speciational processes. importantly, we find that the crater lake apoyo population, for which strong evidence of sympatric speciation has been demonstrated, has lower genetic diversity than other crater lakes and the strongest evidence for ongoing selection.

