BACKGROUND
the traditional chinese medicinal plants lycium barbarum l. and l. ruthenicum murr. are valued for the abundance of bioactive carotenoids and anthocyanins in their fruits, respectively. however, the cellular and molecular mechanisms contributing to their species-specific bioactive profiles remain poorly understood.


RESULTS
in this study, the red fruit  of l. barbarum was found to accumulate high levels of carotenoids , while they were undetectable in the black fruit  of l. ruthenicum. cytological and gene transcriptional analyses revealed that the chromoplast differentiation that occurs in the chloroplast during fruit ripening only occurs in rf, indicating that the lack of chromoplast biogenesis in bf leads to no sink for carotenoid storage and the failure to synthesize carotenoids. similar enzyme activities of phytoene synthase  <dig> , chromoplast-specific lycopene β-cyclase  and β-carotene hydroxylase  <dig>  were observed in both l. ruthenicum and l. barbarum, suggesting that the undetectable carotenoid levels in bf were not due to the inactivation of carotenoid biosynthetic enzymes. the transcript levels of the carotenoid biosynthetic genes, particularly psy <dig>  phytoene desaturase , ζ-carotene desaturase , cyc-b and crtr-b <dig>  were greatly increased during rf ripening, indicating increased zeaxanthin biosynthesis. additionally, carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase  <dig>  was expressed at much higher levels in bf than in rf, suggesting continuous carotenoid degradation in bf.


CONCLUSIONS
the failure of the chromoplast development in bf causes low carotenoid biosynthesis levels and continuous carotenoid degradation, which ultimately leads to undetectable carotenoid levels in ripe bf. in contrast, the successful chromoplast biogenesis in rf furnishes the sink necessary for carotenoid storage. based on this observation, the abundant zeaxanthin accumulation in rf is primarily determined via both the large carotenoid biosynthesis levels and the lack of carotenoid degradation, which are regulated at the transcriptional level.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
carotenoidschromoplastfruit developmentgene expressionlycium barbaruml. ruthenicumissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

