BACKGROUND
soy-derived isoflavones potentially protect against obesity and depression. in five different studies we examined the influence of soy-containing diets or equol injections on depression, serotonin levels, body weight gain  and white adipose tissue  deposition in female long-evans rats at various stages of life .


RESULTS
in general, animals fed a soy-rich diet  and/or administered equol  displayed significant decreases in bw and wat compared to a low-soy diet. when equol was injected alone , experiments  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> demonstrated that body weight was significantly decreased. equol has body weight control effects in females that are dependent on ovarian status and/or age of diet initiation. experiments 1- <dig> all displayed no significant differences in depressive-related behavior as measured by the prosolt forced swim test  when soy-rich  or low-soy diets  or equol treatments  were tested in female rats at various ages or hormonal status. results of all the experiments are not presented here due to space limitations, but data from experiment  <dig> are presented. from conception female rats were exposed to either: a) a soy-rich  or b) low-soy diet . after  <dig> days all rats experienced nof. at  <dig> days-old the animals were examined in the porsolt forced swim test . one month later a second pfst was performed . at the first pfst, serotonin and mobility levels were significantly decreased in the phyto-low fed animals compared to animals that consumed the phyto- <dig> diet. after equol injections at the second pfst, mobility and serotonin levels significantly increased in aged nof rats fed the phyto-low diet .


CONCLUSIONS
consumption of dietary isoflavones or equol exposure in rats has body weight controlling effects and equol specifically may have antidepressant potential dependent upon diet initiation and/or dosage of treatments. the current study demonstrates that equol is able to decrease body weight, abdominal wat, and depressive-related behavior. while other factors and mechanisms may play a role, in part, the present results provide a greater understanding of how isoflavonoid molecules modulate the brain's influence on behavior.

