BACKGROUND
fetal bovine serum  contains a wide range of growth factors, hormones, vitamins, amino acids, fatty acids and trace elements required for cell growth. it was shown that animal sera contain also extracellular vesicles  with important biological properties; thus we wondered whether evs present in fbs would influence muscle cell phenotype.

evs were removed from sera by ultracentrifugation . c2c <dig>  l <dig> and human primary myoblasts, were grown either in classical media  or in evs-depleted media. differentiation was induced by replacing the culture medium either with cm or ev-depleted media. qrt-pcr of relevant genes and mirna involved in proliferation, differentiation, energy metabolism and evs formation and secretion were performed.


RESULTS
growth of myoblasts in ev-free media during proliferation produces the most unfavorable situation for proper myotube formation, when considering c <dig> and human myoblasts. removing evs from serum committed myoblasts to differentiate precociously . c2c <dig> and human myoblasts, grown constantly in ev-depleted media during proliferation and differentiation, formed less myotubes than in cm. they had a reduced level of myogenin and a strong increase in myostatin expression, a negative regulator of muscle cell differentiation that affects myotube size. this situation was not reversed when confluent myoblasts were switched to cm for differentiation. like c2c <dig> and human cells, l <dig> formed less myotubes in evs-depleted media. however, as they do not express myostatin, l <dig> myotubes were larger and expressed higher level of cktm <dig> compared to myotubes grown in cm suggesting that they had reached a higher level of differentiation.


CONCLUSIONS
researchers studying the role of muscle evs in culture conditions should consider that depleting evs from serum alters the phenotype of muscle cells. interestingly, the cross-talk between myoblasts and myotubes during myogenesis :e84153) can be recapitulate by using fbs-evs as well. this implies that evs can transfer specific signals to cells from unrelated species and that part of serum ev composition is evolutionarily conserved . evs in body fluids could have an unsuspected function during embryogenesis and in regulation of cellular processes such as hypertrophy and hyperplasia.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
extracellular vesiclesbovine serumproliferationc2c12l6human myoblastsmuscle cellgene expressionmirnasissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

