BACKGROUND
cancer patient's outcome is written, in part, in the gene expression profile of the tumor. we previously identified a 62-probe sets signature  to identify tissue hypoxia in neuroblastoma tumors and showed that nb-hypo stratified neuroblastoma patients in good and poor outcome  <cit> . it was important to develop a prognostic classifier to cluster patients into risk groups benefiting of defined therapeutic approaches. novel classification and data discretization approaches can be instrumental for the generation of accurate predictors and robust tools for clinical decision support. we explored the application to gene expression data of rulex, a novel software suite including the attribute driven incremental discretization technique for transforming continuous variables into simplified discrete ones and the logic learning machine model for intelligible rule generation.


RESULTS
we applied rulex components to the problem of predicting the outcome of neuroblastoma patients on the bases of  <dig> probe sets nb-hypo gene expression signature. the resulting classifier consisted in  <dig> rules utilizing mainly two conditions of the relative expression of  <dig> probe sets. these rules were very effective predictors, as shown in an independent validation set, demonstrating the validity of the llm algorithm applied to microarray data and patients' classification. the llm performed as efficiently as prediction analysis of microarray and support vector machine, and outperformed other learning algorithms such as c <dig> . rulex carried out a feature selection by selecting a new signature  of  <dig> probe sets that turned out to be the most relevant in predicting outcome among the  <dig> of the nb-hypo signature. rules are easily interpretable as they involve only few conditions.

furthermore, we demonstrate that the application of a weighted classification associated with the rules improves the classification of poorly represented classes.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings provided evidence that the application of rulex to the expression values of nb-hypo signature created a set of accurate, high quality, consistent and interpretable rules for the prediction of neuroblastoma patients' outcome. we identified the rulex weighted classification as a flexible tool that can support clinical decisions. for these reasons, we consider rulex to be a useful tool for cancer classification from microarray gene expression data.

logic learning machineattribute driven incremental discretizationexplicit rulesnb-hypo-ii signatureneuroblastomahypoxiaclassifierweighted classification21- <dig> may  <dig> tenth annual meeting of the italian society of bioinformatics   udine, italy

