BACKGROUND
next-generation sequencing technology is an important tool for the rapid, genome-wide identification of genetic variations. however, it is difficult to resolve the ‘signal’ of variations of interest and the ‘noise’ of stochastic sequencing and bioinformatic errors in the large datasets that are generated. we report a simple approach to identify regional linkage to a trait that requires only two pools of dna to be sequenced from progeny of a defined genetic cross  at low coverage  and without parentage assignment of individual snps. the analysis relies on regional averaging of pooled snp frequencies to rapidly scan polymorphisms across the genome for differential regional homozygosity, which is then displayed graphically.


RESULTS
progeny from defined genetic crosses of tribolium castaneum  segregating for the phosphine resistance trait were exposed to phosphine to select for the resistance trait while the remainders were left unexposed. next generation sequencing was then carried out on the genomic dna from each pool of selected and unselected insects from each generation. the reads were mapped against the annotated t. castaneum genome from ncbi  and analysed for snp variations. since it is difficult to accurately call individual snp frequencies when the depth of sequence coverage is low, variant frequencies were averaged across larger regions. results from regional snp frequency averaging identified two loci, tc_rph <dig> on chromosome  <dig> and tc_rph <dig> on chromosome  <dig>  which together are responsible for high level resistance. identification of the two loci was possible with only 5-7× average coverage of the genome per dataset. these loci were subsequently confirmed by direct snp marker analysis and fine-scale mapping. individually, homozygosity of tc_rph <dig> or tc_rph <dig> results in only weak resistance to phosphine , whereas in combination they interact synergistically to provide a high-level resistance >200×. the tc_rph <dig> resistance allele resulted in a significant fitness cost relative to the wild type allele in unselected beetles over eighteen generations.


CONCLUSIONS
we have validated the technique of linkage mapping by low-coverage sequencing of progeny from a simple genetic cross. the approach relied on regional averaging of snp frequencies and was used to successfully identify candidate gene loci for phosphine resistance in t. castaneum. this is a relatively simple and rapid approach to identifying genomic regions associated with traits in defined genetic crosses that does not require any specialised statistical analysis.

insecticide resistancerhyzopertha dominicalinkage disequilibriumfitness costgene interactions

