BACKGROUND
the rationale for gathering information from plants procuring nitrogen through symbiotic interactions controlled by a common genetic program for a sustainable biofuel production is the high energy demanding application of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers. we curated sequence information publicly available for the biofuel plant sugarcane, performed an analysis of the common sym pathway known to control symbiosis in other plants, and provide results, sequences and literature links as an online database.

methods
sugarcane sequences and informations were downloaded from the nucest database, cleaned and trimmed with seqclean, assembled with tgicl plus translating mapping method, and annotated. the annotation is based on blast searches against a local formatted plant uniprot <dig> generated with cd-hit for functional assignment, rpsblast to cdd database for conserved domain analysis, and blast search to sorghum's for gene ontology  assignment. gene expression was normalized according the unigene standard, presented as ests/ <dig> kb. protein sequences known in the sym pathway were used as queries to search the symgrass sequence database. additionally, antimicrobial peptides described in the phytamp database served as queries to retrieve and generate expression profiles of these defense genes in the libraries compared to the libraries obtained under symbiotic interactions.


RESULTS
we describe the symgrass, a database of sugarcane orthologous genes involved in arbuscular mycorrhiza  and root nodule  symbiosis. the database aggregates knowledge about sequences, tissues, organ, developmental stages and experimental conditions, and provides annotation and level of gene expression for sugarcane transcripts and sym orthologous genes in sugarcane through a web interface. several candidate genes were found for all nodes in the pathway, and interestingly a set of symbiosis specific genes was found.


CONCLUSIONS
the knowledge integrated in symgrass may guide studies on molecular, cellular and physiological mechanisms by which sugarcane controls the establishment and efficiency of endophytic associations. we believe that the candidate sequences for the sym pathway together with the pool of exclusively expressed tentative consensus  sequences are crucial for the design of molecular studies to unravel the mechanisms controlling the establishment of symbioses in sugarcane, ultimately serving as a basis for the improvement of grass crops.

16- <dig> september  <dig> seventh international meeting on computational intelligence methods for bioinformatics and biostatistics  palermo, italy

