BACKGROUND
mass spectrometry for biological data analysis is an active field of research, providing an efficient way of high-throughput proteome screening. a popular variant of mass spectrometry is seldi, which is often used to measure sample populations with the goal of developing  classifiers. unfortunately, not only is the data resulting from such measurements quite noisy, variance between replicate measurements of the same sample can be high as well. normalisation of spectra can greatly reduce the effect of this technical variance and further improve the quality and interpretability of the data. however, it is unclear which normalisation method yields the most informative result.


RESULTS
in this paper, we describe the first systematic comparison of a wide range of normalisation methods, using two objectives that should be met by a good method. these objectives are minimisation of inter-spectra variance and maximisation of signal with respect to class separation. the former is assessed using an estimation of the coefficient of variation, the latter using the classification performance of three types of classifiers on real-world datasets representing two-class diagnostic problems. to obtain a maximally robust evaluation of a normalisation method, both objectives are evaluated over multiple datasets and multiple configurations of baseline correction and peak detection methods. results are assessed for statistical significance and visualised to reveal the performance of each normalisation method, in particular with respect to using no normalisation. the normalisation methods described have been implemented in the freely available masda r-package.


CONCLUSIONS
in the general case, normalisation of mass spectra is beneficial to the quality of data. the majority of methods we compared performed significantly better than the case in which no normalisation was used. we have shown that normalisation methods that scale spectra by a factor based on the dispersion  of the data clearly outperform those where a factor based on the central location  is used. additional improvements in performance are obtained when these factors are estimated locally, using a sliding window within spectra, instead of globally, over full spectra. the underperforming category of methods using a globally estimated factor based on the central location of the data includes the method used by the majority of seldi users.

