BACKGROUND
marek’s disease  is a commercially important neoplastic disease of chickens caused by the marek’s disease virus , a naturally occurring oncogenic alphaherpesvirus. enhancing md genetic resistance is desirable to augment current vaccines and other md control measures. high throughput sequencing was used to profile splenic transcriptomes from individual f <dig> progeny infected with mdv at  <dig> days of age from both outbred broilers  and inbred layer  chicken lines that differed in md genetic resistance. the resulting information was used to identify snps, genes, and biological pathways exhibiting allele-specific expression  in response to mdv infection in each type of chicken. in addition, we compared and contrasted the results of pathway analyses ) between chicken types to help inform on the biological response to mdv infection.


RESULTS
with  <dig> individuals per line and treatment group providing high power, we identified  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms  in  <dig>  genes and  <dig>  snps in  <dig>  genes in broilers and layers, respectively, that exhibited ase in response to mdv infection. furthermore,  <dig> and  <dig> genes in broilers and layers, respectively, were found to show de following mdv infection. comparing the datasets, only  <dig> snps and  <dig> genes for ase and  <dig> genes for de were common between the two bird types. although the chicken types used in this study were genetically different, at the pathway level, both tlr receptor and jak/stat signaling pathways were enriched as well as exhibiting a high proportion of ase genes, especially at the beginning of both above mentioned regulatory pathways.


CONCLUSIONS
rna sequencing with adequate biological replicates is a powerful approach to identify high confidence snps, genes, and pathways that are associated with transcriptional response to mdv infection. in addition, the snps exhibiting ase in response to mdv infection provide a strong foundation for determining the extent to which variation in expression influences md incidence plus yield genetic markers for genomic selection. however, given the paucity of overlap among ase snp sets , it is likely that separate screens need to be incorporated for each population. finally, comparison of gene lists obtained between these two diverse chicken types indicate the tlr and jak/stat signaling are conserved when responding to mdv infection and may be altered by selection of genes exhibiting ase found at the start of each pathway.

marek’s diseasegenetic resistancerna-seqallele-specific expressionbiological pathways

