BACKGROUND
the order tetraodontiformes consists of approximately  <dig> species of fishes in nine families. members of the order exhibit striking morphological diversity and radiated into various habitats such as freshwater, brackish and coastal waters, open seas, and deep waters along continental shelves and slopes. despite extensive studies based on both morphology and molecules, there has been no clear resolution except for monophyly of each family and sister-group relationships of diodontidae + tetraodontidae and balistidae + monacanthidae. to address phylogenetic questions of tetraodontiform fishes, we used whole mitochondrial genome  sequences from  <dig> selected species  that fully represent all families and subfamilies of tetraodontiformes . partitioned maximum likelihood  and bayesian analyses were performed on two data sets comprising concatenated nucleotide sequences from  <dig> protein-coding genes ,  <dig> transfer rna and two ribosomal rna genes .


RESULTS
the resultant tree topologies from the two data sets were congruent, with many internal branches showing high support values. the mitogenomic data strongly supported monophyly of all families and subfamilies  and sister-group relationships of balistidae + monacanthidae and tetraodontidae + diodontidae, confirming the results of previous studies. however, we also found two unexpected basal splits into tetraodontoidei  and triacanthodoidei .


CONCLUSIONS
this basal split into the two clades has never been reported and challenges previously proposed hypotheses based on both morphology and nuclear gene sequences. it is likely that the basal split had involved ecological diversification, because most members of tetraodontoidei exclusively occur in shallow waters , while those of triacanthodoidei occur mainly in relatively deep waters along continental shelves and slopes except for more derived ostraciids. this suggests that the basal split between the two clades led to subsequent radiation into the two different habitats.

