BACKGROUND
bacterial lung infections are a major cause of economic losses in the pig industry; they are responsible for approximately 50% of the antibiotics used in pigs and, therefore, also present an increasing concern to consumer protection agencies. in response to this changing market we investigated the feasibility of an old approach aimed at the breeding selection of more resistant pigs. as a first step in this direction we applied a new respiratory health score system to study the susceptibility of four different pig breeding lines  towards the respiratory tract pathogen actinobacillus  pleuropneumoniae.


RESULTS
a controlled experimental aerosol infection with an a. pleuropneumoniae serotype  <dig> isolate was performed using  <dig> weaning pigs of defined breeding lines from the breeds german landrace, piétrain, hamphire, and large white. pigs were clinically assessed on days  <dig> and  <dig> post infection following a novel scoring system, the respiratory health score , which combines clinical, sonographic and radiographic examination results. the ranking on day  <dig> was significantly correlated with the ranking based on the pathomorphological lung lesion score . based on their rhs pigs were assigned to the different quartiles independent of the breeding line. the rhs-based rankings of pigs on day  <dig> and on day  <dig> were highly correlated  independent of the breeding line. pigs of the hampshire line were predominantly found in the lowest scoring quartile  and absent in the highest scoring quartile. in contrast, pigs of the german landrace and piétrain breeding lines were predominantly found in the highest scoring quartile .


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate that the rhs obtained from live pigs shows a highly significant correlation to the lung lesion score considered as a "gold standard". the correlation of the ranking at days  <dig> and  <dig> post infection implies that the course of disease is highly dependent on the acute lung damage. the different severity of signs among the tested pig breeding lines clearly suggests a genetic difference in the susceptibility of pigs to a. pleuropneumoniae infection.

