BACKGROUND
dapunpv , presented in this report, belongs to alphabaculovirus group ib. its full, newly sequenced genome shows close relationship to baculovirus opmnpv isolated from douglas-fir tussock moth orgyia pseudotsugata. baculovirus dapunpv is a natural limiter of pale tussock moth dasychira pudibunda l. , which can occur in a form of an outbreak on many species of deciduous trees and may cause significant economic losses in the forests.

methods
late instars dead larvae of pale tussock moth were mechanically homogenized and polyhedra were purified during series of ultracentrifugation. viral dna was extarcted and sequenced using miseq illumina platform.  <dig>  paired reads were used for de novo assembling. genome annotation, multiple allingment to others baculoviruses and phylogegentic analises were perform with the use of multiple bioinformatic tools like: glimmer <dig>  hmmer web server, geneious  <dig> and mega <dig> 


RESULTS
the genome of dapunpv is  <dig>  bp long with at pairs content  <dig>  %. the predicted number of encoded putative open reading frames  is  <dig> and six of them demonstrate low or no homology to orfs previously found in baculoviruses. dapunpv genome shows very high similarity to opmnpv in a nucleotide sequence  and gene content , though some major differences  have also been noted.


CONCLUSIONS
similarly to other members of the baculoviridae family, dapunpv baculovirus possesses highly conserved core genes. among them, there is a second copy of occluded derived virus envelope  <dig> protein , which was previously found only in a member of alphabaculovirus group ii – lyxymnpv . surprisingly enough, dapunpv and lyxymnpv genomes share also another feature. phylogenetic analysis of chitin binding family protein  indicates significant similarity of those two baculoviruses from distinct evolutionary groups which infect the same hosts from lymantriidae. the ubiquitin like family gene , which has not been described until now, is another characteristic component of dapunpv genome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
baculovirusnext generation sequencingdapunpvpale tussock mothdasychira pudibundaopmnpvissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

