BACKGROUND
insecticide resistance is a major challenge for the control program of insect pests in the fields of crop protection, human and animal health etc. resistance to different insecticides is conferred by the proteins encoded from certain class of genes of the insects. to distinguish the insecticide resistant proteins from non-resistant proteins, no computational tool is available till date. thus, development of such a computational tool will be helpful in predicting the insecticide resistant proteins, which can be targeted for developing appropriate insecticides.


RESULTS
five different sets of feature viz., amino acid composition , di-peptide composition , pseudo amino acid composition , composition-transition-distribution  and auto-correlation function  were used to map the protein sequences into numeric feature vectors. the encoded numeric vectors were then used as input in support vector machine  for classification of insecticide resistant and non-resistant proteins. higher accuracies were obtained under rbf kernel than that of other kernels. further, accuracies were observed to be higher for dpc feature set as compared to others. the proposed approach achieved an overall accuracy of >90% in discriminating resistant from non-resistant proteins. further, the two classes of resistant proteins i.e., detoxification-based and target-based were discriminated from non-resistant proteins with >95% accuracy. besides, >95% accuracy was also observed for discrimination of proteins involved in detoxification- and target-based resistance mechanisms. the proposed approach not only outperformed blastp, psi-blast and delta-blast algorithms, but also achieved >92% accuracy while assessed using an independent dataset of  <dig> insecticide resistant proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
this paper presents the first computational approach for discriminating the insecticide resistant proteins from non-resistant proteins. based on the proposed approach, an online prediction server dirprot has also been developed for computational prediction of insecticide resistant proteins, which is accessible at http://cabgrid.res.in:8080/dirprot/. the proposed approach is believed to supplement the efforts needed to develop dynamic insecticides in wet-lab by targeting the insecticide resistant proteins.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
insecticide resistancesvmdi-peptide compositioncytochrome p450gabahttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001503indian council of agricultural researchagril.edn.4-1/2013-a&p dated  <dig> .2014issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

