BACKGROUND
batrachochytrium dendrobatidis , the causative agent of chytridiomycosis, is decimating amphibians worldwide. unsurprisingly, the majority of studies have therefore concentrated on documenting morbidity and mortality of susceptible species and projecting population consequences as a consequence of this emerging infectious disease. currently, there is a paucity of studies investigating the sub-lethal costs of bd in apparently asymptomatic species, particularly in controlled experimental conditions. here we report the consequences of a single dose of b. dendrobatidis zoospores on captive adult palmate newts  for morphological and behavioural traits that associate with reproductive success.


RESULTS
a single exposure to ~ <dig> zoospores induced a subclinical bd infection. one week after inoculation 84% of newts tested positive for bd, and of those, 98% had apparently lost the infection by the day  <dig>  however, exposed newts suffered significant mass loss compared with control newts, and those experimental newts removing higher levels of bd lost most mass. we found no evidence to suggest that three secondary sexual characteristics  were reduced between experimental versus control newts; in fact, rear foot webbing was 26% more expansive at the end of the experiment in exposed newts. finally, compared with unexposed controls, exposure to bd was associated with a 50% earlier initiation of the non-reproductive terrestrial phase.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that bd has measureable, but sub-lethal effects, on adult palmate newts, at least under the laboratory conditions presented. we conclude that the effects reported are most likely to be mediated through the initiation of costly immune responses and/or tissue repair mechanisms. although we found no evidence of hastened secondary sexual trait regression, through reducing individual body condition and potentially, breeding season duration, we predict that bd exposure might have negative impacts on populations of palmate newts through reducing individual reproductive success and adult recruitment.

body conditioncost of immunitychytridiomycosisemerging infectious diseaseresistancesecondary sexual traits

