BACKGROUND
the post-genomic era poses several challenges. the biggest is the identification of biochemical function for protein sequences and structures resulting from genomic initiatives. most sequences lack a characterized function and are annotated as hypothetical or uncharacterized. while homology-based methods are useful, and work well for sequences with sequence identities above 50%, they fail for sequences in the twilight zone  of sequence identity. for cases where sequence methods fail, structural approaches are often used, based on the premise that structure preserves function for longer evolutionary time-frames than sequence alone. it is now clear that no single method can be used successfully for functional inference. given the growing need for functional assignments, we describe here a systematic new approach, designated ligand-centric, which is primarily based on analysis of ligand-bound/unbound structures in the pdb. results of applying our approach to s-adenosyl-l-methionine  binding proteins are presented.


RESULTS
our analysis included  <dig>  structures that belong to  <dig> unique families of the protein information resource superfamily system. our ligand-centric approach was divided into four levels: residue, protein/domain, ligand, and family levels. the residue level included the identification of conserved binding site residues based on structure-guided sequence alignments of representative members of a family, and the identification of conserved structural motifs. the protein/domain level included structural classification of proteins, pfam domains, domain architectures, and protein topologies. the ligand level included ligand conformations, ribose sugar puckering, and the identification of conserved ligand-atom interactions. the family level included phylogenetic analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
we found that sam bound to a total of  <dig> different fold types . we identified  <dig> new fold types and  <dig> additional topological arrangements of strands within the well-studied rossmann fold methyltransferases . this extends the existing structural classification of sam binding proteins. a striking correlation between fold type and the conformation of the bound sam  was found across the  <dig> fold types. several site-specific rules were created for the assignment of functional residues to families and proteins that do not have a bound sam or a solved structure.

