BACKGROUND
behavioral traits such as sociability, emotional reactivity and aggressiveness are major factors in animal adaptation to breeding conditions. in order to investigate the genetic control of these traits as well as their relationships with production traits, a study was undertaken on a large second generation cross  between two lines of japanese quail divergently selected on their social reinstatement behavior. all the birds were measured for several social behaviors , behaviors measuring the emotional reactivity of the birds , and production traits .


RESULTS
we report the results of the first genome-wide qtl detection based on a medium density snp panel obtained from whole genome sequencing of a pool of individuals from each divergent line. a genetic map was constructed using  <dig> markers among which  <dig> could be positioned on  <dig> different linkage groups. the sex-averaged linkage map spanned a total of 3057 cm with an average marker spacing of  <dig>  cm. with the exception of a few regions, the marker order was the same in japanese quail and the chicken, which confirmed a well conserved synteny between the two species. the linkage analyses performed using qtlmap software revealed a total of  <dig> qtls related either to behavioral  or production  traits. the most numerous qtls  concerned social motivation traits. interestingly, our results pinpointed putative pleiotropic regions which controlled emotional reactivity and body-weight of birds  or their social motivation and the onset of egg laying .


CONCLUSIONS
this study identified several qtl regions for social and emotional behaviors in the quail. further research will be needed to refine the qtl and confirm or refute the role of candidate genes, which were suggested by bioinformatics analysis. it can be hoped that the identification of genes and polymorphisms related to behavioral traits in the quail will have further applications for other poultry species  and will contribute to solving animal welfare issues in poultry production.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

