BACKGROUND
newcastle disease , which is caused by the newcastle disease virus , is one of the most important avian diseases in poultry. since its discovery in  <dig>  nd has caused great economic losses to the world poultry industry and remains a threat to chickens and wild birds. although a stringent vaccination policy is widely adopted to control nd, nd outbreaks still occur, and virulent ndv is sporadically isolated from chickens and wild birds. to study the pathogenesis of nd and provide tools to prevent its prevalence, novel antibody fragments should be developed. the variable domains of the heavy chain of the heavy-chain antibodies  are the smallest naturally occurring antibodies derived from camelid heavy-chain antibodies. the comparatively small size, high affinity, high solubility, low immunogenicity and ability to bind epitopes inaccessible to conventional antibodies of vhh make them ideal candidates for a considerable number of therapeutic and biotechnological applications. however, an anti-ndv vhh has not been reported to date.


RESULTS
in this study, a vhh yeast two-hybrid library was constructed from ndv vaccine immunized c. bactrianus, and seven vhh fragments to the haemagglutinin-neuraminidase  protein of ndv were successfully screened and characterized for the first time. these selected vhh clones were all expressed as soluble protein in e. coli. elisa, dot blot, immunocytochemistry and pull down results showed that the screened vhhs could interact with ndv virion, among which five had neutralizing activity. in addition, the seven vhhs could inhibit the haemagglutination activity of different ndv strains.


CONCLUSIONS
we constructed an ndv-immunized vhh yeast two-hybrid library and screened and characterized seven vhhs targeting ndv hn protein for the first time. the seven vhhs may have great potential for ndv diagnosis, pathogenesis and therapeutics.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
newcastle disease virusvhhhn proteinyeast two-hybridissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

