BACKGROUND
the cell cycle and cellular oxidative stress responses are tightly controlled for proper growth and development of scots pine  seed. programmed cell death  is an integral part of the embryogenesis during which megagametophyte cells in the embryo surrounding region  and cells in the nucellar layers face death. in the present study, we show both the tissue and developmental stage specific expression of the genes encoding the autophagy related atg <dig>  catalase , and retinoblastoma related protein  as well as the connection between the gene expressions and cell death programs.


RESULTS
we found strong cat expression in the cells of the developing embryo throughout the embryogenesis as well as in the cells of the megagametophyte and the nucellar layers at the early embryogeny. the cat expression was found to overlap with both the atg <dig> expression and hydrogen peroxide localization. at the late embryogeny, cat expression diminished in the dying cells of the nucellar layers as well as in megagametophyte cells, showing the first signs of incipient cell death. accumulation of starch and minor rbr expression were characteristic of megagametophyte cells in the esr, whereas strong rbr expression was found in the cells of the nucellar layers at the late embryogeny.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that atg <dig>  cat, and rbr are involved in the scots pine embryogenesis and cell death processes. cat seems to protect cells against hydrogen peroxide accumulation and oxidative stress related cell death especially during active metabolism. the opposite expression of rbr in the esr and nucellar layers alongside morphological characteristics emphasizes the different type of the cell death processes in these tissues. furthermore, the changes in atg <dig> and rbr expressions specifically in the megagametophyte cells dying by necrotic cell death suggest the genetic regulation of developmental necrosis in scots pine embryogenesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
autophagycatalaseconiferdevelopmental cell deathembryogenesismegagametophytepinusretinoblastoma-related proteinscots pineseed developmentissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

