BACKGROUND
dna methylation has essential roles in transcriptional regulation, imprinting, x chromosome inactivation and other cellular processes, and aberrant cpg methylation is directly involved in the pathogenesis of human imprinting disorders and many cancers. to address the need for a quantitative and highly multiplexed bisulfite sequencing method with long read lengths for targeted cpg methylation analysis, we developed single-molecule real-time bisulfite sequencing .


RESULTS
optimized bisulfite conversion and pcr conditions enabled the amplification of dna fragments up to ~ <dig>  kb, and subjecting overlapping 625–1491 bp amplicons to smrt-bs indicated high reproducibility across all amplicon lengths  and low standard deviations  between individual cpg sites sequenced in triplicate. higher variability in cpg methylation quantitation was correlated with reduced sequencing depth, particularly for intermediately methylated regions. smrt-bs was validated by orthogonal bisulfite-based microarray  and second generation sequencing ; however, longer smrt-bs amplicons  had reduced, but very acceptable, correlation with both orthogonal methods  compared to amplicons less than ~ <dig>  kb . multiplexing utility was assessed by simultaneously subjecting four distinct cpg island amplicons  and  <dig> hematological malignancy cell lines to smrt-bs , which identified a spectrum of highly quantitative methylation levels across all interrogated cpg sites and cell lines.


CONCLUSIONS
smrt-bs is a novel, accurate and cost-effective targeted cpg methylation method that is amenable to a high degree of multiplexing with minimal clonal pcr artifacts. increased sequencing depth is necessary when interrogating longer amplicons  and the previously reported bisulfite sequencing pcr bias towards unmethylated dna should be considered when measuring intermediately methylated regions. coupled with an optimized bisulfite pcr protocol, smrt-bs is capable of interrogating ~ <dig>  kb amplicons, which theoretically can cover ~91% of cpg islands in the human genome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dna methylationcpg islandsbisulfite sequencinglong-read sequencingthird generation sequencingsingle-molecule real-time  sequencingpacific bioscienceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

