BACKGROUND
enteropathogenic escherichia coli  is distinguished mainly by the presence of epec adherence factor plasmid  in typical epec  and its absence in atypical epec . the initial adherence to the intestinal mucosa is complex and mediated by adhesins other than bundle-forming pilus, which is not produced by aepec. extracellular matrix  proteins of eukaryotic cells are commonly recognized by bacterial adhesins. therefore, binding to ecm proteins may facilitate colonization, invasion and/or signaling by intestinal pathogens. previous studies from our group demonstrated that aepec o26:h <dig>  showed high binding activity to fibronectin, not shared by its counterpart, aepec o26:hnm.


RESULTS
in the present study, using mass spectrometry after fibronectin-associated immunoprecipitation, two proteins, flagellin  and groel , were identified and ba <dig> binding ability to fibronectin was inhibited in the presence of anti-h <dig> and anti-groel sera, but not by either naïve rabbit or other unrelated sera. it was also observed that the presence of purified flagellin inhibits adhesion of ba <dig> to cellular fibronectin in a dose-dependent manner. additionally, ba <dig> groel is similar to the same protein of uropathogenic e. coli.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that flagellin may play a role in the in vitro interaction of ba <dig> with cellular fibronectin, and groel can be an accessory protein in this process.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
atypical epecbindingfibronectinflagellingroelsão paulo research foundation 06/05145-0piazza roxane m. f. são paulo research foundation 04/12136-5elias waldir p. são paulo research foundation 06/58303-5rossato sarita s. conselho nacional de desenvolvimento científico e tecnológico 470648/2008-2piazza roxane m. f. fondo nacional de desarrollo científico y tecnológico 1120809farfan mauricio j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

