BACKGROUND
in this study, we investigated the individual and combinatorial effect of elevated co <dig> conditions and salinity stress on the dynamics of both the transcriptional and metabolic physiology of arabidopsis thaliana liquid hydroponic cultures over the first  <dig> hours of continuous treatment. both perturbations are of particular interest in plant and agro-biotechnological applications. moreover, within the timeframe of this experiment, they are expected to affect plant growth to opposite directions. thus, a major objective was to investigate whether this expected "divergence" was valid for the individual perturbations and to study how it is manifested under the combined stress at two molecular levels of cellular function, using high-throughput analyses.


RESULTS
we observed that a) high salinity has stronger effect than elevated co <dig> at both the transcriptional and metabolic levels, b) the transcriptional responses to the salinity and combined stresses exhibit strong similarity, implying a robust transcriptional machinery acting to the salinity stress independent of the co-occurrence of elevated co <dig>  c) the combinatorial effect of the two perturbations on the metabolic physiology is milder than of the salinity stress alone. metabolomic analysis suggested that the beneficial role of elevated co <dig> on salt-stressed plants within the timeframe of this study should be attributed to the provided additional resources; these allow the plants to respond to high salinity without having to forfeit other major metabolic functions, and d)  <dig> h- <dig> h and  <dig> h of treatment coincide with significant changes in the metabolic physiology under any of the investigated stresses. significant differences between the acute and longer term responses were observed at both molecular levels.


CONCLUSIONS
this study contributes large-scale dynamic omic data from two levels of cellular function for a plant system under various stresses. it provides an additional example of the power of integrated omic analyses for the comprehensive study of the molecular physiology of complex biological systems. moreover, taking into consideration the particular interest of the two investigated perturbations in plant biotechnology, enhanced understanding of the molecular physiology of the plants under these conditions could lead to the design of novel metabolic engineering strategies to increase the resistance of commercial crops to salinity stress.

