BACKGROUND
the complex balance between environmental and host factors is an important determinant of susceptibility to infection. disturbances of this equilibrium may result in multifactorial diseases as illustrated by the summer mortality syndrome, a worldwide and complex phenomenon that affects the oysters, crassostrea gigas. the summer mortality syndrome reveals a physiological intolerance making this oyster species susceptible to diseases. exploration of genetic basis governing the oyster resistance or susceptibility to infections is thus a major goal for understanding field mortality events. in this context, we used high-throughput genomic approaches to identify genetic traits that may characterize inherent survival capacities in c. gigas.


RESULTS
using digital gene expression , we analyzed the transcriptomes of hemocytes  of oysters able or not able to survive infections by vibrio species shown to be involved in summer mortalities. hemocytes were nonlethally collected from oysters before vibrio experimental infection, and two dge libraries were generated from individuals that survived or did not survive. exploration of dge data and microfluidic qpcr analyses at individual level showed an extraordinary polymorphism in gene expressions, but also a set of hemocyte-expressed genes whose basal mrna levels discriminate oyster capacity to survive infections by the pathogenic v. splendidus lgp <dig>  finally, we identified a signature of  <dig> genes that predicted oyster survival capacity. their expressions are likely driven by distinct transcriptional regulation processes associated or not associated to gene copy number variation .


CONCLUSIONS
we provide here for the first time in oyster a gene expression survival signature that represents a useful tool for understanding mortality events and for assessing genetic traits of interest for disease resistance selection programs.

marine invertebratemollusk bivalvemass mortalitytranscriptome-wide analysisdigital gene expressionmicrofluidic qpcrsurvival signaturepolymorphismgene copy numbersurvival predictive biomarkers

