BACKGROUND
some clover species, particularly trifolium subterraneum, have previously been reported to have highly unusual plastomes, relative to closely related legumes, enlarged with many duplications, gene losses and the presence of dna unique to trifolium, which may represent horizontal transfer. in order to pinpoint the evolutionary origin of this phenomenon within the genus trifolium, we sequenced and assembled the plastomes of eight additional trifolium species widely sampled from across the genus.


RESULTS
the trifolium plastomes fell into two groups: those of trifolium boissieri, t. strictum and t. glanduliferum  were tractable, assembled readily and were not unusual in the general context of fabeae plastomes. the other trifolium species  proved refractory to assembly mainly because of numerous short duplications. these species form a single clade, which we call the “refractory clade” . the characteristics of the refractory clade are the presence of numerous short duplications and 7-15% longer genomes than the tractable species. molecular dating estimates that the origin of the most recent common ancestor  of the refractory clade is approximately  <dig>  million years ago . this is considerably younger than the estimated mrca ages of trifolium  and trifolium subg. trifolium .


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the unusual repetitive plastome type previously characterized in trifolium subterraneum had a single origin within trifolium and is characteristic of most  species of subgenus trifolium. it appears that an ancestral plastome within trifolium underwent an evolutionary change resulting in plastomes that either actively promoted, were permissive to, or were unable to control, duplications within the genome. the precise mechanism of this important change in the mode and tempo of plastome evolution deserves further investigation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
trifoliumcloverplastome evolutionplastid genome evolutionrepetitive dnafabaceaeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

