BACKGROUND
we studied patterns of molecular adaptation in the wild mediterranean legume medicago truncatula. we focused on two phenotypic traits that are not functionally linked: flowering time and perception of symbiotic microbes. phenology is an important fitness component, especially for annual plants, and many instances of molecular adaptation have been reported for genes involved in flowering pathways. while perception of symbiotic microbes is also integral to adaptation in many plant species, very few reports of molecular adaptation exist for symbiotic genes. here we used data from  <dig> individuals and  <dig> gene fragments to quantify the overall strength of both positive and purifying selection in m. truncatula and asked if footprints of positive selection can be detected at key genes of rhizobia recognition pathways.


RESULTS
we examined nucleotide variation among  <dig> accessions from natural populations in  <dig> gene fragments:  <dig> genes involved in nitrogen-fixing bacteria recognition,  <dig> genes involved in flowering, and  <dig> genes used as control loci. we detected  <dig> polymorphic sites yielding an average nucleotide diversity  of  <dig>  per site. non-synonymous variation is under sizable purifying selection with 90% of amino-acid changing mutations being strongly selected against. accessions were structured in two groups consistent with geographical origins. each of these two groups harboured an excess of rare alleles, relative to expectations of a constant-sized population, suggesting recent population expansion. using coalescent simulations and an approximate bayesian computation framework we detected several instances of genes departing from selective neutrality within each group and showed that the polymorphism of two nodulation and four flowering genes has probably been shaped by recent positive selection.


CONCLUSIONS
we quantify the intensity of purifying selection in the m. truncatula genome and show that putative footprints of natural selection can be detected at different time scales in both flowering and symbiotic pathways.

