BACKGROUND
the food and drug administration  approved drug labels contain a broad array of information, ranging from adverse drug reactions  to drug efficacy, risk-benefit consideration, and more. however, the labeling language used to describe these information is free text often containing ambiguous semantic descriptions, which poses a great challenge in retrieving useful information from the labeling text in a consistent and accurate fashion for comparative analysis across drugs. consequently, this task has largely relied on the manual reading of the full text by experts, which is time consuming and labor intensive.

method
in this study, a novel text mining method with unsupervised learning in nature, called topic modeling, was applied to the drug labeling with a goal of discovering “topics” that group drugs with similar safety concerns and/or therapeutic uses together. a total of  <dig> fda-approved drug labels were used in this study. first, the three labeling sections  of each drug label were processed by the medical dictionary for regulatory activities  to convert the free text of each label to the standard adr terms. next, the topic modeling approach with latent dirichlet allocation  was applied to generate  <dig> topics, each associated with a set of drugs grouped together based on the probability analysis. lastly, the efficacy of the topic modeling was evaluated based on known information about the therapeutic uses and safety data of drugs.


RESULTS
the results demonstrate that drugs grouped by topics are associated with the same safety concerns and/or therapeutic uses with statistical significance . the identified topics have distinct context that can be directly linked to specific adverse events  or therapeutic application . we were also able to identify potential adverse events that might arise from specific medications via topics.


CONCLUSIONS
the successful application of topic modeling on the fda drug labeling demonstrates its potential utility as a hypothesis generation means to infer hidden relationships of concepts such as, in this study, drug safety and therapeutic use in the study of biomedical documents.

1- <dig> april  <dig> eighth annual mcbios conference. computational biology and bioinformatics for a new decade college station, tx, usa

