BACKGROUND
with the development of inexpensive, high-throughput sequencing technologies, it has become feasible to examine questions related to population genetics and molecular evolution of non-model species in their ecological contexts on a genome-wide scale. here, we employed a newly developed suite of integrated, web-based programs to examine population dynamics and signatures of selection across the genome using several well-established tests, including fst, pn/ps, and mcdonald-kreitman. we applied these techniques to study populations of honey bees  in east africa. in kenya, there are several described a. mellifera subspecies, which are thought to be localized to distinct ecological regions.


RESULTS
we performed whole genome sequencing of  <dig> worker honey bees from apiaries distributed throughout kenya and identified  <dig>  million putative single-nucleotide polymorphisms. the dense coverage allowed us to apply several computational procedures to study population structure and the evolutionary relationships among the populations, and to detect signs of adaptive evolution across the genome. while there is considerable gene flow among the sampled populations, there are clear distinctions between populations from the northern desert region and those from the temperate, savannah region. we identified several genes showing population genetic patterns consistent with positive selection within african bee populations, and between these populations and european a. mellifera or asian apis florea.


CONCLUSIONS
these results lay the groundwork for future studies of adaptive ecological evolution in honey bees, and demonstrate the use of new, freely available web-based tools and workflows  that can be applied to any model system with genomic information.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
apis melliferagalaxygenome sequencingadaptive evolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

