BACKGROUND
the low seed vigor and poor field emergence are main factors that restricting the extension of sweet corn in china. spermidine  plays an important role in plant growth and development, but little is known about the effect of spd on sweet corn seed germination. therefore the effect of exogenous spd on seed germination and physiological and biochemical changes during seed imbibition of xiantian no. <dig> were investigated in this study.


RESULTS
spd soaking treatment not only improved seed germination percentage but also significantly enhanced seed vigor which was indicated by higher germination index, vigor index, shoot heights and dry weights of shoot and root compared with the control; while exogenous cha, the biosynthesis inhibitor of spd, significantly inhibited seed germination and declined seed vigor. spd application significantly increased endogenous spd, gibberellins and ethylene contents and simultaneously reduced aba concentration in embryos during seed imbibition. in addition, the effects of exogenous spd on h2o <dig> and mda productions were also analyzed. enhanced h2o <dig> concentration was observed in spd-treated seed embryo, while no significant difference of mda level in seed embryo was observed between spd treatment and control. however, the lower h2o <dig> and significantly higher mda contents than control were detected in cha-treated seed embryos.


CONCLUSIONS
the results suggested that spd contributing to fast seed germination and high seed vigor of sweet corn might be closely related with the metabolism of hormones including gibberellins, aba and ethylene, and with the increase of h2o <dig> in the radical produced partly from spd oxidation. in addition, spd might play an important role in cell membrane integrity maintaining.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gene expressionh2o2phytohormoneseed germinationspermidinesweet cornagro-scientific research in the public interest201203052hu jin http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3137170831201279guan yajing hu jin http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004731natural science foundation of zhejiang provincely15c130002lz14c130002guan yajing hu jin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

