BACKGROUND
malate synthase, one of the two enzymes unique to the glyoxylate cycle, is found in all three domains of life, and is crucial to the utilization of two-carbon compounds for net biosynthetic pathways such as gluconeogenesis. in addition to the main isoforms a and g, so named because of their differential expression in e. coli grown on either acetate or glycolate respectively, a third distinct isoform has been identified. these three isoforms differ considerably in size and sequence conservation. the a isoform  comprises ~ <dig> residues, the g isoform  is ~ <dig> residues, and this third isoform  is ~ <dig> residues in length. both isoforms a and g have been structurally characterized in detail, but no structures have been reported for the h isoform which has been found thus far only in members of the halophilic archaea.


RESULTS
we have solved the structure of a malate synthase h  isoform member from haloferax volcanii in complex with glyoxylate at  <dig>  Å resolution, and also as a ternary complex with acetyl-coenzyme a and pyruvate at  <dig>  Å. like the a and g isoforms, msh is based on a β8/α <dig>  barrel. unlike previously solved malate synthase structures which are all monomeric, this enzyme is found in the native state as a trimer/hexamer equilibrium. compared to isoforms a and g, msh displays deletion of an n-terminal domain and a smaller deletion at the c-terminus. the msh active site is closely superimposable with those of msa and msg, with the ternary complex indicating a nucleophilic attack on pyruvate by the enolate intermediate of acetyl-coenzyme a.


CONCLUSIONS
the reported structures of msh from haloferax volcanii allow a detailed analysis and comparison with previously solved structures of isoforms a and g. these structural comparisons provide insight into evolutionary relationships among these isoforms, and also indicate that despite the size and sequence variation, and the truncated c-terminal domain of the h isoform, the catalytic mechanism is conserved. sequence analysis in light of the structure indicates that additional members of isoform h likely exist in the databases but have been misannotated.

