BACKGROUND
capripox viruses are economically important pathogens in goat and sheep producing areas of the world, with specific focus on goat pox virus , sheep pox virus  and the lumpy skin disease virus . clinically, sheep pox and goat pox have the same symptoms and cannot be distinguished serologically. this presents a real need for a rapid, inexpensive, and easy to operate and maintain genotyping tool to facilitate accurate disease diagnosis and surveillance for better management of capripox outbreaks.


RESULTS
a lamp method was developed for the specific differential detection of gtpv and sppv using three sets of lamp primers designed on the basis of itr sequences. reactions were performed at 62°c for either  <dig> or 60 min, and specificity confirmed by successful differential detection of several gtpv and sppv isolates. no cross reactivity with orf virus, foot-and-mouth disease virus , a. marginale lushi isolate, mycoplasma mycoides subsp. capri, chlamydophila psittaci, theileria ovis, t. luwenshuni, t. uilenbergi or babesia sp was noted. rflp-pcr analysis of  <dig> preserved epidemic materials revealed  <dig> samples infected with goat pox and  <dig> infected with sheep pox, with lamp test results showing a positive detection for all samples. when utilizing gtpv and sppv genomic dna, the universal lamp primers  and gtpv lamp primers displayed a 100% detection rate; while the sppv lamp detection rate was  <dig> %, consistent with the laboratory tested results.


CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the three sets of lamp primers when combined provide an analytically robust method able to fully distinguish between gtpv and sppv. the presented lamp method provides a specific, sensitive and rapid diagnostic tool for the distinction of gtpv and sppv infections, with the potential to be standardized as a detection method for capripox viruses in endemic areas.

goat pox virus sheep pox virus inverted terminal repeat  regionsloop-mediated isothermal amplification differential diagnosis

