BACKGROUND
24-hour biological clocks are intimately connected to the cellular signalling network, which complicates the analysis of clock mechanisms. the transcriptional regulator toc <dig>  is a founding component of the gene circuit in the plant circadian clock. recent results show that toc <dig> suppresses transcription of multiple target genes within the clock circuit, far beyond its previously-described regulation of the morning transcription factors lhy  and cca <dig> . it is unclear how this pervasive effect of toc <dig> affects the dynamics of the clock and its outputs. toc <dig> also appears to function in a nested feedback loop that includes signalling by the plant hormone abscisic acid , which is upregulated by abiotic stresses, such as drought. aba treatments both alter toc <dig> levels and affect the clock’s timing behaviour. conversely, the clock rhythmically modulates physiological processes induced by aba, such as the closing of stomata in the leaf epidermis. in order to understand the dynamics of the clock and its outputs under changing environmental conditions, the reciprocal interactions between the clock and other signalling pathways must be integrated.


RESULTS
we extended the mathematical model of the plant clock gene circuit by incorporating the repression of multiple clock genes by toc <dig>  observed experimentally. the revised model more accurately matches the data on the clock’s molecular profiles and timing behaviour, explaining the clock’s responses in toc <dig> over-expression and toc <dig> mutant plants. a simplified representation of aba signalling allowed us to investigate the interactions of aba and circadian pathways. increased aba levels lengthen the free-running period of the clock, consistent with the experimental data. adding stomatal closure to the model, as a key aba- and clock-regulated downstream process allowed to describe toc <dig> effects on the rhythmic gating of stomatal closure.


CONCLUSIONS
the integrated model of the circadian clock circuit and aba-regulated environmental sensing allowed us to explain multiple experimental observations on the timing and stomatal responses to genetic and environmental perturbations. these results crystallise a new role of toc <dig> as an environmental sensor, which both affects the pace of the central oscillator and modulates the kinetics of downstream processes.

circadian rhythmsbiological clocksgene regulatory networksmathematical modelsystems biology

