BACKGROUND
trnase z removes the 3'-trailer sequences from precursor trnas, which is an essential step preceding the addition of the cca sequence. trnase z exists in the short  and long  forms. based on the sequence characteristics, they can be divided into two major types: bacterial-type trnase zs and eukaryotic-type trnase zl, and one minor type, thermotoga maritima -type trnase zs. the number of trnase zs is highly variable, with the largest number being identified experimentally in the flowering plant arabidopsis thaliana. it is unknown whether multiple trnase zs found in a. thaliana is common to the plant kingdom. also unknown is the extent of sequence and structural conservation among trnase zs from the plant kingdom.


RESULTS
we report the identification and analysis of candidate trnase zs in  <dig> fully sequenced genomes of green plants, the great majority of which are flowering plants. it appears that green plants contain multiple distinct trnase zs predicted to reside in different subcellular compartments. furthermore, while the bacterial-type trnase zss are present only in basal land plants and green algae, the tm-type trnase zss are widespread in green plants. the protein sequences of the tm-type trnase zss identified in green plants are similar to those of the bacterial-type trnase zss but have distinct features, including the tm-type flexible arm, the variant catalytic heat and hst motifs, and a lack of the pxkxrn motif involved in cca anti-determination , which prevents trnase z cleavage of mature trnas. examination of flowering plant chloroplast trna genes reveals that many of these genes encode partial cca sequences. based on our results and previous studies, we predict that the plant tm-type trnase zss may not recognize the cca sequence as an anti-determinant.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings substantially expand the current repertoire of the tm-type trnase zss and hint at the possibility that these proteins may have been selected for their ability to process chloroplast pre-trnas with whole or partial cca sequences. our results also support the coevolution of trnase zs and trna 3'-trailer sequences in plants.

trna precursor endonucleasetrnase zelac2post-transcriptional processinggreen plantphylogenetics

