BACKGROUND
clostridium difficile toxins a and b , considered to be essential for c. difficile infection, affect the morphology of several cell types with different potencies and timing. however, morphological changes over various time scales are poorly characterized. the toxins’ glucosyltransferase domains are critical to their deleterious effects, and cell responses to glucosyltransferase-independent activities are incompletely understood. by tracking morphological changes of multiple cell types to c. difficile toxins with high temporal resolution, cellular responses to tcda, tcdb, and a glucosyltransferase-deficient tcdb  are elucidated.


RESULTS
human umbilical vein endothelial cells, j <dig> macrophage-like cells, and four epithelial cell lines  were treated with tcda, tcdb, gdtcdb. impedance across cell cultures was measured to track changes in cell morphology. metrics from impedance data, developed to quantify rapid and long-lasting responses, produced standard curves with wide dynamic ranges that defined cell line sensitivities. except for t <dig> cells, all cell lines were most sensitive to tcdb. j <dig> macrophages stretched and increased in size in response to tcda and tcdb but not gdtcdb. high concentrations of tcdb and gdtcdb  greatly reduced macrophage viability. in hct <dig> cells, gdtcdb did not induce a rapid cytopathic effect, yet it delayed tcda and tcdb’s rapid effects. gdtcdb did not clearly delay tcda or tcdb’s toxin-induced effects on macrophages.


CONCLUSIONS
epithelial and endothelial cells have similar responses to toxins yet differ in timing and degree. relative potencies of tcda and tcdb in mouse epithelial cells in vitro do not correlate with potencies in vivo. tcdb requires glucosyltransferase activity to cause macrophages to spread, but cell death from high tcdb concentrations is glucosyltransferase-independent. competition experiments with gdtcdb in epithelial cells confirm common tcda and tcdb mechanisms, yet different responses of macrophages to tcda and tcdb suggest different, additional mechanisms or targets in these cells. this first-time, precise quantification of the response of multiple cell lines to tcda and tcdb provides a comparative framework for delineating the roles of different cell types and toxin-host interactions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
clostridium difficiletoxin atoxin bglucosyltransferaseepithelialendothelialissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

