BACKGROUND
improving nutrient homeostasis is a major challenge of a sustainable maize cultivation, and cornerstone to ensure food supply for a growing world population. although, iron constitutes an important nutrient, iron availability is limited. in this respect, iron deficiency associated chlorosis causes severe yield losses every year. natural variation of the latter trait has yet not been addressed in maize and was therefore studied in the present analysis.


RESULTS
in this study, we i) report about the contrasting chlorosis phenotypes of the inbreds b <dig> and mo <dig> at  <dig> and 300 μm iron regime, ii) identified over  <dig> significantly regulated transcripts  within both inbreds at these growth conditions by deep rna-sequencing, iii) linked the gained knowledge with qtl information about iron deficiency related traits within the maize intermated b <dig> by mo <dig>  population, and iv) highlighted contributing molecular pathways. in this respect, several genes within methionine salvage pathway and phytosiderophore synthesis were found to present constitutively high expression in mo <dig>  even under sufficient iron supply. moreover, the same expression pattern could be observed for two putative bhlh transcription factors. in addition, a number of differentially expressed genes showed a co-localisation with qtl confidence intervals for iron deficiency related traits within the ibm population.


CONCLUSIONS
our study highlights differential iron deficiency associated chlorosis between b <dig> and mo <dig> and represents a valuable resource for differentially expressed genes upon iron limitation and chlorosis response. besides identifying two putative bhlh transcription factors, we propose that methionine salvage pathway and sterol metabolism amongst others; underlie the contrasting iron deficiency related chlorosis phenotype of both inbreds. altogether, this study emphasizes a contribution of selected genes and pathways on natural trait variation within the ibm population.

chlorosisiron deficiencyibm populationnatural variationqtlrna-seqzea mays

