BACKGROUND
canine obesity is usually treated with dietary energy restriction, but data are limited regarding nutritional adequacy. the aim of the current study was to compare intake of essential nutrients with national research council recommendations in obese dogs during weight management with a purpose-formulated diet.

methods
twenty-seven dogs were included in this non-randomised retrospective observational cohort study. all were determined to be systemically well, and without significant abnormalities based upon physical examination and clinicopathological assessments. the dogs underwent a controlled weight loss protocol of at least 182 days’ duration using a high protein high fibre weight loss diet. median, maximum, and minimum daily intakes of all essential nutrients were compared against nrc  <dig> recommended allowances  for adult dogs.


RESULTS
median weight loss was 28 % , mean daily energy intake was 61 kcal/kg <dig>  , and no clinical signs of nutrient deficiency were observed in any dog. based upon the average nutrient content of the diet, daily intake of the majority of essential nutrients was greater than their nrc  <dig> recommended allowance , except for selenium, choline, methionine/cysteine, tryptophan, magnesium, and potassium. however, apart from choline  and methionine/cysteine , all essential nutrients remained above nrc minimum requirements  throughout the trial.


CONCLUSIONS
when fed the diet used in the current study, daily intakes of most essential nutrients meet both their nrc  <dig> ra and mr in obese dogs during weight loss. in light of absence of clinical signs of nutrient deficiency, it is unclear what significance intakes less that nrc cut-offs for some nutrients have , and further studies are recommended.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
caninecaloric restrictionnutritional adequacyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

