BACKGROUND
classification microarrays are used for purposes such as identifying strains of bacteria and determining genetic relationships to understand the epidemiology of an infectious disease. for these cases, mixed microarrays, which are composed of dna from more than one organism, are more effective than conventional microarrays composed of dna from a single organism. selection of probes is a key factor in designing successful mixed microarrays because redundant sequences are inefficient and limited representation of diversity can restrict application of the microarray. we have developed a java-based software tool, called plasmid, for use in selecting the minimum set of probe sequences needed to classify different groups of plasmids or bacteria.


RESULTS
the software program was successfully applied to several different sets of data. the utility of plasmid was illustrated using existing mixed-plasmid microarray data as well as data from a virtual mixed-genome microarray constructed from different strains of streptococcus. moreover, use of data from expression microarray experiments demonstrated the generality of plasmid.


CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we describe a new software tool for selecting a set of probes for a classification microarray. while the tool was developed for the design of mixed microarrays–and mixed-plasmid microarrays in particular–it can also be used to design expression arrays. the user can choose from several clustering methods , several probe ranking methods, and several different display methods. a novel approach is used for probe redundancy reduction, and probe selection is accomplished via stepwise discriminant analysis. data can be entered in different formats , and dendrogram, heat map, and scatter plot images can be saved in several different formats . weights generated using stepwise discriminant analysis can be stored for analysis of subsequent experimental data. additionally, plasmid can be used to construct virtual microarrays with genomes from public databases, which can then be used to identify an optimal set of probes.

