BACKGROUND
salmonella dublin  is a zoonotic bacterium which is host adapted to cattle. the bacterium can cause subclinical persistent infection in cattle , which may be reactivated. during reactivation, animals may shed bacteria, thus constituting a source of infection for other animals. identification of such carriers is assumed to be critical in attempts to control and eradicate the infection. some authors suggest that persistently high antibody levels in serum or milk is indicative of a carrier state in cattle. however, this has been questioned by other studies in which s. dublin were not found in all animals suspected of being carriers based on antibody measurements when such animals were examined at slaughter. some hypothesize that the lack of isolated bacteria from long-term high antibody level cattle is due to a latent infection stage that can later be reactivated, for instance during stress around calving or due to transportation.

this study examined nine adult cattle with persistently high antibody responses to s. dublin o-antigen based lipopolysaccharide for cultivable bacteria in faeces, milk and internal organs before and after transportation, isolation and experimental immunosuppression with dexamethasone sodium phosphate over a period of 7– <dig> days.


RESULTS
clear signs of immunosuppression were seen as expression of leucocytosis and neutrophilia in all animals on day 3– <dig> after the first injections with dexamethasone sodium phosphate. no clinical signs or necropsy findings indicating salmonellosis were observed in any of the animals. no shedding of s. dublin was found in faeces  or milk  at any point in time during the 7– <dig> day period. s. dublin was recovered by a conventional culture method from tissue samples from mammary lymph nodes, spleen and liver collected from three animals at necropsy.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, immunosuppression by transportation stress or dexamethasone treatment did not lead to excretion of s. dublin in milk or faeces from infected animals. the study questions the general conception that cattle with persistently high antibody levels against s. dublin o-antigens in naturally infected herds should be considered high risk for transmission and therefore culled as part of effective intervention strategies. it is suggested that the location of s. dublin infected foci in the animal plays a major role for the risk of excreting bacteria.

