BACKGROUND
genome-wide profiling of single-nucleotide polymorphisms is receiving increasing attention as a method of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis in humans and of commercial genotyping of pre-transfer embryos in cattle. however, the very small quantity of genomic dna in biopsy material from early embryos poses daunting technical challenges. a reliable whole-genome amplification  procedure would greatly facilitate the procedure.


RESULTS
several pcr-based and non-pcr based wga technologies, namely multiple displacement amplification, quasi-random primed library synthesis followed by pcr, ligation-mediated pcr, and single-primer isothermal amplification were tested in combination with different dna extractions protocols for various quantities of genomic dna inputs. the efficiency of each method was evaluated by comparing the genotypes obtained from  <dig> cultured cells  to unamplified reference gdna. the gdna input, gdna extraction method and amplification technology were all found to be critical for successful genome-wide genotyping. the selected wga platform was then tested on embryo biopsies , comparing their results to that of biopsies collected after birth. although wga inevitably leads to a random loss of information and to the introduction of erroneous genotypes, following genomic imputation the resulting genetic index of both sources of dna were highly correlated .


CONCLUSIONS
it is possible to generate high-quality dna in sufficient quantities for successful genome-wide genotyping starting from an early embryo biopsy. however, imputation from parental and population genotypes is a requirement for completing and correcting genotypic data. judicious selection of the wga platform, careful handling of the samples and genomic imputation together, make it possible to perform extremely reliable genomic evaluations for pre-transfer embryos.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bovine early embryoembryo biopsywhole-genome amplificationgenotypinggenomic breeding valuegenotype imputationpre-implantation genetic diagnosismultiple displacement amplificationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

