BACKGROUND
most previous studies of morphological and molecular data have consistently supported the monophyly of the true water bugs . an exception is a recent study by hua et al.  based on nine nepomorphan mitochondrial genomes. in the analysis of hua et al. , the water bugs in the group pleoidea formed the sister group to a clade that consisted of nepomorpha  + leptopodomorpha  + cimicomorpha  + pentatomomorpha , thereby suggesting that fully aquatic hemipterans evolved independently at least twice. based on these results, hua et al.  elevated the pleoidea to a new infraorder, the plemorpha.


RESULTS
our reanalysis suggests that the lack of support for the monophyly of the true water bugs  by hua et al.  likely resulted from inadequate taxon sampling. in particular, long-branch attraction  between the distant outgroup taxa and pleoidea, as well as lba among taxa in the ingroup, made nepomorpha appear to be polyphyletic. we used three complementary strategies to test and alleviate the effects of lba:  the removal of distant outgroups from the analysis;  the addition of closely related outgroups; and  the addition of a mitochondrial genome from a second family of pleoidea. we also performed likelihood-ratio tests to examine the support for monophyly of nepomorpha with different combinations of taxa included in the analysis. furthermore, we found that specimens of helotrephes sp. were misidentified as paraplea frontalis  by hua et al. .


CONCLUSIONS
all analyses that included the addition of more taxa significantly and consistently supported the placement of pleoidea within the nepomorpha . our analyses further support a close relationship between notonectoidea and pleoidea within nepomorpha, and the superfamilies nepoidea, ochteroidea, naucoroidea, and pleoidea are resolved as monophyletic in all trees with strong support. our results also confirmed that monophyly of nepomorpha clearly is not refuted by the mitochondrial genome data.

long-branch attractionnepomorphamitochondrial genometaxon samplinglikelihood-ratio test

