BACKGROUND
bone-devouring osedax worms were described over a decade ago from deep-sea whale falls. the gutless females  have a unique root system that penetrates the bone and nourishes them via endosymbiotic bacteria. emerging from the bone is a cylindrical trunk, which is enclosed in a transparent tube, that generally gives rise to a plume of four palps . in most osedax species, dwarf males gather in harems along the female’s trunk and the nervous system of these microscopic forms has been described in detail. here, the nervous system of bone-eating osedax forms are described for the first time, allowing for hypotheses on how the abberant ventral brain and nervous system of siboglinidae may have evolved from a ganglionated nervous system with a dorsal brain, as seen in most extant annelids.


RESULTS
the intraepidermal nervous systems of four female osedax spp. and the bone-eating o. priapus male were reconstructed in detail by a combination of immunocytochemistry, clsm, histology and tem. they all showed a simple nervous system composed of an anterior ventral brain, connected with anteriorly directed paired palp and gonoduct nerves, and four main pairs of posteriorly directed longitudinal nerves . transverse peripheral nerves surround the trunk, ovisac and root system. the nervous system of osedax resembles that of other siboglinids, though possibly presenting additional lateral and dorsal longitudinal nerves. it differs from most sedentaria in the presence of an intraepidermal ventral brain, rather than a subepidermal dorsal brain, and by having an intraepidermal nerve cord with several plexi and up to three main commissures along the elongated trunk, which may comprise two indistinct segments.


CONCLUSIONS
osedax shows closer neuroarchitectural resemblance to vestimentifera + sclerolinum  than to frenulata. the intraepidermal nervous system with widely separated nerve cords, double brain commissures, double palp nerves and other traits found in osedax can all be traced to represent ancestral states of siboglinidae. a broader comparison of the nervous system and body regions across osedax and other siboglinids allows for a reinterpretation of the anterior body region in the group.

keywords
cephalic ganglionventral nerve cordneurophylogenysegmentationimmunocytochemistrypalpacetylated α-tubulinserotoninfrmfamideimmunoreactivityclsmtemhistologyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002261russian foundation for basic research 14-04-32176mol-arimskaya-korsakova nadezhda n. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

