BACKGROUND
due to the nature of scientific methodology, research articles are rich in speculative and tentative statements, also known as hedges. we explore a linguistically motivated approach to the problem of recognizing such language in biomedical research articles. our approach draws on prior linguistic work as well as existing lexical resources to create a dictionary of hedging cues and extends it by introducing syntactic patterns.

furthermore, recognizing that hedging cues differ in speculative strength, we assign them weights in two ways: automatically using the information gain  measure and semi-automatically based on their types and centrality to hedging. weights of hedging cues are used to determine the speculative strength of sentences.


RESULTS
we test our system on two publicly available hedging datasets. on the fruit-fly dataset, we achieve a precision-recall breakeven point  of  <dig>  using the semi-automatic weighting scheme and a lower bep of  <dig>  with the information gain weighting scheme. these results are competitive with the previously reported best results . on the bmc dataset, using semi-automatic weighting yields a bep of  <dig> , a statistically significant improvement  over the previously reported best result , while information gain weighting yields a bep of  <dig> .


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that speculative language can be recognized successfully with a linguistically motivated approach and confirms that selection of hedging devices affects the speculative strength of the sentence, which can be captured reasonably by weighting the hedging cues. the improvement obtained on the bmc dataset with a semi-automatic weighting scheme indicates that our linguistically oriented approach is more portable than the machine-learning based approaches. lower performance obtained with the information gain weighting scheme suggests that this method may benefit from a larger, manually annotated corpus for automatically inducing the weights.

 <dig>  <dig>  <dig>  natural language processing in biomedicine  acl workshop  <dig> columbus, oh, usa

