BACKGROUND
affymetrix gene expression arrays incorporate paired perfect match  and mismatch  probes to distinguish true signals from those arising from cross-hybridization events. a mm signal often shows greater intensity than a pm signal; we propose that one underlying cause is the presence of allelic variants arising from single nucleotide polymorphisms . to annotate and characterize snp contributions to anomalous probe binding behavior we have developed a software tool called affymapsdetector.


RESULTS
affymapsdetector can be used to describe any affymetrix expression genechip™ with respect to snps. when affymapsdetector was run on genechip™ hg-u95av <dig> against dbsnp-build- <dig>  we found  <dig> probes  containing snps, out of which  <dig> probes contained at least one snp at position  <dig>  against dbsnp-build- <dig>   <dig> probes  contained snps, of which  <dig> probes contained at least one snp at position  <dig>  therefore, depending on the expressed allele, the mm probe can sometimes be the transcript complement. this information was used to characterize probe measurements reported in a published, well-replicated lung adenocarcinoma study. the total intensity distributions showed that the snp-containing probes had a larger negative mean intensity difference  and greater range of the difference than did probes without snps. in the sample replicates, snp-containing probes with reproducible intensity ratios were identified, allowing selection of snp probesets that yielded unique sample signatures. at the gene expression level, use of the  value for snp-containing probes resulted in different presence/absence calls for some genes. such a change in status of the genes has the clear potential for influencing downstream clustering and classification results.


CONCLUSIONS
output from this tool characterizes snp-containing probes on genechip™ microarrays, thus improving our understanding of factors contributing to expression measurements. the pattern of snp binding examined so far indicates distinct behavior of the snp-containing probes and has the potential to help us identify new snps. knowing which probes contain snps provides flexibility in determining whether to include or exclude them from gene-expression intensity calculations; selected sets of snp-containing probes produce sample-unique signatures.

affymapsdetector information is available at

