BACKGROUND
ammopiptanthus mongolicus  cheng f., an evergreen broadleaf legume shrub, is distributed in mid-asia where the temperature can be as low as −30°c during the winter. although a. mongolicus is an ideal model to study the plant response to cold stress, insufficient genomic resources for this species are available in public databases. to identify genes involved in cold acclimation , a high-throughput sequencing technology was applied.


RESULTS
we sequenced cold-treated and control  samples of a. mongolicus, and obtained  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> high quality reads, respectively. after de novo assembly and quantitative assessment,  <dig> all-unigenes were finally generated with an average length of 816 bp. we then obtained functional annotations by aligning all-unigenes with public protein databases including nr, swissprot, kegg and cog. differentially expressed genes  were investigated using the rpkm method. overall,  <dig> up-regulated genes and  <dig> down-regulated genes were identified. to increase our understanding of these degs, we performed go enrichment and metabolic pathway enrichment analyses. based on these results, a series of candidate genes involved in cold responsive pathways were selected and discussed. moreover, we analyzed transcription factors, and found  <dig> of them are differentially expressed. finally,  <dig> of the candidate genes that were up-regulated and known to be associated with cold stress were examined using qrt-pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we identified a large set of cdna unigenes from a. mongolicus. this is the first transcriptome sequencing of this non-model species under cold-acclimation using illumina/solexa, a next-generation sequencing technology. we sequenced cold-treated and control  samples of a. mongolicus and obtained large numbers of unigenes annotated to public databases. studies of differentially expressed genes involved in cold-related metabolic pathways and transcription factors facilitate the discovery of cold-resistance genes.

ammopiptanthus mongolicuscold acclimationtranscriptomeillumina/solexa

