BACKGROUND
the aim of this research was to identify the effects of pleistocene climate change on the distribution of fauna in tasmania, and contrast this with biotic responses in other temperate regions in the northern and southern hemisphere that experienced glacial activity during this epoch. this was achieved by examining the phylogeographic patterns in a widely distributed tasmanian endemic reptile, niveoscincus ocellatus.  <dig> individuals from  <dig> populations across the distributional range of n. ocellatus were surveyed for variation at two mitochondrial genes , and two nuclear genes . phylogenetic relationships were reconstructed using a range of methods , and the demographic histories of populations were assessed .


RESULTS
there was a high degree of mitochondrial haplotype diversity  and phylogeographic structure, where spatially distinct groups were associated with tasmania’s northeast and a large area covering southeast and central tasmania. phylogeographic structure was also present within each major group, but the degree varied regionally, being highest in the northeast. only the southeastern group had a signature of demographic expansion, occurring during the pleistocene but post-dating the last glacial maximum. in contrast, nuclear dna had low levels of variation and a lack of phylogeographic structure, and further loci should be surveyed to corroborate the mitochondrial inferences.


CONCLUSIONS
the phylogeographic patterns of n. ocellatus indicate pleistocene range and demographic expansion in n. ocellatus, particularly in the southeast and central areas of tasmania. expansion in central and southeastern areas appears to have been more recent in both demographic and spatial contexts, than in northeast tasmania, which is consistent with inferences for other taxa of greater stability and persistence in northeast tasmania during the last glacial maximum. these phylogeographic patterns indicate contrasting demographic histories of populations in close proximity to areas directly affected by glaciers in the southern hemisphere during the lgm.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
glacial refugiapleistocenetasmaniaphylogeographyreptilerecolonisationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

