BACKGROUND
reception of and response to exogenous and endogenous osmotic changes is important to sustain plant growth and development, as well as reproductive formation. hyperosmolality-gated calcium-permeable channels  were first characterised as an osmosensor in arabidopsis and are involved in the perception of extracellular changes to trigger hyperosmolality-induced i increases . to explore the potential biological functions of oscas in rice, we performed a bioinformatics and expression analysis of the ososca gene family.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> ososca genes were identified from the genome database of oryza sativa l. japonica. based on their sequence composition and phylogenetic relationship, the ososca family was classified into four clades. gene and protein structure analysis indicated that the  <dig> ososcas shared similar structures with their homologs in oryza sativa l. ssp. indica, oryza glaberrima, and oryza brachyantha. multiple sequence alignment analysis revealed a conserved duf <dig> domain in these members, in which the first three tms were conserved, while the others were not. the expression profiles of ososca genes were analysed at different stages of vegetative growth, reproductive development, and under osmotic-associated abiotic stresses. we found that four and six ososca genes showed a clear correlation between the expression profile and osmotic changes during caryopsis development and seed imbibition, respectively. orchestrated transcription of three ososcas was strongly associated with the circadian clock. moreover, osmotic-related abiotic stress differentially induced the expression of  <dig> genes.


CONCLUSIONS
the entire osca family is characterised by the presence of a conserved duf <dig> domain, which functions as an osmotic-sensing calcium channel. the phylogenetic tree of osca genes showed that two subspecies of cultivated rice, oryza sativa l. ssp. japonica and oryza sativa l. ssp. indica, are more closely related than wild rice oryza glaberrima, while oryza brachyantha was less closely related. ososca expression is organ- and tissue-specific and regulated by different osmotic-related abiotic stresses in rice. these findings will facilitate further research in this gene family and provide potential target genes for generation of genetically modified osmotic-stress-resistant plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
oscaduf <dig> domainphylogenetic relationshipsexpression profileosmotic stressoryzaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

