BACKGROUND
the rumen microbiota functions as an effective system for conversion of dietary feed to microbial proteins and volatile fatty acids. in the present study, metagenomic approach was applied to elucidate the buffalo rumen microbiome of jaffrabadi buffalo adapted to varied dietary treatments with the hypothesis that the microbial diversity and subsequent in the functional capacity will alter with diet change and enhance our knowledge of effect of microbe on host physiology. eight adult animals were gradually adapted to an increasing roughage diet  containing 50: <dig> , 75: <dig>  and 100: <dig>  roughage to concentrate proportion for 6 weeks. metagenomic sequences of solid  and liquid  fractions obtained using ion torrent pgm platform were analyzed using mg-rast server and cazymes approach.


RESULTS
taxonomic analysis revealed that bacteroidetes was the most abundant phylum followed by firmicutes, fibrobacter and proteobacteria. functional analysis revealed protein  and carbohydrate  metabolism as the dominant categories. principal component analysis demonstrated that roughage proportion, fraction of rumen and type of forage affected rumen microbiome at taxonomic as well as functional level. rumen metabolite study revealed that rumen fluid nitrogen content reduced in high roughage diet fed animals and pathway analysis showed reduction in the genes coding enzymes involved in methanogenesis pathway. cazyme annotation revealed the abundance of genes encoding glycoside hydrolases , with the gh <dig> family most abundant followed by gh <dig> and gh <dig> in all samples.


CONCLUSIONS
results reveals that high roughage diet feed improved microbial protein synthesis and reduces methane emission. cazyme analysis indicated the importance of microbiome in feed component digestion for fulfilling energy requirements of the host. the findings help determine the role of rumen microbes in plant polysaccharide breakdown and in developing strategies to maximize productivity in ruminants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
jaffrabadi rumen metagenomeroughage proportionsmg-rastcazymeshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001503indian council of agricultural researchb.h. 2030-20joshi chaitanya g. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

