BACKGROUND
cyanothece sp. pcc  <dig> is an excellent cyanobacterial model organism with great potential to be applied as a biocatalyst for the production of high value compounds. like other unicellular diazotrophic cyanobacterial species, it has a tightly regulated metabolism synchronized to the light–dark cycle. utilizing transcriptomic and proteomic methods, we quantified the relationships between transcription and translation underlying central and secondary metabolism in response to nitrogen free,  <dig> hour light and  <dig> hour dark conditions.


RESULTS
by combining mass-spectrometry based proteomics and rna-sequencing transcriptomics, we quantitatively measured a total of  <dig> mrnas and  <dig> proteins at four time points across a  <dig> hour light–dark cycle. photosynthesis, nitrogen fixation, and carbon storage relevant genes were expressed during the preceding light or dark period, concurrent with measured nitrogenase activity in the late light period. we describe many instances of disparity in peak mrna and protein abundances, and strong correlation of light dependent expression of both antisense and crispr-related gene expression. the proteins for nitrogenase and the pentose phosphate pathway were highest in the dark, whereas those for glycolysis and the tca cycle were more prominent in the light. interestingly, one copy of the psba gene encoding the photosystem ii  reaction center protein d <dig>  was highly upregulated only in the dark. this protein likely cannot catalyze o <dig> evolution and so may be used by the cell to keep psii intact during n <dig> fixation. the crispr elements were found exclusively at the ends of the large plasmid and we speculate that their presence is crucial to the maintenance of this plasmid.


CONCLUSIONS
this investigation of parallel transcriptional and translational activity within cyanothece sp. pcc  <dig> provided quantitative information on expression levels of metabolic pathways relevant to engineering efforts. the identification of expression patterns for both mrna and protein affords a basis for improving biofuel production in this strain and for further genetic manipulations. expression analysis of the genes encoded on the  <dig> plasmids provided insight into the possible acquisition and maintenance of some of these extra-chromosomal elements.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cyanothececyanobacteriarna-seqn <dig> fixationproteomicsbutanolcrisprissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

