BACKGROUND
drought is the major constraint to increase yield in chickpea . improving drought tolerance is therefore of outmost importance for breeding. however, the complexity of the trait allowed only marginal progress. a solution to the current stagnation is expected from innovative molecular tools such as transcriptome analyses providing insight into stress-related gene activity, which combined with molecular markers and expression qtl mapping, may accelerate knowledge-based breeding. supersage, an improved version of the serial analysis of gene expression  technique, generating genome-wide, high-quality transcription profiles from any eukaryote, has been employed in the present study. the method produces  <dig> bp long fragments  from defined positions in cdnas, providing sufficient sequence information to unambiguously characterize the mrnas. further, supersage tags may be immediately used to produce microarrays and probes for real-time-pcr, thereby overcoming the lack of genomic tools in non-model organisms.


RESULTS
we applied supersage to the analysis of gene expression in chickpea roots in response to drought. to this end, we sequenced  <dig>   <dig> bp tags representing  <dig>  unique transcripts  from drought-stressed and non-stressed control roots. a total of  <dig>   unitags were more than  <dig> -fold differentially expressed, and  <dig>  were regulated more than 8-fold upon stress. their large size enabled the unambiguous annotation of  <dig>   unitags to genes or proteins in public data bases and thus to stress-response processes. we designed a microarray carrying  <dig>  of these  <dig> bp tags. the chip data confirmed 79% of the tag-based results, whereas rt-pcr confirmed the supersage data in all cases.


CONCLUSIONS
this study represents the most comprehensive analysis of the drought-response transcriptome of chickpea available to date. it demonstrates that – inter alias – signal transduction, transcription regulation, osmolyte accumulation, and ros scavenging undergo strong transcriptional remodelling in chickpea roots already  <dig> h after drought stress. certain transcript isoforms characterizing these processes are potential targets for breeding for drought tolerance. we demonstrate that these can be easily accessed by micro-arrays and rt-pcr assays readily produced downstream of supersage. our study proves that supersage owns potential for molecular breeding also in non-model crops.

