BACKGROUND
the release of the porcine genome sequence offers great perspectives for pig genetics and genomics, and more generally will contribute to the understanding of mammalian genome biology and evolution. the process of producing a complete genome sequence of high quality, while facilitated by high-throughput sequencing technologies, remains a difficult task. the porcine genome was sequenced using a combination of a hierarchical shotgun strategy and data generated with whole genome shotgun. in addition to the bac contig map used for the clone-by-clone approach, genomic mapping resources for the pig include two radiation hybrid  panels at two different resolutions. these two panels have been used extensively for the physical mapping of pig genes and markers prior to the availability of the pig genome sequence.


RESULTS
in order to contribute to the assembly of the pig genome, we genotyped the two radiation hybrid  panels with a snp array  and produced high density physical rh maps for each pig autosome. we first present the methods developed to obtain high density rh maps with  <dig>  snps from the snp array genotyping. we then show how they were useful to identify problems in a draft of the pig genome assembly, and how the rh maps enabled the problems to be corrected in the porcine genome sequence. finally, we used the rh maps to predict the position of  <dig>  snps and  <dig>  scaffolds currently unplaced on the porcine genome assembly.


CONCLUSIONS
a complete process, from genotyping of a high density snp array on rh panels, to the construction of genome-wide high density rh maps, and finally their exploitation for validating and improving a genome assembly is presented here. the study includes the cross-validation of rh based findings with independent information from genetic data and comparative mapping with the human genome. several additional resources are also provided, in particular the predicted genomic location of currently unplaced snps and associated scaffolds summing up to a total of  <dig> megabases, that can be useful for the exploitation of the pig genome assembly.

