BACKGROUND
chronic, non-healing wounds are often characterized by the persistence of bacteria within biofilms - aggregations of cells encased within a self-produced polysaccharide matrix. biofilm bacteria exhibit unique characteristics from planktonic, or culture-grown, bacterial phenotype, including diminished responses to antimicrobial therapy and persistence against host immune responses. mesenchymal stromal cells  are host cells characterized by their multifunctional ability to undergo differentiation into multiple cell types and modulation of host-immune responses by secreting factors that promote wound healing. while these characteristics make mscs an attractive therapeutic for wounds, these pro-healing activities may be differentially influenced in the context of an infection  within chronic wounds. herein, we evaluated the effect of soluble factors derived from biofilms of clinical isolates of staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas aeruginosa on the viability, differentiation, and paracrine activity of human mscs to evaluate the influence of biofilms on msc activity in vitro.


RESULTS
exposure of mscs to biofilm-conditioned medias of s. aureus and p. aeruginosa resulted in reductions in cell viability, in part due to activation of apoptosis. similarly, exposure to soluble factors from biofilms was also observed to diminish the migration ability of cells and to hinder multi-lineage differentiation of mscs. in contrast to these findings, exposure of mscs to soluble factors from biofilms resulted in significant increases in the release of paracrine factors involved in inflammation and wound healing.


CONCLUSIONS
collectively, these findings demonstrate that factors produced by biofilms can negatively impact the intrinsic properties of mscs, in particular limiting the migratory and differentiation capacity of mscs. consequently, these studies suggest use/application of stem-cell therapies in the context of infection may have a limited therapeutic effect.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
staphylococcus aureuspseudomonas aeruginosabiofilmmesenchymal stromal cellswound healingdifferentiationangiogenesisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

