BACKGROUND
every year pathogenic organisms cause billions of dollars' worth damage to crops and livestock. in agriculture, study of plant-microbe interactions is demanding a special attention to develop management strategies for the destructive pathogen induced diseases that cause huge crop losses every year worldwide. pseudomonas syringae is a major bacterial leaf pathogen that causes diseases in a wide range of plant species. among its various strains, pathovar tomato strain dc <dig>  is asserted to infect the plant host arabidopsis thaliana and thus, has been accepted as a model system for experimental characterization of the molecular dynamics of plant-pathogen interactions. protein-protein interactions  play a critical role in initiating pathogenesis and maintaining infection. understanding the ppi network between a host and pathogen is a critical step for studying the molecular basis of pathogenesis. the experimental study of ppis at a large scale is very scarce and also the high throughput experimental results show high false positive rate. hence, there is a need for developing efficient computational models to predict the interaction between host and pathogen in a genome scale, and find novel candidate effectors and/or their targets.


RESULTS
in this study, we used two computational approaches, the interolog and the domain-based to predict the interactions between arabidopsis and pstdc <dig> in genome scale. the interolog method relies on protein sequence similarity to conduct the ppi prediction. a pseudomonas protein and an arabidopsis protein are predicted to interact with each other if an experimentally verified interaction exists between their respective homologous proteins in another organism. the domain-based method uses domain interaction information, which is derived from known protein 3d structures, to infer the potential ppis. if a pseudomonas and an arabidopsis protein contain an interacting domain pair, one can expect the two proteins to interact with each other. the interolog-based method predicts ~ <dig> m ppis involving around  <dig> arabidopsis and  <dig> pseudomonas proteins in the full genome. the domain-based method predicts  <dig> ppis comprising  <dig> arabidopsis and  <dig> pseudomonas proteins. further, around  <dig> ppis have been identified as interacting from both the methods as a consensus.


CONCLUSIONS
the present work predicts the protein-protein interaction network between arabidopsis thaliana and pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato dc <dig> in a genome wide scale with a high confidence. although the predicted ppis may contain some false positives, the computational methods provide reasonable amount of interactions which can be further validated by high throughput experiments. this can be a useful resource to the plant community to characterize the host-pathogen interaction in arabidopsis and pseudomonas system. further, these prediction models can be applied to the agriculturally relevant crops.

plant-pathogen interactionsbioinformaticsunsupervised learningarabidopsispseudomonas syringaeinteractomecomputational prediction6- <dig> march  <dig> 11th annual mcbios conference stillwater, ok, usa

