BACKGROUND
leishmania  are intracellular protozoan parasites that are able to survive and replicate within the harsh and potentially hostile phagolysosomal environment of mammalian mononuclear phagocytes. a complex interplay then takes place between the macrophage  striving to eliminate the pathogen and the parasite struggling for its own survival.

to investigate this host-parasite conflict at the transcriptional level, in the context of monocyte-derived human mΦs  infection by l. major metacyclic promastigotes, the quantitative technique of serial analysis of gene expression  was used.


RESULTS
after extracting mrna from resting human mΦs, leishmania-infected human mΦs and l. major parasites, three sage libraries were constructed and sequenced generating up to  <dig> ;  <dig>  and  <dig>  tags respectively . using computational data analysis and direct comparison to  <dig>  publicly available experimental human tags, the parasite and the host cell transcriptomes were then simultaneously characterized from the mixed cellular extract, confidently discriminating host from parasite transcripts. this procedure led us to reliably assign  <dig>  tags to mΦs' and  <dig>  tags to l. major parasites transcripts. we focused on these, showing significant changes in their expression that are likely to be relevant to the pathogenesis of parasite infection:  human mΦs genes, belonging to key immune response proteins  and  a group of leishmania genes showing a preferential expression at the parasite's intra-cellular developing stage.


CONCLUSIONS
dual sage transcriptome analysis provided a useful, powerful and accurate approach to discriminating genes of human or parasitic origin in leishmania-infected human mΦs. the findings presented in this work suggest that the leishmania parasite modulates key transcripts in human mΦs that may be beneficial for its establishment and survival. furthermore, these results provide an overview of gene expression at two developmental stages of the parasite, namely metacyclic promastigotes and intracellular amastigotes and indicate a broad difference between their transcriptomic profiles. finally, our reported set of expressed genes will be useful in future rounds of data mining and gene annotation.

