BACKGROUND
reverse transcription pcr  is widely recognized to be the gold standard method for quantifying gene expression. studies using rt-pcr technology as a discovery tool have historically been limited to relatively small gene sets compared to other gene expression platforms such as microarrays. we have recently shown that taqman® rt-pcr can be scaled up to profile expression for  <dig> genes in fixed paraffin-embedded  clinical study tumor specimens. this technology has also been used to develop and commercialize a widely used clinical test for breast cancer prognosis and prediction, the onco typedx™ assay. a similar need exists in colon cancer for a test that provides information on the likelihood of disease recurrence in colon cancer  and the likelihood of tumor response to standard chemotherapy regimens . we have now scaled our rt-pcr assay to efficiently screen  <dig> biomarkers across hundreds of patient samples and applied this process to biomarker discovery in colon cancer. this screening strategy remains attractive due to the inherent advantages of maintaining platform consistency from discovery through clinical application.


RESULTS
rna was extracted from formalin fixed paraffin embedded  tissue, as old as  <dig> years, from  <dig> patients enrolled in nsabp c- <dig> and c- <dig> colon cancer studies. multiplexed reverse transcription reactions were performed using a gene specific primer pool containing  <dig> unique primers. pcr was performed as independent taqman® reactions for each candidate gene. hierarchal clustering demonstrates that genes expected to co-express form obvious, distinct and in certain cases very tightly correlated clusters, validating the reliability of this technical approach to biomarker discovery.


CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a high throughput, quantitatively precise multi-analyte gene expression platform for biomarker discovery that approaches low density dna arrays in numbers of genes analyzed while maintaining the high specificity, sensitivity and reproducibility that are characteristics of rt-pcr. biomarkers discovered using this approach can be transferred to a clinical reference laboratory setting without having to re-validate the assay on a second technology platform.

