BACKGROUND
improvement of α-tocopherol content is an important breeding aim to increase the nutritional value of crops. several efforts have been conducted to improve the α-tocopherol content in soybean  through transgenic technology by overexpressing genes related to α-tocopherol biosynthesis or through changes to crop management practices. varieties with high α-tocopherol content have been identified in soybean germplasms. the heritability of this trait has been characterized in a cross between high α-tocopherol variety keszthelyi aproszemu sarga  and low α-tocopherol variety ichihime. in this study, the genetic mechanism of the high α-tocopherol content trait of kas was elucidated.


RESULTS
through qtl analysis and fine mapping in populations from a cross between kas and a japanese variety ichihime, we identified γ-tmt <dig>  which encodes γ-tocopherol methyltransferase, as a candidate gene responsible for high α-tocopherol concentration in kas. several nucleotide polymorphisms including two nonsynonymous mutations were found in the coding region of γ-tmt <dig> between ichihime and kas, but none of which was responsible for the difference in α-tocopherol concentration. therefore, we focused on transcriptional regulation of γ-tmt <dig> in developing seeds and leaves. an f <dig> line that was heterozygous for the region containing γ-tmt <dig> was self-pollinated. from among the progeny, plants that were homozygous at the γ-tmt <dig> locus were chosen for further evaluation. the expression level of γ-tmt <dig> was higher both in developing seeds and leaves of plants homozygous for the γ-tmt <dig> allele from kas. the higher expression level was closely correlated with high α-tocopherol content in developing seeds. we generated transgenic arabidopsis plants harboring gus gene under the control of γ-tmt <dig> promoter from kas or ichihime. the gus activity assay showed that the activity of γ-tmt <dig> promoter from kas was higher than that of ichihime.


CONCLUSIONS
the genetic variation in γ-tmt <dig>  which plays a major role in determining α-tocopherol concentration, provides significant information about the regulation of tocopherol biosynthesis in soybean seeds. this knowledge will help breeding programs to develop new soybean varieties with high α-tocopherol content.

