BACKGROUND
african animal trypanosomiasis  caused by tsetse fly-transmitted protozoa of the genus trypanosoma is a major constraint on livestock and agricultural production in africa and is among the top ten global cattle diseases impacting on the poor. here we show that a functional genomics approach can be used to identify temporal changes in host peripheral blood mononuclear cell  gene expression due to disease progression. we also show that major gene expression differences exist between cattle from trypanotolerant and trypanosusceptible breeds. using bovine long oligonucleotide microarrays and real time quantitative reverse transcription pcr  validation we analysed pbmc gene expression in naïve trypanotolerant and trypanosusceptible cattle experimentally challenged with trypanosoma congolense across a 34-day infection time course.


RESULTS
trypanotolerant n'dama cattle displayed a rapid and distinct transcriptional response to infection, with a ten-fold higher number of genes differentially expressed at day  <dig> post-infection compared to trypanosusceptible boran cattle. these analyses identified coordinated temporal gene expression changes for both breeds in response to trypanosome infection. in addition, a panel of genes were identified that showed pronounced differences in gene expression between the two breeds, which may underlie the phenomena of trypanotolerance and trypanosusceptibility. gene ontology  analysis demonstrate that the products of these genes may contribute to increased mitochondrial mrna translational efficiency, a more pronounced b cell response, an elevated activation status and a heightened response to stress in trypanotolerant cattle.


CONCLUSIONS
this study has revealed an extensive and diverse range of cellular processes that are altered temporally in response to trypanosome infection in african cattle. results indicate that the trypanotolerant n'dama cattle respond more rapidly and with a greater magnitude to infection compared to the trypanosusceptible boran cattle. specifically, a subset of the genes analyzed by real time qrt-pcr, which display significant breed differences, could collectively contribute to the trypanotolerance trait in n'dama.

