BACKGROUND
the present study was conducted to compare the differences in gut microbiota composition and gut-phenotypes among pig breeds, and determine whether these differences would transmit to mice colonized with fecal microbiota of different pig breeds. a total of  <dig> 1-day-old germ-free balb/c mice were divided into  <dig> groups , which were transplanted with intact fecal microbiota of tibetan pig , yorkshire pig  and rongchang pig , respectively.


RESULTS
results showed that different pig breeds exhibited distinct gut microbiota profile based on high-throughput pyrosequencing. yp exhibited a lower firmicutes/bacteroidetes ratio and apparent genera differences compared with rp and tp, and higher levels of bacteria from spirochaetes were observed in tp compared with rp and yp . transplanted porcine microbiota into gf mice replicated the phenotypes of pig donors. moreover, the three groups of donor pigs and their mice recipients exhibited different intestinal index and morphology. tp and rp had higher intestinal weight and relative cdx <dig> mrna expression in ileum than yp, and longer intestine, higher villus height of duodenum and jejunum were observed in tp compared with yp and rp . tp exhibited higher glp- <dig> mrna expression in duodenum and jejunum than rp . similarly, yfm had lower intestine weight and cdx <dig> mrna expression in ileum than tfm and rfm . the intestine length in tfm was longer than that in rfm, and tfm had higher villus height in duodenum and jejunum and glp- <dig> mrna expression in ileum than the other two groups . besides, the digestive and absorptive ability was different among the three groups in donor pigs and mice recipients. yp had higher jejunal lactase and maltase activities than tp and rp, while tp had higher activities of jejunal atpase, γ-gt, and relative sglt <dig> mrna expression in duodenum and jejunum than yp and rp . likewise, yfm had higher jejunal sucrase and maltase activities than tfm and rfm, whereas higher jejunal γ-gt activity and relative sglt <dig> mrna expression in duodenum and ileum were observed in tfm compared with yfm and rfm . in addition, tibetan pigs-derived microbiota improved gut barrier in mice recipients. the concentration of mda in yp was higher than that in tp and rp , and the relative zo- <dig> mrna expression in ileum in tp was higher than that in yp . likely, compared with tfm and rfm, yfm exhibited increasing mda concentration in jejunum , and the relative zo- <dig> mrna expression in duodenum and ileum in tfm were higher than that in yfm .


CONCLUSIONS
there were huge differences in gut microbiota composition and gut characteristics among pig breeds, and gut microbiota could partially convey host gut characteristics from pigs to mice.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pig breedsintestinal developmentdigestive and absorptive activitiesgerm-free micefecal microbiota transplantationchina agriculture research systemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

