BACKGROUND
the hemibiotroph colletotrichum lentis, causative agent of anthracnose on lens culinaris  was recently described as a new species. during its interaction with the host plant, c. lentis likely secretes numerous effector proteins, including toxins to alter the plant’s innate immunity, thereby gaining access to the host tissues for nutrition and reproduction.


RESULTS
in silico analysis of  <dig> ests generated from c. lentis-infected lentil leaf tissues identified  <dig> candidate effectors. in planta infection stage-specific gene expression waves among candidate effectors were revealed for the appressorial penetration phase, biotrophic phase and necrotrophic phase. no sign of positive selection pressure  in effectors was detected at the intraspecific level. a single nucleotide polymorphism in the orf of candidate effector clce <dig>  used to develop a kaspar marker, differentiated perfectly between pathogenic race  <dig> and race  <dig> isolates when tested on  <dig> isolates arbitrarily selected from a large culture collection representing the western canadian population of c. lentis. furthermore, an est encoding argininosuccinate lyase  was identified as a bacterial gene. a toxin protein cltoxb was further characterized as a potential host-specific toxin through heterologous in planta expression. the knock-down of cltoxb transcripts by rnai resulted in reduced virulence, suggesting that cltoxb is a virulence factor. in silico analysis of the cltoxb sequence and comparative genomics revealed that toxb is unlikely a foreign gene in the c. lentis genome. incongruency between established species relationships and that established based on gene sequence data confirmed toxb arose through evolution from a common ancestor, whereas the bacterial gene arg identified in c. lentis was horizontally transferred from bacteria.


CONCLUSIONS
est mining and expression profiling revealed a set of in planta expressed candidate effectors. we developed a kaspar assay using effector polymorphism to differentiate c. lentis races. comparative genomics revealed a foreign gene encoding a potential virulence factor arg, which was horizontally transferred from bacteria into the genus colletotrichum. cltoxb is further characterized as a host-specific toxin that is likely to contribute to quantitative differences in virulence between the races  <dig> and  <dig> 

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fungal pathogenicity and virulenceplant disease resistanceextended phenotypecolletotrichumissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

