BACKGROUND
as an abstract mapping of the gene regulations in the cell, gene regulatory network is important to both biological research study and practical applications. the reverse engineering of gene regulatory networks from microarray gene expression data is a challenging research problem in systems biology. with the development of biological technologies, multiple time-course gene expression datasets might be collected for a specific gene network under different circumstances. the inference of a gene regulatory network can be improved by integrating these multiple datasets. it is also known that gene expression data may be contaminated with large errors or outliers, which may affect the inference results.


RESULTS
a novel method, huber group lasso, is proposed to infer the same underlying network topology from multiple time-course gene expression datasets as well as to take the robustness to large error or outliers into account. to solve the optimization problem involved in the proposed method, an efficient algorithm which combines the ideas of auxiliary function minimization and block descent is developed. a stability selection method is adapted to our method to find a network topology consisting of edges with scores. the proposed method is applied to both simulation datasets and real experimental datasets. it shows that huber group lasso outperforms the group lasso in terms of both areas under receiver operating characteristic curves and areas under the precision-recall curves.


CONCLUSIONS
the convergence analysis of the algorithm theoretically shows that the sequence generated from the algorithm converges to the optimal solution of the problem. the simulation and real data examples demonstrate the effectiveness of the huber group lasso in integrating multiple time-course gene expression datasets and improving the resistance to large errors or outliers.

gene regulatory networkreverse engineeringgroup lassooptimizationgene expression data18- <dig> december  <dig> ieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine  shanghai, china

