BACKGROUND
copy number variations  have been linked to different phenotypes in human, including many diseases. a genome-scale understanding of cnvs is available in a few plants but none are wild species, leaving a knowledge gap regarding their genome biology and evolutionary role. we developed a reliable cnv detection method for species lacking contiguous reference genome. we selected multiple probes within  <dig>  gene sequences and developed comparative genome hybridization on arrays. gene cnvs were assessed in three full-sib families from species with  <dig> gb genomes, i.e., white and black spruce, and interior spruce - a natural hybrid.


RESULTS
we discovered hundreds of gene cnvs in each species,  <dig> in total, which were enriched in functions related to stress and defense responses and narrow expression profiles, indicating a potential role in adaptation. the number of shared cnvs was in accordance with the degree of relatedness between individuals and species. the genetically mapped subset of these genes showed a wide distribution across the genome, implying numerous structural variations. the hybrid family presented significantly fewer cnvs, suggesting that the admixture of two species within one genome reduces the occurrence of cnvs.


CONCLUSIONS
the approach we developed is of particular interest in non-model species lacking a reference genome. our findings point to a role for cnvs in adaptation. their reduced abundance in the hybrid may limit genetic variability and evolvability of hybrids. we propose that cnvs make a qualitatively distinct contribution to adaptation which could be important for short term change.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
copy number variationcomparative genomic hybridizationnon-model speciesgenomic structural variationgenome architecturespecies hybridizationpicea glaucapicea marianapicea engelmanniconifersissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

