BACKGROUND
a latent behavior of a biological cell is complex. deriving the underlying simplicity, or the fundamental rules governing this behavior has been the holy grail of systems biology. data-driven prediction of the system components and their component interplays that are responsible for the target system’s phenotype is a key and challenging step in this endeavor.


RESULTS
the proposed approach, which we call system phenotype-related interplaying components enumerator , iteratively enumerates statistically significant system components that are hypothesized  to play an important role in defining the specificity of the target system’s phenotype;  to exhibit a functionally coherent behavior, namely, act in a coordinated manner to perform the phenotype-specific function; and  to improve the predictive skill of the system’s phenotype when used collectively in the ensemble of predictive models. spice can be applied to both instance-based data and network-based data. when validated, spice effectively identified system components related to three target phenotypes: biohydrogen production, motility, and cancer. manual results curation agreed with the known phenotype-related system components reported in literature. additionally, using the identified system components as discriminatory features improved the prediction accuracy by 10% on the phenotype-classification task when compared to a number of state-of-the-art methods applied to eight benchmark microarray data sets.


CONCLUSIONS
we formulate a problem—enumeration of phenotype-determining system component interplays—and propose an effective methodology  to address this problem. spice improved identification of cancer-related groups of genes from various microarray data sets and detected groups of genes associated with microbial biohydrogen production and motility, many of which were reported in literature. spice also improved the predictive skill of the system’s phenotype determination compared to individual classifiers and/or other ensemble methods, such as bagging, boosting, random forest, nearest shrunken centroid, and random forest variable selection method.

