BACKGROUND
various clinical protocols have been developed to aid in the clinical diagnosis of classical bovine spongiform encephalopathy , which is confirmed by postmortem examinations based on vacuolation and accumulation of disease-associated prion protein  in the brain. the present study investigated the occurrence and progression of sixty selected clinical signs and behaviour combinations in  <dig> experimentally exposed cattle subsequently categorised postmortem as confirmed or unconfirmed bse cases. appropriate undosed or saline inoculated controls were examined similarly and the data analysed to explore the possible occurrence of bse-specific clinical expression in animals unconfirmed by postmortem examinations.


RESULTS
based on the display of selected behavioural, sensory and locomotor changes,  <dig>  orally dosed and  <dig>  intracerebrally inoculated pathologically confirmed bse cases and  <dig>  orally dosed and  <dig>  intracerebrally inoculated but unconfirmed cases were considered clinical bse suspects. none of  <dig> controls showed significant signs and were all negative on diagnostic postmortem examinations. signs indicative of bse suspects, particularly over-reactivity and ataxia, were more frequently displayed in confirmed cases with vacuolar changes in the brain. the display of several bse-associated signs over time, including repeated startle responses and nervousness, was significantly more frequent in confirmed bse cases compared to controls, but these two signs were also significantly more frequent in orally dosed cattle unconfirmed by postmortem examinations.


CONCLUSIONS
the findings confirm that in experimentally infected cattle clinical abnormalities indicative of bse are accompanied by vacuolar changes and prpd accumulation in the brainstem. the presence of more frequently expressed signs in cases with vacuolar changes is consistent with this pathology representing a more advanced stage of disease. that bse-like signs or sign combinations occur in inoculated animals that were not confirmed as bse cases by postmortem examinations requires further study to investigate the potential causal relationship with prion disease.

