BACKGROUND
bacterial panicle blight caused by the bacterium burkholderia glumae is an emerging disease of rice in the united states. not much is known about this disease, the disease cycle or any source of disease resistance. to understand the interaction between rice and burkholderia glumae, we used transcriptomics via next-generation sequencing  and bioinformatics to identify differentially expressed transcripts between resistant and susceptible interactions and formulate a model for rice resistance to the disease.


RESULTS
using inoculated young seedlings as sample tissues, we identified unique transcripts involved with resistance to bacterial panicle blight, including a pif-like orf <dig> and verified differential expression of some selected genes using qrt-pcr. these transcripts, which include resistance genes of the nbs-lrr type, kinases, transcription factors, transporters and expressed proteins with functions that are not known, have not been reported in other pathosystems including rice blast or bacterial blight. further, functional annotation analysis reveals enrichment of defense response and programmed cell death ; atp and protein binding ; and mitochondrion-related  transcripts in the resistant interaction.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, we formulated a model for rice resistance to bacterial panicle blight that involves an activation of previously unknown resistance genes and their activation partners upon challenge with b. glumae. other interesting findings are that 1) though these resistance transcripts were up-regulated upon inoculation in the resistant interaction, some of them were already expressed in the water-inoculated control from the resistant genotype, but not in the water- and bacterium-inoculated samples from the susceptible genotype; 2) rice may have co-opted an orf that was previously a part of a transposable element to aid in the resistance mechanism; and 3) resistance may have existed immediately prior to rice domestication.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacterial panicle blightdisease resistancenext-generation sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

