BACKGROUND
most physiological processes in mammals are temporally regulated by means of a master circadian clock in the brain and peripheral oscillators in most other tissues. a transcriptional-translation feedback network of clock genes produces near  <dig> h oscillations in clock gene and protein expression. here, we aim to identify novel additions to the clock network using a meta-analysis of public chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing , proteomics and protein-protein interaction data starting from a published list of  <dig> genes with robust transcriptional rhythms and circadian phenotypes of knockdowns.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> candidate genes including nine known clock genes that received significantly high scores and were also robust to the relative weights assigned to different data types. our scoring was consistent with the original ranking of the  <dig> genes, but also provided novel complementary insights. candidate genes were enriched for genes expressed in a circadian manner in multiple tissues with regulation driven mainly by transcription factors bmal <dig> and rev-erb α,β. moreover, peak transcription of candidate genes was remarkably consistent across tissues. while peaks of the  <dig> genes were distributed uniformly throughout the day, candidate gene peaks were strongly concentrated around dusk. finally, we showed that binding of specific transcription factors to a gene promoter was predictive of peak transcription at a certain time of day and discuss combinatorial phase regulation.


CONCLUSIONS
combining complementary publicly-available data targeting different levels of regulation within the circadian network, we filtered the original list and found  <dig> novel robust candidate clock genes. using the criteria of circadian proteomic expression, circadian expression in multiple tissues and independent gene knockdown data, we propose six genes  involved in metabolism and cancer for further experimental investigation. the availability of public high-throughput databases makes such meta-analysis a promising approach to test consistency between sources and tap their entire potential.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mammalian circadian clockclock genesmeta-analysisphase regulationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

