BACKGROUND
entity coreference is common in biomedical literature and it can affect text understanding systems that rely on accurate identification of named entities, such as relation extraction and automatic summarization. coreference resolution is a foundational yet challenging natural language processing task which, if performed successfully, is likely to enhance such systems significantly. in this paper, we propose a semantically oriented, rule-based method to resolve sortal anaphora, a specific type of coreference that forms the majority of coreference instances in biomedical literature. the method addresses all entity types and relies on linguistic components of semrep, a broad-coverage biomedical relation extraction system. it has been incorporated into semrep, extending its core semantic interpretation capability from sentence level to discourse level.


RESULTS
we evaluated our sortal anaphora resolution method in several ways. the first evaluation specifically focused on sortal anaphora relations. our methodology achieved a f <dig> score of  <dig>  on the test portion of a manually annotated corpus of  <dig> medline abstracts, a 4-fold improvement over the baseline method. investigating the impact of sortal anaphora resolution on relation extraction, we found that the overall effect was positive, with  <dig> % of the changes involving uninformative relations being replaced by more specific and informative ones, while  <dig> % of the changes had no effect, and only  <dig> % were negative. we estimate that anaphora resolution results in changes in about  <dig>  % of approximately  <dig> million semantic relations extracted from the entire pubmed.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that a heavily semantic approach to sortal anaphora resolution is largely effective for biomedical literature. our evaluation and error analysis highlight some areas for further improvements, such as coordination processing and intra-sentential antecedent selection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
natural language processingsortal anaphora resolutionbiomedical literaturesemantic relation extractionu.s. national library of medicineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

