BACKGROUND
the sr/camta proteins represent a small family of transcription activators that play important roles in plant responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. seven slsr/camta genes were identified in tomato as tomato counterparts of sr/camta; however, the involvement of slsrs/camtas in biotic and abiotic stress responses is not clear. in this study, we performed functional analysis of the slsr/camta family for their possible functions in defense response against pathogens and tolerance to drought stress.


RESULTS
expression of slsrs was induced with distinct patterns by botrytis cinerea and pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato  dc <dig>  virus-induced gene silencing -based knockdown of either slsr <dig> or slsr3l in tomato resulted in enhanced resistance to b. cinerea and pst dc <dig> and led to constitutive accumulation of h2o <dig>  elevated expression of defense genes, marker genes for pathogen-associated molecular pattern-triggered immunity, and regulatory genes involved in the salicylic acid- and ethylene-mediated signaling pathways. furthermore, the expression of slsr1l and slsr2l in detached leaves and whole plants was significantly induced by drought stress. silencing of slsr1l led to decreased drought stress tolerance, accelerated water loss in leaves, reduced root biomass and attenuated expression of drought stress responsive genes in tomato. the slsr <dig> and slsr3l proteins were localized in the nucleus of plant cells when transiently expressed in nicotiana benthamiana and had transcriptional activation activity in yeast.


CONCLUSIONS
vigs-based functional analyses demonstrate that both slsr <dig> and slsr3l in the tomato slsr/camta family are negative regulators of defense response against b. cinerea and pst dc <dig> while slsr1l is a positive regulator of drought stress tolerance in tomato.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tomato sr/camtadisease resistance responsedrought stressissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

