BACKGROUND
brucella microti was first isolated from common vole  in the czech republic in central europe in  <dig>  as b. microti is the only brucella species known to live in soil, its distribution, ecology, zoonotic potential, and genomic organization is of particular interest. the present paper is the first to report the isolation of b. microti from a wild boar , which is also the first isolation of this bacterial species in hungary.


RESULTS
the b. microti isolate was cultured, after enrichment in brucella-selective broth, from the submandibular lymph node of a female wild boar that was taken by hunters in hungary near the austrian border in september  <dig>  histological and immunohistological examinations of the lymph node sections with b. abortus-, b. suis- and b. canis-specific sera gave negative results. the isolate did not require co <dig> for growth, was oxidase, catalase, and urease positive, h2s negative, grew well in the presence of 20 μg/ml basic fuchsin and thionin, and had brownish pigmentation after three days of incubation. it gave strong positive agglutination with anti-a and anti-m but had a negative reaction with anti-r monospecific sera. the api  <dig> ne test identified it as ochrobactrum anthropi with  <dig>  % identity, and it showed b. microti-specific banding pattern in the bruce- and suis-ladder multiplex pcr systems. whole genome re-sequencing identified  <dig> snps in orthologous loci when compared to the b. microti reference genome available in genbank, and the mlva analysis yielded a unique profile.


CONCLUSIONS
given that the female wild boar did not develop any clinical disease, we hypothesize that this host species only harboured the bacterium, serving as a possible reservoir capable of maintaining and spreading this pathogen. the infectious source could have been either a rodent, a carcass that had been eaten or infection occurred via the boar rooting in soil. the low number of discovered snps suggests an unexpectedly high level of genetic homogeneity in this brucella species.

keywords
biochemistrybrucella microtiimmunohistochemistrymlvamorphologywild boarwhole genome sequencinghungaryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

