BACKGROUND
the role of cyclooxygenase- <dig> and cox- <dig> in the saluretic and renin-angiotensin responses to loop diuretics in the cat is unknown. we propose in vivo characterisation of isoform roles in a furosemide model by administering non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  with differing selectivity profiles: robenacoxib  and ketoprofen .


RESULTS
in this four period crossover study, we compared the effect of four treatments: placebo, robenacoxib once or twice daily and ketoprofen once daily concomitantly with furosemide in seven healthy cats. for each period, urine and blood samples were collected at baseline and within 48 h of treatment starting. plasma renin activity , plasma and urinary aldosterone concentrations, glomerular filtration rate  and 24 h urinary volumes, electrolytes and eicosanoids , renal injury biomarker excretions  were measured. urine volume  and urinary sodium, chloride and calcium excretions increased from baseline with all treatments. plasma creatinine increased with all treatments except placebo, whereas gfr was significantly decreased from baseline only with ketoprofen. pra increased significantly with placebo and once daily robenacoxib and the increase was significantly higher with placebo compared to ketoprofen . urinary aldosterone excretion increased with all treatments but this increase was inhibited by 75 % with ketoprofen and 65 % with once daily robenacoxib compared to placebo. urinary pge <dig> excretion decreased with all treatments and excretion was significantly lower with ketoprofen compared to placebo. urinary txb <dig> excretion was significantly increased from baseline only with placebo. nag increased from baseline with all treatments. immunohistochemistry on post-mortem renal specimens, obtained from a different group of cats that died naturally of non-renal causes, suggested constitutive cox- <dig> and cox- <dig> co-localization in many renal structures including the macula densa .


CONCLUSIONS
these data suggest that both cox- <dig> and cox- <dig> could generate the signal from the md to the renin secreting cells in cats exposed to furosemide. co-localization of cox isoenzymes in md cells supports the functional data reported here.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
furosemidecyclooxygenasecoxibnsaidsrobenacoxibketoprofenfelinerenalmacula densarenin-angiotensin-aldosterone systemissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

