BACKGROUND
the identification of structured units in a protein sequence is an important first step for most biochemical studies. importantly for this study, the identification of stable structured region is a crucial first step to generate novel synthetic antibodies. while many approaches to find domains or predict structured regions exist, important limitations remain, such as the optimization of domain boundaries and the lack of identification of non-domain structured units. moreover, no integrated tool exists to find and optimize structural domains within protein sequences.


RESULTS
here, we describe a new tool, pat  that can efficiently identify both domains  and non-domain putative structured units. pat automatically analyzes various structural properties, evaluates the folding stability, and reports possible structural domains in a given protein sequence. for reliability evaluation of pat, we applied pat to identify antibody target molecules based on the notion that soluble and well-defined protein secondary and tertiary structures are appropriate target molecules for synthetic antibodies.


CONCLUSIONS
pat is an efficient and sensitive tool to identify structured units. a performance analysis shows that pat can characterize structurally well-defined regions in a given sequence and outperforms other efforts to define reliable boundaries of domains. specially, pat successfully identifies experimentally confirmed target molecules for antibody generation. pat also offers the pre-calculated results of  <dig>  human proteins to accelerate common queries. pat can therefore help to investigate large-scale structured domains and improve the success rate for synthetic antibody generation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
structural domainsprotein domainprotein sequenceantibody target moleculessynthetic antibodyputative structural unitphage displaycanadian institute for health researchbasic science research program through the national research foundationnserc-create training programissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

