BACKGROUND
salinity–alkalinity stress is known to adversely affect a variety of processes in plants, thus inhibiting growth and decreasing crop yield. polyamines protect plants against a variety of environmental stresses. however, whether exogenous spermidine increases the tolerance of tomato seedlings via effects on chloroplast antioxidant enzymes and chlorophyll metabolism is unknown. in this study, we examined the effect of exogenous spermidine on chlorophyll synthesis and degradation pathway intermediates and related enzyme activities, as well as chloroplast ultrastructure, gene expression, and antioxidants in salinity–alkalinity–stressed tomato seedlings.


RESULTS
salinity–alkalinity stress disrupted chlorophyll metabolism and hindered uroorphyrinogen iii conversion to protoporphyrin ix. these effects were more pronounced in seedlings of cultivar zhongza no.  <dig> than cultivar jinpengchaoguan. under salinity–alkalinity stress, exogenous spermidine alleviated decreases in the contents of total chlorophyll and chlorophyll a and b in seedlings of both cultivars following 4 days of stress. with extended stress, exogenous spermidine reduced the accumulation of δ–aminolevulinic acid, porphobilinogen, and uroorphyrinogen iii and increased the levels of protoporphyrin ix, mg–protoporphyrin ix, and protochlorophyllide, suggesting that spermidine promotes the conversion of uroorphyrinogen iii to protoporphyrin ix. the effect occurred earlier in cultivar jinpengchaoguan than in cultivar zhongza no.  <dig>  exogenous spermidine also alleviated the stress–induced increases in malondialdehyde content, superoxide radical generation rate, chlorophyllase activity, and expression of the chlorophyllase gene and the stress–induced decreases in the activities of antioxidant enzymes, antioxidants, and expression of the porphobilinogen deaminase gene. in addition, exogenous spermidine stabilized the chloroplast ultrastructure in stressed tomato seedlings.


CONCLUSIONS
the tomato cultivars examined exhibited different capacities for responding to salinity–alkalinity stress. exogenous spermidine triggers effective protection against damage induced by salinity–alkalinity stress in tomato seedlings, probably by maintaining chloroplast structural integrity and alleviating salinity–alkalinity–induced oxidative damage, most likely through regulation of chlorophyll metabolism and the enzymatic and non–enzymatic antioxidant systems in chloroplast. exogenous spermidine also exerts positive effects at the transcription level, such as down–regulation of the expression of the chlorophyllase gene and up–regulation of the expression of the porphobilinogen deaminase gene.

keywords
spermidinetomatosalinity–alkalinity stresschloroplastchlorophyll precursorantioxidant systemnational key technology r&d program in the 12th 5-year plan of china;no. 2014bad14b06hu xiaohui scientific research special fund of northwest agriculture & forestry universityqn2013018hu xiaohui issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

