BACKGROUND
herbaceous peony  is a traditional flower in china and a wedding attractive flower in worldwide. in its flower colour, yellow is the rarest which is ten times the price of the other colours. however, the breeding of new yellow p. lactiflora varieties using genetic engineering is severely limited due to the little-known biochemical and molecular mechanisms underlying its characteristic formation.


RESULTS
in this study, two cdna libraries generated from p. lactiflora chimaera with red outer-petal and yellow inner-petal were sequenced using an illumina hiseq™  <dig> platform.  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> total raw reads from red outer-petal and yellow inner-petal cdna libraries were generated, which were assembled into  <dig>  and  <dig>  unigenes with an average length of  <dig> and 617 nt, respectively. moreover,  <dig>  non-redundant all-unigenes were obtained, with  <dig>  all-unigenes  annotated in public databases. in addition,  <dig>  all-unigenes were differentially expressed between the red outer-petal and yellow inner-petal, with  <dig>  up-regulated and  <dig>  down-regulated all-unigenes, and the flavonoid metabolic pathway related to colour development was identified using the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes database . subsequently, the expression patterns of  <dig> candidate differentially expressed genes  involved in the flavonoid metabolic pathway were examined, and flavonoids were qualitatively and quantitatively analysed. numerous anthoxanthins  and a few anthocyanins were detected in the yellow inner-petal, which were all lower than those in the red outer-petal due to the low expression levels of the phenylalanine ammonialyase gene , flavonol synthase gene , dihydroflavonol 4-reductase gene , anthocyanidin synthase gene , anthocyanidin 3-o-glucosyltransferase gene  and anthocyanidin 5-o-glucosyltransferase gene .


CONCLUSIONS
transcriptome sequencing  analysis based on the high throughput sequencing technology was an efficient approach to identify critical genes in p. lactiflora and other non-model plants. the flavonoid metabolic pathway and glucide metabolic pathway were identified as relatived yellow formation in p. lactiflora, plpal, plfls, pldfr, plans, pl3gt and pl5gt were selected as potential candidates involved in flavonoid metabolic pathway, which inducing inhibition of anthocyanin biosynthesis mediated yellow formation in p. lactiflora. this study could lay a theoretical foundation for breeding new yellow p. lactiflora varieties.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
anthocyaninsflower colourflavonoidsherbaceous peonytranscriptomeyellowissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

