BACKGROUND
the major intrinsic proteins  facilitate the transport of water and neutral solutes across the lipid bilayers. plant mips are believed to be important in cell division and expansion and in water transport properties in response to environmental conditions. more than  <dig> mip sequences have been identified in arabidopsis thaliana, maize and rice. plasma membrane intrinsic proteins , tonoplast intrinsic proteins , nod26-like intrinsic protein  and small and basic intrinsic proteins  are subfamilies of plant mips. despite sequence diversity, all the experimentally determined structures belonging to the mip superfamily have the same "hour-glass" fold.


RESULTS
we have structurally characterized  <dig> rice and  <dig> maize mips and compared them with that of arabidopsis. homology models of  <dig> mips from all three plant species were built. structure-based sequence alignments were generated and the residues in the helix-helix interfaces were analyzed. small residues  are found to be highly conserved as a group in the helix-helix interface of mip structures. individual families sometimes prefer one or another of the residues from this group. the narrow aromatic/arginine  selectivity filter in mips has been shown to provide an important constriction for solute permeability. ar/r regions were analyzed and compared between the three plant species. seventeen tip, nip and sip members from rice and maize have ar/r signatures that are not found in arabidopsis. a subgroup of rice and maize nips has small residues in three of the four positions in the ar/r tetrad, resulting in a wider constriction. these mip members could transport larger solute molecules.


CONCLUSIONS
small residues are group-conserved in the helix-helix interface of mip structures and they seem to be important for close helix-helix interactions. such conservation might help to preserve the hour-glass fold in mip structures. analysis and comparison of ar/r selectivity filters suggest that rice and maize mips could transport more diverse solutes than arabidopsis mips. thus the mip members show conservation in helix-helix interfaces and diversity in aromatic/arginine selectivity filters. the former is related to structural stability and the later can be linked to functional diversity.

