BACKGROUND
environmental temperature has serious implications in life cycle of aquatic ectotherms. understanding the molecular mechanisms of temperature acclimation and adaptation of marine organisms is of the uttermost importance for ecology, fisheries, and aquaculture, as it allows modeling the effects of global warming on population dynamics. regulatory molecules are major modulators of acclimation and adaptation; among them, micrornas  are versatile and substantial contributors to regulatory networks of development and adaptive plasticity. however, their role in thermal plasticity is poorly known. we have asked whether the temperature and its shift during the early ontogeny  affect the mirna repertoire of atlantic cod , and if thermal experience has long-term consequences in the mirna profile.


RESULTS
we characterized mirna during different developmental stages and in juvenile tissues using next generation sequencing. we identified  <dig> putative mirna precursor loci,  <dig> novel precursor mirnas, and  <dig> mature mirnas. some mirnas showed stage- or tissue-enriched expression and mirnas, such as the mir-17 ~  <dig> cluster, myomirs , neuromirs , mir-130b, and mir- <dig> showed differential expression in different temperature regimes. long-term effect of embryonic incubation temperature was revealed on expression of some mirnas in juvenile pituitary , gonad , and liver , but not in brain. some of differentially expressed mirnas in the liver were confirmed using lna-based rt-qpcr. the effect of temperature on methylation status of selected mirna promoter regions was mostly inconclusive.


CONCLUSIONS
temperature elevation by several degrees during embryonic and larval developmental stages significantly alters the mirna profile, both short-term and long-term. our results suggest that a further rise in seas temperature might affect life history of atlantic cod.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
atlantic codembryonic developmentmethylationmirnathermal plasticityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

