BACKGROUND
active and passive surveillance for avian influenza virus  and newcastle disease virus  is widespread in commercial poultry worldwide, therefore optimization of sample collection and transport would be valuable to achieve the best sensitivity and specificity possible, and to develop the most accurate and efficient testing programs. a h7n <dig> low pathogenicity  aiv strain was selected and used as an indicator virus because it is present in lower concentrations in swabbings and thus requires greater sensitivity for detection compared to highly pathogenic  aiv. for similar reasons a mesogenic strain of ndv was selected. using oro-pharyngeal and cloacal swabs collected from chickens experimentally exposed to the viruses we evaluated the effects of numerous aspects of sample collection and transport: 1) swab construction material , 2) transport media , 3) media volume , 4) transporting the swab wet in the vial or removing the swab prior to transport, or transporting the swab dry with no media, and 5) single swabs versus pooling  <dig> or  <dig> swabs per vial.


RESULTS
using real-time rt-pcr , virus isolation  and commercial antigen detection immunoassays for aiv we observed statistically significant differences and consistent trends with some elements of sample collection and transport; media, dry transport and swab construction. conversely, the number of swabs pooled  and whether the swab was removed prior to transport did not impact virus detection. similarly, with ndv detection by both vi and rrt-pcr was not affected by the numbers of swabs collected in a single vial .


CONCLUSIONS
we observed that flocked and foam swabs were superior to non-flocked swabs, bhi media was better than pbs, and transporting swabs wet was better for virus recovery and detection than transporting them dry. there was no observable difference in detection whether the swab was removed prior to transport or left in the vial. also, with both aiv and ndv, there was no observed difference in virus detection between pools of  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> swabs.

