BACKGROUND
recombinant gas vesicles  from halobacterium sp. strain sd <dig> expressing cassettes with different sivsm inserts, have potential utility as an effective antigen display system for immunogen testing in vivo and for initial epitope assessments in vitro. previous mouse model studies demonstrated immunization with r-gv expressing selected exogenous sequences elicited a prolonged immune response. here we tested segments from three sivsm genes  each surface displayed by r-gv. as with hiv, for sivsm the proteins encoded by tat, rev and nef respectively serve critical and diverse functions: effects on efficient viral rna polymerase ii transcription, regulation of viral gene expression and effects on specific signaling functions through the assembly of multiprotein complexes. humoral responses to r-gvtat, rev or nef <dig> elicited in vivo, associated changes in selected cell cytokine production following r-gv internalization, and the capacity of j774a. <dig> macrophage cells to degrade these internalized display/delivery particles in vitro were examined.


RESULTS
the in vivo studies involving r-gv immunizations and in vitro studies of r-gv uptake by j774a. <dig> macrophages demonstrated:  tests for antibody isotypes in immunized mice sera showed activation and re-stimulation of memory b cells,  during long term immune response to the epitopes, primarily the igg <dig> isotype was produced,  in vitro, macrophage degradation of r-gv containing different sivsm inserts occurred over a period of days resulting in an inherent slow breakdown and degradation of the sivsm peptide inserts,  vesicle specific gvpc, a larger protein, degraded more slowly than the recombinant peptide inserts and  in vitro uptake and degradation of the r-gv populations tested was associated with sivsm insert specific patterns for cytokines il- <dig>  il- <dig> and il- <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
together these findings provide new information underscoring r-gv potential. they can clearly: display various exogenous peptides, be intracellularly degraded in vitro over a period of days, affect cell cytokine levels, and retain their self-adjuvanting capacity irrespective of the specific peptide expressed within the gvpc protein. these features support the cost effective generation of vaccine components, and provide a simple, self-adjuvanting system for assessing immune visibility of and specific responses to individual pathogen peptides.

