BACKGROUND
the enzyme glucose-6-phosphatase catalyzes the dephosphorylation of glucose-6-phosphatase to glucose, the final step in the gluconeogenic and glycogenolytic pathways. expression of the glucose-6-phosphatase gene is induced by glucocorticoids and elevated levels of intracellular camp. the effect of camp in regulating glucose-6-phosphatase gene transcription was corroborated by the identification of two genetic motifs cre <dig> and cre <dig> in the human and murine glucose-6-phosphatase gene promoter that resemble camp response elements .


RESULTS
the camp response element is a point of convergence for many extracellular and intracellular signals, including camp, calcium, and neurotrophins. the major cre binding protein creb, a member of the basic region leucine zipper  family of transcription factors, requires phosphorylation to become a biologically active transcriptional activator. since unphosphorylated creb is transcriptionally silent simple overexpression studies cannot be performed to test the biological role of cre-like sequences of the glucose-6-phosphatase gene. the use of a constitutively active creb2/creb fusion protein allowed us to uncouple the investigation of target genes of creb from the variety of signaling pathways that lead to an activation of creb. here, we show that this constitutively active creb2/creb fusion protein strikingly enhanced reporter gene transcription mediated by either cre <dig> or cre <dig> derived from the glucose-6-phosphatase gene. likewise, reporter gene transcription was enhanced following expression of the catalytic subunit of camp-dependent protein kinase  in the nucleus of transfected cells. in contrast, activating transcription factor  <dig> , known to compete with creb for binding to the canonical cre sequence 5'-tgacgtca-3', did not transactivate reporter genes containing cre <dig>  cre <dig>  or both cres derived from the glucose-6-phosphatase gene.


CONCLUSIONS
using a constitutively active creb2/creb fusion protein and a mutant of the pka catalytic subunit that is targeted to the nucleus, we have shown that the glucose-6-phosphatase gene has two distinct genetic elements that function as bona fide cre. this study further shows that the expression vectors encoding c2/creb and catalytic subunit of pka are valuable tools for the study of creb-mediated gene transcription and the biological functions of creb.

