BACKGROUND
isoprenylcysteine carboxyl methyltransferase  is the third of three enzymes that posttranslationally modify proteins that contain c-terminal caax motifs. the processing of caax proteins through this so-called prenylation pathway via a route initiated by addition of an isoprenoid lipid is required for both membrane targeting and function of the proteins. the involvement of many caax proteins such as ras gtpases in oncogenesis and other aberrant proliferative disorders has led to the targeting of the enzymes involved in their processing for therapeutic development, necessitating a detailed understanding of the mechanisms of the enzymes.


RESULTS
in this study, we have investigated the kinetic mechanism of recombinant human icmt. in the reaction catalyzed by icmt, s-adenosyl-l-methionine  provides the methyl group that is transferred to the second substrate, the c-terminal isoprenylated cysteine residue of a caax protein, thereby generating a c-terminal prenylcysteine methyl ester on the protein. to facilitate the kinetic analysis of icmt, we synthesized a new small molecule substrate of the enzyme, biotin-s-farnesyl-l-cysteine . initial kinetic analysis of icmt suggested a sequential mechanism for the enzyme that was further analyzed using a dead end competitive inhibitor, s-farnesylthioacetic acid . inhibition by fta was competitive with respect to bfc and uncompetitive with respect to adomet, indicating an ordered mechanism with sam binding first. to investigate the order of product dissociation, product inhibition studies were undertaken with s-adenosyl-l-homocysteine  and the n-acetyl-s-farnesyl-l-cysteine methylester . this analysis indicated that adohcy is a competitive inhibitor with respect to adomet, while afcme shows a noncompetitive inhibition with respect to bfc and a mixed-type inhibition with respect to adomet. these studies established that adohcy is the final product released, and that bfc and afcme bind to different forms of the enzyme.


CONCLUSIONS
these studies establish that catalysis by human icmt proceeds through an ordered sequential mechanism and provide a kinetic framework for analysis of specific inhibitors of this key enzyme.

