BACKGROUND
infectious pancreatic necrosis  is a highly contagious birnavirus disease of farmed salmonid fish, which often causes high levels of morbidity and mortality. a large host genetic component to resistance has been previously described for atlantic salmon , which mediates high mortality rates in some families and zero mortality in others. however, the molecular and immunological basis for this resistance is not yet fully known. this manuscript describes a global comparison of the gene expression profiles of resistant and susceptible atlantic salmon fry following challenge with the ipn virus.


RESULTS
salmon fry from two ipnv-resistant and two ipnv-susceptible full sibling families were challenged with the virus and sampled at 1 day, 7 days and 20 days post-challenge. significant viral titre was observed in both resistant and susceptible fish at all timepoints, although generally at higher levels in susceptible fish. gene expression profiles combined with gene ontology and pathway analyses demonstrated that while a clear immune response was observed in both resistant and susceptible fish, there were striking differences between the two phenotypes. the susceptible fish showed marked up-regulation of genes related to cytokine activity and inflammatory response that evidently failed to protect against the virus. in contrast, the resistant fish demonstrated a less pronounced immune response including up-regulation of genes relating to the m <dig> macrophage system.


CONCLUSIONS
while only the susceptible phenotype shows appreciable mortality levels, both resistant and susceptible fish can become infected with ipnv. susceptible fish are characterized by a much larger, yet ineffective, immune response, largely related to cytokine and inflammatory systems. resistant fish demonstrate a more moderate, putative macrophage-mediated inflammatory response, which may contribute to their survival.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
salmo salarvirustranscriptomeinfectious pancreatic necrosisdisease resistanceinterferoninnate immunityaquaculturehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000268biotechnology and biological sciences research councilbb/h022007/1bb/f002750/1bb/f001959/1bb/j004235/1bb/j004243/1bishop stephen c. bron james e. houston ross d. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000268biotechnology and biological sciences research council bb/j004324/1fundación barriéthe marine alliance for science and technology for scotlandhr09011taggart john b. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

