BACKGROUND
next-generation sequencing  technologies have provided researchers with vast possibilities in various biological and biomedical research areas. efficient data mining strategies are in high demand for large scale comparative and evolutional studies to be performed on the large amounts of data derived from ngs projects. topic modeling is an active research field in machine learning and has been mainly used as an analytical tool to structure large textual corpora for data mining.

methods
we report a novel procedure to analyse ngs data using topic modeling. it consists of four major procedures: ngs data retrieval, preprocessing, topic modeling, and data mining using latent dirichlet allocation  topic outputs. the ngs data set of the salmonella enterica strains were used as a case study to show the workflow of this procedure. the perplexity measurement of the topic numbers and the convergence efficiencies of gibbs sampling were calculated and discussed for achieving the best result from the proposed procedure.


RESULTS
the output topics by lda algorithms could be treated as features of salmonella strains to accurately describe the genetic diversity of flic gene in various serotypes. the results of a two-way hierarchical clustering and data matrix analysis on lda-derived matrices successfully classified salmonella serotypes based on the ngs data. the implementation of topic modeling in ngs data analysis procedure provides a new way to elucidate genetic information from ngs data, and identify the gene-phenotype relationships and biomarkers, especially in the era of biological and medical big data.


CONCLUSIONS
the implementation of topic modeling in ngs data analysis provides a new way to elucidate genetic information from ngs data, and identify the gene-phenotype relationships and biomarkers, especially in the era of biological and medical big data.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
data miningtopic modelingnext-generation sequencing genetic diversitybiomarkerissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

