BACKGROUND
high dose ionizing radiation  induces potent toxic cell effects mediated by either direct dna damage or the production of reactive oxygen species . ir-induced modulations in multiple biological processes have been proposed to be partly regulated by radiosensitive microrna . in order to gain new insights into the role of mirnas in the regulation of biological processes after ir, we have investigated changes in mrna and mirna expression after high dose ir.


RESULTS
ir induced changes in the mrna and mirna profiles of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells . when comparing non-irradiated and irradiated samples, we detected a time-dependent increase in differentially expressed mrnas and mirnas, with the highest differences detectable 20 hours after exposure. gene ontology analysis revealed that very early events  after irradiation were specifically associated with p <dig> signaling and apoptotic pathways, whereas a large number of diverse cellular processes were deregulated after 20 hours. transcription factor analysis of all up-regulated genes confirmed the importance of p <dig> in the early post-irradiation phase. when analyzing mirna expression, we found  <dig> mirnas that were significantly regulated in the late post-irradiation phase. integrating mirna and target gene expression data, we found a significant negative correlation between mirna-mrna and identified hepatic leukemia factor  as a transcription factor down-regulated in the response to ir. these regulated mirnas and the hlf target genes were involved in modulating radio-responsive pathways, such as apoptosis, the makp signaling pathway, endocytosis, and cytokine-cytokine interactions.


CONCLUSIONS
using a large dataset of mrna and mirna expression profiles, we describe the interplay of mrnas and mirnas in the regulation of gene expression in response to ir at a posttranscriptional level and their involvement in the modulation of radiation-induced biological pathways.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
microarraymicrornasmessenger rnaapoptosismononuclear leukocytesp53ionizing radiationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

