BACKGROUND
the mechanisms of steroids actions in the brain mainly involve the binding and nuclear translocation of specific cytoplasmic receptors. these receptors can act as transcription factors and regulate gene expression. however, steroid-dependent transcriptional regulation in different types of neural cells is not yet fully understood. the aim of this study was to evaluate and compare transcriptional alterations induced by various steroid receptor agonists in primary cultures of astrocytes and neurons from mouse brain.


RESULTS
we utilized whole-genome microarrays  and quantitative pcr analyses to measure mrna abundance levels. to stimulate gene expression we treated neuronal and astroglial cultures with dexamethasone , aldosterone , progesterone , 5α-dihydrotestosterone  and β-estradiol  for 4 h. neurons were found to exhibit higher levels of expression of mineralocorticoid receptor, progesterone receptor and estrogen receptor  <dig> than astrocytes. however, higher mrna level of glucocorticoid receptor mrna was observed in astrocytes. we identified  <dig> genes regulated by steroids. in astrocytes we found  <dig> genes altered by dexamethasone and  <dig> altered by aldosterone. functional classification of the regulated genes indicated their putative involvement in multiple aspects of cell metabolism  and the inflammatory response . progesterone, dihydrotestosterone and estradiol did not change gene expression in astrocytes. we found no significant changes in gene expression in neurons.


CONCLUSIONS
the obtained results indicate that glial cells might be the primary targets of transcriptional action of steroids in the central nervous system. substantial changes in gene expression driven by the glucocorticoid receptor imply an important role for the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis in the hormone-dependent regulation of brain physiology. this is an in vitro study. hence, the model may not accurately reflect all the effects of steroids on gene expression in neurons in vivo.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

ministerstwo nauki i szkolnictwa wyższego 0414/ip1/2011/71piechota marcin narodowe centrum nauki 2011/03/d/nz3/01686korostynski michał institute of pharmacology passtatutory fundsprzewlocki ryszard issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

