BACKGROUND
microtus fortis is a non-permissive host of schistosoma japonicum. it has natural resistance against schistosomes, although the precise resistance mechanisms remain unclear. the paucity of genetic information for m. fortis limits the use of available immunological methods. thus, studies based on high-throughput sequencing technologies are required to obtain information about resistance mechanisms against s. japonicum.


RESULTS
using illumina single-end technology, a de novo assembly of the m. fortis transcriptome produced  <dig>  unigenes with an average length of  <dig> nucleotides. comparisons were made between m. fortis before and after infection with s. japonicum using rna-seq quantification analysis. the highest number of differentially expressed genes  occurred two weeks after infection, and the highest number of down-regulated degs occurred three weeks after infection. simultaneously, the strongest pathological changes in the liver were observed at week two. gene ontology terms and pathways related to the degs revealed that up-regulated transcripts were involved in metabolism, immunity and inflammatory responses. quantitative real-time pcr analysis showed that patterns of gene expression were consistent with rna-seq results.


CONCLUSIONS
after infection with s. japonicum, a defensive reaction in m. fortis commenced rapidly, increasing dramatically in the second week, and gradually decreasing three weeks after infection. the obtained m. fortis transcriptome and degs profile data demonstrated that natural and adaptive immune responses, play an important role in m. fortis immunity to s. japonicum. these findings provide a better understanding of the natural resistance mechanisms of m. fortis against schistosomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
microtus fortisschistosoma japonicumnon-permissive hostrna-seqissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

