BACKGROUND
steroids are small molecule hormones derived from cholesterol. steroids affect many tissues, including the brain. in the zebra finch, estrogenic steroids are particularly interesting because they masculinize the neural circuit that controls singing and their synthesis in the brain is modulated by experience. here, we analyzed the zebra finch genome assembly to assess the content, conservation, and organization of genes that code for components of the estrogen-synthetic pathway and steroid nuclear receptors. based on these analyses, we also investigated neural expression of a cholesterol transport protein gene in the context of song neurobiology.


RESULTS
we present sequence-based analysis of twenty steroid-related genes using the genome assembly and other resources. generally, zebra finch genes showed high homology to genes in other species. the diversity of steroidogenic enzymes and receptors may be lower in songbirds than in mammals; we were unable to identify all known mammalian isoforms of the 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase families in the zebra finch genome assembly, and not all splice sites described in mammals were identified in the corresponding zebra finch genes. we did identify two factors, nobox and nr1h2-rxr, that may be important for coordinated transcription of multiple steroid-related genes. we found very little qualitative overlap in predicted transcription factor binding sites in the genes for two cholesterol transport proteins, the  <dig> kda cholesterol transport protein  and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein . we therefore performed in situ hybridization for tspo and found that its mrna was not always detected in brain regions where star and steroidogenic enzymes were previously shown to be expressed. also, transcription of tspo, but not star, may be regulated by the experience of hearing song.


CONCLUSIONS
the genes required for estradiol synthesis and action are represented in the zebra finch genome assembly, though the complement of steroidogenic genes may be smaller in birds than in mammals. coordinated transcription of multiple steroidogenic genes is possible, but results were inconsistent with the hypothesis that star and tspo mrnas are co-regulated. integration of genomic and neuroanatomical analyses will continue to provide insights into the evolution and function of steroidogenesis in the songbird brain.

