BACKGROUND
picea likiangensis var. balfouriana  hillier ex slavin  is an ecologically and economically important conifer that grows rapidly under optimum conditions and produces high-quality wood. it has a wide geographic distribution and is prevalent in southwest and eastern regions of china. under suboptimal conditions, p. balfouriana grows slowly, which restricts its cultivation. somatic embryogenesis has been used in the mass propagation of commercial species. however, low initiation rates are a common problem and the mechanisms involved in the induction of somatic embryogenesis are not fully understood. to understand the molecular mechanisms regulating somatic embryogenesis in p. balfouriana, high-throughput rna-seq technology was used to investigate the transcriptomes of embryogenic and non-embryogenic tissues from three p. balfouriana genotypes. we compared the genes expressed in these tissues to identify molecular markers with embryogenic potential.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> , <dig> nucleotide sequence reads were obtained for the embryogenic and non-embryogenic tissues of p. balfouriana, and  <dig> % of them uniquely matched  <dig>   of the  <dig>  genes in the picea abies genome database . differential gene expression analysis identified  <dig>  differentially expressed genes  in the embryogenic tissues relative to the non-embryogenic tissues, including  <dig> significantly upregulated and  <dig> significantly downregulated genes. kegg  pathway analysis revealed that the most significantly altered genes were involved in plant hormone signal transduction, metabolic pathways , and phenylalanine metabolism.


CONCLUSIONS
we found that the initiation of embryogenic tissues affected gene expression in many kegg pathways, but predominantly in plant hormone signal transduction, plant-pathogen interaction, and starch and sucrose metabolism. the changes in multiple pathways related to induction in the p. balfouriana embryogenic tissues described here, will contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms involved in the initiation of somatic embryogenesis. additionally, we found that somatic embryogenesis receptor kinase , arabinogalactan proteins, and members of the wus-related homeobox protein family may play important roles and could act as molecular markers in the early stage of somatic embryogenesis, as reported previously.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
picea balfourianasomatic embryogenesisembryogenic tissuenon-embryogenic tissueissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

