BACKGROUND
environmental shotgun sequencing  provides a new way to study communities in microbial ecology. we here use sequence data from the global ocean sampling  expedition to investigate toxicant selection pressures revealed by the presence of detoxification genes in marine bacteria. to capture a broad range of potential toxicants we selected detoxification protein families representing systems protecting microorganisms from a variety of stressors, such as metals, organic compounds, antibiotics and oxygen radicals.


RESULTS
using a bioinformatics procedure based on comparative analysis to finished bacterial genomes we found that the amount of detoxification genes present in marine microorganisms seems surprisingly small. the underrepresentation is particularly evident for toxicant transporters and proteins involved in detoxifying metals. exceptions are enzymes involved in oxidative stress defense where peroxidase enzymes are more abundant in marine bacteria compared to bacteria in general. in contrast, catalases are almost completely absent from the open ocean environment, suggesting that peroxidases and peroxiredoxins constitute a core line of defense against reactive oxygen species  in the marine milieu.


CONCLUSIONS
we found no indication that detoxification systems would be generally more abundant close to the coast compared to the open ocean. on the contrary, for several of the protein families that displayed a significant geographical distribution, like peroxidase, penicillin binding transpeptidase and divalent ion transport protein, the open ocean samples showed the highest abundance. along the same lines, the abundance of most detoxification proteins did not increase with estimated pollution. the low level of detoxification systems in marine bacteria indicate that the majority of marine bacteria have a low capacity to adapt to increased pollution. our study exemplifies the use of metagenomics data in ecotoxicology, and in particular how anthropogenic consequences on life in the sea can be examined.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
detoxificationecotoxicologyglobal ocean samplingmarinemetagenomicsoxidative stresstoxic metalsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

