BACKGROUND
brachiaria ruziziensis is one of the most important forage species planted in the tropics. the application of genomic tools to aid the selection of superior genotypes can provide support to b. ruziziensis breeding programs. however, there is a complete lack of information about the b. ruziziensis genome. also, the availability of genomic tools, such as molecular markers, to support b. ruziziensis breeding programs is rather limited. recently, next-generation sequencing technologies have been applied to generate sequence data for the identification of microsatellite regions and primer design. in this study, we present a first validated set of ssr markers for brachiaria ruziziensis, selected from a de novo partial genome assembly of single-end illumina reads.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  perfect microsatellite loci were detected in contigs with a minimum 10x coverage. we selected a set of  <dig> microsatellite loci identified in contigs with minimum 100x coverage for primer design and synthesis, and tested a subset of  <dig> primer pairs,  <dig> of which were polymorphic on  <dig> representative b. ruziziensis accessions. descriptive statistics for these primer pairs are presented, as well as estimates of marker transferability to other relevant brachiaria species. finally, a set of  <dig> multiplex panels containing the  <dig> most informative markers was validated and proposed for b. ruziziensis genetic analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
we show that the detection and development of microsatellite markers from genome assembled illumina single-end dna sequences is highly efficient. the developed markers are readily suitable for genetic analysis and marker assisted selection of brachiaria ruziziensis. the use of this approach for microsatellite marker development is promising for species with limited genomic information, whose breeding programs would benefit from the use of genomic tools. to our knowledge, this is the first set of microsatellite markers developed for this important species.

