BACKGROUND
molecular typing methods are critical for epidemiological investigations, facilitating disease outbreak detection and source identification. study of the epidemiology of the emerging human pathogen arcobacter butzleri is currently hampered by the lack of a subtyping method that is easily deployable in the context of routine epidemiological surveillance. in this study we describe a comparative genomic fingerprinting  method for high-resolution and high-throughput subtyping of a. butzleri. comparative analysis of the genome sequences of eleven a. butzleri strains, including eight strains newly sequenced as part of this project, was employed to identify accessory genes suitable for generating unique genetic fingerprints for high-resolution subtyping based on gene presence or absence within a strain.


RESULTS
a set of eighty-three accessory genes was used to examine the population structure of a dataset comprised of isolates from various sources, including human and non-human animals, sewage, and river water . a streamlined assay  based on a subset of  <dig> genes was subsequently developed through marker optimization. high levels of profile diversity  were observed among the  <dig> isolates in the dataset, and a high simpson’s index of diversity  observed  indicate that the cgf <dig> assay possesses high discriminatory power. at the same time, our observation that  <dig> isolates in this dataset could be assigned to  <dig> clades with a profile similarity of 90% or greater indicates that the method can be used to identify clades comprised of genetically similar isolates.


CONCLUSIONS
the cgf <dig> assay described herein combines high resolution and repeatability with high throughput for the rapid characterization of a. butzleri strains. this assay will facilitate the study of the population structure and epidemiology of a. butzleri.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
molecular epidemiologysubtypingcomparative genomicsarcobacter butzlerigenome sequencingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

