BACKGROUND
the infraorder anomura has long captivated the attention of evolutionary biologists due to its impressive morphological diversity and ecological adaptations. to date,  <dig> extant species have been described but phylogenetic relationships at high taxonomic levels remain unresolved. here, we reconstruct the evolutionary history—phylogeny, divergence times, character evolution and diversification—of this speciose clade. for this purpose, we sequenced two mitochondrial  and three nuclear  markers for  <dig> of the  <dig> extant families, using traditional sanger and next-generation  <dig> sequencing methods. molecular data were combined with  <dig> morphological characters in order to estimate the largest anomuran phylogeny to date. the anomuran fossil record allowed us to incorporate  <dig> fossils for divergence time analyses.


RESULTS
our best phylogenetic hypothesis  supports most anomuran superfamilies and families as monophyletic. however, three families and eleven genera are recovered as para- and polyphyletic. divergence time analysis dates the origin of anomura to the late permian ~ <dig>  mya with many of the present day families radiating during the jurassic and early cretaceous. ancestral state reconstruction suggests that carcinization occurred independently  <dig> times within the group. the invasion of freshwater and terrestrial environments both occurred between the late cretaceous and tertiary. diversification analyses found the speciation rate to be low across anomura, and we identify  <dig> major changes in the tempo of diversification; the most significant at the base of a clade that includes the squat-lobster family chirostylidae.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings are compared against current classifications and previous hypotheses of anomuran relationships. many families and genera appear to be poly- or paraphyletic suggesting a need for further taxonomic revisions at these levels. a divergence time analysis provides key insights into the origins of major lineages and events and the timing of morphological  and ecological  transitions. living anomuran biodiversity is the product of  <dig> major changes in the tempo of diversification; our initial insights suggest that the acquisition of a crab-like form did not act as a key innovation.

anomuraphylogenydivergence timesdiversification ratesmolecularmorphologycharacter evolutionnext-generation sequencing

