BACKGROUND
large-scale sequencing efforts produced millions of expressed sequence tags  collectively representing differentiated biochemical and functional states. analysis of these est libraries reveals differential gene expressions, and therefore est data sets constitute valuable resources for comparative transcriptomics. to translate differentially expressed genes into a better understanding of the underlying biological phenomena, existing microarray analysis approaches usually involve the integration of gene expression with gene ontology  databases to derive comparable functional profiles. however, methods are not available yet to process est-derived transcription maps to enable go-based global functional profiling for comparative transcriptomics in a high throughput manner.


RESULTS
here we present go-diff, a go-based functional profiling approach towards high throughput est-based gene expression analysis and comparative transcriptomics. utilizing holistic gene expression information, the software converts est frequencies into est coverage ratios of go terms. the ratios are then tested for statistical significances to uncover differentially represented go terms between the compared transcriptomes, and functional differences are thus inferred. we demonstrated the validity and the utility of this software by identifying differentially represented go terms in three application cases: intra-species comparison; meta-analysis to test a specific hypothesis; inter-species comparison. go-diff findings were consistent with previous knowledge and provided new clues for further discoveries. a comprehensive test on the go-diff results using series of comparisons between est libraries of human and mouse tissues showed acceptable levels of consistency: 61% for human-human; 69% for mouse-mouse; 47% for human-mouse.


CONCLUSIONS
go-diff is the first software integrating est profiles with go knowledge databases to mine functional differentiation between biological systems, e.g. tissues of the same species or the same tissue cross species. with rapid accumulation of est resources in the public domain and expanding sequencing effort in individual laboratories, go-diff is useful as a screening tool before undertaking serious expression studies.

