BACKGROUND
orthoptera, the largest polyneopteran insect order, contains  <dig> suborders and  <dig> subfamilies. orthoptera mitochondrial genomes  follow the ancestral insect gene order, with the exception of a trnd-trnk rearrangement in acridomorphs and rare trna inversions. a question still remains regarding whether a long thymine-nucleotide stretch  involved in the recognition of the replication origin exists in the control region  of orthoptera mitochondrial dna . herein, we completed the sequencing of whole mitogenomes of two congeners , which possess overlapping distribution areas. additionally, we performed comparative mitogenomic analysis to depict evolutionary trends of orthoptera mitogenomes.


RESULTS
both sinochlora mitogenomes possess  <dig> genes and one cr, a common gene orientation, normal structures of transfer rna and ribosomal rna genes, rather low a+t bias, and significant c skew in the majority strand , resembling all the other sequenced ensiferans. both mitogenomes are characterized by  a large size resulting from multiple copies of an approximately  <dig> bp gc-rich tandem repeat within cr;  a novel gene order , compared to the ancestral order ; and  redundant trns pseudogenes located between trns and nad <dig>  multiple independent duplication events followed by random and/or non-random loss occurred during sinochlora mtdna evolution. the orthoptera mtdna recognition sequence of the replication origin may be one of two kinds: a long t-stretch situated in or adjacent to a possible stem-loop structure or a variant of a long t-stretch located within a potential stem-loop structure.


CONCLUSIONS
the unique sinochlora mitogenomes reveal that the mtdna architecture within orthoptera is more variable than previously thought, enriching our knowledge on mitogenomic genetic diversities. the novel genome rearrangements shed light on mtdna evolutionary patterns. the two kinds of recognition sequences of replication origin suggest that the regulatory sequences involved in the replication initiation process of mtdna have diverged through orthoptera evolution.

sinochlora longifissasinochlora retrolateralismitochondrial genomegenome rearrangementsrecognition sequence

