BACKGROUND
an underlying tenet of the epigenetic code hypothesis is the existence of protein domains that can recognize various chromatin structures. to date, two major candidates have emerged:  the bromodomain, which can recognize certain acetylation marks and  the chromodomain, which can recognize certain methylation marks.


RESULTS
the epc-n  domain is formally defined herein. this domain is conserved across eukaryotes and is predicted to form a right-handed orthogonal four-helix bundle with extended strands at both termini. the types of amino acid residues that define the epc-n domain suggest a role in mediating protein-protein interactions, possibly specifically in the context of chromatin binding, and the types of proteins in which it is found  strongly suggest a role in epigenetic structure formation and/or recognition. there appear to be two major epc-n protein families that can be divided into four unique protein subfamilies. two of these subfamilies  may be related to one another in that subfamily i can be viewed as a plant-specific expansion of subfamily ii. the other two subfamilies  appear to be related to one another by duplication events in a primordial fungal-metazoan-mycetozoan ancestor. subfamilies iii and iv are further defined by the presence of an evolutionarily conserved five-center-zinc-binding motif in the loop connecting the second and third helices of the four-helix bundle. this motif appears to consist of a phd followed by a mononuclear zn knuckle, followed by a phd-like derivative, and will thus be referred to as the pzpm. all non-epc-n proteins studied thus far that contain the pzpm have been implicated in histone methylation and/or gene silencing. in addition, an unusual phyletic distribution of epc-n-containing proteins is observed.


CONCLUSIONS
the data suggest that the epc-n domain is a protein-protein interaction module found in chromatin associated proteins. it is possible that the epc-n domain serves as a direct link between histone acetylation and methylation statuses. the unusual phyletic distribution of epc-n-containing proteins may provide a conduit for future insight into how different organisms form, perceive and respond to epigenetic information.

