BACKGROUND
vascular endothelial growth factor  is an endothelial cell mitogen that stimulates vasculogenesis. it has also been shown to act as a neurotrophic factor in vitro and in vivo. deletion of the hypoxia response element of the promoter region of the gene encoding vegf in mice causes a reduction in neural vegf expression, and results in adult-onset motor neurone degeneration that resembles amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . investigating the molecular pathways to neurodegeneration in the vegfδ/δ mouse model of als may improve understanding of the mechanisms of motor neurone death in the human disease.


RESULTS
microarray analysis was used to determine the transcriptional profile of laser captured spinal motor neurones of transgenic and wild-type littermates at  <dig> time points of disease.  <dig> genes were significantly differentially expressed in motor neurones of presymptomatic vegfδ/δ mice,  <dig> at disease onset, and  <dig> at late stage disease. massive transcriptional downregulation occurred with disease progression, associated with downregulation of genes involved in rna processing at late stage disease. vegfδ/δ mice showed reduction in expression, from symptom onset, of the cholesterol synthesis pathway, and genes involved in nervous system development, including axonogenesis, synapse formation, growth factor signalling pathways, cell adhesion and microtubule-based processes. these changes may reflect a reduced capacity of vegfδ/δ mice for maintenance and remodelling of neuronal processes in the face of demands of neural plasticity. the findings are supported by the demonstration that in primary motor neurone cultures from vegfδ/δ mice, axon outgrowth is significantly reduced compared to wild-type littermates.


CONCLUSIONS
downregulation of these genes involved in axon outgrowth and synapse formation in adult mice suggests a hitherto unrecognized role of vegf in the maintenance of neuronal circuitry. dysregulation of vegf may lead to neurodegeneration through synaptic regression and dying-back axonopathy.

