BACKGROUND
interstitial cystitis is a chronic condition associated with bladder inflammation and, like a number of other chronic pain states, symptoms associated with interstitial cystitis are more common in females and fluctuate during the menstrual cycle. the aim of this study was to determine if estrogens could directly modulate signalling pathways within bladder sensory neurons, such as extracellular signal-related kinase  and p <dig> mitogen-activated protein  kinases. these signalling pathways have been implicated in neuronal plasticity underlying development of inflammatory somatic pain but have not been as extensively investigated in visceral nociceptors. we have focused on lumbosacral dorsal root ganglion  neurons projecting to pelvic viscera  of adult female sprague-dawley rats and performed both in vitro and in vivo manipulations to compare the effects of short- and long-term changes in estrogen levels on mapk expression and activation. we have also investigated if prolonged estrogen deprivation influences the effects of lower urinary tract inflammation on mapk signalling.


RESULTS
in studies of isolated drg neurons in short-term  culture, we found that estradiol and estrogen receptor  agonists rapidly stimulated er-dependent p <dig> phosphorylation relative to total p <dig>  examination of drgs following chronic estrogen deprivation in vivo  showed a parallel increase in total and phosphorylated p <dig> . we also observed an increase in erk <dig> phosphorylation , but no change in erk <dig> expression . we observed no change in erk <dig> expression or phosphorylation. although ovariectomy increased the level of phosphorylated erk <dig> , cyclophosphamide-induced lower urinary tract inflammation did not cause a net increase of either erk <dig> or erk <dig>  or their phosphorylation. inflammation did, however, cause an increase in p <dig> protein levels, relative to β-tubulin. prior ovariectomy did not alter the response to inflammation.


CONCLUSIONS
these results provide new insights into the complex effects of estrogens on bladder nociceptor signalling. the diversity of estrogen actions in these ganglia raises the possibility of developing new ways to modulate their function in pelvic hyperactivity or pain states.

