BACKGROUND
nucleotide binding site-leucine rich repeat -encoding genes comprise the largest class of plant disease resistance genes. the  <dig> nbs-lrr-encoding genes and the  <dig> related genes that do not encode lrrs represent approximately  <dig> % of all orfs so far annotated in arabidopsis ecotype col- <dig>  despite their prevalence in the genome and functional importance, there was little information regarding expression of these genes.


RESULTS
we analyzed the expression patterns of ~ <dig> nbs-lrr-encoding and related genes in arabidopsis col- <dig> using multiple analytical approaches: expressed sequenced tag  representation, massively parallel signature sequencing , microarray analysis, rapid amplification of cdna ends  pcr, and gene trap lines. most of these genes were expressed at low levels with a variety of tissue specificities. expression was detected by at least one approach for all but  <dig> of these genes. the expression of some but not the majority of nbs-lrr-encoding and related genes was affected by salicylic acid  treatment; the response to sa varied among different accessions. an analysis of previously published microarray data indicated that ten nbs-lrr-encoding and related genes exhibited increased expression in wild-type landsberg erecta  after flagellin treatment. several of these ten genes also showed altered expression after sa treatment, consistent with the regulation of r gene expression during defense responses and overlap between the basal defense response and salicylic acid signaling pathways. enhancer trap analysis indicated that neither jasmonic acid nor benzothiadiazole , a salicylic acid analog, induced detectable expression of the five nbs-lrr-encoding genes and one tir-nbs-encoding gene tested; however, bth did induce detectable expression of the other tir-nbs-encoding gene analyzed. evidence for alternative mrna polyadenylation sites was observed for many of the tested genes. evidence for alternative splicing was found for at least  <dig> genes,  <dig> of which encode tir-nbs-lrr proteins. there was no obvious correlation between expression pattern, phylogenetic relationship or genomic location of the nbs-lrr-encoding and related genes studied.


CONCLUSIONS
transcripts of many nbs-lrr-encoding and related genes were defined. most were present at low levels and exhibited tissue-specific expression patterns. expression data are consistent with most arabidopsis nbs-lrr-encoding and related genes functioning in plant defense responses but do not preclude other biological roles.

