BACKGROUND
the new shoots of the albino tea cultivar ‘anji baicha’ are yellow or white at low temperatures and turn green as the environmental temperatures increase during the early spring. ‘anji baicha’ metabolite profiles exhibit considerable variability over three color and developmental stages, especially regarding the carotenoid, chlorophyll, and theanine concentrations. previous studies focused on physiological characteristics, gene expression differences, and variations in metabolite abundances in albino tea plant leaves at specific growth stages. however, the molecular mechanisms regulating metabolite biosynthesis in various color and developmental stages in albino tea leaves have not been fully characterized.


RESULTS
we used rna-sequencing to analyze ‘anji baicha’ leaves at the yellow-green, albescent, and re-greening stages. the leaf transcriptomes differed considerably among the three stages. functional classifications based on gene ontology enrichment and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes enrichment analyses revealed that differentially expressed unigenes were mainly related to metabolic pathways, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, and carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms. chemical analyses revealed higher β-carotene and theanine levels, but lower chlorophyll a levels, in the albescent stage than in the green stage. furthermore, unigenes involved in carotenoid, chlorophyll, and theanine biosyntheses were identified, and the expression patterns of the differentially expressed unigenes in these biosynthesis pathways were characterized. through co-expression analyses, we identified the key genes in these pathways. these genes may be responsible for the metabolite biosynthesis differences among the different leaf color and developmental stages of ‘anji baicha’ tea plants.


CONCLUSIONS
our study presents the results of transcriptomic and biochemical analyses of ‘anji baicha’ tea plants at various stages. the distinct transcriptome profiles for each color and developmental stage enabled us to identify changes to biosynthesis pathways and revealed the contributions of such variations to the albino phenotype of tea plants. furthermore, comparisons of the transcriptomes and related metabolites helped clarify the molecular regulatory mechanisms underlying the secondary metabolic pathways in different stages.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
albinocamellia sinensiscarotenoidschlorophyllsrna-seqtheaninetea plantministry of agriculture of china through the earmarked fund for china agriculture research systemcars-023chen liang chinese academy of agricultural sciences through the agricultural science and technology innovation programcaas-astip-2014-tricaaschen liang http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3150056831600562xu yan-xia ma jian-qiang issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

