BACKGROUND
initially known as the reproductive hormone, relaxin was shown to possess other therapeutically useful properties that include extracellular matrix remodeling, anti-inflammatory, anti-ischemic and angiogenic effects. all these findings make relaxin a potential drug for diverse medical applications. its precursor, pro-relaxin, is an 18 kda protein, that shows activity in in vitro assays. since extraction of relaxin from animal tissues raises several issues, prokaryotes and eukaryotes were both used as expression systems for recombinant relaxin production. most productive results were obtained when using escherichia coli as a host for human relaxin expression. however, in such host, relaxin precipitated in the form of inclusion bodies and, therefore, required several expensive recovery steps as cell lysis, refolding and reduction.


RESULTS
to overcome the issues related to prokaryotic expression here we report the production and purification of secreted human pro-relaxin h <dig> by using the methylotrophic yeast pichia pastoris as expression host. the methanol inducible promoter aox <dig> was used to drive expression of the native and histidine tagged forms of pro-relaxin h <dig> in dual phase fed-batch experiments on the 22 l scale. both protein forms presented the correct structure, as determined by mass spectrometry and western blotting analyses, and demonstrated to be biologically active in immune enzymatic assays. the presence of the tag allowed to simplify pro-relaxin purification obtaining higher purity.


CONCLUSIONS
this work presents a strategy for microbial production of recombinant human pro-relaxin h <dig> in pichia pastoris that allowed the obtainment of biologically active pro-hormone, with a final concentration in the fermentation broth ranging between  <dig> and 14 mg/l of product, as determined by densitometric analyses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pro-relaxinpro-hormoneprotein instabilitypichia pastorisimaclcmshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003407ministero dell’istruzione, dell’università e della ricercanational project “nutrafast pon01_01226: dal nutraceutico al farmaco per strategie integrate”issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

