BACKGROUND
populus euphratica oliv and p. pruinosa schrenk  both grow in dry desert areas with high summer temperatures. however, p. euphratica is distributed in dry deserts with deep underground water whereas p. pruinosa occurs in deserts in which there is underground water close to the surface. we therefore hypothesized that these two sister species may have evolved divergent regulatory and metabolic pathways during their interaction with different salt habitats and other stresses. to test this hypothesis, we compared transcriptomes from callus exposed to  <dig> h of salt stress and control callus samples from both species and identified differentially expressed genes  and alternative splicing  events that had occurred under salt stress.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  transcripts were identified and  <dig> genes were found to be differentially expressed in at least one species in response to salt stress. of these degs,  <dig> and  <dig> were identified in p. euphratica and p. pruinosa, respectively, while  <dig> degs were common to both species. on the basis of parametric analysis of gene set enrichment, go enrichment in p. euphratica was found to be significantly different from that in p. pruinosa. numerous genes involved in hormone biosynthesis, transporters and transcription factors showed clear differences between the two species in response to salt stress. we also identified  <dig>  as events which were mapped to  <dig> poplar genomic loci from four libraries. go enrichments for genes undergoing as events in p. euphratica differed significantly from those in p. pruinosa.


CONCLUSIONS
a number of salt-responsive genes in both p. euphratica and p. pruinosa were identified and candidate genes with potential roles in the salinity adaptation were proposed. transcriptome comparisons of two sister desert poplar species under salt stress suggest that these two species may have developed different genetic pathways in order to adapt to different desert salt habitats. the degs that were found to be common to both species under salt stress may be especially important for future genetic improvement of cultivated poplars or other crops through transgenic approaches in order to increase tolerance of saline soil conditions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
p. euphraticap. pruinosasalt tolerancesalinity stresstranscriptomedifferentially expressed genesalternative splicingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

