BACKGROUND
computational approaches in the identification of drug targets are expected to reduce time and effort in drug development. advances in genomics and proteomics provide the opportunity to uncover properties of druggable genomes. although several studies have been conducted for distinguishing drug targets from non-drug targets, they mainly focus on the sequences and functional roles of proteins. many other properties of proteins have not been fully investigated.

methods
using the drugbank  database containing nearly  <dig>  drug entries including  <dig> fda-approved drugs and  <dig> of their targets and human uniprot/swiss-prot databases, we defined  <dig> non-redundant drug target and  <dig>  non-drug target proteins. to select these non-redundant protein datasets, we built four datasets  by considering clustering of paralogous proteins.


RESULTS
we first reassessed the widely used properties of drug target proteins. we confirmed and extended that drug target proteins  are likely to have more hydrophobic, less polar, less pest sequences, and more signal peptide sequences higher and  are more involved in enzyme catalysis, oxidation and reduction in cellular respiration, and operational genes. in this study, we proposed new properties  for effectively identifying drug target proteins. we found that  drug targetability and protein essentiality are decoupled,  druggability of proteins has high expression level and tissue specificity, and  functional post-translational modification residues are enriched in drug target proteins. in addition, to predict the drug targetability of proteins, we exploited two machine learning methods . when we predicted drug targets by combining previously known protein properties and proposed new properties, an f-score of  <dig>  was obtained.


CONCLUSIONS
when the newly proposed properties are integrated, the prediction performance is improved and these properties are related to drug targets. we believe that our study will provide a new aspect in inferring drug-target interactions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
drug targetbioinformaticsproteomicsdtmbio 2016: the tenth international workshop on data and text mining in biomedical informatics dtmbio 2016indianapolis, in, usa 24- <dig> october  <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

