BACKGROUND
cytokinins are known to play an important role in fruit set and early fruit growth, but their involvement in later stages of fruit development is less well understood. recent reports of greatly increased cytokinin concentrations in the flesh of ripening kiwifruit  c.f. liang & a.r. ferguson) and grapes  have suggested that these hormones are implicated in the control of ripening-related processes.


RESULTS
a similar pattern of isopentenyladenine  accumulation was observed in the ripening fruit of several grapevine cultivars, strawberry  and tomato , suggesting a common, ripening-related role for this cytokinin. significant differences in maximal ip concentrations between grapevine cultivars and between fruit species might reflect varying degrees of relevance or functional adaptations of this hormone in the ripening process. grapevine orthologues of five arabidopsis  gene families involved in cytokinin metabolism and signalling were identified and analysed for their expression in developing grape berries and a range of other grapevine tissues. members of each gene family were characterised by distinct expression profiles during berry development and in different grapevine organs, suggesting a complex regulation of cellular cytokinin activities throughout the plant. the post-veraison-specific expression of a set of biosynthesis, activation, perception and signalling genes together with a lack of expression of degradation-related genes during the ripening phase were indicative of a local control of berry ip concentrations leading to the observed accumulation of ip in ripening grapes.


CONCLUSIONS
the transcriptional analysis of grapevine genes involved in cytokinin production, degradation and response has provided a possible explanation for the ripening-associated accumulation of ip in grapes and other fruit. the pre- and post-veraison-specific expression of different members from each of five gene families suggests a highly complex and finely-tuned regulation of cytokinin concentrations and response to different cytokinin species at particular stages of fruit development. the same complexity and specialisation is also reflected in the distinct expression profiles of cytokinin-related genes in other grapevine organs.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cytokininsisopentenyladeninevitis viniferaripeningaustralian grape and wine authoritycsp 09/ <dig> and 14/01davies christopher issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

