BACKGROUND
microbes, plants, and fungi synthesize an enormous number of metabolites exhibiting rich chemical diversity. for a high-level classification, metabolism is subdivided into primary  and secondary  metabolism. sm products are often not essential for survival of the organism and it is generally assumed that sm enzymes stem from pm homologs.


RESULTS
we wanted to assess evolutionary relationships and function of bona fide bacterial pm and sm enzymes. thus, we analyzed the content of  <dig> biosynthetic gene clusters  from the mibig dataset; the encoded bacterial enzymes served as representatives of sm. the content of  <dig> bacterial genomes known not to harbor bgcs served as a representation of pm. enzymes were categorized on their ec number and for these enzyme functions, frequencies were determined. the comparison of pm/sm frequencies indicates a certain preference for hydrolases  and ligases  in pm and of oxidoreductases  and lyases  in sm.

based on blast searches, we determined pairs of pm/sm homologs and their functional diversity. oxidoreductases, transferases , lyases and isomerases  form a tightly interlinked network indicating that many protein folds can accommodate different functions in pm and sm. in contrast, the functional diversity of hydrolases and especially ligases is significantly limited in pm and sm.

for the most direct comparison of pm/sm homologs, we restricted for each bgc the search to the content of the genome it comes from. for each homologous hit, the contribution of the genomic neighborhood to metabolic pathways was summarized in bgc-specific html-pages that are interlinked with kegg; this dataset can be downloaded from https://www.bioinf.ur.de.


CONCLUSIONS
only few reaction chemistries are overrepresented in bacterial sm and at least 55% of the enzymatic functions present in bgcs possess pm homologs. many sm enzymes arose in pm and nature utilized the evolvability of enzymes similarly to establish novel functions both in pm and sm. future work aimed at the elucidation of evolutionary routes that have interconverted a pm enzyme into an sm homolog can profit from our bgc-specific annotations.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
primary metabolismsecondary metabolismenzyme evolutionenzyme designhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftme2259/2-1merkl rainer issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

