BACKGROUND
the limited duration and compromised efficiency of oocyte-mediated reprogramming, which occurs during the early hours following somatic cell nuclear transfer , may significantly interfere with epigenetic reprogramming, contributing to the high incidence of ill/fatal transcriptional phenotypes and physiological anomalies occurring later during pre- and post-implantation events. a potent histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin a , was used to understand the effects of assisted epigenetic modifications on transcriptional profiles of scnt blastocysts and to identify specific or categories of genes affected.


RESULTS
tsa improved the yield and quality of in vitro embryo development compared to control . significance analysis of microarray results revealed that of  <dig>  targeted gene transcripts represented on the microarray slide, a relatively small number of genes were differentially expressed in ctr-nt  and tsa-nt  compared to ivf embryos. for both scnt groups, the majority of downregulated and more than half of upregulated genes were common and as much as 15 % of all deregulated transcripts were located on chromosome x. correspondence analysis clustered ctr-nt and ivf transcriptomes close together regardless of the embryo production method, whereas tsa changed scnt transcriptome to a very clearly separated cluster. ontological classification of deregulated genes using ipa uncovered a variety of functional categories similarly affected in both scnt groups with a preponderance of genes required for biological processes. examination of genes involved in different canonical pathways revealed that the wnt and fgf pathways were similarly affected in both scnt groups. although tsa markedly changed epigenetic reprogramming of donor cells , reconstituted oocytes , and blastocysts , these changes did not recapitulate parallel marked changes in chromatin remodeling, and nascent mrna and oct4-egfp expression of tsa-nt vs. crt-nt embryos.


CONCLUSIONS
the results obtained suggest that despite the extensive reprogramming of donor cells that occurred by the blastocyst stage, scnt-specific errors are of a non-random nature in bovine and are not responsive to epigenetic modifications by tsa.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
somatic cell nuclear transfertrichostatin atranscriptomebovineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

