BACKGROUND
molecular marker-assisted breeding provides an efficient tool to develop improved crop varieties. a major challenge for the broad application of markers in marker-assisted selection is that the marker phenotypes must match plant phenotypes in a wide range of breeding germplasm. in this study, we used the legume crop species lupinus angustifolius  to demonstrate the utility of whole genome sequencing and re-sequencing on the development of diagnostic markers for molecular plant breeding.


RESULTS
nine lupin cultivars released in australia from  <dig> to  <dig> were subjected to whole genome re-sequencing. the re-sequencing data together with the reference genome sequence data were used in marker development, which revealed  <dig>  to  <dig>  snp markers from pairwise comparisons among the cultivars. a total of  <dig>  markers were anchored on the lupin genetic linkage map. marker mining obtained an average of  <dig> snp markers and  <dig> indel markers for each of the  <dig> genome sequence assembly scaffolds bearing markers linked to  <dig> genes of agronomic interest. using the r gene phtjr conferring resistance to phomopsis stem blight disease as a test case, we discovered  <dig> candidate diagnostic markers by genotyping and selecting markers on a genetic linkage map. a further  <dig> candidate diagnostic markers were discovered by marker mining on a scaffold bearing non-diagnostic markers linked to the phtjr gene. nine out from the ten tested candidate diagnostic markers were confirmed as truly diagnostic on a broad range of commercial cultivars. markers developed using these strategies meet the requirements for broad application in molecular plant breeding.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that low-cost genome sequencing and re-sequencing data were sufficient and very effective in the development of diagnostic markers for marker-assisted selection. the strategies used in this study may be applied to any trait or plant species. whole genome sequencing and re-sequencing provides a powerful tool to overcome current limitations in molecular plant breeding, which will enable plant breeders to precisely pyramid favourable genes to develop super crop varieties to meet future food demands.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genome sequencingre-sequencingnext-generation sequencing marker-assisted selection diagnostic markersprecision breedingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

