BACKGROUND
nothing is currently known about microbial composition of saline lakes of the novosibirsk region and its dependence on physical-chemical parameters of waters. we studied the structure of microbial communities of saline lakes of the novosibirsk region and the effect of physical-chemical parameters of waters on microbial communities of these lakes.


RESULTS
according to the ion content, the lakes were classified either as chloride or chloride-sulfate types. water salinity ranges from  <dig>  to 290 g l− <dig>  many diverse microbial communities were found. filamentous and colonial cyanobacteria of the genera scytonema, aphanocapsa, and/or filamentous algae dominated in littoral communities. spatial and temporal organization of planktonic microbial communities and the quantities of archaea and bacteria were investigated using fluorescent in situ hybridization. we have found that the dominant planktonic component is represented by archaea, or, less frequently, by bacteria. various phylogenetic groups  are nonuniformly distributed. the principal component analysis was used to detect environmental factors that affect microorganism abundance. we found the principal components responsible for  <dig>  % of the observed variation. it was demonstrated that two-block partial least squares was a better method than principal component analysis for analysis of the data. we observed general relationships between microbial abundance and water salinity.


CONCLUSIONS
we have performed the first-ever study of the structure of the microbial communities of eleven saline lakes in the novosibirsk region along with their physical-chemical parameters of waters. our study demonstrates that saline lakes in the novosibirsk region contain a unique microbial communities that may become a prolific source of microorganisms for fundamental and applied studies in various fields of ecology, microbiology, geochemistry, and biotechnology, and deserve further metagenomic investigation.

keywords
microbial communitiessaline lakesenvironmental factorsfluorescent in situ hybridizationthe 7th international young scientists school “systems biology and bioinformatics”  novosibirsk, russia 22- <dig> june  <dig> http://conf.nsc.ru/plantgen2015issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

