BACKGROUND
the development of high-throughput technologies has produced several large scale protein interaction data sets for multiple species, and significant efforts have been made to analyze the data sets in order to understand protein activities. considering that the basic units of protein interactions are domain interactions, it is crucial to understand protein interactions at the level of the domains. the availability of many diverse biological data sets provides an opportunity to discover the underlying domain interactions within protein interactions through an integration of these biological data sets.


RESULTS
we combine protein interaction data sets from multiple species, molecular sequences, and gene ontology to construct a set of high-confidence domain-domain interactions. first, we propose a new measure, the expected number of interactions for each pair of domains, to score domain interactions based on protein interaction data in one species and show that it has similar performance as the e-value defined by riley et al.  <cit> . our new measure is applied to the protein interaction data sets from yeast, worm, fruitfly and humans. second, information on pairs of domains that coexist in known proteins and on pairs of domains with the same gene ontology function annotations are incorporated to construct a high-confidence set of domain-domain interactions using a bayesian approach. finally, we evaluate the set of domain-domain interactions by comparing predicted domain interactions with those defined in ipfam database  <cit>  that were derived based on protein structures. the accuracy of predicted domain interactions are also confirmed by comparing with experimentally obtained domain interactions from h. pylori  <cit> . as a result, a total of  <dig>  high-confidence domain interactions are obtained and these domain interactions are used to unravel detailed protein and domain interactions in several protein complexes.


CONCLUSIONS
our study shows that integration of multiple biological data sets based on the bayesian approach provides a reliable framework to predict domain interactions. by integrating multiple data sources, the coverage and accuracy of predicted domain interactions can be significantly increased.

