BACKGROUND
concurrent with the efforts currently underway in mapping microbial genomes using high-throughput sequencing methods, systems biologists are building metabolic models to characterize and predict cell metabolisms. one of the key steps in building a metabolic model is using multiple databases to collect and assemble essential information about genome-annotations and the architecture of the metabolic network for a specific organism. to speed up metabolic model development for a large number of microorganisms, we need a user-friendly platform to construct metabolic networks and to perform constraint-based flux balance analysis based on genome databases and experimental results.


RESULTS
we have developed a semi-automatic, web-based platform  for generating and reconstructing metabolic models for annotated microorganisms. microbesflux is able to automatically download the metabolic network  of ~ <dig>  species from the kegg database  and then convert it to a metabolic model draft. the platform also provides diverse customized tools, such as gene knockouts and the introduction of heterologous pathways, for users to reconstruct the model network. the reconstructed metabolic network can be formulated to a constraint-based flux model to predict and analyze the carbon fluxes in microbial metabolisms. the simulation results can be exported in the sbml format . furthermore, we also demonstrated the platform functionalities by developing an fba model  for a recent annotated bioethanol producer, thermoanaerobacter sp. strain x <dig>  to predict its biomass growth and ethanol production.


CONCLUSIONS
microbesflux is an installation-free and open-source platform that enables biologists without prior programming knowledge to develop metabolic models for annotated microorganisms in the kegg database. our system facilitates users to reconstruct metabolic networks of organisms based on experimental information. through human-computer interaction, microbesflux provides users with reasonable predictions of microbial metabolism via flux balance analysis. this prototype platform can be a springboard for advanced and broad-scope modeling of complex biological systems by integrating other “omics” data or 13 c- metabolic flux analysis results. microbesflux is available at http://tanglab.engineering.wustl.edu/static/microbesflux.html and will be continuously improved based on feedback from users.

