BACKGROUND
zearalenone  is a secondary metabolite produced by fusarium species. zea was proved to exert a wide range of unwanted side effects, but its mechanism of action, particularly at duodenum levels, remains unclear. in our study based on the microarray technology we assessed the alteration of gene expression pattern sus scrofa duodenum which has been previously exposed to zea. gene expression data was validated by qrt-pcr and elisa. the gene expression data were further extrapolated the results to their human orthologues and analyzed the data in the context of human health using ipa .


RESULTS
using agilent microarray technology, we found that gene expression pattern was significantly affected by zea exposure, considering a 2-fold expression difference as a cut-off level and a p-value <  <dig> . in total, we found  <dig> upregulated and  <dig> downregulated transcripts. about  <dig> genes  were extrapolated to their human orthologues. ipa analysis showed various altered key cellular and molecular pathways. as expected, we observed a significant alteration of immune response related genes, mapk  pathways or toll-like receptors . what captured our attention was the modulation of pathways related to the activation of early carcinogenesis.


CONCLUSIONS
our data demonstrate that zea has a complex effect at duodenum level. zea is able to activate not only the immune response related genes, but also those relate to colorectal carcinogenesis. the effects can be more dramatic when connected with the exposure to other environmental toxic agents or co-occurrence with different microorganisms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
zearalenoneduodenumsus scrofaextrapolation to humanhealthmicroarrayimpact of feed co-contamination and mitigating solutions to increase feed safety, animal health and food qualitypnii-pcca-102/2011-2016taranu ionelia issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

