BACKGROUND
drought is a major constraint for plant growth and crop productivity that is receiving an increased attention due to global climate changes. chloroplasts act as environmental sensors, however, only partial information is available on stress-induced mechanisms within plastids. here, we investigated the chloroplast response to a severe drought treatment and a subsequent recovery cycle in tomato through physiological, metabolite and proteomic analyses.


RESULTS
under stress conditions, tomato plants showed stunted growth, and elevated levels of proline, abscisic acid  and late embryogenesis abundant gene transcript. proteomics revealed that water deficit deeply affects chloroplast protein repertoire , mainly involving energy-related functional species. following the rewatering cycle, physiological parameters and metabolite levels indicated a recovery of tomato plant functions, while proteomics revealed a still ongoing adjustment of the chloroplast protein repertoire, which was even wider than during the drought phase . changes in gene expression of candidate genes and accumulation of aba suggested the activation under stress of a specific chloroplast-to-nucleus  signaling pathway and interconnection with the aba-dependent network.


CONCLUSIONS
our results give an original overview on the role of chloroplast as enviromental sensor by both coordinating the expression of nuclear-encoded plastid-localised proteins and mediating plant stress response. although our data suggest the activation of a specific retrograde signaling pathway and interconnection with aba signaling network in tomato, the involvement and fine regulation of such pathway need to be further investigated through the development and characterization of ad hoc designed plant mutants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
water deficitproteomic analysisabscisic acidprolineenvironmental sensorretrograde signalingitalian ministry of research pon02_00395_ <dig> ‘genopompro’italian ministry of research innovazione e sviluppo del mezzogiorno, conoscenze integrate per sostenibilità ed innovazione del made in italy agroalimentare - legge n. 191/2009issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

