BACKGROUND
messenger rna polyadenylation is an essential step for the maturation of most eukaryotic mrnas. accurate determination of poly sites helps define the 3’-ends of genes, which is important for genome annotation and gene function research. genomic studies have revealed the presence of poly sites in intergenic regions, which may be attributed to 3’-utr extensions and novel transcript units. however, there is no systematically evaluation of intergenic poly sites in plants.


RESULTS
approximately  <dig>  intergenic poly site clusters  in arabidopsis thaliana were discovered and evaluated at the whole genome level. based on the distributions of distance from ipacs to nearby sense and antisense genes, these ipacs were classified into three categories. about 70 % of them were from previously unannotated 3’-utr extensions to known genes, which would extend  <dig> transcripts of tair <dig> genome annotation beyond their 3’-ends, with a mean extension of  <dig> nucleotides.  <dig> ipacs were originated from novel intergenic transcripts,  <dig> of which were likely to be associated with protein coding transcripts.  <dig> ipacs corresponded to antisense transcripts for genes on the reverse strand, which might affect  <dig> protein coding genes and  <dig> non-protein-coding genes, including long non-coding rna genes. the rest of ipacs could be originated from transcriptional read-through or gene mis-annotations.


CONCLUSIONS
the identified ipacs corresponding to novel transcripts, 3’-utr extensions, and antisense transcription should be incorporated into current arabidopsis genome annotation. comprehensive characterization of ipacs from this study provides insights of alternative polyadenylation and antisense transcription in plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
alternative polyadenylationrna processinggenome annotationintergenic region3’-utrissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

