BACKGROUND
life-science laboratories make increasing use of next generation sequencing  for studying bio-macromolecules and their interactions. array-based methods for measuring gene expression or protein-dna interactions are being replaced by rna-seq and chip-seq. sequencing is generally performed by specialized facilities that have to keep track of sequencing requests, trace samples, ensure quality and make data available according to predefined privileges.

an integrated tool helps to troubleshoot problems, to maintain a high quality standard, to reduce time and costs. commercial and non-commercial tools called lims  are available for this purpose. however, they often come at prohibitive cost and/or lack the flexibility and scalability needed to adjust seamlessly to the frequently changing protocols employed.

in order to manage the flow of sequencing data produced at the genomic unit of the italian institute of technology , we developed smith .

methods
smith is a web application with a mysql server at the backend. wet-lab scientists of the centre for genomic science and database experts from the politecnico of milan in the context of a genomic data model project developed smith. the data base schema stores all the information of an ngs experiment, including the descriptions of all protocols and algorithms used in the process. notably, an attribute-value table allows associating an unconstrained textual description to each sample and all the data produced afterwards. this method permits the creation of metadata that can be used to search the database for specific files as well as for statistical analyses.


RESULTS
smith runs automatically and limits direct human interaction mainly to administrative tasks. smith data-delivery procedures were standardized making it easier for biologists and analysts to navigate the data. automation also helps saving time. the workflows are available through an api provided by the workflow management system. the parameters and input data are passed to the workflow engine that performs de-multiplexing, quality control, alignments, etc.


CONCLUSIONS
smith standardizes, automates, and speeds up sequencing workflows. annotation of data with key-value pairs facilitates meta-analysis.

16- <dig> october  <dig> nettab 2013: 13th network tools and applications in biology workshop on semantic, social and mobile applications for bioinformatics and biomedical literature venice, italy

