BACKGROUND
drosophila dscam <dig> is a cell-surface protein that plays important roles in neural development and axon tiling of neurons. it is known that thousands of isoforms bind themselves through specific homophilic interactions, a process which provides the basis for cellular self-recognition. detailed biochemical studies of specific isoforms strongly suggest that homophilic binding, i.e. the formation of homodimers by identical dscam <dig> isomers, is of great importance for the self-avoidance of neurons. due to experimental limitations, it is currently impossible to measure the homophilic binding affinities for all  <dig>  potential isoforms.


RESULTS
here we reconstructed the dna sequences of an ancestral dscam form  using a comparative genomic approach. on the basis of this sequence, we established a working model to predict the self-binding affinities of all isoforms in both the current and the ancestral genome, using machine-learning methods. detailed computational analysis was performed to compare the self-binding affinities of all isoforms present in these two genomes. our results revealed that 1) isoforms containing newly derived variable domains exhibit higher self-binding affinities than those with conserved domains, and 2) current isoforms display higher self-binding affinities than their counterparts in the ancient genome. as thousands of dscam isoforms are needed for the self-avoidance of the neuron, we propose that an increase in self-binding affinity provides the basis for the successful evolution of the arthropod brain.


CONCLUSIONS
our data presented here provide an excellent model for future experimental studies of the binding behavior of dscam isoforms. the results of our analysis indicate that evolution favored the rise of novel variable domains thanks to their higher self-binding affinities, rather than selection merely on the basis of simple expansion of isoform diversity, as that this particular selection process would have established the powerful mechanisms required for neuronal self-avoidance. thus, we reveal here a new molecular mechanism for the successful evolution of arthropod brains.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dscamhomophilic bindingevolution of arthropodsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

