BACKGROUND
the application of genotyping by sequencing  approaches, combined with data imputation methodologies, is narrowing the genetic knowledge gap between major and understudied, minor crops. gbs is an excellent tool to characterize the genomic structure of recently domesticated  and understudied species, such as cranberry , by generating large numbers of markers for genomic studies such as genetic mapping.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> potentially mappable single nucleotide polymorphisms  in a cranberry pseudo-testcross population wherein  <dig> snps and  <dig> short sequence repeats  were used to construct a high density linkage map in cranberry of which a total of  <dig> markers were mapped. recombination frequency, linkage disequilibrium , and segregation distortion at the genomic level in the parental and integrated linkage maps were characterized for first time in cranberry. ssr markers, used as the backbone in the map, revealed high collinearity with previously published linkage maps. the  <dig> point map consisted of twelve linkage groups spanning 1112 cm, which anchored  <dig> nuclear scaffolds accounting for ~13 mb of the estimated 470 mb cranberry genome. bin mapping identified  <dig> and  <dig> unique bins in the parentals and a total of  <dig> unique marker positions in the integrated map. synteny analyses comparing the order of anchored cranberry scaffolds to their homologous positions in kiwifruit, grape, and coffee genomes provided initial evidence of homology between cranberry and closely related species.


CONCLUSIONS
gbs data was used to rapidly saturate the cranberry genome with markers in a pseudo-testcross population. collinearity between the present saturated genetic map and previous cranberry ssr maps suggests that the snp locations represent accurate marker order and chromosome structure of the cranberry genome. snps greatly improved current marker genome coverage, which allowed for genome-wide structure investigations such as segregation distortion, recombination, linkage disequilibrium, and synteny analyses. in the future, gbs can be used to accelerate cranberry molecular breeding through qtl mapping and genome-wide association studies .

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genotyping by sequencingimputationvaccinium macrocarponpseudo-testcrosslinkage disequilibriumsegregation distortionsyntenyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

