BACKGROUND
insect ovarioles are classified into two categories: panoistic and meroistic, the later having apparently evolved from an ancestral panoistic type. molecular data on oogenesis is practically restricted to meroistic ovaries. if we aim at studying the evolutionary transition from panoistic to meroistic, data on panoistic ovaries should be gathered. to this end, we planned the construction of a suppression subtractive hybridization  library to identify genes involved in panoistic choriogenesis, using the cockroach blattella germanica as model.


RESULTS
we constructed a post-vitellogenic ovary library by ssh to isolate genes involved in choriogenesis in b. germanica. the tester library was prepared with an ovary pool from 6- to 7-day-old females, whereas the driver library was prepared with an ovary pool from 3- to 4-day-old females. from the ssh library, we obtained  <dig> high quality sequences which clustered into  <dig> unique sequences grouped in  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singlets. the sequences were compared against non-redundant ncbi databases using blast. we found that 44% of the unique sequences had homologous sequences in known genes of other organisms, whereas 56% had no significant similarity to any of the databases entries. a gene ontology analysis was carried out, classifying the  <dig> sequences into different functional categories. seven of these gene sequences, representative of different categories and processes, were chosen to perform expression studies during the first gonadotrophic cycle by real-time pcr. results showed that they were mainly expressed during post-vitellogenesis, which validates the ssh technique. in two of them corresponding to novel genes, we demonstrated that they are specifically expressed in the cytoplasm of follicular cells in basal oocytes at the time of choriogenesis.


CONCLUSIONS
the ssh approach has proven to be useful in identifying ovarian genes expressed after vitellogenesis in b. germanica. for most of the genes, functions related to choriogenesis are postulated. the relatively high percentage of novel genes obtained and the practical absence of chorion genes typical of meroistic ovaries suggest that mechanisms regulating chorion formation in panoistic ovaries are significantly different from those of meroistic ones.

