BACKGROUND
tandem amino acid repeats are characterised by the consecutive recurrence of a single amino acid. they exhibit high rates of length mutations in addition to point mutations and have been proposed to be involved in genetic plasticity. squamate reptiles  diversify in both morphology and physiology. the underlying mechanism is yet to be understood. in a previous phylogenomic analysis of reptiles, the density of tandem repeats in an anole lizard diverged heavily from that of the other reptiles. to gain further insight into the tandem amino acid repeats in squamates, we analysed the repeat content in the green anole  proteome and compared the amino acid repeats in a large orthologous protein data set from six vertebrates .


RESULTS
our results revealed that the number of amino acid repeats in the green anole exceeded those found in the other five species studied. species-only repeats were found in high proportion in the green anole but not in the other five species, suggesting that the green anole had gained many amino acid repeats in either the anolis or the squamate lineage. since the amino acid repeat containing genes in the green anole were highly enriched in genes related to transcription and development, an important family of developmental genes, i.e., the hox family, was further studied in a wide collection of squamates. abundant amino acid repeats were also observed, implying the general high tolerance of amino acid repeats in squamates. a particular enrichment of amino acid repeats was observed in the central class hox genes that are known to be responsible for defining cervical to lumbar regions.


CONCLUSIONS
our study suggests that the abundant amino acid repeats in the green anole, and possibly in other squamates, may play a role in increasing the genetic variability, and contribute to the evolutionary diversity of this clade.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
homopolymeric tracthomopeptidesquamateslepidosauriacomparative genomicshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of chinano. 31172075zhang peng the program for new century excellent talents in universityncet-09-0898zhang peng issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

