BACKGROUND
somatic embryogenesis is a notable illustration of cell totipotency, by which somatic cells undergo dedifferentiation and then differentiate into somatic embryos. our previous work demonstrated that pretreatment of immature zygotic embryos with  <dig>  m sucrose solution for 72 h efficiently induced somatic embryo initiation in camphor tree. to better understand the molecular basis of somatic embryogenesis induced by osmotic stress, de novo transcriptome sequencing of three tissues of camphor tree  were conducted using illumina hiseq  <dig> platform.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  g high quality clean reads were obtained from cdna libraries of the three samples. the overall de novo assembly of cdna sequence data generated  <dig> transcripts, with an average length of 998 bp.  <dig> unigenes  with an average length of 680 bp were annotated with gene descriptions, gene ontology terms or metabolic pathways based on blastx search against nr, nt, swissprot, go, cog/kog, and kegg databases. cegma software identified  <dig> out of  <dig> ultra-conserved core proteins as ‘complete’ in the transcriptome assembly, showing a completeness of  <dig>  %. a total of  <dig> genes previously annotated to be potentially involved in somatic embryogenesis were identified. comparative transcriptome analysis showed that a total of  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in the three samples. the differentially expressed genes were divided into six groups based on k-means clustering. expression level analysis of  <dig> somatic embryogenesis-related genes indicated a high correlation between rna-seq and qrt-pcr data. gene enrichment analysis showed significantly differential expression of genes responding to stress and stimulus.


CONCLUSIONS
the present work reported a de novo transcriptome assembly and global analysis focused on gene expression changes during initiation and formation of somatic embryos in camphor tree. differential expression of somatic embryogenesis-related genes indicates that sucrose induced somatic embryogenesis may share or partly share the mechanisms of somatic embryogenesis induced by plant hormones. this study provides comprehensive transcript information and gene expression data for camphor tree. it could also serve as an important platform resource for further functional studies in plant embryogenesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cinnamomum camphora lsomatic embryogenesisrna-seqde novo assemblycomparative transcriptomeosmotic stressissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

