BACKGROUND
bacterial dna is well-known for its potent immunostimulatory properties which have been attributed to the abundance of cpg dinucleotides within the genomes of prokaryotes. research has found that mammalian tlr <dig> is a receptor which mediates the immune response to cpg dna; however, its functional properties in non-mammalian vertebrates are still poorly characterized. leukocytes isolated from lower vertebrates, including teleosts, respond to cpg dna and tlr <dig> has been identified in many fish species; however, the ligand-binding properties of fish tlr <dig> have, so far, not been studied. the fact that some vertebrates, like chicken, lack tlr <dig> and use an alternative molecule  as a receptor for cpgs has questioned the functional conservation of tlr <dig> within vertebrates.


RESULTS
in the current study, tlr <dig> from atlantic salmon  has been found to interact with synthetic oligonucleotides via a cpg-independent but a ph-dependent mechanism. the endogenous receptor, expressed by primary mononuclear phagocytes colocalizes with cpg oligonucleotides  in vesicles that appear to be endosomes. when overexpressed in salmonid cell lines, sstlr <dig> spontaneously activates isre-containing promoters of genes involved in the ifn response; however, the transgenic receptor fails to translocate to cpg-containing endosomes. this indicates that only specific immune cell types have the ability to relocate the receptor to the appropriate cellular compartments where it may become activated by its ligand. in addition, through co-precipitation and mass spectrometry, two salmon proteins - hnrnpa <dig> and ncoa <dig>  which both contain rna-binding domains , were found to bind cpg odns, suggesting they may be involved in the cpg response in salmon leukocytes.


CONCLUSIONS
the presented data are the first to demonstrate that the dna-binding properties of tlr <dig> are conserved between teleosts and mammals. the current study also identifies additional molecules which may function as mediators of the immunostimulatory properties of foreign dna.

innate immunitytoll-like receptorscpg oligonucleotidesteleostsrna recognition motifs

