BACKGROUND
the mass extirpation of the island of moorea's endemic partulid tree snail fauna, following the deliberate introduction of the alien predator euglandina rosea, represents one of the highest profile conservation crises of the past thirty years. all of the island's partulids were thought to be extirpated by  <dig>  with five species persisting in zoos, but intensive field surveys have recently detected a number of surviving wild populations. we report here a mitochondrial  phylogenetic estimate of moorean partulid wild and captive lineage survival calibrated with a reference museum collection that pre-dates the predator's introduction and that also includes a parallel dataset from the neighboring island of tahiti.


RESULTS
although severe winnowing of moorea's mt lineage diversity has occurred, seven of eight  partulid tip clades remain extant. the extinct mt clade occurred predominantly in the p. suturalis species complex and it represented a major component of moorea's endemic partulid treespace. extant moorean mt clades exhibited a complex spectrum of persistence on moorea, in captivity, and  on tahiti. most notably, three partula taxa, bearing two multi-island mt lineages, have survived decades of e. rosea predation on moorea  and in the valleys of tahiti . their differential persistence was correlated with intrinsic attributes, such as taxonomy and mt lineages, rather than with their respective within-island distribution patterns.


CONCLUSIONS
conservation efforts directed toward moorean and tahitian partulids have typically operated within a single island frame of reference, but our discovery of robust genealogical ties among survivors on both islands implies that a multi-island perspective is required. understanding what genetic and/or ecological factors have enabled partula taeniata, p. hyalina and p. clara to differentially survive long-term direct exposure to the predator may provide important clues toward developing a viable long term conservation plan for society island partulid tree snails.

