BACKGROUND
signal transduction is the major mechanism through which cells transmit external stimuli to evoke intracellular biochemical responses. diverse cellular stimuli create a wide variety of transcription factor activities through signal transduction pathways, resulting in different gene expression patterns. understanding the relationship between external stimuli and the corresponding cellular responses, as well as the subsequent effects on downstream genes, is a major challenge in systems biology. thus, a systematic approach is needed to integrate experimental data and theoretical hypotheses to identify the physiological consequences of environmental stimuli.


RESULTS
we proposed a systematic approach that combines forward and reverse engineering to link the signal transduction cascade with the gene responses. to demonstrate the feasibility of our strategy, we focused on linking the nf-κb signaling pathway with the inflammatory gene regulatory responses because nf-κb has long been recognized to play a crucial role in inflammation. we first utilized forward engineering  to construct the nf-κb signaling pathway and reverse engineering  to build a gene regulatory network . then, we demonstrated that the corresponding ikk profiles can be identified in the grn and are consistent with the experimental validation of the ikk kinase assay. we found that the time-lapse gene expression of several cytokines and chemokines  is concordant with the nf-κb activity profile, and these genes have stronger influence strength within the grn. such regulatory effects have highlighted the crucial roles of nf-κb signaling in the acute inflammatory response and enhance our understanding of the systemic inflammatory response syndrome.


CONCLUSIONS
we successfully identified and distinguished the corresponding signaling profiles among three microarray datasets with different stimuli strengths. in our model, the crucial genes of the nf-κb regulatory network were also identified to reflect the biological consequences of inflammation. with the experimental validation, our strategy is thus an effective solution to decipher cross-talk effects when attempting to integrate new kinetic parameters from other signal transduction pathways. the strategy also provides new insight for systems biology modeling to link any signal transduction pathways with the responses of downstream genes of interest.

