BACKGROUND
cranial neural crest cells  are a unique embryonic cell type which give rise to a diverse array of derivatives extending from neurons and glia through to bone and cartilage. depending on their point of origin along the antero-posterior axis cranial nccs are rapidly sorted into distinct migratory streams that give rise to axial specific structures. these migratory streams mirror the underlying segmentation of the brain with nccs exiting the diencephalon and midbrain following distinct paths compared to those exiting the hindbrain rhombomeres . the genetic landscape of cranial nccs arising at different axial levels remains unknown.


RESULTS
here we have used rna sequencing to uncover the transcriptional profiles of mouse cranial nccs arising at different axial levels. whole transcriptome analysis identified over  <dig> transcripts differentially expressed between nccs arising anterior to r <dig>  and the r <dig> migratory stream. eight of the genes differentially expressed between these populations were validated by rt-pcr with  <dig> being further validated by in situ hybridisation. we also explored the expression of the neuropilins  and their co-receptors and show that the a-type plexins are differentially expressed in different cranial ncc streams.


CONCLUSIONS
our analyses identify a large number of genes differentially regulated between cranial nccs arising at different axial levels. this data provides a comprehensive description of the genetic landscape driving diversity of distinct cranial ncc streams and provides novel insight into the regulatory networks controlling the formation of specific skeletal elements and the mechanisms promoting migration along different paths.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
neural crestfaterna-seqneuropilincranial neural cresthttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000925national health and medical research councilissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

