BACKGROUND
the importance of understanding the detailed mechanism of cysteine biosynthesis in bacteria is underscored by the fact that cysteine is the only sulfur donor for all cellular components containing reduced sulfur. o-acetylserine sulfhydrylase  catalyzes this crucial last step in the cysteine biosynthesis and has been recognized as an important gene for the survival and virulence of pathogenic bacteria. structural and kinetic studies have contributed to the understanding of mechanistic aspects of oass, but details of ligand recognition features of oass are not available. in the absence of any detailed study on the energetics of ligand binding, we have studied the thermodynamics of oass from salmonella typhimurium , haemophilus influenzae , and mycobacterium tuberculosis  binding to their substrate o-acetylserine , substrate analogue , and product .


RESULTS
ligand binding properties of three oass enzymes are studied under defined solution conditions. both substrate and product binding is an exothermic reaction, but their thermodynamic signatures are very different. cysteine binding to oass shows that both enthalpy and entropy contribute significantly to the binding free energy at all temperatures  examined. the analyses of interaction between oass with oas  or methionine  revealed a completely different mode of binding. binding of both oas and methionine to oass is dominated by a favorable entropy change, with minor contribution from enthalpy change  at 20°c. our salt dependent ligand binding studies indicate that methionine binding affinity is more sensitive to  as compared to cysteine affinity.


CONCLUSIONS
we show that oass from three different pathogenic bacteria bind substrate and product through two different mechanisms. results indicate that predominantly entropy driven methionine binding is not mediated through classical hydrophobic binding, instead, may involve desolvation of the polar active site. we speculate that oass in general, may exhibit two different binding mechanisms for recognizing substrates and products.

ligand bindingenthalpyentropyfluorescenceisothermal titration calorimetry

