BACKGROUND
a novel variant of the st1-sccmeciv methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus  lineage, mostly associated with nosocomial bloodstream infections , has emerged in rio de janeiro. bacterial biofilm has been considered a major virulence factor in central venous catheter-associated bsi. the mechanisms involved in biofilm formation/accumulation are multifactorial and complex. studies have suggested that biofilm production was affected in vitro and vivo for agr-null mutants of s. aureus.


RESULTS
the impact of naturally occurring inhibition of agr signaling on virulence profiles and infections associated with the st <dig> variant was investigated. agr dysfunction was detected in a significant percentage  of the isolates with concomitant increase in biofilm accumulation in vitro and in vivo, and enhanced ability to adhere to and invade airway cells. the biofilm formed by these st <dig> isolates was ica-independent and proteinaceous in nature. in fact, the improved colonization properties were paralleled by an increased expression of the biofilm-associated genes fnba, spa and sasg. the transcription of sara, a positive regulator of agr, was two-times reduced for the agr-dysfunctional mrsa. remarkably, the agr inhibition was genetically stable. indeed, agr-dysfunctional isolates succeed to colonize and cause both acute and chronic infections in hospitalized patients, and also to effectively accumulate biofilm in a mouse subcutaneous catheter implant model.


CONCLUSIONS
the ability of agr-dysfunctional isolates to cause infections in humans and to form biofilm in the animal model suggests that therapeutic approaches based on agr-inactivation strategies are unlikely to be effective in controlling human-device infections caused by st <dig> isolates. the increased biofilm accumulation associated with the acquisition of multiple antimicrobial resistant traits might have influenced  the expansion of this usa <dig> related clone in our hospitals.

mrsast1-sccmecivusa400agrbiofilmvirulence factors

