BACKGROUND
the combination of model-based comparative techniques, disparity analyses and ecomorphological correlations constitutes a powerful method to gain insight into the evolutionary mechanisms that shape morphological variation and speciation processes. in this study, we used a time-calibrated phylogeny of  <dig> iberian species of short-horned grasshoppers  to test for patterns of morphological disparity in relation to their ecology and phylogenetic history. specifically, we examined the role of substrate type and level of ecological specialization in driving different aspects of morphological evolution  in this recent radiation.


RESULTS
we found a bimodal distribution of locomotory attributes corresponding to the two main substrate type guilds ; plant-perching species tend to exhibit larger wings and thicker femora than those that remain on the ground. this suggests that life form  is an important driving force in the evolution of morphological traits in short-horned grasshoppers, irrespective of ancestry. substrate type and ecological specialization had no significant influence on head shape, a trait that showed a strong phylogenetic conservatism. finally, we also found a marginal significant association between the length of antennae and the level of ecological specialization, suggesting that the development of sensory organs may be favored in specialist species.


CONCLUSIONS
our results provide evidence that even in taxonomic groups showing limited morphological and ecological disparity, natural selection seems to play a more important role than genetic drift in driving the speciation process. overall, this study suggests that morphostatic radiations should not necessarily be considered as “non-adaptive” and that the speciation process can bind both adaptive divergence mechanisms and neutral speciation processes related with allopatric and/or reproductive isolation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ecomorphologygeometric morphometricsphenotypic evolutionmorphostatic radiationorthopteratempo and modehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007136secretaría de estado de investigación, desarrollo e innovacióncgl2014-54671-portego joaquín issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

