BACKGROUND
dengue is a viral disease spread to humans by mosquitoes. notably, there are four serotypes of dengue viruses  that places ~40 % of the global population at risk of infection. however, lack of a suitable drug or a preventive vaccine exacerbates the matter further. envelope domain-iii  antigen of dengue virus  has garnered much attention as a promising vaccine candidate for dengue, in addition to its use as a diagnostic intermediate. hence developing a method for efficient production of high quality recombinant ediii is important for research and industrial purpose.


RESULTS
in this work, a pichia pastoris system was optimized for the secretory over-expression of denv serotype- <dig> ediii under the control of methanol inducible aox <dig> promoter. temperature alone had a significant impact upon the amount of secretory ediii, with  <dig> -fold increase upon reducing the induction temperature from  <dig> to 20 °c. however surprisingly, supplementation of culture media with casamino acids , further augmented secretory ediii titer, with a concomitant drop of intracellular ediii levels at both temperatures. though, reduction in intracellular retention of ediii was more prominent at 20 °c than 30 °c. this suggests that ca supplementation facilitates overexpressing p. pastoris cells to secrete more ediii by reducing the proportion retained intracellularly. moreover, a bell-shaped correlation was observed between ca concentration and secretory ediii titer. the maximum ediii expression level of 187 mg/l was achieved under shake flask conditions with induction at 20 °c in the presence of 1 % ca. the overall increase in ediii titer was ~9-fold compared to un-optimized conditions. notably, mouse immune-sera, generated using this purified ediii antigen, efficiently neutralized the denv.


CONCLUSIONS
the strategy described herein could enable fulfilling the mounting demand for recombinant ediii as well as lay direction to future studies on secretory expression of recombinant proteins in p. pastoris with ca as a media supplement.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
casamino acidsdengue virusenvelope domain iiipichia pastorissecretionhttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001407department of biotechnology , ministry of science and technologyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

