BACKGROUND
subtilisin-like serine proteases play an important role in pathogenic fungi during the penetration and colonization of their hosts. in this study, we perform an evolutionary analysis of the subtilisin-like serine protease genes of subphylum pezizomycotina to find if there are similar pathogenic mechanisms among the pathogenic fungi with different life styles, which utilize subtilisin-like serine proteases as virulence factors. within pezizomycotina, nematode-trapping fungi are unique because they capture soil nematodes using specialized trapping devices. increasing evidence suggests subtilisin-like serine proteases from nematode-trapping fungi are involved in the penetration and digestion of nematode cuticles. here we also conduct positive selection analysis on the subtilisin-like serine protease genes from nematode-trapping fungi.


RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis of  <dig> subtilisin-like serine protease genes from pezizomycotina suggests five strongly-supported monophyletic clades. the subtilisin-like serine protease genes previously identified or presumed as endocellular proteases were clustered into one clade and diverged the earliest in the phylogeny. in addition, the cuticle-degrading protease genes from entomopathogenic and nematode-parasitic fungi were clustered together, indicating that they might have overlapping pathogenic mechanisms against insects and nematodes. our experimental bioassays supported this conclusion. interestingly, although they both function as cuticle-degrading proteases, the subtilisin-like serine protease genes from nematode-trapping fungi and nematode-parasitic fungi were not grouped together in the phylogenetic tree. our evolutionary analysis revealed evidence for positive selection on the subtilisin-like serine protease genes of the nematode-trapping fungi.


CONCLUSIONS
our study provides new insights into the evolution of subtilisin-like serine protease genes in pezizomycotina. pezizomycotina subtilisins most likely evolved from endocellular to extracellular proteases. the entomopathogenic and nematode-parasitic fungi likely share similar properties in parasitism. in addition, our data provided better understanding about the duplications and subsequent functional divergence of subtilisin-like serine protease genes in pezizomycotina. the evidence of positive selection detected in the subtilisin-like serine protease genes of nematode-trapping fungi in the present study suggests that the subtilisin-like serine proteases may have played important roles during the evolution of pathogenicity of nematode-trapping fungi against nematodes.

