BACKGROUND
β-galactosidases can be used to produce low-lactose milk and dairy products for lactose intolerant people. although commercial β-galactosidases have outstanding lactose hydrolysis ability, their thermostability is low, and reaction products have strong inhibition to these enzymes. in addition, the β-galactosidases possessing simultaneously high thermostability and tolerance of galactose and glucose are still seldom reported until now. therefore, identification of novel β-galactosidases with high thermostability and tolerance to reaction products from unculturable microorganisms accounting for over 99% of microorganisms in the environment via metagenomic strategy is still urgently in demand.


RESULTS
in the present study, a novel β-galactosidase  consisting of  <dig> amino acids was identified from a metagenomic library from soil samples of turpan basin in china by functional screening. after being overexpressed in escherichia coli and purified to homogeneity, the enzymatic properties of gal <dig> with n-terminal fusion tag were investigated. the recombinant enzyme displayed a ph optimum of  <dig>  and a temperature optimum of 78°c, and was considerably stable in the temperature range of 40°c - 70°c with almost unchangeable activity after incubation for 60 min. furthermore, gal <dig> displayed a very high tolerance of galactose and glucose, with the highest inhibition constant ki,gal  and ki,glu  among β-galactosidases. in addition, gal <dig> also exhibited high enzymatic activity for its synthetic substrate o-nitrophenyl-β-d-galactopyranoside  and natural substrate lactose .


CONCLUSIONS
this study will enrich the source of β-galactosidases, and attract some attentions to β-galactosidases from extreme habitats and metagenomic library. furthermore, the recombinant gal <dig> fused with  <dig> amino acids exhibits many novel properties including high activity and thermostability at high temperatures, the ph optimum of  <dig> , high enzyme activity for lactose, as well as high tolerance of galactose and glucose. these properties make it a good candidate in the production of low-lactose milk and dairy products after further study.

β-galactosidasesmetagenomic libraryenzyme characterizationthermostabilitytolerance of galactose and glucose

