BACKGROUND
the receiver operating characteristic  curve is a fundamental tool to assess the discriminant performance for not only a single marker but also a score function combining multiple markers. the area under the roc curve  for a score function measures the intrinsic ability for the score function to discriminate between the controls and cases. recently, the partial auc  has been paid more attention than the auc, because a suitable range of the false positive rate can be focused according to various clinical situations. however, existing pauc-based methods only handle a few markers and do not take nonlinear combination of markers into consideration.


RESULTS
we have developed a new statistical method that focuses on the pauc based on a boosting technique. the markers are combined componentially for maximizing the pauc in the boosting algorithm using natural cubic splines or decision stumps , according to the values of markers . we show that the resulting score plots are useful for understanding how each marker is associated with the outcome variable. we compare the performance of the proposed boosting method with those of other existing methods, and demonstrate the utility using real data sets. as a result, we have much better discrimination performances in the sense of the pauc in both simulation studies and real data analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
the proposed method addresses how to combine the markers after a pauc-based filtering procedure in high dimensional setting. hence, it provides a consistent way of analyzing data based on the pauc from maker selection to marker combination for discrimination problems. the method can capture not only linear but also nonlinear association between the outcome variable and the markers, about which the nonlinearity is known to be necessary in general for the maximization of the pauc. the method also puts importance on the accuracy of classification performance as well as interpretability of the association, by offering simple and smooth resultant score plots for each marker.

