BACKGROUND
diseases from staphylococcus aureus are a major problem in indian hospitals and recent studies point to infiltration of community associated methicillin resistant s. aureus  into hospitals. although ca-mrsa are genetically different from nosocomial mrsa, the distinction between the two groups is blurring as ca-mrsa are showing multidrug resistance and are endemic in many hospitals. our survey of samples collected from indian hospitals between  <dig> and  <dig> had shown mainly hospital associated methicillin resistant staphylococcus aureus  carrying staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec  type iii and iiia. but s. aureus isolates collected from  <dig> onwards from community and hospital settings in india have shown sccmec type iv and v cassettes while several variations of type iv sccmec cassettes from iva to ivj have been found in other parts of the world. in the present study, we have collected nasal swabs from rural and urban healthy carriers and pus, blood etc from in patients from hospitals to study the distribution of sccmec elements and sequence types  in the community and hospital environment. we performed molecular characterization of all the isolates to determine their lineage and microarray of select isolates from each sequence type to analyze their toxins, virulence and immune-evasion factors.


RESULTS
molecular analyses of 68 s. aureus isolates from in and around bengaluru and three other indian cities have been carried out. the chosen isolates fall into fifteen sts with all major clonal complexes  present along with some minor ones. the dominant mrsa clones are st <dig> and st <dig> among healthy carriers and patients. we are reporting three novel clones, two methicillin sensitive s. aureus  isolates belonging to st <dig> , and two mrsa clones, st <dig> , and st <dig> as emerging clones in this study for the first time. sixty nine percent of isolates carry panton- valentine leucocidin genes  along with many other toxins. there is more diversity of sts among methicillin sensitive s. aureus than resistant ones. microarray analysis of isolates belonging to different sts gives an insight into major toxins, virulence factors, adhesion and immune evasion factors present among the isolates in various parts of india.


CONCLUSIONS
s. aureus isolates reported in this study belong to a highly diverse group of sts and cc and we are reporting several new sts which have not been reported earlier along with factors influencing virulence and host pathogen interactions.

