BACKGROUND
over the last few years much research has been devoted to investigating the synchronization between cortical motor and muscular activity as measured by eeg/meg-emg coherence. the main focus so far has been on corticomuscular coherence  during static force condition, for which coherence in beta-range has been described. in contrast, we showed in a recent study  <cit>  that dynamic force condition is accompanied by gamma-range cmc. the modulation of the cmc by various dynamic force amplitudes, however, remained uninvestigated. the present study addresses this question. we examined eight healthy human subjects. eeg and surface emg were recorded simultaneously. the visuomotor task consisted in isometric compensation for  <dig> forces  generated by a manipulandum. the cmc, the cortical eeg spectral power , the emg sp and the errors in motor performance  were analyzed.


RESULTS
for the static force condition we found the well-documented, significant beta-range cmc  over the contralateral sensorimotor cortex. gamma-band cmc  occurred in both small and large dynamic force conditions without any significant difference between both conditions. although in some subjects beta-range cmc was observed during both dynamic force conditions no significant difference between conditions could be detected. with respect to the motor performance, the lowest errors were obtained in the static force condition and the highest ones in the dynamic condition with large amplitude. however, when we normalized the magnitude of the errors to the amplitude of the applied force  no significant difference between both dynamic conditions was observed.


CONCLUSIONS
these findings confirm that during dynamic force output the corticomuscular network oscillates at gamma frequencies. moreover, we show that amplitude modulation of dynamic force has no effect on the gamma cmc in the low force range investigated. we suggest that gamma cmc is rather associated with the internal state of the sensorimotor system as supported by the unchanged relative error between both dynamic conditions.

