BACKGROUND
gauging the microbial community structures and functions become imperative to understand the ecological processes. to understand the impact of long-term oil contamination on microbial community structure soil samples were taken from oil fields located in different industrial regions across kadi, near ahmedabad, india. soil collected was hence used for metagenomic dna extraction to study the capabilities of intrinsic microbial community in tolerating the oil perturbation.


RESULTS
taxonomic profiling was carried out by two different complementary approaches i.e. 16s rdna and lowest common ancestor. the community profiling revealed the enrichment of phylum “proteobacteria” and genus “chromobacterium,” respectively for polluted soil sample. our results indicated that soil microbial diversity  decreased significantly with contamination. further, assignment of obtained metagenome reads to clusters of orthologous groups  of protein and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  hits revealed metabolic potential of indigenous microbial community. enzymes were mapped on fatty acid biosynthesis pathway to elucidate their roles in possible catalytic reactions.


CONCLUSIONS
to the best of our knowledge this is first study for influence of edible oil on soil microbial communities via shotgun sequencing. the results indicated that long-term oil contamination significantly affects soil microbial community structure by acting as an environmental filter to decrease the regional differences distinguishing soil microbial communities.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
oil perturbationβ-proteobacteria16s rrna genebacterial community structurefatty acid biosynthesisenzymeshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001501university grants commission f. 42-167/ <dig> madamwar datta department of biotechnologybt/01/ceib/09/v/05madamwar datta issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

