BACKGROUND
systemic immune activation  and immunosenescence develop in some people with advancing age. this process, known as “inflamm-aging,” is associated with physical frailty and sarcopenia. meanwhile, successful antiretroviral therapy has led to a growing number of older hiv-1-infected individuals who face both age-related and hiv-1-related inflammation, which may synergistically promote physical decline, including frailty and sarcopenia. the purpose of our study was to determine if inflammation during treated hiv- <dig> infection worsens physical impairment in older individuals.

methods
we determined the severity of hiv-associated inflammation and physical performance  in  <dig> older hiv-infected individuals  receiving suppressive antiretroviral therapy, balanced for confounding variables including age, anthropometrics, and co-morbidities with  <dig> uninfected control individuals. biomarkers for microbial translocation , inflammation , and coagulopathy  were assayed in plasma. activation phenotypes of cd4+t cells, cd8+ t cells and monocytes were measured by flow cytometry. physical performance was measured by  <dig> m walking speed, a short physical performance battery , and lower extremity muscle strength and fatigue.


RESULTS
overall physical function was similar in the uninfected and hiv-infected groups. compared to uninfected individuals, the hiv-infected group had elevated levels of scd <dig> , crp  and il- <dig>  and an increased frequency of cd4+ and cd8+ t cells with an immunosenescent cd57+ phenotype . neither plasma inflammatory biomarkers nor cd57+ t cells correlated with cd4+ t cell counts. furthermore, none of the elevated inflammatory biomarkers in the hiv-infected subjects were associated with any of the physical performance results.


CONCLUSIONS
when age-related co-morbidities were carefully balanced between the uninfected and hiv-infected groups, no evidence of inflammation-associated physical impairment was detected. despite careful balancing for age, bmi, medications and co-morbidities, the hiv-infected group still displayed evidence of significant chronic inflammation, including elevated scd <dig>  crp, il- <dig> and cd57+ t cells, although the magnitude of this inflammation was unrelated to physical impairment.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

