BACKGROUND
phellinus sulphurascens is a fungal pathogen that causes laminar root rot in conifers, one of the most damaging root diseases in western north america. despite its importance as a forest pathogen, this fungus is still poorly studied at the genomic level. an understanding of the molecular events involved in establishment of the disease should help to develop new methods for control of this disease.


RESULTS
we generated over  <dig> expressed sequence tags from two cdna libraries constructed using either mycelia grown on cellophane sheets and exposed to douglas-fir roots or tissues from p. sulphurascens-infected douglas-fir roots. a total of  <dig> unique genes were identified from the two libraries, and functional classification of  <dig> of these genes was possible using the functional catalogue  annotation scheme. cdnas were identified that encoded  <dig> potential virulence factors, including numerous genes implicated in virulence in a variety of phytopathogenic fungi. many of these putative virulence factors were also among  <dig> genes identified as encoding putatively secreted proteins. the expression patterns of  <dig> selected fungal genes over 7 days of infection of douglas-fir were examined using real-time pcr, and those significantly up-regulated included rhamnogalacturonan acetylesterase,  <dig> -benzoquinone reductase, a cyclophilin, a glucoamylase,  <dig> hydrophobins, a lipase, a serine carboxypeptidase, a putative ran-binding protein, and two unknown putatively secreted proteins called 1 j <dig> and 2 j <dig>  significantly down-regulated genes included a manganese-superoxide dismutase, two metalloproteases, and an unknown putatively secreted protein called ps <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
this first collection of phellinus sulphurascens est sequences and its annotation provide an important resource for future research aimed at understanding key virulence factors of this forest pathogen. we examined the expression patterns of numerous fungal genes with potential roles in virulence, and found a collection of functionally diverse genes that are significantly up- or down-regulated during infection of douglas-fir seedling roots by p. sulphurascens.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
virulencepathogenicitylaminated root rot phellinus sulphurascensdouglas-firissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

