BACKGROUND
long-term monitoring of the biological impacts of the radioactive pollution caused by the fukushima nuclear accident in march  <dig> is required to understand what has occurred in organisms living in the polluted areas. here, we investigated spatial and temporal changes of the abnormality rate  in both field-caught adult populations and laboratory-reared offspring populations of the pale grass blue butterfly, zizeeria maha, which has generation time of approximately one month. we monitored  <dig> localities  every spring and fall over 3 years .


RESULTS
the adult ars of these localities quickly increased and peaked in the fall of  <dig>  which was not observed in non-contaminated localities. in the offspring generation, the total ars, which include deaths at the larval, prepupal, and pupal stages and morphological abnormalities at the adult stage, peaked either in the fall of  <dig> or in the spring of  <dig>  with much higher levels than those of the parent field populations, suggesting that high incidence of deaths and abnormalities might have occurred in the field populations. importantly, the elevated ars of the field and offspring populations settled back to a normal level by the fall of  <dig> and by the spring of  <dig>  respectively. similar results were obtained not only in the spatiotemporal dynamics of the number of individuals caught per minute but also in the temporal dynamics of the correlation coefficient between the adult abnormality rate and the ground radiation dose or the distance from the power plant.


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrated an occurrence and an accumulation of adverse physiological and genetic effects in early generations, followed by their decrease and leveling off at a normal level, providing the most comprehensive record of biological dynamics after a nuclear accident available today. this study also indicates the importance of considering generation time and adaptive evolution in evaluating the biological impacts of artificial pollution in wild organisms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
adaptive evolutionfukushima nuclear accidentlong-term monitoringpale grass blue butterflyradioactive contaminationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

