BACKGROUND
anopheles sinensis is a major malaria vector in china and other southeast asian countries, and it is becoming increasingly resistant to the insecticides used for agriculture, net impregnation, and indoor residual spray. very limited genomic information on this species is available, which has hindered the development of new tools for resistance surveillance and vector control. we used the  <dig> gs flx system and generated expressed sequence tag  databases of various life stages of an. sinensis, and we determined the transcriptional differences between deltamethrin resistant and susceptible mosquitoes.


RESULTS
the  <dig> gs flx transcriptome sequencing yielded a total of  <dig>  reads  with the pooled an. sinensis mosquitoes across various development stages. the de novo assembly generated  <dig>  contigs with average length of 493 bp. a total of  <dig>  ests were generated with gene ontology  and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  annotation. a total of  <dig>  ests were differentially expressed between deltamethrin resistant and susceptible mosquitoes collected from the same field site in jiangsu, china. among these differentially expressed ests, a total of  <dig> pathways were mapped to the kegg database, with the predominant ests belonging to metabolic pathways. furthermore, a total of  <dig>  microsatellites and  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms  were identified.


CONCLUSIONS
the annotated est and transcriptome databases provide a valuable genomic resource for further genetic studies of this important malaria vector species. the differentially expressed ests associated with insecticide resistance identified in this study lay an important foundation for further functional analysis. the identified microsatellite and snp markers will provide useful tools for future population genetic and comparative genomic analyses of malaria vectors.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomeexpressed sequence tagpyrethroid resistancegene expressionanopheles sinensisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

