BACKGROUND
small noncoding rna , including micrornas  and endogenous small-interfering rnas  are key gene regulators in eukaryotes, playing critical roles in plant development and stress tolerance. trans-acting sirnas , which are secondary sirnas triggered by mirnas, and sirnas from natural antisense transcripts  are two well-studied classes of endo-sirnas.


RESULTS
in order to understand sncrnas’ roles in plant chilling response and stress acclimation, we performed a comprehensive study of mirnas and endo-sirnas in cassava , a major source of food for the world populations in tropical regions. combining next-generation sequencing and computational and experimental analyses, we profiled and characterized sncrna species and mrna genes from the plants that experienced severe and moderate chilling stresses, that underwent further severe chilling stress after chilling acclimation at moderate stress, and that grew under the normal condition. we also included castor bean  in our study to understand conservation of sncrnas. in addition to known mirnas, we identified  <dig>  novel mirnas as well as  <dig>  putative secondary sirna-yielding and  <dig>  nat-sirna-yielding candidate loci in cassava and castor bean, respectively. among the expressed sncrnas,  <dig> mirnas,  <dig> ta-sirnas and  <dig> nat-sirnas showed significant expression changes under chilling stresses.


CONCLUSIONS
systematic and computational analysis of micrornaome and experimental validation collectively showed that mirnas, ta-sirnas, and possibly nat-sirnas play important roles in chilling response and chilling acclimation in cassava by regulating stress-related pathways, e.g. auxin signal transduction. the conservation of these sncrna might shed lights on the role of sncrna-mediated pathways affected by chilling stress and stress acclimation in euphorbiaceous plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
micrornatasirnachilling acclimationcassavaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

