BACKGROUND
coxiella burnetii is an intracellular bacterial pathogen that causes acute and chronic disease in humans. bacterial replication occurs within enlarged parasitophorous vacuoles  of eukaryotic cells, the biogenesis and maintenance of which is dependent on c. burnetii protein synthesis. these observations suggest that c. burnetii actively subverts host cell processes, however little is known about the cellular biology mechanisms manipulated by the pathogen during infection. here, we examined host cell gene expression changes specifically induced by c. burnetii proteins during infection.


RESULTS
we have identified  <dig> host cell genes that are specifically regulated when de novo c. burnetii protein synthesis occurs during infection using comparative microarray analysis. two parallel sets of infected and uninfected thp- <dig> cells were grown for  <dig> h followed by the addition of chloramphenicol  to  <dig> μg/ml in one set. total rna was harvested at  <dig> hpi from all conditions, and microarrays performed using phalanx human onearray™ slides. a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  thp- <dig> genes were up or down regulated ≥ <dig> fold in the c. burnetii infected vs. uninfected cell sets, respectively. comparisons between the complementary data sets , eliminated the common gene expression changes. a stringent comparison  between the separate microarrays revealed  <dig> host cell genes modulated by c. burnetii protein synthesis. ontological analysis of these genes identified the innate immune response, cell death and proliferation, vesicle trafficking and development, lipid homeostasis, and cytoskeletal organization as predominant cellular functions modulated by c. burnetii protein synthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
collectively, these data indicate that c. burnetii proteins actively regulate the expression of specific host cell genes and pathways. this is in addition to host cell genes that respond to the presence of the pathogen whether or not it is actively synthesizing proteins. these findings indicate that c. burnetii modulates the host cell gene expression to avoid the immune response, preserve the host cell from death, and direct the development and maintenance of a replicative pv by controlling vesicle formation and trafficking within the host cell during infection.

