BACKGROUND
plant parasitic nematodes are unusual metazoans as they are equipped with genes that allow for symbiont-independent degradation of plant cell walls. among the cell wall-degrading enzymes, glycoside hydrolase family  <dig>  cellulases are relatively well characterized, especially for high impact parasites such as root-knot and cyst nematodes. interestingly, ancestors of extant nematodes most likely acquired these ghf <dig> cellulases from a prokaryote donor by one or multiple lateral gene transfer events. to obtain insight into the origin of ghf <dig> cellulases among evolutionary advanced members of the order tylenchida, cellulase biodiversity data from less distal family members were collected and analyzed.


RESULTS
single nematodes were used to obtain  genomic sequences of cellulases from representatives of the genera meloidogyne, pratylenchus, hirschmanniella and globodera. combined bayesian analysis of ≈  <dig> cellulase sequences revealed three types of catalytic domains . represented by  <dig> sequences, type b is numerically dominant, and the overall topology of the catalytic domain type shows remarkable resemblance with trees based on neutral  small subunit ribosomal dna sequences. bayesian analysis further suggested a sister relationship between the lesion nematode pratylenchus thornei and all type b cellulases from root-knot nematodes. yet, the relationship between the three catalytic domain types remained unclear. superposition of intron data onto the cellulase tree suggests that types b and c are related, and together distinct from type a that is characterized by two unique introns.


CONCLUSIONS
all tylenchida members investigated here harbored one or multiple ghf <dig> cellulases. three types of catalytic domains are distinguished, and the presence of at least two types is relatively common among plant parasitic tylenchida. analysis of coding sequences of cellulases suggests that root-knot and cyst nematodes did not acquire this gene directly by lateral genes transfer. more likely, these genes were passed on by ancestors of a family nowadays known as the pratylenchidae.

lateral gene transfercellulasenematodesplant parasitism

