BACKGROUND
the ability to site-specifically conjugate a protein to a payload of interest  has found widespread application in basic research and drug development. for example, antibody-drug conjugates represent a class of biotherapeutics that couple the targeting specificity of an antibody with the chemotherapeutic potency of a small molecule drug. while first generation antibody-drug conjugates  used random conjugation approaches, next-generation adcs are employing site-specific conjugation. a facile way to generate site-specific protein conjugates is via the aldehyde tag technology, where a five amino acid consensus sequence  is genetically encoded into the protein of interest at the desired location. during protein expression, the cys residue within this consensus sequence can be recognized by ectopically-expressed formylglycine generating enzyme , which converts the cys to a formylglycine  residue. the latter bears an aldehyde functional group that serves as a chemical handle for subsequent conjugation.


RESULTS
the yield of cys conversion to fgly during protein production can be variable and is highly dependent on culture conditions. we set out to achieve consistently high yields by modulating culture conditions to maximize fge activity within the cell. we recently showed that fge is a copper-dependent oxidase that binds copper in a stoichiometric fashion and uses it to activate oxygen, driving enzymatic turnover. building upon that work, here we show that by supplementing cell culture media with copper we can routinely reach high yields of highly converted protein. we demonstrate that cells incorporate copper from the media into fge, which results in increased specific activity of the enzyme. the amount of copper required is compatible with large scale cell culture, as demonstrated in fed-batch cell cultures with antibody titers of 5 g · l− <dig>  specific cellular production rates of 75 pg · cell−1 · d− <dig>  and fgly conversion yields of 95–98 %.


CONCLUSIONS
we describe a process with a high yield of site-specific formylglycine  generation during monoclonal antibody production in cho cells. the conversion of cys to fgly depends upon the activity of fge, which can be ensured by supplementing the culture media with  <dig> um copper sulfate.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aldehyde tagformylglycine-generating enzymefgefglysmartag™site-specificconjugationsntibody-drug conjugateadcissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

