BACKGROUND
antimicrobial peptides  are a class of antimicrobial agents with broad-spectrum activities. several reports indicate that cationic amps bind to the negatively charged bacterial membrane causing membrane depolarization and damage. however, membrane depolarization and damage may be insufficient to elicit cell death, thereby suggesting that other mechanism of action could be involved in this phenomenon. in this study, we investigated the antimicrobial activity of a novel antimicrobial peptide, tp <dig>  against two strains of pseudomonas aeruginosa, as well as its possible mechanisms of action.


RESULTS
tp <dig> proved to be bactericidal against p. aeruginosa as confirmed by the reduced bacteria counts, membrane damage and cytoplasmic membrane depolarization. in addition, it was non-toxic to mouse j <dig> macrophages and human lung a <dig> epithelial cells. electron microscopy analysis showed tp <dig> bactericidal effects by structural changes of the bacteria from viable rod-shaped cells to those with cell membrane damages, proceeding into the efflux of cytoplasmic contents and emergence of ghost cells. gene expression analysis on the effects of tp <dig> on outer membrane biogenesis genes underscored marked down-regulation, particularly of oprf, which encodes a major structural and outer membrane porin  in both strains studied, indicating that the peptide may cause deregulation of outer membrane genes and reduced structural stability which could lead to cell death.


CONCLUSIONS
our data shows that tp <dig> has potent antimicrobial activity against p aeruginosa. the correlation between membrane damage, depolarization and reduced expression of outer membrane biogenesis genes, particularly oprf may suggest the bactericidal mechanism of action of the tp <dig> peptide.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pseudomonas aeruginosaantimicrobial peptidesantimicrobial effectnsf-cresthrd-1241701singh shree r. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

