BACKGROUND
bud dormancy is an important biological phenomenon of perennial plants that enables them to survive under harsh environmental circumstances. grape  is one of the most grown fruit crop worldwide; however, underlying mechanisms involved in grape bud dormancy are not yet clear. this work was aimed to explore the underlying molecular mechanism regulating bud dormancy in grape.


RESULTS
we have performed transcriptome and differential transcript expression analyses of “shine muscat” grape buds using the illumina rna-seq system. comparisons of transcript expression levels among three stages of dormancy, paradormancy  vs endodormancy , summer buds  vs ed and sb vs pd, resulted in the detection of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts, respectively. out of approximately  <dig> million high-quality generated reads,  <dig> transcripts were differentially expressed . grape reference genome was used for alignment of sequence reads and to measure the expression level of transcripts. furthermore, findings obtained were then compared using two different databases; gene ontology  and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes , to annotate the transcript descriptions and to assign a pathway to each transcript. kegg analysis revealed that secondary metabolites biosynthesis and plant hormone signaling was found most enriched out of the  <dig> total pathways. in the comparisons of the pd vs ed and sb vs ed stages of grape buds, the gibberellin  and abscisic acid  pathways were found to be the most enriched. the aba and ga pathways were further analyzed to observe the expression pattern of differentially expressed transcripts. transcripts related to the pp2c family  were found to be up-regulated in the pd vs ed comparison and down-regulated in the sb vs ed and sb vs pd comparisons. gid <dig> family transcripts  were up-regulated while della family transcripts were down-regulated during the three dormancy stages. differentially expressed transcripts  related to redox activity were abundant in the go biological process category. rt-qpcr assay results for  <dig> selected transcripts validated the data obtained by rna-seq.


CONCLUSIONS
at this stage, taking into account the results obtained so far, it is possible to put forward a hypothesis for the molecular mechanism underlying grape bud dormancy, which may pave the way for ultimate improvements in the grape industry.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqdegssummer budsparadormancyendodormancyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002338ministry of education of the people's republic of chinachina agriculture research system.issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

