BACKGROUND
the transcription factor myc is a critical regulator of diverse cellular processes, including both replication and apoptosis. differences in myc-regulated gene expression responsible for such opposing outcomes in vivo remain obscure. to address this we have examined time-dependent changes in global gene expression in two transgenic mouse models in which myc activation, in either skin suprabasal keratinocytes or pancreatic islet β-cells, promotes tissue expansion or involution, respectively.


RESULTS
consistent with observed phenotypes, expression of cell cycle genes is increased in both models , as are those involved in cell growth and metabolism, while expression of genes involved in cell differentiation is down-regulated. however, in β-cells, which unlike suprabasal keratinocytes undergo prominent apoptosis from  <dig> hours, there is up-regulation of genes associated with dna-damage response and intrinsic apoptotic pathways, including atr, arf, bax and cycs. in striking contrast, this is not the case for suprabasal keratinocytes, where pro-apoptotic genes such as noxa are down-regulated and key anti-apoptotic pathways  and those promoting angiogenesis are up-regulated. moreover, dramatic up-regulation of steroid hormone-regulated kallikrein serine protease family members in suprabasal keratinocytes alone could further enhance local igf <dig> actions, such as through proteolysis of igf <dig> binding proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
activation of myc causes cell growth, loss of differentiation and cell cycle entry in both β-cells and suprabasal keratinocytes in vivo. apoptosis, which is confined to β-cells, may involve a combination of a dna-damage response and downstream activation of pro-apoptotic signalling pathways, including cdc2a and p19arf/p <dig>  and downstream targets. conversely, avoidance of apoptosis in suprabasal keratinocytes may result primarily from the activation of key anti-apoptotic signalling pathways, particularly igf1-akt, and induction of an angiogenic response, though intrinsic resistance to induction of p19arf by myc in suprabasal keratinocytes may contribute.

