BACKGROUND
pectinases play an important role in plant cell wall deconstruction and have potential in diverse industries such as food, wine, animal feed, textile, paper, fuel, and others. the demand for such enzymes is increasing exponentially, as are the efforts to improve their production and to implement their use in several industrial processes. the goal of this study was to examine the potential of producing polygalacturonase i from aspergillus niger in plants and to investigate the effects of subcellular compartmentalization and protein fusions on its accumulation and activity.


RESULTS
polygalacturonase i from aspergillus niger  was transiently produced in nicotiana benthamiana by targeting it to five different cellular compartments: apoplast, endoplasmic reticulum , vacuole, chloroplast and cytosol. accumulation levels of  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> % of total soluble protein  were observed in the apoplast, er, and vacuole, respectively, and specific activity was significantly higher in vacuole-targeted anpgi compared to the same enzyme targeted to the er or apoplast. no accumulation was found for anpgi when targeted to the chloroplast or cytosol. analysis of anpgi fused with elastin-like polypeptide  revealed a significant increase in the protein accumulation level, especially when targeted to the vacuole where the protein doubles its accumulation to  <dig> % of tsp, while the hydrophobin  fusion impaired anpgi accumulation and both tags impaired activity, albeit to different extents. the recombinant protein showed activity against polygalacturonic acid with optimum conditions at ph  <dig>  and temperature from  <dig> to 50°c, depending on its fusion. in vivo analysis of reducing sugar content revealed a higher release of reducing sugars in plant tissue expressing recombinant anpgi compared to wild type n. benthamiana leaves.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that subcellular compartmentalization of enzymes has an impact on both the target protein accumulation and its activity, especially in the case of proteins that undergo post-translational modifications, and should be taken into consideration when protein production strategies are designed. using plants to produce heterologous enzymes for the degradation of a key component of the plant cell wall could reduce the cost of biomass pretreatment for the production of cellulosic biofuels.

polygalacturonaseaspergillus nigernicotiana benthamianaelastin-like polypeptidehydrophobin icellulosic biofuels

