BACKGROUND
lung maturation is a late fetal developmental event in both mice and humans. because of this, lung immaturity is a serious problem in premature infants. disruption of genes for either the glucocorticoid receptor  or the nfib transcription factors results in perinatal lethality due to lung immaturity. in both knockouts, the phenotype includes excess cell proliferation, failure of saccularization and reduced expression of markers of epithelial differentiation. this similarity suggests that the two genes may co-regulate a specific set of genes essential for lung maturation.


RESULTS
we analyzed the roles of these two transcription factors in regulating transcription using chip-seq data for nfib, and rna expression data and motif analysis for both. our new chip-seq data for nfib in lung at e <dig>  shows that nfib binds to a nfi motif. this motif is over-represented in the promoters of genes that are under-expressed in nfib-ko mice at e <dig> , suggesting an activator role for nfib. using available microarray data from nr3c1-ko mice, we further identified  <dig> genes that are under-expressed in both nfib and nr3c <dig> knockouts, an overlap which is  <dig>  times larger than what would be expected by chance. finally, we looked for enrichment of  <dig> recently published transcription factor motifs in the promoters of these putative target genes and found that the nfib and glucocorticoid receptor motifs were among the most enriched, suggesting that a subset of these genes may be directly activated by nfib and nr3c <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
our data provide the first evidence for nfib and nr3c <dig> co-regulating genes related to lung maturation. they also establish that the in vivo dna-binding specificity of nfib is the same as previously seen in vitro, and highly similar to that of the other nfi-family members nfia, nfic and nfix.

lung developmentnr3c1glucocorticoid receptornfibregulation of transcriptionchip-seq analysisexpression analysismotif analysistranscription factor

