BACKGROUND
one of the major sources of human salmonella infections is meat. therefore, efficient and rapid monitoring of salmonella in the meat production chain is necessary. validation of alternative methods is needed to prove that the performance is equal to established methods. very few of the published pcr methods for salmonella have been validated in collaborative studies. this study describes a validation including comparative and collaborative trials, based on the recommendations from the nordic organization for validation of alternative microbiological methods  of a same-day, non-commercial real-time pcr method for detection of salmonella in meat and carcass swabs.


RESULTS
the comparative trial was performed against a reference method  using artificially and naturally contaminated samples . the relative accuracy was 99%, relative detection level 100%, relative sensitivity 103% and relative specificity 100%. the collaborative trial included six laboratories testing minced meat, poultry neck-skins, and carcass swabs as un-inoculated samples and samples artificially contaminated with 1– <dig> cfu/ <dig> g, and 10– <dig> cfu/ <dig> g. valid results were obtained from five of the laboratories and used for the statistical analysis. apart from one of the non-inoculated samples being false positive with pcr for one of the laboratories, no false positive or false negative results were reported. partly based on results obtained in this study, the method has obtained nordval approval for analysis of salmonella in meat and carcass swabs. the pcr method was transferred to a production laboratory and the performance was compared with the bax salmonella test on  <dig> pork samples artificially contaminated with salmonella. there was no significant difference in the results obtained by the two methods.


CONCLUSIONS
the real-time pcr method for detection of salmonella in meat and carcass swabs was validated in comparative and collaborative trials according to nordval recommendations. the pcr method was found to perform well. the test is currently being implemented for screening of several hundred thousand samples per year at a number of major danish slaughterhouses to shorten the post-slaughter storage time and facilitate the swift export of fresh meat.

