BACKGROUND
a critical step in the rt-qpcr workflow for studying gene expression is data normalization, one of the strategies being the use of reference genes. this study aimed to identify and validate a selection of reference genes for relative quantification in talaromyces versatilis, a relevant industrial filamentous fungus. beyond t. versatilis, this study also aimed to propose reference genes that are applicable more widely for rt-qpcr data normalization in filamentous fungi.


RESULTS
a selection of stable, potential reference genes was carried out in silico from rna-seq based transcriptomic data obtained from t. versatilis. a dozen functionally unrelated candidate genes were analysed by rt-qpcr assays over more than  <dig> relevant culture conditions. by using genorm, we showed that most of these candidate genes had stable transcript levels in most of the conditions, from growth environments to conidial germination. the overall robustness of these genes was explored further by showing that any combination of  <dig> of them led to minimal normalization bias. to extend the relevance of the study beyond t. versatilis, we challenged their stability together with sixteen other classically used genes such as β-tubulin or actin, in a representative sample of about  <dig> rna-seq datasets. these datasets were obtained from  <dig> phylogenetically distant filamentous fungi exposed to prevalent experimental conditions. although this wide analysis demonstrated that each of the chosen genes exhibited sporadic up- or down-regulation, their hierarchical clustering allowed the identification of a promising group of  <dig> genes, which presented weak expression changes and no tendency to up- or down-regulation over the whole set of conditions. this group included ubcb, sac <dig>  fis <dig> and sara genes, as well as tfc <dig> and ubc <dig> that were previously validated for their use in s. cerevisiae.


CONCLUSIONS
we propose a set of  <dig> genes that can be used as reference genes in rt-qpcr data normalization in any field of fungal biology. however, we recommend that the uniform transcription of these genes is tested by systematic experimental validation and to use the geometric averaging of at least  <dig> of the best ones. this will minimize the bias in normalization and will support trustworthy biological conclusions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
filamentous fungitalaromycesrna-seqrt-qpcrreference genesnormalizationgene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

