BACKGROUND
mathematical models are used to gain an integrative understanding of biochemical processes and networks. commonly the models are based on deterministic ordinary differential equations. when molecular counts are low, stochastic formalisms like monte carlo simulations are more appropriate and well established. however, compared to the wealth of computational methods used to fit and analyze deterministic models, there is only little available to quantify the exactness of the fit of stochastic models compared to experimental data or to analyze different aspects of the modeling results.


RESULTS
here, we developed a method to fit stochastic simulations to experimental high-throughput data, meaning data that exhibits distributions. the method uses a comparison of the probability density functions that are computed based on monte carlo simulations and the experimental data. multiple parameter values are iteratively evaluated using optimization routines. the method improves its performance by selecting parameters values after comparing the similitude between the deterministic stability of the system and the modes in the experimental data distribution. as a case study we fitted a model of the irf <dig> gene expression circuit to time-course experimental data obtained by flow cytometry. irf <dig> shows bimodal dynamics upon ifn stimulation. this dynamics occurs due to the switching between active and basal states of the irf <dig> promoter. however, the exact molecular mechanisms responsible for the bimodality of irf <dig> is not fully understood.


CONCLUSIONS
our results allow us to conclude that the activation of the irf <dig> promoter by the combination of irf <dig> and isgf <dig> is sufficient to explain the observed bimodal dynamics.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
irf7ifnstochastic modelsparameter estimationconacyt263795bundesministerium für bildung und forschungimmunoquantissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

