BACKGROUND
antimicrobial peptides have become important candidates as new antibiotics against resistant bacterial strains. however, the major industrial manufacture of antimicrobial peptides is chemical synthesis with high costs and in relatively small scale. the ub-tag and sumo-tag are useful for increasing the yield of enzymes and other proteins in expression system. in this study, antimicrobial peptide a20l , a derivative of v13k in the previous study is used as a template to be expressed in different ub-tag and human sumo tag systems to compare the prokaryotic expression approaches of antimicrobial peptide. the antibacterial mechanism of action and membrane specificity of a20l was further studied.

methods
we fused the ub and sumo1/2/3/ <dig> with a20l to construct expression plasmids. ub-a20l and sumo1/2/ <dig> gene sequences were inserted into the phue plasmids and pet-28b+ plasmids, respectively, to construct phue-a20l plasmids and pet-28b+-sumo1/2/3/4-a20l plasmids. these plasmids were transformed into e. coli rosetta  and induced with iptg to express ub-a20l and sumo1/2/3/ <dig> fusion proteins. the recombinant proteins were found in the soluble fraction after being over expressed in e. coli rosetta . antibacterial and hemolytic activities and membrane permeabilization ability of a20l were determined. peptide structure was also studied by circular dichroism experiments.


RESULTS
a20l  was successfully expressed by fusion with an ubiquitin tag  and human sumo tags . a20l exhibited antimicrobial activity against various gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. based on the hemolytic activity against human red blood cells, a20l showed good specificity against bacteria. the circular dichroism experiments illustrated that a20l was transferred into an α-helical structure in the presence of hydrophobic environment. the antibacterial mechanism of action and membrane specificity of a20l was further studied using membrane permeabilization experiments and tryptophan fluorescence and quenching experiments in liposomes.


CONCLUSIONS
the ub-tag and human sumo-tags represent good alternatives to chemical synthesis for the industrial production of antimicrobial peptides with low costs and high yields. the antibacterial mechanism of action of a20l was proved as membrane disruption. a20l showed stronger specificity on liposomes mimicking bacterial membrane than those mimicking eukaryotic cell membrane, which is consistent with the biological activity studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
antimicrobial peptideubiquitinsmall ubiquitin-related modifierliposomespecificityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

