BACKGROUND
drought stress is one of the most severe problem limited agricultural productivity worldwide. it has been reported that plants response to drought-stress by sophisticated mechanisms at both transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. however, the precise molecular mechanisms governing the responses of tobacco leaves to drought stress and water status are not well understood. to identify genes and mirnas involved in drought-stress responses in tobacco, we performed both mrna and small rna sequencing on tobacco leaf samples from the following three treatments: untreated-control , drought stress , and re-watering .


RESULTS
in total, we identified  <dig> differentially expressed genes  between the dl and cl  treatments and identified  <dig> degs between the wl and dl  treatments. further analysis revealed  <dig> overlapping degs between the dl vs. cl and wl vs. dl comparisons, and, strikingly, all of these genes exhibited opposing expression trends between these two comparisons, strongly suggesting that these overlapping degs are somehow involved in the responses of tobacco leaves to drought stress. functional annotation analysis showed significant up-regulation of genes annotated to be involved in responses to stimulus and stress,  antioxidant defense , down regulation of genes related to the cell cycle pathway, and photosynthesis processes. we also found  <dig> and  <dig> transcription factors  among the degs in, respectively, the dl vs. cl and the wl vs. dl comparisons. in addition, small rna sequencing revealed  <dig> known micrornas  from  <dig> families and  <dig> novel mirna candidates in tobacco. we also found that five known mirna families  showed differential regulation under drought conditions. analysis to identify negative correlations between the differentially expressed mirnas  and degs revealed  <dig> mrna-mirna interactions between cl and dl plants, and  <dig> mrna-mirna interactions between dl and wl plants.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a global view of the transcriptional and the post-transcriptional responses of tobacco under drought stress and re-watering conditions. our results establish an empirical foundation that should prove valuable for further investigations into the molecular mechanisms through which tobacco, and plants more generally, respond to drought stress at multiple molecular genetic levels.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

zhengzhou tobacco research institute902014ca0410liu pingping issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

