BACKGROUND
the reconstruction of context-specific metabolic models from easily and reliably measurable features such as transcriptomics data will be increasingly important in research and medicine. current reconstruction methods suffer from high computational effort and arbitrary threshold setting. moreover, understanding the underlying epigenetic regulation might allow the identification of putative intervention points within metabolic networks. genes under high regulatory load from multiple enhancers or super-enhancers are known key genes for disease and cell identity. however, their role in regulation of metabolism and their placement within the metabolic networks has not been studied.

methods
here we present fastcormics, a fast and robust workflow for the creation of high-quality metabolic models from transcriptomics data. fastcormics is devoid of arbitrary parameter settings and due to its low computational demand allows cross-validation assays. applying fastcormics, we have generated models for  <dig> primary human cell types from microarray data, revealing significant differences in their metabolic networks.


RESULTS
to understand the cell type-specific regulation of the alternative metabolic pathways we built multiple models during differentiation of primary human monocytes to macrophages and performed chip-seq experiments for histone h <dig> k <dig> acetylation  to map the active enhancers in macrophages. focusing on the metabolic genes under high regulatory load from multiple enhancers or super-enhancers, we found these genes to show the most cell type-restricted and abundant expression profiles within their respective pathways. importantly, the high regulatory load genes are associated to reactions enriched for transport reactions and other pathway entry points, suggesting that they are critical regulatory control points for cell type-specific metabolism.


CONCLUSIONS
by integrating metabolic modelling and epigenomic analysis we have identified high regulatory load as a common feature of metabolic genes at pathway entry points such as transporters within the macrophage metabolic network. analysis of these control points through further integration of metabolic and gene regulatory networks in various contexts could be beneficial in multiple fields from identification of disease intervention strategies to cellular reprogramming.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
metabolic modellingmacrophage differentiationhigh regulatory loadactive enhancerregulation of metabolismissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

