BACKGROUND
the hormonal state during the estrus cycle or pregnancy produces alterations on female olfactory perception that are accompanied by specific maternal behaviors, but it is unclear how sex hormones act on the olfactory system to enable these sensory changes.


RESULTS
herein, we show that the production of neuronal progenitors is stimulated in the vomeronasal organ  epithelium of female mice during a late phase of pregnancy. using a wide range of molecular markers that cover the whole vno cell maturation process in combination with ca2+ imaging in early postmitotic neurons, we show that newly generated vno cells adopt morphological and functional properties of mature sensory neurons. a fraction of these newly generated cells project their axons to the olfactory forebrain, extend dendrites that contact the vno lumen, and can detect peptides and urinary proteins shown to contain pheromone activity. high-throughput rna-sequencing reveals concomitant differences in gene expression in the vno transcriptomes of pregnant females. these include relative increases in expression of  <dig> vomeronasal receptors, of which  <dig> belong to the v1r subfamily, and may therefore be considered as candidate receptors for mediating maternal behaviors. we identify the expression of several hormone receptors in the vno of which estrogen receptor α  is directly localized to neural progenitors. administration of sustained high levels of estrogen, but not progesterone, is sufficient to stimulate vomeronasal progenitor cell proliferation in the vno epithelium.


CONCLUSIONS
peripheral olfactory neurogenesis driven by estrogen may contribute to modulate sensory perception and adaptive vno-dependent behaviors during pregnancy and early motherhood.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
adult neurogenesisesr1estrogenhormone receptorspregnancyvomeronasal organvomeronasal receptorsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

