BACKGROUND
hepatitis b virus  isolates have been classified in eight genotypes, a to h, which exhibit distinct geographical distributions. genotypes a, d and f are predominant in brazil, a country formed by a miscegenated population, where the proportion of individuals from caucasian, amerindian and african origins varies by region. genotype f, which is the most divergent, is considered indigenous to the americas. a systematic molecular characterization of hbv isolates from different parts of the world would be invaluable in establishing hbv evolutionary origins and dispersion patterns. a large-scale study is needed to map the region-by-region distribution of the hbv genotypes in brazil.


RESULTS
genotyping by pcr-rflp of  <dig> hbv isolates from hbsag-positive blood donors showed that at least two of the three genotypes, a, d, and f, co-circulate in each of the five geographic regions of brazil. no other genotypes were identified. overall, genotype a was most prevalent , and most of these isolates were classified as subgenotype a <dig> . genotype d was the most common genotype in the south  and central  regions. the prevalence of genotype f was low  countrywide. nucleotide sequencing of the s gene and a phylogenetic analysis of  <dig> hbv genotype f isolates showed that a great majority  belonged to subgenotype f <dig>  cluster ii. the deduced serotype of  <dig> of  <dig> f isolates was adw <dig>  the remaining isolate showed a leucine-to-isoleucine substitution at position  <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
the presence of genotypes a, d and f, and the absence of other genotypes in a large cohort of hbv infected individuals may reflect the ethnic origins of the brazilian population. the high prevalence of isolates from subgenotype a <dig>  indicates that the african influx during the colonial slavery period had a major impact on the circulation of hbv genotype a currently found in brazil. although most genotype f isolates belonged to cluster ii, the presence of some isolates belonging to clusters i  and iv suggests the existence of two or more founder viral populations of genotype f in brazil.

