BACKGROUND
streptomycetes are soil-dwelling gram-positive bacteria that are best known as the major producers of antibiotics used in the pharmaceutical industry. the evolution of exceptionally powerful transporter systems in streptomycetes has enabled their adaptation to the complex soil environment.


RESULTS
our comparative genomic analyses revealed that each of the eleven streptomyces species examined possesses a rich repertoire of from 761- <dig> transport proteins, accounting for  <dig>  to  <dig>  % of each respective proteome. these transporters can be divided into seven functional classes and  <dig> transporter families. among them, the atp-binding cassette  superfamily and the major facilitator superfamily  represent more than 40 % of all the transport proteins in streptomyces. they play important roles in both nutrient uptake and substrate secretion, especially in the efflux of drugs and toxicants. the evolutionary flexibility across eleven streptomyces species is seen in the lineage-specific distribution of transport proteins in two major protein translocation pathways: the general secretory  pathway and the twin-arginine translocation  pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
our results present a catalog of transport systems in eleven streptomyces species. these expansive transport systems are important mediators of the complex processes including nutrient uptake, concentration balance of elements, efflux of drugs and toxins, and the timely and orderly secretion of proteins. a better understanding of transport systems will allow enhanced optimization of production processes for both pharmaceutical and industrial applications of streptomyces, which are widely used in antibiotic production and heterologous expression of recombinant proteins.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
streptomycestransport proteinscomparative genomicsdrug effluxprotein translocationthe international conference on intelligent biology and medicine   <dig> indianapolis, in, usa 13- <dig> november  <dig> http://watson.compbio.iupui.edu/yunliu/icibm/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

