BACKGROUND
systemic inflammation is known to induce sickness behaviors, including decreased social interaction and pain. we have reported increased serum inflammatory cytokines in a rat model of repetitive strain injury . here, we sought to determine if sickness behaviors are induced in this model and the effectiveness of conservative treatments.

methods
experimental rats underwent initial training to learn a high force reaching task , with or without ibuprofen treatment . subsets of trained animals went on to perform a high repetition high force  task for  <dig> or 12 weeks  without treatment, or received two secondary interventions: ibuprofen  or a move to a lower demand low repetition low force task , beginning in task week  <dig>  mixed-effects models with repeated measures assays were used to assay duration of social interaction, aggression, forepaw withdrawal thresholds and reach performance abilities. one-way and two-way anovas were used to assay tissue responses. corrections for multiple comparisons were made.


RESULTS
trhf + ibu rats did not develop behavioral declines or systemic increases in il-1beta and il- <dig>  observed in untreated trhf rats. untreated hrhf rats showed social interaction declines, difficulties performing the operant task and forepaw mechanical allodynia. untreated hrhf rats also had increased serum levels of several inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, neuroinflammatory responses  in the brain, median nerve and spinal cord, and substance p and neurokinin  <dig> immunoexpression in the spinal cord. hrhf + ibu and hrhf-to-lrlf rats showed improved social interaction and reduced inflammatory serum, nerve and brain changes. however, neither secondary treatment rescued hrhf-task induced forepaw allodynia, or completely attenuated task performance declines or spinal cord responses.


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that inflammatory mechanisms induced by prolonged performance of high physical demand tasks mediate the development of social interaction declines and aggression. however, persistent spinal cord sensitization was associated with persistent behavioral indices of discomfort, despite use of conservative secondary interventions indicating the need for prevention or more effective interventions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
repetitive loadingwork-related musculoskeletal disordersupper extremitysocial interactionaggressionmechanical hypersensitivityvon freyinflammationcytokineshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000069national institute of arthritis and musculoskeletal and skin diseasesar056019barbe m. f. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000025national institute of mental healthp30mh092177issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

