BACKGROUND
siraitia grosvenorii  is an herbaceous perennial plant native to southern china and most prevalent in guilin city. its fruit contains a sweet, fleshy, edible pulp that is widely used in traditional chinese medicine. the major bioactive constituents in the fruit extract are the cucurbitane-type triterpene saponins known as mogrosides. among them, mogroside v is nearly  <dig> times sweeter than sucrose. however, little is known about mogrosides biosynthesis in s. grosvenorii, especially the late steps of the pathway.


RESULTS
in this study, a cdna library generated from of equal amount of rna taken from s. grosvenorii fruit at  <dig> days after flowering  and  <dig> daf were sequenced using illumina/solexa platform. more than  <dig> , <dig> high-quality reads from a cdna library were generated that was assembled into  <dig>  unigenes. de novo assembly and gap-filling generated  <dig>  unigenes with an average sequence length of  <dig> base pairs. a total of  <dig>   unique sequences were annotated and  <dig>  of the unique sequences were assigned to specific metabolic pathways by the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. cdna sequences for all of the known enzymes involved in mogrosides backbone synthesis were identified from our library. additionally, a total of eighty-five cytochrome p <dig>  and ninety udp-glucosyltransferase  unigenes were identified, some of which appear to encode enzymes responsible for the conversion of the mogroside backbone into the various mogrosides. digital gene expression profile  analysis using solexa sequencing was performed on three important stages of fruit development, and based on their expression pattern, seven cyp450s and five udpgs were selected as the candidates most likely to be involved in mogrosides biosynthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
a combination of rna-seq and dge analysis based on the next generation sequencing technology was shown to be a powerful method for identifying candidate genes encoding enzymes responsible for the biosynthesis of novel secondary metabolites in a non-model plant. seven cyp450s and five udpgs were selected as potential candidates involved in mogrosides biosynthesis. the transcriptome data from this study provides an important resource for understanding the formation of major bioactive constituents in the fruit extract from s. grosvenorii.

