BACKGROUND
phytophthora root and stem rot  of soybean, caused by phytophthora sojae, is controlled by rps genes. however, little is known regarding the rps-induced molecular responses to p. sojae and how they actually overlap. we thus sequenced, analyzed, and compared the transcriptomes of  <dig> near isogenic lines , each with a unique rps gene/allele, and the susceptible parent williams, pre- and post-inoculation with the pathogen.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  differentially expressed genes  were identified in williams versus  <dig>  to  <dig>  degs in individual nils upon inoculation with the pathogen. comparisons of the degs between the nils and williams identified incompatible interaction genes  and compatible interaction genes . hierarchical cluster and heatmap analyses consistently grouped the nils into three clusters: cluster i , cluster ii  and cluster iii , suggesting an overlap in rps-induced defense signaling among certain nils. gene ontology  analysis revealed associations between members of the wrky family and incompatible reactions and between a number of phytohormone signaling pathways and incompatible/compatible interactions. these associations appear to be distinguished according to the nil clusters.


CONCLUSIONS
this study characterized genes and multiple branches of putative regulatory networks associated with resistance to p. sojae in ten soybean nils, and depicted functional “fingerprints” of individual rps-mediated resistance responses through comparative transcriptomic analysis. of particular interest are dramatic variations of detected degs, putatively involved in ethylene -, jasmonic acid -,  ros-, and  mapk- signaling, among these soybean nils, implicating their important roles of these signaling in differentiating molecular defense responses. we hypothesize that different timing and robustness in defense signaling to the same pathogen may be largely responsible for such variations.

comparative transcriptomicsresistance to phytophthora sojaesoybean

