BACKGROUND
kiwi represent the most basal extant avian lineage  and exhibit biological attributes that are unusual or extreme among living birds, such as large egg size, strong olfaction, nocturnality, flightlessness and long lifespan. despite intense interest in their evolution and their threatened status, genomic resources for kiwi were virtually non-existent until the recent publication of a single genome. here we present the most comprehensive kiwi transcriptomes to date, obtained via illumina sequencing of whole blood and de novo assembly of mrna sequences of eight individuals from each of the two rarest kiwi species, little spotted kiwi  and rowi .


RESULTS
sequences obtained were orthologous with a wide diversity of functional genes despite the sequencing of a single tissue type. individual and composite assemblies contain more than  <dig> unique protein coding transcripts in each of lsk and rowi that show strong homology with chicken , including those associated with growth, development, disease resistance, reproduction and behavior. the assemblies also contain  <dig>  snps that distinguish between lsk and rowi,  <dig>  snps among lsk , and  <dig>  snps among rowi . we found  <dig> transcripts differentially expressed between lsk and rowi and  <dig> transcripts differentially expressed between the sexes. of the latter,  <dig> could be mapped to chicken chromosomes with 95% syntenic with chromosome z.


CONCLUSIONS
our study has simultaneously sequenced multiple species, sexes, and individual kiwi at thousands of genes, and thus represents a significant leap forward in genomic resources available for kiwi. the expression pattern we observed among chromosome z related genes in kiwi is similar to that observed in ostriches and emu, suggesting a common and ancestral pattern of sex chromosome homomorphy, recombination, and gene dosage among living paleognaths. the transcriptome assemblies described here will provide a rich resource for polymorphic marker development and studies of adaptation of these highly unusual and endangered birds.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomekiwiapteryxsex chromosome evolutionde novo assemblyillumina australianew zealand genomics ltdnew zealand ministry of business, innovation and employmenthttp://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007610allan wilson centreissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

