BACKGROUND
the observed correlation between ultraviolet light incidence and skin color, together with the geographical apportionment of skin reflectance among human populations, suggests an adaptive value for the pigmentation of the human skin. we have used affymetrix u133a v <dig>  gene expression microarrays to investigate the expression profiles of a total of  <dig> melanocyte cell lines  plus their respective unirradiated controls. in order to reveal signatures of selection in loci with a bearing on skin pigmentation in humans, we have resequenced between  <dig> to  <dig> kb of the proximal regulatory regions of three of the most differently expressed genes, in the expectation that variation at regulatory regions might account for intraespecific morphological diversity, as suggested elsewhere.


RESULTS
contrary to our expectations, expression profiles did not cluster the cells into unirradiated versus irradiated melanocytes, or into lightly pigmented versus darkly pigmented melanocytes. instead, expression profiles correlated with the presence of bovine pituitary extract  in the media. this allowed us to differentiate between melanocytes that are synthesizing melanin and those that are not. tyr, tyrp <dig> and dct were among the five most differently expressed genes between these two groups. population genetic analyses of sequence haplotypes of the proximal regulatory flanking-regions included tajima's d, hew and dhew neutrality tests analysis. these were complemented with ehh tests  in which the significance was obtained by a novel approach using extensive simulations under the coalescent model with recombination. we observe strong evidence for positive selection for tyrp <dig> alleles in africans and for dct and tyrp <dig> in asians. however, the overall picture reflects a complex pattern of selection, which might include overdominance for dct in europeans.


CONCLUSIONS
diversity patterns clearly evidence adaptive selection in pigmentation genes in africans and asians. in europeans, the evidence is more complex, and both directional and balancing selection may be involved in light skin. as a result, different non-african populations may have acquired light skin by alternative ways, and so light skin, and perhaps dark skin too, may be the result of convergent evolution.

