BACKGROUND
we have previously identified a locus on human chromosome 20q <dig> , encompassing related genes of postulated wfdc-type protease inhibitors and semen coagulum proteins. three of the genes with wfdc motif also coded for the kunitz-type protease inhibitor motif. in this report, we have reinvestigated the locus for homologous genes encoding kunitz motif only. the identified genes have been analyzed with respect to structure, expression and function.


RESULTS
we identified three novel genes; spint <dig>  spint <dig> and spint <dig>  and the structure of their transcripts were determined by sequencing of dna generated by rapid amplification of cdna ends. each gene encodes a kunitz domain preceded by a typical signal peptide sequence, which indicates that the proteins of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  kda are secreted. analysis of transcripts in  <dig> tissues showed that the genes predominantly are expressed in the epididymis. the recombinantly produced proteins could not inhibit the amidolytic activity of trypsin, chymotrypsin, plasmin, thrombin, coagulation factor xa, elastase, urokinase and prostate specific antigen, whereas similarly made bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor  had the same bioactivity as the protein isolated from bovine pancreas.


CONCLUSIONS
the similar organization, chromosomal location and site of expression, suggests that the novel genes are homologous with the genes of wfdc-type protease inhibitors and semen coagulum proteins, despite the lack of similarity in primary structure of their protein products. their restricted expression to the epididymis suggests that they could be important for male reproduction. the recombinantly produced proteins are presumably bioactive, as demonstrated with similarly made bpti, but may have a narrower spectrum of inhibition, as indicated by the lacking activity against eight proteases with differing specificity. another possibility is that they have lost the protease inhibiting properties, which is typical of kunitz domains, in favor of hitherto unknown functions.

