BACKGROUND
different high-dimensional regression methodologies exist for the selection of variables to predict a continuous variable. to improve the variable selection in case clustered observations are present in the training data, an extension towards mixed-effects modeling  is requested, but may not always be straightforward to implement.

in this article, we developed such a mm extension  for the automated variable selection by a linear regression based genetic algorithm  using multi-model inference . we exemplify our approach by training a linear regression model for prediction of resistance to the integrase inhibitor raltegravir  on a genotype-phenotype database, with many integrase mutations as candidate covariates. the genotype-phenotype pairs in this database were derived from a limited number of subjects, with presence of multiple data points from the same subject, and with an intra-class correlation of  <dig> .


RESULTS
in generation of the ral model, we took computational efficiency into account by optimizing the ga parameters one by one, and by using tournament selection. to derive the main ga parameters we used  <dig> times 5-fold cross-validation. the number of integrase mutations to be used as covariates in the mixed effects models was  <dig> . a ga solution was found when r2mm >  <dig>  . we tested three different mmi approaches to combine the results of  <dig> ga solutions into one ga-mm-mmi model. when evaluating the ga-mm-mmi performance on two unseen data sets, a more parsimonious and interpretable model was found  with better predictive accuracy  in comparison to ga-ordinary least squares  and least absolute shrinkage and selection operator .


CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated improved performance when using ga-mm-mmi for selection of mutations on a genotype-phenotype data set. as we largely automated setting the ga parameters, the method should be applicable on similar datasets with clustered observations.

variable selectionlinear regressiongenetic algorithmmixed-effects modelmulti-model inference

