BACKGROUND
during wheat senescence, leaf components are degraded in a coordinated manner, releasing amino acids and micronutrients which are subsequently transported to the developing grain. we have previously shown that the simultaneous downregulation of grain protein content  transcription factors, gpc <dig> and gpc <dig>  greatly delays senescence and disrupts nutrient remobilization, and therefore provide a valuable entry point to identify genes involved in micronutrient transport to the wheat grain.


RESULTS
we generated loss-of-function mutations for gpc <dig> and gpc <dig> in tetraploid wheat and showed in field trials that gpc <dig> mutants exhibit significant delays in senescence and reductions in grain zn and fe content, but that mutations in gpc <dig> had no significant effect on these traits. an rna-seq study of these mutants at different time points showed a larger proportion of senescence-regulated genes among the gpc <dig>  than among the gpc <dig>  regulated genes. combined, the two gpc genes regulate a subset  of the senescence-regulated genes,  <dig> % of which are upregulated at 12 days after anthesis, before the appearance of any visible signs of senescence. taken together, these results demonstrate that gpc <dig> is a key regulator of nutrient remobilization which acts predominantly during the early stages of senescence. genes upregulated at this stage include transporters from the zip and ysl gene families, which facilitate zn and fe export from the cytoplasm to the phloem, and genes involved in the biosynthesis of chelators that facilitate the phloem-based transport of these nutrients to the grains.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides an overview of the transport mechanisms activated in the wheat flag leaf during monocarpic senescence. it also identifies promising targets to improve nutrient remobilization to the wheat grain, which can help mitigate zn and fe deficiencies that afflict many regions of the developing world.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
wheatsenescencegpczinc transportiron transportzipissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

