BACKGROUND
seeds use environmental cues such as temperature to coordinate the timing of their germination, allowing plants to synchronize their life history with the seasons. winter chilling is of central importance to alleviate seed dormancy, but very little is known of how chilling responses are regulated in conifer seeds. white spruce  is an important conifer species of boreal forests in the north american taiga. the recent sequencing and assembly of the white spruce genome allows for comparative gene expression studies toward elucidating the molecular mechanisms governing dormancy alleviation by moist chilling. here we focused on hormone metabolite profiling and analyses of genes encoding components of hormone signal transduction pathways, to elucidate changes during dormancy alleviation and to help address how germination cues such as temperature and light trigger radicle emergence.


RESULTS
aba, ga, and auxin underwent considerable changes as seeds underwent moist chilling and during subsequent germination; likewise, transcripts encoding hormone-signaling components  were differentially regulated during these critical stages. during moist chilling, active iaa was maintained at constant levels, but iaa conjugates  were substantially accumulated. aba concentrations decreased during germination of previously moist-chilled seeds, while the precursor of bioactive ga <dig>  accumulated. we contend that seed dormancy and germination may be partly mediated through the changing hormone concentrations and a modulation of interactions between central auxin-signaling pathway components . in response to germination cues, namely exposure to light and to increased temperature: the transfer of seeds from moist-chilling to 30 °c, significant changes in gene transcripts and protein expression occurred during the first six hours, substantiating a very swift reaction to germination-promoting conditions after seeds had received sufficient exposure to the chilling stimulus.


CONCLUSIONS
the dormancy to germination transition in white spruce seeds was correlated with changes in auxin conjugation, auxin signaling components, and potential interactions between auxin-aba signaling cascades . auxin flux adds a new dimension to the aba:ga balance mechanism that underlies both dormancy alleviation by chilling, and subsequent radicle emergence to complete germination by warm temperature and light stimuli.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
seed dormancyauxinabagasmoist-chillingseed germinationwhite spruceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

