BACKGROUND
vacuolar h+-atpases are large protein complexes of more than  <dig> kda that acidify endomembrane compartments and are part of the secretory system of eukaryotic cells. they are built from  <dig> different -subunits. the paper addresses the question of sub-cellular localisation and subunit composition of plant v-atpase in vivo and in vitro mainly by using colocalization and fluorescence resonance energy transfer techniques . focus is placed on the examination and function of the  <dig> kda membrane spanning subunit vha-a. showing similarities to the already described vph <dig> and stv <dig> vacuolar atpase subunits from yeast, vha-a revealed a bipartite structure with  a less conserved cytoplasmically orientated n-terminus and  a membrane-spanning c-terminus with a higher extent of conservation including all amino acids shown to be essential for proton translocation in the yeast. on the basis of sequence data vha-a appears to be an essential structural and functional element of v-atpase, although previously a sole function in assembly has been proposed.


RESULTS
to elucidate the presence and function of vha-a in the plant complex, three approaches were undertaken:  co-immunoprecipitation with antibodies directed to epitopes in the n- and c-terminal part of vha-a, respectively,  immunocytochemistry approach including co-localisation studies with known plant endomembrane markers, and  in vivo-fret between subunits fused to variants of green fluorescence protein  in transfected cells.


CONCLUSIONS
all three sets of results show that v-atpase contains vha-a protein that interacts in a specific manner with other subunits. the genomes of plants encode three genes of the  <dig> kda subunit  of the vacuolar type h+-atpase. immuno-localisation of vha-a shows that the recognized subunit is exclusively located on the endoplasmic reticulum. this result is in agreement with the hypothesis that the different isoforms of vha-a may localize on distinct endomembrane compartments, as it was shown for its yeast counterpart vph <dig> 

