BACKGROUND
cultivated peanut  is an allotetraploid species whose ancestral genomes are most likely derived from the a-genome species, a. duranensis, and the b-genome species, a. ipaensis. the very recent  evolutionary origin of a. hypogaea has imposed a bottleneck for allelic and phenotypic diversity within the cultigen. however, wild diploid relatives are a rich source of alleles that could be used for crop improvement and their simpler genomes can be more easily analyzed while providing insight into the structure of the allotetraploid peanut genome. the objective of this research was to establish a high-density genetic map of the diploid species a. duranensis based on de novo generated est databases. arachis duranensis was chosen for mapping because it is the a-genome progenitor of cultivated peanut and also in order to circumvent the confounding effects of gene duplication associated with allopolyploidy in a. hypogaea.


RESULTS
more than one million expressed sequence tag  sequences generated from normalized cdna libraries of a. duranensis were assembled into  <dig>  unique transcripts. mining this dataset,  <dig> est-snp markers were developed between two a. duranensis accessions, pi  <dig> and grif  <dig>  an additional  <dig> snp markers also were developed from genomic sequences representing conserved legume orthologs. of the  <dig> snp markers,  <dig> were placed on a genetic map. in addition,  <dig> est-ssr markers identified in a. hypogaea assemblies were included in the map along with  <dig> disease resistance gene candidate  and  <dig> other previously published markers. in total,  <dig> markers spanning  <dig>  cm over  <dig> linkage groups were mapped. gene sequences that provided mapped markers were annotated using similarity searches in three different databases, and gene ontology descriptions were determined using the medicago gene atlas and tair databases. synteny analysis between a. duranensis, medicago and glycine revealed significant stretches of conserved gene clusters spread across the peanut genome. a higher level of colinearity was detected between a. duranensis and glycine than with medicago.


CONCLUSIONS
the first high-density, gene-based linkage map for a. duranensis was generated that can serve as a reference map for both wild and cultivated arachis species. the markers developed here are valuable resources for the peanut, and more broadly, to the legume research community. the a-genome map will have utility for fine mapping in other peanut species and has already had application for mapping a nematode resistance gene that was introgressed into a. hypogaea from a. cardenasii.

