BACKGROUND
the tephritid fruit flies include a number of economically important pests of horticulture, with a large accumulated body of research on their biology and control. amongst the tephritidae, the genus bactrocera, containing over  <dig> species, presents various species groups of potential utility for genetic studies of speciation, behaviour or pest control. in australia, there exists a triad of closely-related, sympatric bactrocera species which do not mate in the wild but which, despite distinct morphologies and behaviours, can be force-mated in the laboratory to produce fertile hybrid offspring. to exploit the opportunities offered by genomics, such as the efficient identification of genetic loci central to pest behaviour and to the earliest stages of speciation, investigators require genomic resources for future investigations.


RESULTS
we produced a draft de novo genome assembly of australia’s major tephritid pest species, bactrocera tryoni. the male genome  includes approximately 150mb of interspersed repetitive dna sequences and 60mb of satellite dna. assessment using conserved core eukaryotic sequences indicated 98% completeness. over  <dig>  maker-derived gene models showed a large degree of overlap with other dipteran reference genomes. the sequence of the ribosomal rna transcribed unit was also determined. unscaffolded assemblies of b. neohumeralis and b. jarvisi were then produced; comparison with b. tryoni showed that the species are more closely related than any drosophila species pair. the similarity of the genomes was exploited to identify  <dig> potentially diagnostic indels between the species, all of which occur in non-coding regions.


CONCLUSIONS
this first draft b. tryoni genome resembles other dipteran genomes in terms of size and putative coding sequences. for all three species included in this study, we have identified a comprehensive set of non-redundant repetitive sequences, including the ribosomal rna unit, and have quantified the major satellite dna families. these genetic resources will facilitate the further investigations of genetic mechanisms responsible for the behavioural and morphological differences between these three species and other tephritids. we have also shown how whole genome sequence data can be used to generate simple diagnostic tests between very closely-related species where only one of the species is scaffolded.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

