BACKGROUND
domesticated animals quickly evolve docile and submissive behaviors after isolation from their wild conspecifics. model organisms reared for prolonged periods in the laboratory also exhibit similar shifts towards these domesticated behaviors. yet whether this divergence is due to inadvertent selection in the lab or the fixation of deleterious mutations remains unknown.


RESULTS
here, we compare the genomes of lab-reared and wild-caught drosophila melanogaster to understand the genetic basis of these recently endowed behaviors common to laboratory models. from reassembled genomes of common lab strains, we identify unique, derived variants not present in global populations . decreased selective constraints across low frequency snps  are different from patterns found in the wild and more similar to neutral expectations, suggesting an overall accumulation of deleterious mutations. however, high-frequency lab snps found in most or all lab strains reveal an enrichment of x-linked loci and neuro-sensory genes across large extended haplotypes. among shared polymorphisms, we also find highly differentiated snps, in which the derived allele is higher in frequency in the wild , enriched for similar neurogenetic ontologies, indicative of relaxed selection on more active wild alleles in the lab.


CONCLUSIONS
among random mutations that continuously accumulate in the laboratory, we detect common adaptive signatures in domesticated lab strains of fruit flies. our results demonstrate that lab animals can quickly evolve domesticated behaviors via unconscious selection by humans early on a broad pool of disproportionately large neurogenetic targets followed by the fixation of accumulated deleterious mutations on functionally similar targets.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
behavioradaptationpurifying selectionpositive selectionextended haplotypesdomestication genomicsmodel organismsdomestication syndromehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000076directorate for biological sciences1407006kulathinal rob j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

