BACKGROUND
articular cartilage has poor intrinsic capacity for regeneration because of its avascularity and very slow cellular turnover. defects deriving from trauma or joint disease tend to be repaired with fibrocartilage rather than hyaline cartilage. consequent degenerative processes are related to the width and depth of the defect. since mesenchymal stem cells  deriving from patients affected by osteoarthritis have a lower proliferative and chondrogenic activity, the systemic or local delivery of heterologous cells may enhance regeneration or inhibit the progressive loss of joint tissue. embryonic stem cells  are very promising, since they can self-renew for prolonged periods without differentiation and can differentiate into tissues from all the  <dig> germ layers. to date only a few experiments have used escs for the study of the cartilage regeneration in animal models and most of them used laboratory animals. sheep, due to their anatomical, physiological and immunological similarity to humans, represent a valid model for translational studies. this experiment aimed to evaluate if the local delivery of male sheep embryonic stem-like  cells into osteochondral defects in the femoral condyles of adult sheep can enhance the regeneration of articular cartilage. twenty-two ewes were divided into  <dig> groups . newly formed tissue was evaluated by macroscopic, histological, immunohistochemical  and fluorescent in situ hybridization  assays.


RESULTS
regenerated tissue was ultimately evaluated on  <dig> sheep. samples engrafted with es-like cells had significantly better histologic evidence of regeneration with respect to empty defects, used as controls, at all time periods.


CONCLUSIONS
histological assessments demonstrated that the local delivery of es-like cells into osteochondral defects in sheep femoral condyles enhances the regeneration of the articular hyaline cartilage, without signs of immune rejection or teratoma for 24 months after engraftment.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
articular cartilageembryonic stem-like cellfluorescent in situ hybridizationosteochondral defectsheepissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

