BACKGROUND
changes in the copy number of dna sequences are one of the main mechanisms generating genome variability in eukaryotes. these changes are often related to phenotypic effects such as genetic disorders or novel pathogen resistance. the increasing availability of genome sequences through the application of next-generation massive sequencing technologies has allowed the study of genomic polymorphisms at both the interspecific and intraspecific levels, thus helping to understand how species adapt to changing environments through genome variability.


RESULTS
data on gene presence/absence variation  in melon was obtained by resequencing a cultivated accession and an old-relative melon variety, and using previously obtained resequencing data from three other melon cultivars, among them dhl <dig>  on which the current draft melon genome sequence is based. a total of  <dig>  pav events were detected, involving  <dig> % of the predicted melon gene complement. in all, an average  <dig> % of genes were absent from each analyzed cultivar as compared to the dhl <dig> reference genome. the most populated functional category among the  <dig> pav genes of known function was that of stress response proteins . our results suggest that genes from multi-copy families are five times more likely to be affected by pav than singleton genes. also, the chance of genes present in the genome in tandem arrays being affected by pav is double that of isolated genes, with pav genes tending to be in longer clusters. the highest concentration of pav events detected in the melon genome was found in a  <dig>  mb region of linkage group v, which also shows the highest density of melon stress-response genes. in particular, this region contains the longest continuous gene-containing pav sequence so far identified in melon.


CONCLUSIONS
the first genome-wide report of pav variation among several melon cultivars is presented here. multi-copy and clustered genes, especially those with putative stress-response functions, were found to be particularly affected by pav polymorphisms. as cucurbits are known to possess a significantly lower number of defense-related genes compared to other plant species, pav variation may play an important role in generating new pathogen resistances at the subspecies level. in addition, these results show the limitations of single reference genome sequences as the only basis for characterization and cloning of resistance genes.

