BACKGROUND
like most animals, insects rely on their olfactory systems for finding food and mates and in avoiding noxious chemicals and predators. most insect olfactory neurons express an odorant-specific odorant receptor  along with orco, the olfactory co-receptor. orco binds ors and permits their trafficking to the dendrites of antennal olfactory sensory neurons , where together, they are suggested to form heteromeric ligand-gated non-selective cation channels. while most amino acid residues in orco are well conserved across insect orders, one especially well-conserved region in orco’s second intracellular loop is a putative calmodulin  binding site . in this study, we explore the relationship between orco and cam in vivo in the olfactory neurons of drosophila melanogaster.


RESULTS
we first found osn-specific knock-down of cam at the onset of osn development disrupts the spontaneous firing of osns and reduces orco trafficking to the ciliated dendrites of osns without affecting their morphology. we then generated a series of orco cbs mutant proteins and found that none of them rescue the orco-null orco <dig> mutant phenotype, which is characterized by an or protein trafficking defect that blocks spontaneous and odorant-evoked osn activity. in contrast to an identically constructed wild-type form of orco that does rescue the orco <dig> phenotype, all the orco cbs mutants remain stuck in the osn soma, preventing even the smallest odorant-evoked response. last, we found cam’s modulation of or trafficking is dependent on activity. knock-down of cam in all orco-positive osns after or expression is well established has little effect on olfactory responsiveness alone. when combined with an extended exposure to odorant, however, this late-onset cam knock-down significantly reduces both olfactory sensitivity and the trafficking of orco only to the ciliated dendrites of osns that respond to the exposed odorant.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we show cam regulates or trafficking and olfactory responses in vivo in drosophila olfactory neurons via a well-conserved binding site on the olfactory co-receptor orco. as cam’s modulation of orco seems to be dependent on activity, we propose a model in which the cam/orco interaction allows insect osns to maintain appropriate dendritic levels of or regardless of environmental odorant concentrations.

keywords
insect olfactiondrosophila melanogasterodorant receptororcocalmodulinhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003725national research foundation of korea2010-00062172013r1a1a2011339jones walton d. kaist high-risk high-return projectn11160082jones walton d. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

