BACKGROUND
parasitic angiosperm orobanche crenata infection represents a major constraint for the cultivation of legumes worldwide. the level of protection achieved to date is either incomplete or ephemeral. hence, an efficient control of the parasite requires a better understanding of its interaction and associated resistance mechanisms at molecular levels.


RESULTS
in order to study the plant response to this parasitic plant and the molecular basis of the resistance we have used a proteomic approach. the root proteome of two accessions of the model legume medicago truncatula displaying differences in their resistance phenotype, in control as well as in inoculated plants, over two time points , has been compared. we report quantitative as well as qualitative differences in the 2-de maps between early-  and late-resistant  genotypes after coomassie and silver-staining:  <dig> differential spots were observed between non-inoculated genotypes, and  <dig> and  <dig> spots for sa  <dig> and sa  <dig> non-inoculated and inoculated plants, respectively. in all,  <dig> differential spots were identified by peptide mass fingerprinting  following maldi-tof/tof mass spectrometry. many of the proteins showing significant differences between genotypes and after parasitic infection belong to the functional category of defense and stress-related proteins. a number of spots correspond to proteins with the same function, and might represent members of a multigenic family or post-transcriptional forms of the same protein.


CONCLUSIONS
the results obtained suggest the existence of a generic defense mechanism operating during the early stages of infection and differing in both genotypes. the faster response to the infection observed in the sa  <dig> genotype might be due to the action of proteins targeted against key elements needed for the parasite's successful infection, such as protease inhibitors. our data are discussed and compared with those previously obtained with pea  <cit>  and transcriptomic analysis of other plant-pathogen and plant-parasitic plant systems.

