BACKGROUND
toll-like receptors  are major molecular pattern recognition receptors of the innate immune system. atlantic cod  is the first vertebrate known to have lost most of the mammalian tlr orthologues, particularly all bacterial recognising and other cell surface tlrs. on the other hand, its genome encodes a unique repertoire of teleost-specific tlrs. the aim of this study was to investigate if these duplicate tlrs have been retained through adaptive evolution to compensate for the lack of other cell surface tlrs in the cod genome.


RESULTS
in this study, one tlr <dig>   <dig> tlr <dig> and two tlr <dig> genes representing the teleost-specific tlr family have been cloned and characterised in cod. phylogenetic analysis grouped all tlr <dig> genes under a single clade, indicating that the multiple cod paralogues have arisen through lineage-specific duplications. all tlrs examined were transcribed in immune-related tissues as well as in stomach, gut and gonads of adult cod and were differentially expressed during early development. these tlrs were also differentially regulated following immune challenge by immersion with vibrio anguillarum, indicating their role in the immune response. an increase in water temperature from  <dig> to 12°c was associated with a  <dig> -fold down-regulation of tlr22d transcript levels in spleen. maximum likelihood analysis with different evolution models revealed that tlr <dig> genes are under positive selection. a total of  <dig> codons were found to be positively selected, of which  <dig> are in the ligand binding region of ectodomain.


CONCLUSIONS
positive selection pressure coupled with experimental evidence of differential expression strongly support the hypothesis that teleost-specific tlr paralogues in cod are undergoing neofunctionalisation and can recognise bacterial pathogen-associated molecular patterns to compensate for the lack of other cell surface tlrs.

atlantic codtoll-like receptorstlrinnate immunitypositive selectionthermal stressneofunctionalisation

