BACKGROUND
udder infections with environmental pathogens like escherichia coli are a serious problem for the dairy industry. reduction of incidence and severity of mastitis is desirable and mild priming of the immune system either through vaccination or with low doses of immune stimulants such as lipopolysaccharide lps was previously found to dampen detrimental effects of a subsequent infection. monocytes/macrophages are known to develop tolerance towards the endotoxin lps  as adaptation strategy to prevent exuberant inflammation.

we have recently observed that infusion of  <dig> μg of lps into the quarter of an udder effectively protected for several days against an experimentally elicited mastitis. we have modelled this process in primary cultures of mammary epithelial cells  from the cow. mec are by far the most abundant cells in the healthy udder coming into contact with invading pathogens and little is known about their role in establishing et.


RESULTS
we primed primary mec cultures for  <dig> h with lps  and stimulated three cultures either  <dig> h or  <dig> h later with 107/ml particles of heat inactivated e. coli bacteria for six hours. priming-related alterations in the global transcriptome of those cells were quantified with affymetrix microarrays. lps priming alone caused differential expression of  <dig> genes and mediated significantly different response to a subsequent e. coli challenge of  <dig> genes. expression of  <dig> genes was enhanced while that of  <dig> was decreased. higher expressed were anti-microbial factors , cell and tissue protecting factors  as well as mediators of the sentinel function of mec . dampened was the expression of potentially harmful pro-inflammatory master cytokines  and immune effectors . functional network analysis highlighted the reduced expression of il1b and of irf <dig> as key to this modulation.


CONCLUSIONS
lps-primed mec are fitter to repel pathogens and better protected against misguided attacks of the immune response. attenuated is the exuberant expression of factors potentially promoting immunopathological processes. mec therefore recapitulate many aspects of et known so far from professional immune cells.

