BACKGROUND
torcetrapib, a cholesteryl ester transfer protein  inhibitor which raises high-density lipoprotein  cholesterol and reduces low-density lipoprotein  cholesterol level, has been documented to increase mortality and cardiac events associated with adverse effects. however, it is still unclear the underlying mechanisms of the off-target effects of torcetrapib.


RESULTS
in the present study, we developed a systems biology approach by combining a human reassembled signaling network with the publicly available microarray gene expression data to provide unique insights into the off-target adverse effects for torcetrapib. cytoscape with three plugins including bisogenet, networkanalyzer and clusterone was utilized to establish a context-specific drug-gene interaction network. the david functional annotation tool was applied for gene ontology  analysis, while pathway enrichment analysis was clustered by toppfun. furthermore, potential off-targets of torcetrapib were predicted by a reverse docking approach. in general,  <dig> nodes were retrieved from the integrative signaling network and  <dig> inter-connected relations were obtained from the bisogenet plugin. in addition,  <dig> significantly up-regulated genes were detected by significance analysis of microarray  in adrenal carcinoma cells treated with torcetrapib. after constructing the human signaling network, the over-expressed microarray genes were mapped to illustrate the context-specific network. subsequently, three conspicuous gene regulatory networks  modules were unearthed, which contributed to the off-target effects of torcetrapib. go analysis reflected dramatically over-represented biological processes associated with torcetrapib including activation of cell death, apoptosis and regulation of rna metabolic process. enriched signaling pathways uncovered that il- <dig> receptor beta chain in t cell activation, platelet-derived growth factor receptor  beta signaling pathway, il2-mediated signaling events, erbb signaling pathway and signaling events mediated by hepatocyte growth factor receptor  might play decisive characters in the adverse cardiovascular effects associated with torcetrapib. finally, a reverse docking algorithm in silico between torcetrapib and transmembrane receptors was conducted to identify the potential off-targets. this screening was carried out based on the enriched signaling network analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
our study provided unique insights into the biological processes of torcetrapib-associated off-target adverse effects in a systems biology visual angle. in particular, we highlighted the importance of pdgfr, hgfr, il- <dig> receptor and erbb1tyrosine kinase might be direct off-targets, which were highly related to the unfavorable adverse effects of torcetrapib and worthy of further experimental validation.

