BACKGROUND
it has recently been shown that the trichoderma fungal species used for biocontrol of plant diseases are capable of interacting with plant roots directly, behaving as symbiotic microorganisms. with a view to providing further information at transcriptomic level about the early response of trichoderma to a host plant, we developed a high-density oligonucleotide  microarray encompassing  <dig>  expressed sequence tag -based transcripts from eight trichoderma spp. and  <dig>  genome-derived transcripts of t. reesei, and we have used this microarray to examine the gene expression of t. harzianum either alone or in the presence of tomato plants, chitin, or glucose.


RESULTS
global microarray analysis revealed  <dig>  probe sets showing differential expression in t. harzianum mycelia under at least one of the culture conditions tested as compared with one another. hierarchical clustering and heat map representation showed that the expression patterns obtained in glucose medium clustered separately from the expression patterns observed in the presence of tomato plants and chitin. annotations using the blast2go suite identified  <dig> of the  <dig> transcripts whose probe sets afforded up-regulated expression in response to tomato plants. some of these transcripts were predicted to encode proteins related to trichoderma-host  associations, such as sm1/elp <dig> protein, proteases p <dig> and pra <dig>  enchochitinase chit <dig>  or qid <dig> protein, although previously uncharacterized genes were also identified, including those responsible for the possible biosynthesis of nitric oxide, xenobiotic detoxification, mycelium development, or those related to the formation of infection structures in plant tissues.


CONCLUSIONS
the effectiveness of the trichoderma hdo microarray to detect different gene responses under different growth conditions in the fungus t. harzianum strongly indicates that this tool should be useful for further assays that include different stages of plant colonization, as well as for expression studies in other trichoderma spp. represented on it. using this microarray, we have been able to define a number of genes probably involved in the transcriptional response of t. harzianum within the first hours of contact with tomato plant roots, which may provide new insights into the mechanisms and roles of this fungus in the trichoderma-plant interaction.

