BACKGROUND
hepatocellular carcinoma  is on the rise and the sixth most common cancer worldwide. to combat hcc effectively research is directed towards its early detection and the development of targeted therapies. given the fact that epidermal growth factor  is an important mitogen for hepatocytes we searched for disease regulated proteins to improve an understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of egf induced hcc. disease regulated proteins were studied by 2de maldi-tof/tof and a transcriptomic approach, by immunohistochemistry and advanced bioinformatics.


RESULTS
mapping of egf induced liver cancer in a transgenic mouse model identified n =  <dig>  significantly regulated proteins of which n =  <dig> were tumour-specific. to unravel molecular circuits linked to aberrant egfr signalling diverse computational approaches were employed and this defined n =  <dig> key nodes using n =  <dig> disease regulated proteins for network construction. string analysis revealed protein-protein interactions of > 70% disease regulated proteins with individual proteins being validated by immunohistochemistry. the disease regulated network proteins were mapped to distinct pathways and bioinformatics provided novel insight into molecular circuits associated with significant changes in either glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, argine and proline metabolism, protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, hif- and mapk signalling, lipoprotein metabolism, platelet activation and hemostatic control as a result of aberrant egf signalling. the biological significance of the findings was corroborated with gene expression data derived from tumour tissues to evntually define a rationale by which tumours embark on intriguing changes in metabolism that is of utility for an understanding of tumour growth. moreover, among the egf tumour specific proteins n =  <dig> were likewise uniquely expressed in human hcc and for n =  <dig> proteins regulation in human hcc was confirmed using the publically available human protein atlas depository, therefore demonstrating clinical significance.


CONCLUSIONS
novel insight into the molecular pathogenesis of egf induced liver cancer was obtained and among the  <dig> newly identified proteins several are likely candidates for the development of molecularly targeted therapies and include the nucleoside diphosphate kinase a, bifunctional atp-dependent dihydroyacetone kinase and phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein <dig>  the latter being an inhibitor of the raf- <dig> kinase.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
epidermal growth factortransgenic micehepatocellular carcinoma2d-pagemaldi-tof/tofimmunhistochemistrycomputational biologyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

