BACKGROUND
insects thriving on nutritionally poor habitats have integrated mutualistic intracellular symbiotic bacteria  in a bacteria-bearing tissue  that isolates the endosymbionts and protects them against a host systemic immune response. whilst the metabolic and physiological features of long-term insect associations have been investigated in detail over the past decades, cellular and immune regulations that determine the host response to endosymbionts and pathogens have attracted interest more recently.


RESULTS
to investigate bacteriome cellular specificities and weevil immune responses to bacteria, we have constructed and sequenced  <dig> cdna libraries from sitophilus oryzae whole larvae and bacteriomes. bioinformatic analysis of  <dig>  ests led to the generation of  <dig>  weevil unigenes. based on in silico analysis and on the examination of genes involved in the cellular pathways of potential interest to intracellular symbiosis , we have selected and analyzed  <dig> genes using qrt-pcr, taking into consideration bacteriome specificity and symbiosis impact on the host response to pathogens. we show that the bacteriome tissue accumulates transcripts from genes involved in cellular development and survival, such as the apoptotic inhibitors iap <dig> and iap <dig>  and endosomal fusion and trafficking, such as rab <dig>  hrs, and snare. as regards our investigation into immunity, we first strengthen the bacteriome immunomodulation previously reported in s. zeamais. we show that the sarcotoxin, the c-type lysozyme, and the wpgrp <dig> genes are downregulated in the s. oryzae bacteriome, when compared to aposymbiotic insects and insects challenged with e. coli. secondly, transcript level comparison between symbiotic and aposymbiotic larvae provides evidence that the immune systemic response to pathogens is decreased in symbiotic insects, as shown by the relatively high expression of wpgrp <dig>  wpgrp <dig>  coleoptericin-b, diptericin, and sarcotoxin genes in aposymbiotic insects.


CONCLUSIONS
library sequencing significantly increased the number of unigenes, allowing for improved functional and genetic investigations in the cereal weevil s. oryzae. transcriptomic analyses support selective and local immune gene expression in the bacteriome tissue and uncover cellular pathways that are of potential interest to bacteriocyte survival and homeostasis. bacterial challenge experiments have revealed that the systemic immune response would be less induced in a symbiotic insect, thus highlighting new perspectives on host immunity in long-term invertebrate co-evolutionary associations.

