BACKGROUND
molecular markers allow rapid identification of biologically important germplasm/s having desired character. previously we have reported a genotype specific molecular marker, balco <dig>  of bambusa balcooa containing an orf  having high similarity with receptor like cytoplasmic kinase of arabidopsis and oryza. balco <dig> was found to be associated only with bamboo genotypes endowed with high cellulose and low lignin contents of fibers. under the above backdrop, it was necessitated to characterize this genetic marker for better understanding of its biological significance in context of superior quality fiber development.


RESULTS
the full length cdna  of bbkst, a serine-threonine protein kinase was isolated from b. balcooa comprising of six lrr domains at the n-terminal end and a kinase domain at the c-terminal end. bacteria-expressed bbkst-kinase domain  showed mg2+ dependent kinase activity at ph  <dig> , 28°c. bioinformatics study followed by phospho-amino analysis further confirmed that bbkst-kinase belongs to the serine/threonine protein kinase family. transcript analysis of the bbkst gene following rna slot blot hybridization and qpcr revealed higher expression of bbkst during initiation and elongation stages of fiber development. tissue specific expression studies showed much higher expression of bbkst transcript in stems and internodes of b. balcooa than in leaves and rhizomes. southern analysis revealed single copy insertion of bbkst in most of the agrobacterium mediated transgenic tobacco plants. real-time pcr detected 150- <dig> fold enhanced expression of bbkst in different t <dig> tobacco lines than that of the vector transformed plants. heterologous expression of bbkst under control of 35s promoter in transgenic tobacco showed high cellulose deposition in the xylem fibers. number of xylary fibers was higher in transgenic t <dig> and t <dig> plants than that of empty-vector transformed tobacco plants offering enhanced mechanical strength to the transgenic plants, which was also substantiated by their strong upright phenotypes, significantly higher cellulose contents, flexibility coefficient, slenderness ratio, and lower runkel ratio of the fibers.


CONCLUSIONS
this finding clearly demonstrated that bbkst gene  encodes a serine/threonine protein kinase. bbkst induced higher cellulose deposition/synthesis in transgenic tobacco plants, an important attribute of fiber quality bestowing additional strength to the plant.

bambusa balcooafiberreceptor like cytoplasmic kinasescar markerserine-threoninekinaseleucine rich repeat domainkinase domain

