BACKGROUND
microarrays are invaluable tools for genome interrogation, snp detection, and expression analysis, among other applications. such broad capabilities would be of value to many pathogen research communities, although the development and use of genome-scale microarrays is often a costly undertaking. therefore, effective methods for reducing unnecessary probes while maintaining or expanding functionality would be relevant to many investigators.


RESULTS
taking advantage of available genome sequences and annotation for toxoplasma gondii  and plasmodium falciparum , we designed a single oligonucleotide microarray capable of supporting a wide range of applications at relatively low cost, including genome-wide expression profiling for toxoplasma, and single-nucleotide polymorphism -based genotyping of both t. gondii and p. falciparum. expression profiling of the three clonotypic lineages dominating t. gondii populations in north america and europe provides a first comprehensive view of the parasite transcriptome, revealing that ~49% of all annotated genes are expressed in parasite tachyzoites  and 26% of genes are differentially expressed among strains. a novel design utilizing few probes provided high confidence genotyping, used here to resolve recombination points in the clonal progeny of sexual crosses. recent sequencing of additional t. gondii isolates identifies > <dig> k new snps, including ~ <dig> k that intersect with expression profiling probes, yielding additional markers for genotyping studies, and further validating the utility of a combined expression profiling/genotyping array design. additional applications facilitating snp and transcript discovery, alternative statistical methods for quantifying gene expression, etc. are also pursued at pilot scale to inform future array designs.


CONCLUSIONS
in addition to providing an initial global view of the t. gondii transcriptome across major lineages and permitting detailed resolution of recombination points in a historical sexual cross, the multifunctional nature of this array also allowed opportunities to exploit probes for purposes beyond their intended use, enhancing analyses. this array is in widespread use by the t. gondii research community, and several aspects of the design strategy are likely to be useful for other pathogens.

