BACKGROUND
the interferon-γ -inducible immunity-related gtpase , irgm <dig>  plays an essential role in restraining activation of the irg pathogen resistance system. however, the loss of irgm <dig> in mice also causes a dramatic but unexplained susceptibility phenotype upon infection with a variety of pathogens, including many not normally controlled by the irg system. this phenotype is associated with lymphopenia, hemopoietic collapse, and death of the mouse.


RESULTS
we show that the three regulatory irg proteins , including irgm <dig>  each of which localizes to distinct sets of endocellular membranes, play an important role during the cellular response to ifn-γ, each protecting specific membranes from off-target activation of effector irg proteins . in the absence of irgm <dig>  which is localized mainly at lysosomal and golgi membranes, activated gks proteins load onto lysosomes, and are associated with reduced lysosomal acidity and failure to process autophagosomes. another gms protein, irgm <dig>  is localized to endoplasmic reticulum  membranes; in the irgm3-deficient mouse, activated gks proteins are found at the er. the irgm3-deficient mouse does not show the drastic phenotype of the irgm <dig> mouse. in the irgm1/irgm <dig> double knock-out mouse, activated gks proteins associate with lipid droplets, but not with lysosomes, and the irgm1/irgm3−/− does not have the generalized immunodeficiency phenotype expected from its irgm <dig> deficiency.


CONCLUSIONS
the membrane targeting properties of the three gms proteins to specific endocellular membranes prevent accumulation of activated gks protein effectors on the corresponding membranes and thus enable gks proteins to distinguish organellar cellular membranes from the membranes of pathogen vacuoles. our data suggest that the generalized lymphomyeloid collapse that occurs in irgm1−/− mice upon infection with a variety of pathogens may be due to lysosomal damage caused by off-target activation of gks proteins on lysosomal membranes and consequent failure of autophagosomal processing.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
immunity-related gtpasesirgspathogen recognitionirgm1irgm3lysosomesautophagyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftsfb670sfb680german academic exchange service phd scholarshipmaric-biresev jelena international graduate school for development, health and diseasephd scholarshipmaric-biresev jelena issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

