BACKGROUND
antibiotic/ herbicide resistant marker genes have been proven to be very useful in plant transformation for the initial selection of desired transgenic events. however, presence of these genes in the genetically modified crops may render the crop less acceptable to the consumers. among several different approaches, the effectiveness of cre/lox mediated recombination strategy for selectable marker gene  elimination has previously been demonstrated by different groups in several plants including brassica. in the present study exploiting cre/lox mediated recombination strategy, attempt has been made for selectable marker gene elimination from allium sativum leaf agglutinin  expressing brassica plants with hemipteran insect resistant phenotype.


RESULTS
allium sativum leaf agglutinin  linked with lox flanked hygromycin resistant  gene was introduced in mustard. cre recombinase gene cassette was also integrated in separate event. a cre/lox mediated recombination using crossing strategy was adopted to remove the hpt gene from the subsequent generation of selected hybrid events. reciprocal crosses were made between t1asal-lox-hpt-lox and cre-bar plants. marker gene elimination was confirmed in the resulting f <dig> hybrid progenies by pcr analysis, using hpt, cre and asal specific primers followed by southern hybridization. in marker free plants, expression of asal was also confirmed by western blotting and elisa analysis. retention of functionality of expressed asal was investigated by agglutination assay using rabbit erythrocytes. expressed asal was also found to be thermo-sensitive. in planta insect bioassay on f <dig> hybrid progenies exhibited detrimental effect on the performance of devastating target pest, lipaphis erysimi. the f <dig> hybrid hpt negative, asal positive plants were allowed to self- fertilize to obtain f <dig> progeny plants. in some of these plants cre gene was found to be segregated out of the asal gene by genetic segregation yielding completely marker free plants.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study establishes the efficient expression of the newly introduced insect resistant asal gene even after cre/lox mediated recombination resulting in elimination of selectable marker gene.

agglutinationallium sativum leaf agglutinin cre/lox recombinationlipaphis erysimiselectable marker gene 

