BACKGROUND
local adaptation and phenotypic plasticity are important components of plant responses to variations in environmental conditions. while local adaptation has been widely studied in trees, little is known about plasticity of gene expression in adult trees in response to ever changing environmental conditions in natural habitats. here we investigate plasticity of gene expression in needle tissue between two douglas-fir provenances represented by  <dig> adult trees using deep rna sequencing .


RESULTS
using linear mixed models we investigated the effect of temperature, soil water availability and photoperiod on the abundance of  <dig> detected transcripts. expression of more than 80 % of all identified transcripts revealed a response to variations in environmental conditions in the field. go term overrepresentation analysis revealed gene expression responses to temperature, soil water availability and photoperiod that are highly conserved among many plant taxa. however, expression differences between the two douglas-fir provenances were rather small compared to the expression differences observed between individual trees. although the effect of environment on global transcript expression was high, the observed genotype by environment  interaction of gene expression was surprisingly low, since only  <dig> of all detected transcripts showed a gxe interaction.


CONCLUSIONS
the majority of the transcriptome responses in plant leaf tissue is driven by variations in environmental conditions. the small variation between individuals and populations suggests strong conservation of this response within douglas-fir. therefore we conclude that plastic transcriptome responses to variations in environmental conditions are only weakly affected by local adaptation in douglas-fir.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
phenotypic plasticitytranscriptomelocal adaptationpseudotsuga menziesiigene expressiondroughtphotoperiodheatnatural environmentrna-seqhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaften 829/4-1ensminger ingo nsercissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

