BACKGROUND
most eukaryotic species represent stable karyotypes with a particular diploid number. b chromosomes are additional to standard karyotypes and may vary in size, number and morphology even between cells of the same individual. for many years it was generally believed that b chromosomes found in some plant, animal and fungi species lacked active genes. recently, molecular cytogenetic studies showed the presence of additional copies of protein-coding genes on b chromosomes. however, the transcriptional activity of these genes remained elusive. we studied karyotypes of the siberian roe deer  that possess up to  <dig> b chromosomes to investigate the presence and expression of genes on supernumerary chromosomes.


RESULTS
here, we describe a  <dig> mbp region homologous to cattle chromosome  <dig> and containing tnni3k , fpgt, lrriq <dig> and a large gene-sparse segment on b chromosomes of the siberian roe deer. the presence of the copy of the autosomal region was demonstrated by b-specific cdna analysis, pcr assisted mapping, cattle bacterial artificial chromosome  clone localization and quantitative polymerase chain reaction . by comparative analysis of b-specific and non-b chromosomal sequences we discovered some b chromosome-specific mutations in protein-coding genes, which further enabled the detection of a fpgt-tnni3k transcript expressed from duplicated genes located on b chromosomes in roe deer fibroblasts.


CONCLUSIONS
discovery of a large autosomal segment in all b chromosomes of the siberian roe deer further corroborates the view of an autosomal origin for these elements. detection of a b-derived transcript in fibroblasts implies that the protein coding sequences located on bs are not fully inactivated. the origin, evolution and effect on host of b chromosomal genes seem to be similar to autosomal segmental duplications, which reinforces the view that supernumerary chromosomal elements might play an important role in genome evolution.

b chromosomessegmental duplicationsgene duplicationskaryotype evolutioncervidae

