BACKGROUND
high molecular weight glutenin subunits , encoded by the genes at glu- <dig> loci in wheat and its related species, are significant in the determination of grain processing quality. however, the diversity and variations of hmw-gss are relatively low in bread wheat. more interests are now focused on wheat wild relatives in triticeae. the genus aegilops represents an important germplasm for novel hwm-gss and other useful genes for wheat genetic improvement.


RESULTS
six novel glu- <dig> alleles and hmw-gss were identified and characterized from three species of aegilops section sitopsis . both open reading frames  and promoter regions of these glu- <dig> alleles were sequenced and characterized. the orfs of sitopsis glu- <dig> genes are approximately  <dig>  kb and  <dig>  kb for x-type and y-type subunits, respectively. although the primary structures of sitopsis hmw-gss are similar to those of previously reported ones, all six x-type or y-type subunits have the large fragment insertions. our comparative analyses of the deduced amino acid sequences verified that aegilops section sitopsis species encode novel hmw-gss with their molecular weights larger than almost all other known hmw-gss. the glu- <dig> promoter sequences share the high homology among s genome. our phylogenetic analyses by both network and nj tree indicated that there is a close phylogenetic evolutionary relationship of x-type and y-type subunit between s and d genome.


CONCLUSIONS
the large molecular weight of hmw-gss from s genome is a unique feature identified in this study. such large subunits are resulted from the duplications of repetitive domains in sitopsis hmw-gss. the unequal crossover events are the most likely mechanism of variations in glutenin subunits. the s genome-encoded subunits, 1dx <dig>  and 1dx <dig> * have independent origins, although they share similar evolutionary mechanism. as hmw-gss play a key role in wheat baking quality, these large sitopsis glutenin subunits can be used as special genetic resources for wheat quality improvement.

