BACKGROUND
leucine-rich repeat receptor-like protein kinases  are the largest group of receptor-like kinases in plants and play crucial roles in development and stress responses. the evolutionary relationships among lrr-rlk genes have been investigated in flowering plants; however, no comprehensive studies have been performed for these genes in more ancestral groups. the subfamily classification of lrr-rlk genes in plants, the evolutionary history and driving force for the evolution of each lrr-rlk subfamily remain to be understood.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> lrr-rlk genes in the physcomitrella patens moss genome,  <dig> lrr-rlk genes in the selaginella moellendorffii lycophyte genome, and no lrr-rlk genes in five green algae genomes. furthermore, these lrr-rlk sequences, along with previously reported lrr-rlk sequences from arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa, were subjected to evolutionary analyses. phylogenetic analyses revealed that plant lrr-rlks belong to  <dig> subfamilies, eighteen of which were established in early land plants, and one of which evolved in flowering plants. more importantly, we found that the basic structures of lrr-rlk genes for most subfamilies are established in early land plants and conserved within subfamilies and across different plant lineages, but divergent among subfamilies. in addition, most members of the same subfamily had common protein motif compositions, whereas members of different subfamilies showed variations in protein motif compositions. the unique gene structure and protein motif compositions of each subfamily differentiate the subfamily classifications and, more importantly, provide evidence for functional divergence among lrr-rlk subfamilies. maximum likelihood analyses showed that some sites within four subfamilies were under positive selection.


CONCLUSIONS
much of the diversity of plant lrr-rlk genes was established in early land plants. positive selection contributed to the evolution of a few lrr-rlk subfamilies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lrr-rlk genesfunctional divergencegene structuremotifpositive selectionthe national natural science foundation of china 31500178liu ping-li the fundamental research funds for the central universitiesblx2013022liu ping-li issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

