BACKGROUND
intravascular leukocyte recruitment in most vertebrate tissues is restricted to postcapillary and collecting venules, whereas capillaries and arterioles usually support little or no leukocyte adhesion. this segmental restriction is thought to be mediated by endothelial, rather than hemodynamic, differences. the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown, in part because effective tools to distinguish, isolate, and analyze venular endothelial cells  and non-venular endothelial cells  have been unavailable. we hypothesized that the atypical chemokine receptor darc  may distinguish v-ecs versus nv-ecs in mice.

methods
we generated a rat-anti-mouse monoclonal antibody  that specifically recognizes the erythroid and endothelial forms of native, surface-expressed darc. using this reagent, we characterized darc expression and distribution in the microvasculature of murine tissues. 


RESULTS
darc was exquisitely restricted to post-capillary and small collecting venules and completely absent from arteries, arterioles, capillaries, veins, and most lymphatics in every tissue analyzed. accordingly, intravital microscopy showed that adhesive leukocyte-endothelial interactions were restricted to darc+ venules. darc was detectable over the entire circumference of v-ecs, but was more concentrated at cell-cell junctions. analysis of single-cell suspensions suggested that the frequency of v-ecs among the total microvascular ec pool varies considerably between different tissues.


CONCLUSIONS
immunostaining of endothelial darc allows the identification and isolation of intact v-ecs from multiple murine tissues. this strategy may be useful to dissect the mechanisms underlying segmental microvascular specialization in healthy and diseased tissues and to characterize the role of ec subsets in tissue-homeostasis, immune surveillance, infection, inflammation, and malignancies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
monoclonal antibodymicrovascular endotheliumleukocyte adhesiondarc/ackr1chemokineshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthai112521http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002066glaxosmithkline foundationjohn and virginia kaneb fellowshipissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

