BACKGROUND
regulator of chromosome condensation  <dig>  is the guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ran gtpase. localised generation of ran-gtp by rcc <dig> on chromatin is critical for nucleocytoplasmic transport, mitotic spindle assembly and nuclear envelope formation. both the n-terminal tail of rcc <dig> and its association with ran are important for its interaction with chromatin in cells. in vitro, the association of ran with rcc <dig> induces a conformational change in the n-terminal tail that promotes its interaction with dna.


RESULTS
we have investigated the mechanism of the dynamic interaction of the α isoform of human rcc <dig>  with chromatin in live cells using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching  of green fluorescent protein  fusions. we show that the n-terminal tail stabilises the interaction of rcc1α with chromatin and this function can be partially replaced by another lysine-rich nuclear localisation signal. removal of the tail prevents the interaction of rcc1α with chromatin from being stabilised by rant24n, a mutant that binds stably to rcc1α. the interaction of rcc1α with chromatin is destabilised by mutation of lysine  <dig> , which abolishes α-n-terminal methylation, and this interaction is no longer stabilised by rant24n. however, α-n-terminal methylation of rcc1α is not regulated by the binding of rant24n. conversely, the association of ran with precipitated rcc1α does not require the n-terminal tail of rcc1α or its methylation. the mobility of rcc1α on chromatin is increased by mutation of aspartate  <dig> , which inhibits guanine-nucleotide exchange activity, but rcc1αd182a can still bind nucleotide-free ran and its interaction with chromatin is stabilised by rant24n.


CONCLUSIONS
these results show that the stabilisation of the dynamic interaction of rcc1α with chromatin by ran in live cells requires the n-terminal tail of rcc1α. α-n-methylation is not regulated by formation of the binary complex with ran, but it promotes chromatin binding through the tail. this work supports a model in which the association of rcc1α with chromatin is promoted by a conformational change in the α-n-terminal methylated tail that is induced allosterically in the binary complex with ran.

