BACKGROUND
the mannheimia subclades belong to the same bacterial genus, but have taken divergent paths toward their distinct lifestyles. for example, m. haemolytica + m. glucosida are potential pathogens of the respiratory tract in the mammalian suborder ruminantia, whereas m. ruminalis, the supposed sister group, lives as a commensal in the ovine rumen. we have tested the hypothesis that vertical inheritance of the leukotoxin  operon has occurred from the last common ancestor of genus mannheimia to any ancestor of the diverging subclades by exploring gene order data.


RESULTS
we examined the gene order in the 5' flanking region of the leukotoxin operon and found that the 5' flanking gene strings, hslvu-lapb-artj-lktc and xylab-lktc, are peculiar to m. haemolytica + m. glucosida and m. granulomatis, respectively, whereas the gene string hslvu-lapb-lktc is present in m. ruminalis, the supposed sister group of m. haemolytica + m. glucosida, and in the most ancient subclade m. varigena. in m. granulomatis, we found remnants of the gene string hslvu-lapb-lktc in the xylb-lktc intergenic region.


CONCLUSIONS
these observations indicate that the gene string hslvu-lapb-lktc is more ancient than the hslvu-lapb-artj-lktc and xylab-lktc gene strings. the presence of  the ancient gene string hslvu-lapb-lktc among any subclades within genus mannheimia supports that it has been vertically inherited from the last common ancestor of genus mannheimia to any ancestor of the diverging subclades, thus reaffirming the hypothesis of vertical inheritance of the leukotoxin operon. the presence of individual 5' flanking regions in m. haemolytica + m. glucosida and m. granulomatis reflects later genome rearrangements within each subclade. the evolution of the novel 5' flanking region in m. haemolytica + m. glucosida resulted in transcriptional coupling between the divergently arranged artj and lkt promoters. we propose that the chimeric promoter have led to high level expression of the leukotoxin operon which could explain the increased potential of certain m. haemolytica + m. glucosida strains to cause a particular type of infection.

