BACKGROUND
as a valuable medicinal plant, the yield of panax ginseng is seriously affected by autotoxicity, which is a common phenomenon due to continuous cropping. however, the mechanism of autotoxicity in p. ginseng is still unknown.


RESULTS
in total, high throughput sequencing of  <dig> rna-seq libraries produced  <dig>   <dig> 100-nt reads that were assembled into  <dig>  contigs. compared with control,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were significantly up- and down-regulated across different tissues and time points, respectively. gene ontology enrichment analysis showed that ‘enzyme inhibitor activity’, ‘carboxylesterase activity’, ‘pectinesterase activity’, ‘centrosome cycle and duplication’ and ‘mitotic spindle elongation’ were enriched for the up-regulated genes. transcription factors including ap2s/erfs, mybs, and wrkys were up-regulated in roots after benzoic acid treatment. moreover, reactive oxygen species, peroxidases and superoxide dismutase contigs were up-regulated in roots after benzoic acid treatment. physiological and biochemical indexes showed that the proline and malondialdehyde content were restored to lower levels at a later stage after benzoic acid treatment. benzoic acid inhibited the root hair development in a dose-dependent manner, and several differential expressed genes potentially involved in hair development were identified. several key contigs in the flavonoid and ginsenoside biosynthesis pathways were repressed. finally,  <dig>  alternative splicing  events from  <dig>  genes were found after benzoic acid treatment. interestingly, contigs in the ginsenoside biosynthetic pathway underwent as, providing useful information about post-transcriptional regulation in p. ginseng.


CONCLUSIONS
this study revealed the stress-response molecular mechanisms in p. ginseng induced by benzoic acid.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqpanax ginsengautotoxicitybenzoic acidissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

