BACKGROUND
expressed sequence tags  have been used for rapid gene discovery in a variety of organisms and provide a valuable resource for whole genome annotation. although the genome of one marsupial, the opossum monodelphis domestica, has now been sequenced, no est datasets have been reported from any marsupial species. in this study we describe an est dataset from the bandicoot, isoodon macrourus, providing information on the transcriptional profile of the bandicoot thymus and the opportunity for a genome wide comparison between the bandicoot and opossum, two distantly related marsupial species.


RESULTS
a set of  <dig> ests was generated from sequencing randomly chosen clones from a bandicoot thymus cdna library. the nucleic acid and deduced amino acid sequences were compared with sequences both in genbank and the recently completed whole genome sequence of m. domestica. this study provides information on the transcriptional profile of the bandicoot thymus with the identification of genes involved in a broad range of activities including protein metabolism , transcription and/or nucleic acid metabolism , metabolism/energy pathways , immunity , signal transduction , cell growth and maintenance , transport , cell cycle  and apoptosis  and a proportion of genes whose function is unknown . thirty four percent of the bandicoot ests found no match with annotated sequences in any of the public databases. clustering and assembly of the  <dig> bandicoot ests resulted in a set of  <dig> unique sequences of which  <dig> were unannotated ests. of these, seventy one unannotated ests aligned to non-coding regions in the opossum, human, or both genomes, and were identified as strong non-coding rna candidates. eighty-four percent of the  <dig> assembled ests aligned with the m. domestica genome sequence indicating a high level of conservation between these two distantly related marsupials.


CONCLUSIONS
this study is among the first reported marsupial est datasets with a significant inter-species genome comparison between marsupials, providing a valuable resource for transcriptional analyses in marsupials and for future annotation of marsupial whole genome sequences.

