BACKGROUND
campylobacter is the primary cause of food borne gastroenteritis. moreover, the emergence of multiple drug resistant campylobacters from poultry and pork has produced a potential threat to public health. research addressing these issues is sparse in nepal. so, this cross-sectional study aims at determining the prevalence, antibiogram and risk factors of campylobacters from dressed porcine carcass of chitwan, nepal.


RESULTS
we collected  <dig> samples of dressed porcine carcass from  <dig> different pork shops located in chitwan district and processed according to oie terrestrial manual,  <dig>  chapter  <dig> . <dig>  antibiogram of identified campylobacter spp. was evaluated against nine commonly used antibiotics by using disc diffusion method following clsi guidelines. the prevalence of campylobacter spp. was  <dig> % . there was no significant difference  between the prevalence rate of male  and female  carcass. ampicillin and erythromycin showed the highest resistance  followed by colistin , tetracycline , nalidixic acid and cotrimoxazole , ciprofloxacin  and gentamicin . moreover,  <dig> % of the isolates were resistant to more than two antimicrobials. nalidixic acid and tetracycline showed significant difference  in the resistivity pattern among different species of campylobacters. the association between prevalence rate and regular sanitization of slaughter slab equipments was significant . similarly, prevalence rate was significantly associated  with chilling and contamination of intestinal content with carcass.


CONCLUSIONS
the pork meat of chitwan is highly contaminated with antibiotic-resistant campylobacters and slaughtering practices play significant role in contamination. it is necessary to train the butchers about hygienic slaughtering practice. the consumers as well as butchers should adopt safety measures to prevent themselves from antibiotic resistant campylobacters. the veterinary practitioners should adopt prudent use of antibiotics in pigs.

campylobacterprevalenceantibiotic resistancerisk factorsnepal

