BACKGROUND
taars  are among the principal receptors expressed by the olfactory epithelium. we used the recent broad institute release of the genome sequences of five representative fishes of the cichlid family to establish the complete taar repertoires of these species and to compare them with five other fish taar repertoires.


RESULTS
the genome sequences of o. niloticus, p. nyererei, h. burtoni, n. brichardi and m. zebra were analyzed by exhaustive tblastn searches with a set of published taar gene sequences used as positive bait. a second tblastn analysis was then performed on the candidate genes, with a set of non-taar class a gpcr  used as negative bait. the resulting cichlid repertoire contained  <dig> complete taar genes from o. niloticus,  <dig> from p. nyererei,  <dig> from h. burtoni,  <dig> from n. brichardi and  <dig> from m. zebra, plus a number of pseudogenes, edge genes and fragments. a large proportion of these sequences  consisted of two coding exons, separated in all but two cases by an intron in the interloop  <dig> coding sequence. we constructed phylogenetic trees. these trees indicated that taars constitute a distinct clade, well separated from ors  and other class a gpcrs. also these repertoires consist of several families and subfamilies, a number of which are common to fugu, tetraodon, stickleback and medaka. like all other taars identified to date, cichlid taars have a characteristic two-dimensional structure and contain a number of amino-acid motifs or amino acids, such cysteine, in particular conserved positions.


CONCLUSIONS
little is known about the functions of taars: in most cases their ligands have yet to be identified, partly because appropriate methods for such investigations have not been developed. sequences analyses and comparisons of taars in several animal species, here fishes living in the same environment, should help reveal their roles and whether they are complementary to that of ors.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cichlidszebrafishmedakasticklebackfugutetraodontrace amine-associated receptorssplice exonsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

