BACKGROUND
canine distemper  is one of the most contagious and lethal viral diseases in dogs. despite the widespread use of vaccines, the prevalence of the cd virus  has increased at an alarming rate in recent years. in this phylodynamic study, we investigated the spatiotemporal modes of dispersal, viral demographic trends, and effectiveness of vaccines for cdv. a total of  <dig> full-length cdv hemagglutinin  gene sequences dataset were subjected to recombination analysis, including seven from modified live vaccine  strains and  <dig> from taiwan specimens. after excluding the mlv strains and potential recombinant strains, alignments of  <dig> of  <dig> previous cdv strains were further used to analyze phylodynamic characteristics, and evidence of selection, and co-evolution.


RESULTS
the cdv genotype consisted of mlv-associated genotypes such as america- <dig> and rockborn-like strains, which were characterized by long terminal branches and no distinct geographical patterns among lineages. in contrast, wild-type isolates clustered into lineages with a spatiotemporal structure and short terminal branches. co-circulation and extensive diversification were simultaneously observed. the sequence variation signature was shaped by both geographic diversity and host tropism. codon  <dig> was identified as a multi-epistatic interacting in the h protein.


CONCLUSIONS
the topological signature revealed in this study suggests different epidemic scenarios. for example, a ladder-like backbone is a hallmark of directional selection, and cladogenesis at long terminal branches indicates the emergence of a surviving lineage. the stable effective viral population of cdv indicate the effectiveness of vaccines currently used to control the virus.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
canine distemper virushemagglutinin  genespatiotemporal dynamicsdemographic dynamicstaiwanissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

