BACKGROUND
genomic resources for plant and animal species that are under exploitation primarily for human consumption are increasingly important, among other things, for understanding physiological processes and for establishing adequate genetic selection programs. current available techniques for high-throughput sequencing have been implemented in a number of species, including fish, to obtain a proper description of the transcriptome. the objective of this study was to generate a comprehensive transcriptomic database in turbot, a highly priced farmed fish species in europe, with potential expansion to other areas of the world, for which there are unsolved production bottlenecks, to understand better reproductive- and immune-related functions. this information is essential to implement marker assisted selection programs useful for the turbot industry.


RESULTS
expressed sequence tags were generated by sanger sequencing of cdna libraries from different immune-related tissues after several parasitic challenges. the resulting database  was enlarged with sequences generated from a  <dig> sequencing run of brain-hypophysis-gonadal axis-derived rna obtained from turbot at different development stages. the assembly of sanger and  <dig> sequences generated  <dig>  consensus sequences , of which  <dig>  were successfully annotated. a total of  <dig>  sequences were confirmed to be related to reproduction and key genes involved in sex differentiation and maturation were identified for the first time in turbot . similarly,  <dig>  sequences were related to the immune system and several novel key immune genes were identified . the number of genes of many relevant reproduction- and immune-related pathways present in the database was 50–90% of the total gene count of each pathway. in addition,  <dig>  microsatellites and  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms  were also compiled. further,  <dig>  putative natural antisense transcripts  including micrornas were also identified.


CONCLUSIONS
the combined sequencing strategies employed here significantly increased the turbot genomic resources available, including  <dig>  novel sequences. the generated database contains a larger number of genes relevant for reproduction- and immune-associated studies, with an excellent coverage of most genes present in many relevant physiological pathways. this database also allowed the identification of many microsatellites and snp markers that will be very useful for population and genome screening and a valuable aid in marker assisted selection programs.

turbotngsdatabasetranscriptomereproductionimmunegenetic markerssnpmicrosatellitemicroarraynatural antisense transcriptsmicrorna

