BACKGROUND
understanding how organisms adapt to high-elevation environments at a genome scale provides novel insights into the process of adaptive evolution. previous studies have mainly focused on endothermic organisms, while poikilothermic species may have evolved different mechanisms to cope with high-elevation environments. in this context, we sequenced transcriptomes of a pair of closely related anuran species, rana chensinensis and r. kukunoris, which inhabit respective low- and high-elevation habitats. by comparing the two transcriptomes, we identified candidate genes that may be involved in high-elevation adaption in poikilothermic species.


RESULTS
over  <dig> million sequence reads from each transcriptome were generated. a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  transcripts for each species were obtained by de novo assembly. by comparing the orthologous transcripts, we identified  <dig> protein-coding genes that have likely experienced strong positive selection . in addition,  <dig> genes that may bear a signature of positive selection  were also recognized. by considering their functions, fourteen candidate genes were determined to be likely involved in high-elevation adaptation, including two cyp genes, usp- <dig>  and several others.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified a set of candidate genes that may have promoted adaptation of r. kukunoris to its high-elevation environment. these include several genes that have previously been associated with oxygen binding, response to uv radiation, and repair of free radical injury. detailed molecular, physiological, and phenotypic studies are required to better understand the roles of these genes in improving the performance of r. kukunoris in a high-elevation environment. we have evidence for both convergent and divergent evolution between endothermic and poikilothemic species, but additional research across a wide range of organisms will be necessary to comprehend the complexity of high-elevation adaptation.

adaptationhigh elevationtranscriptomeamphibianpositive selectionka/ks ratiocandidate geneoxygen bindinguv radiation

