BACKGROUND
closely related species often occur in geographic isolation, yet sometimes form contact zones with the potential to hybridize. pre-zygotic barriers may prevent cross breeding in such contact zones. in east africa, white-eye birds have evolved into various species, inhabiting different habitat types. zosterops poliogaster is found in cool and moist cloud forests at higher elevations, whereas z. abyssinicus is distributed across the dry and hot lowland savannahs. in most areas, these two species occur allopatrically, but in the contact zone where the mountain meets the savannah, the distributions of these species sometimes overlap , and in a few areas the two taxa occur sympatrically. acoustic communication is thought to be an important species recognition mechanism in birds and an effective prezygotic barrier for hybridisation. we recorded contact calls of both the lowland and highland species in  distinct populations ,  along contact zones , and  in overlapping populations  to test for species and population differentiation.


RESULTS
we found significant differences in call characteristics between the highland and lowland species, in addition to call differentiation within species. the highland z. poliogaster shows a strong call differentiation among local populations, accompanied by comparatively low variability in their contact calls within populations . in contrast, calls of the lowland z. abyssinicus are not differentiated among local sites but show relatively high variability in calls within single populations. call patterns in both species show geographic clines in relation to latitude and longitude. calls from parapatric populations from both species showed greater similarity to the other taxon in comparison to heterospecific populations found in allopatry. however, where the two species occur sympatrically, contact calls of both species are more distinct from each other than in either allopatric or parapatric populations.


CONCLUSIONS
the contrasting patterns reflect divergent spatial distributions: the highland z. poliogaster populations are highly disjunct, while z. abyssinicus lowland populations are interconnected. higher similarity in contact calls of heterospecific populations might be due to intermixing. in contrast, sympatric populations show reproductive character displacement which leads to strongly divergent call patterns.

allopatrybioacousticscontact callsparapatryreproductive character displacementsympatryzosterops abyssinicuszosterops poliogaster

