BACKGROUND
micrornas  are small endogenous non-coding rna involved in the post-transcriptional regulation of specific mrna targets. the first whole goat genome sequence became available in  <dig>  with few annotations. our goal was to establish a list of the mirna expressed in the mammary gland of lactating goats, thus enabling implementation of the goat mirna repertoire and considerably enriching annotation of the goat genome.


RESULTS
here, we performed high throughput rna sequencing on  <dig> lactating goat mammary glands. the bioinformatic detection of mirna was carried out using mirdeep <dig> software. three different methods were used to predict, quantify and annotate the sequenced reads. the first was a de novo approach based on the prediction of mirna from the goat genome only. the second approach used bovine mirna as an external reference whereas the last one used recently available goat mirna. the three methods enabled the prediction and annotation of hundreds of mirna, more than 95% were commonly identified. using bovine mirna,  <dig>  distinct mirna were detected, together with the annotation of  <dig> mirna for which corresponding precursors could not be retrieved in the goat genome, and which were not detected using the de novo approach or with the use of goat mirna. each chromosomal coordinate of the precursors determined here were generated and depicted on a reference localisation map. forty six goat mirna clusters were also reported. the study revealed  <dig> precursors located in goat protein-coding genes, amongst which the location of  <dig> precursors was conserved between human, mouse and bovine, revealing potential new gene regulations in the goat mammary gland. using the publicly available cattle qtl database, and cow precursors conserved in the goat and expressed in lactating mammary gland,  <dig> precursors were located within known qtl regions for milk production and composition.


CONCLUSIONS
the results reported here represent the first major identification study on mirna expressed in the goat mammary gland at peak lactation. the elements generated by this study will now be used as references to decipher the regulation of mirna expression in the goat mammary gland and to clarify their involvement in the lactation process.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mirnagoatmammary glandlactationdeep sequencingchromosomal locationhost genesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

