BACKGROUND
restriction/modification systems provide the dual function of protecting host dna against restriction by methylation of appropriate bases within their recognition sequences, and restriction of foreign invading un-methylated dna, such as promiscuous plasmids or infecting bacteriphage. the plasmid-encoded llaji restriction/modification system from lactococcus lactis recognizes an asymmetric, complementary dna sequence, consisting of 5'gacgc' <dig> in one strand and 5'gcgtc' <dig> in the other and provides a prodigious barrier to bacteriophage infection. llaji is comprised of four similarly oriented genes, encoding two 5mc-mtases  and two subunits responsible for restriction activity . here we employ a detailed genetic analysis of the llaji restriction determinants in an attempt to characterize mechanistic features of this unusual hetero-oligomeric endonuclease.


RESULTS
detailed bioinformatics analysis confirmed the presence of a conserved gtp binding and hydrolysis domain within the c-terminal half of the r <dig> llaji amino acid sequence whilst the n-terminal half appeared to be entirely unique. this domain architecture was homologous with that of the "b" subunit of the gtp-dependent, methyl-specific mcrbc endonuclease from e.coli k- <dig>  r <dig> llaji did not appear to contain a catalytic centre, whereas this conserved motif; pd....d/exk, was clearly identified within the amino acid sequence for r <dig> llaji. both r <dig> llaji and r <dig> llaji were found to be absolutely required for detectable llaji activity in vivo. the llaji restriction subunits were purified and examined in vitro, which allowed the assignment of r <dig> llaji as the sole specificity determining subunit, whilst r <dig> llaji is believed to mediate dna cleavage.


CONCLUSIONS
the hetero-subunit structure of llaji, wherein one subunit mediates dna binding whilst the other subunit is predicted to catalyze strand hydrolysis distinguishes llaji from previously characterized restriction-modification systems. furthermore, this distinction is accentuated by the fact that whilst llaji behaves as a conventional type iia system in vivo, in that it restricts un-methylated dna, it resembles the type iv mcrbc endonuclease, an enzyme specific for methylated dna. a number of similar restriction determinants were identified in the database and it is likely llaji together with these homologous systems, comprise a new subtype of the type ii class incorporating features of type ii and type iv systems.

