BACKGROUND
new broad spectrum antimicrobial agents are urgently needed to combat frequently emerging multi drug resistant pathogens. actinomycetes, the most talented group of microorganisms isolated from unexplored regions of the world may be the ultimate solution to this problem. thus the aim of this study was to isolate several bioactive actinomycetes strains capable of producing antimicrobial secondary metabolite from sundarbans, the only mangrove tiger land of the world.


RESULTS
fifty four actinomycetes were isolated and analyzed for antimicrobial activity against fifteen test organisms including three phytopathogens. nine morphologically distinct and biologically active isolates were subjected to polyphasic identification study.16 s rdna sequencing indicated eight isolates to reveal maximum similarity to the genus streptomyces, whereas one isolate presented only  <dig>  % similarity with streptomyces albogriseolus nrrl b-1305t. seventy-one carbon sources and twenty-three chemical sources utilization assay revealed their metabolic relatedness. among these nine isolates three specific strains were found to have notably higher degree of antimicrobial potential effective in a broader range including phyto-pathogenic fungus. finally the strain sms_su <dig>  which showed antimicrobial activity with mic value of  <dig>  mg ml− <dig> and antioxidant activity with ic <dig> value of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg ml− <dig> was detected to be the most potential one. true prospective of this strain was evaluated utilizing gc-ms and the bioactive compound responsible for antimicrobial activity was purified.


CONCLUSIONS
rare bioactive actinomycetes were isolated from unexplored heritage site. antimicrobial compound has also been identified and purified which is active against a broad range of pathogens.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

