BACKGROUND
the genetic diversity of the human microbiome holds great potential for shedding light on the history of our ancestors. helicobacter pylori is the most prominent example as its analysis allowed a fine-scale resolution of past migration patterns including some that could not be distinguished using human genetic markers. however studies of h. pylori require stomach biopsies, which severely limits the number of samples that can be analysed. by focussing on the house-keeping gene gdh , on the virulence gene gtf  of mitis-streptococci and on the 16s-23s rrna internal transcribed spacer  region of the fusobacterium nucleatum/periodonticum-group we here tested the hypothesis that bacterial genes from human saliva have the potential for distinguishing human populations.


RESULTS
analysis of  <dig> individuals from each of seven geographic regions, encompassing africa, asia and europe, revealed that the genes gdh and its exhibited the highest number of polymorphic sites  and most otus  were unique to a given country. in contrast, the gene gtf had the lowest number of polymorphic sites , and most otus were shared among countries. most of the variation in the gdh and its genes was explained by the high clonal diversity within individuals  followed by inter-individual variation of around 20%, leaving the geographic region as providing virtually no source of sequence variation. conversely, for gtf the variation within individuals accounted for 32%, between individuals for 57% and among geographic regions for 11%. this geographic signature persisted upon extension of the analysis to four additional locations from the american continent. pearson correlation analysis, pairwise fst-cluster analysis as well as unifrac analyses consistently supported a tree structure in which the european countries clustered tightly together and branched with american countries and south africa, to the exclusion of asian countries and the congo.


CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that saliva harbours protein-coding bacterial genes that are geographically structured, and which could potentially be used for addressing previously unresolved human migration events.

oral microbiomehuman migration patternglucosyltransferase

