BACKGROUND
genome-wide assays performed in arabidopsis and other organisms have revealed that the translation status of mrnas responds dramatically to different environmental stresses and genetic lesions in the translation apparatus. to identify additional features of the global landscape of translational control, we used microarray analysis of polysomal as well as non-polysomal mrnas to examine the defects in translation in a poly binding protein mutant, pab <dig> pab <dig>  as well as in a mutant of a large ribosomal subunit protein, rpl24b/shortvalve <dig> 


RESULTS
the mutation of rpl24b stimulated the ribosome occupancy of mrnas for nuclear encoded ribosomal proteins. detailed analysis yielded new insights into the translational regulon containing the ribosomal protein mrnas. first, the ribosome occupancy defects in the rpl24b mutant partially overlapped with those in a previously analyzed initiation factor mutant, eif3h. second, a group of mrnas with incomplete coding sequences appeared to be uncoupled from the regulon, since their dependence on rpl24b differed from regular mrnas. third, different sister paralogs of the ribosomal proteins differed in their translation state in the wild-type. some sister paralogs also differed in their response to the rpl24b mutation. in contrast to rpl24b, the pab <dig> pab <dig> mutant revealed few gene specific translational defects, but a group of seed storage protein mrnas were stimulated in their ribosome occupancy. in the course of this work, while optimizing the statistical analysis of ribosome occupancy data, we collected  <dig> biological replicates of translation states from wild-type seedlings. we defined 20% of mrnas as having a high variance in their translation state. many of these mrnas were functionally associated with responses to the environment, suggesting that subtle variation in the environmental conditions is sensed by plants and transduced to affect the translational efficiency of hundreds of mrnas.


CONCLUSIONS
these data represent the first genome-wide analysis of translation in a eukaryote defective in the large ribosomal subunit. rpl <dig> and eif3h play similar but non-identical roles in eukaryotic translation. the data also shed light on the fine structure of the regulon of ribosomal protein mrnas.

translation stateribosome occupancyrpl24pabpregulonarabidopsis

