BACKGROUND

verticillium dahliae is a phytopathogenic fungal pathogen that causes vascular wilt diseases responsible for considerable decreases in cotton yields. the complex mechanism underlying cotton resistance to verticillium wilt remains uncharacterized. identifying an endogenous resistance gene may be useful for controlling this disease.


RESULTS
we cloned the ribosomal protein l <dig>  gene, which mediates resistance to verticillium wilt, from a wilt-resistant cotton species . we then characterized the function of this gene in cotton and arabidopsis thaliana plants. garpl <dig> encodes a 60s ribosomal protein subunit important for intracellular protein biosynthesis. however, previous studies revealed that some ribosomal proteins are also inhibitory toward oncogenesis and congenital diseases in humans and play a role in plant disease defense. here, we observed that v. dahliae infections induce garpl <dig> expression. furthermore, we determined that the garpl <dig> expression pattern is consistent with the disease resistance level of different cotton varieties. garpl <dig> expression is upregulated by salicylic acid  treatments, suggesting the involvement of garpl <dig> in the sa signal transduction pathway. virus-induced gene silencing technology was used to determine whether the garpl <dig> expression level influences cotton disease resistance. wilt-resistant cotton species in which garpl <dig> was silenced became more susceptible to v. dahliae than the control plants because of a significant decrease in the abundance of immune-related molecules. we also transformed a. thaliana ecotype columbia  plants with garpl <dig> according to the floral dip method. the plants overexpressing garpl <dig> were more resistant to v. dahliae infections than the wild-type col- <dig> plants. the enhanced resistance of transgenic a. thaliana plants to v. dahliae is likely mediated by the sa pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings provide new insights into the role of garpl <dig>  indicating that it plays a crucial role in resistance to cotton “cancer”, also known as verticillium wilt, mainly regulated by an sa-related signaling pathway mechanism.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cottonverticillium wiltresistance generibosomal proteingarpl18salicylic acidmajor program of joint funds  of the national natural sci-ence foundation of chinano. u1303282li fuguang zhengzhou science and technology program153pxxcy180gong qian issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

