BACKGROUND
next-generation sequencing is providing researchers with a relatively fast and affordable option for developing genomic resources for organisms that are not among the traditional genetic models. here we present a de novo assembly of the guppy  transcriptome using  <dig> sequence reads, and we evaluate potential uses of this transcriptome, including detection of sex-specific transcripts and deployment as a reference for gene expression analysis in guppies and a related species. guppies have been model organisms in ecology, evolutionary biology, and animal behaviour for over  <dig> years. an annotated transcriptome and other genomic tools will facilitate understanding the genetic and molecular bases of adaptation and variation in a vertebrate species with a uniquely well known natural history.


RESULTS
we generated approximately  <dig> mbp of mrna sequence data from male brain, male body, female brain, and female body. the resulting  <dig> , <dig> reads assembled into  <dig>  contigs, creating a reference transcriptome for the guppy with an average read depth of 28×. we annotated nearly 40% of this reference transcriptome by searching protein and gene ontology databases. using this annotated transcriptome database, we identified candidate genes of interest to the guppy research community, putative single nucleotide polymorphisms , and male-specific expressed genes. we also showed that our reference transcriptome can be used for rna-sequencing-based analysis of differential gene expression. we identified transcripts that, in juveniles, are regulated differently in the presence and absence of an important predator, rivulus hartii, including two genes implicated in stress response. for each sample in the rna-seq study, >50% of high-quality reads mapped to unique sequences in the reference database with high confidence. in addition, we evaluated the use of the guppy reference transcriptome for gene expression analyses in a congeneric species, the sailfin molly . over 40% of reads from the sailfin molly sample aligned to the guppy transcriptome.


CONCLUSIONS
we show that next-generation sequencing provided a reliable and broad reference transcriptome. this resource allowed us to identify candidate gene variants, snps in coding regions, and sex-specific gene expression, and permitted quantitative analysis of differential gene expression.

