BACKGROUND
genomic selection based on genotyping-by-sequencing  data could accelerate alfalfa yield gains, if it displayed moderate ability to predict parent breeding values. its interest would be enhanced by predicting ability also for germplasm/reference populations other than those for which it was defined. predicting accuracy may be influenced by statistical models, snp calling procedures and missing data imputation strategies.


RESULTS
landrace and variety material from two genetically-contrasting reference populations, i.e.,  <dig> elite genotypes adapted to the po valley  and  <dig> genotypes adapted to mediterranean-climate environments , were genotyped by gbs and phenotyped in separate environments for dry matter yield of their dense-planted half-sib progenies. both populations showed no sub-population genetic structure. predictive accuracy was higher by joint rather than separate snp calling for the two data sets, and using random forest imputation of missing data. highest accuracy was obtained using support vector regression  for pv, and ridge regression blup and svr for me germplasm. bayesian methods  tended to be less accurate. random forest regression was the least accurate model. accuracy attained about  <dig>  for me in the range of  <dig> - <dig>  missing data, and  <dig>  for pv at  <dig>  missing data, using at least  <dig>  snp markers. cross-population predictions based on a smaller subset of common snps implied a relative loss of accuracy of about 25 % for me and 30 % for pv. genome-wide association analyses based on large subsets of m. truncatula-aligned markers revealed many snps with modest association with yield, and some genome areas hosting putative qtls. a comparison of genomic vs. conventional selection for parent breeding value assuming 1-year vs. 5-year selection cycles, respectively, indicated over three-fold greater predicted yield gain per unit time for genomic selection.


CONCLUSIONS
genomic selection for alfalfa yield is promising, based on its moderate prediction accuracy, moderate value of cross-population predictions, and lack of sub-population structure. there is limited scope for searching individual qtls with overwhelming effect on yield. some of our results can contribute to better design of genomic selection experiments for alfalfa and other crops with similar mating systems.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
alfalfabreeding strategygenomic selectiongenotyping-by-sequencinglucernemedicago sativamissing data imputationyieldissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

