BACKGROUND
multilocus sequence typing  is a highly discriminatory typing strategy; it is reproducible and scalable. there is a mlst scheme for clostridium difficile , a gram positive bacillus causing different pathologies of the gastrointestinal tract. this work was aimed at describing the frequency of sequence types  and clades  reported and evalute the intra-taxa diversity in the cd mlst database  using an mlsa approach.


RESULTS
analysis of  <dig> available isolates showed that clade  <dig>  was the most frequent worldwide , followed by c <dig> . regarding sequence types , it was found that st- <dig>  belonging to c <dig>  was the most frequent. the isolates analysed came from  <dig> countries, mostly from the united kingdom  . the diversity of the seven housekeeping genes in the mlst scheme was evaluated, and alleles from the profiles , for identifying cd population structure. it was found that adk and atpa are conserved genes allowing a limited amount of clusters to be discriminated; however, different genes such as drx, glya and particularly soda showed high diversity indexes and grouped cd populations in many clusters, suggesting that these genes’ contribution to cd typing should be revised. it was identified that cd sts reported to date have a mostly clonal population structure with foreseen events of recombination; however, one group of sts was not assigned to a clade being highly different containing at least nine well-supported clusters, suggesting a greater amount of clades for cd.


CONCLUSIONS
this study shows the usefulness of cd-mlst-db as a tool for studying cd distribution and population structure, identifying the need for reviewing the usefulness of soda as housekeeping gene within the mlst scheme and suggesting the existence of a greater amount of cd clades. the study also shows the plausible exchange of genetic material between sts, contributing towards intra-taxa genetic diversity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
clostridium difficilemultilocus sequence typing distribution patternpopulation structurehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007637departamento administrativo de ciencia, tecnología e innovación617issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

