BACKGROUND
cryptosporidiosis is a zoonotic disease caused by the protozoan parasite cryptosporidium spp. that can affect domestic animal and human populations. in newborn ruminants, cryptosporidiosis is characterized by outbreaks of diarrhea, which can result in high morbidity and economic impact. the aim of the present study was to determine the prevalence of cryptosporidium spp. in small ruminants from the perote municipality in veracruz state, mexico. one hundred and sixty small ruminants  from eight farms located in four towns of the perote municipality were examined following a cross-sectional study design. stool samples were analyzed by a modification of the faust centrifugation method, and the presence of cryptosporidium spp. oocysts was examined using a modification of the ziehl-neelsen staining procedure. bivariate and multivariate analyses were used to assess the association of cryptosporidium infection and the general characteristics of the animals studied.


RESULTS
overall,  <dig>  of the  <dig> small ruminants sampled were infected with cryptosporidium spp. the prevalence of cryptosporidium spp. infection in goats was  <dig>  %  and in sheep  <dig>  % . small ruminants aged 1 month old had the highest  prevalence of infection. prevalence varied from 60 % to 85 % among herds. animal species, age, sex, breed, farm, town or cohabitation with cattle did not influence the prevalence of cryptosporidium infection.


CONCLUSIONS
a high prevalence of infection with cryptosporidium spp. was observed in small ruminants from the perote municipality in veracruz, mexico. infection was widely distributed among sheep and goats regardless of their age, breed or farm location. further research is required to identify risk factors for, and to assess the veterinary public health significance of cryptosporidium infection among sheep and goats in the mexican state of veracruz.

keywords
cryptosporidiuminfectionzonoosisprevalencesmall ruminantssheepgoatsveracruz statemexicouniversidad veracruzana, veracruz, mexicoissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

