BACKGROUND
resistance inducers have been used in annual crops as an alternative for disease control. wood perennial fruit trees, such as those of the citrus species, are candidates for treatment with resistance inducers, such as salicylic acid  and chitosan . however, the involved mechanisms in resistance induced by elicitors in citrus are currently few known.


RESULTS
in the present manuscript, we report information regarding the transcriptional changes observed in sweet orange in response to exogenous applications of sa and chi using rna-seq technology. more genes were induced by sa treatment than by chi treatment. in total,  <dig>  differentially expressed genes  were identified following treatment with sa, including the important genes wrky <dig>  pr <dig>  and pr <dig>  which are known to participate in the salicylic acid signaling pathway, and genes involved in ethylene/jasmonic acid biosynthesis . in addition, sa treatment promoted the induction of a subset of genes involved in several metabolic processes, such as redox states and secondary metabolism, which are associated with biotic stress. for chi treatment, there were  <dig> degs, many of them involved in secondary metabolism. for both sa and chi treatments, the auxin pathway genes were repressed, but sa treatment promoted induction in the ethylene and jasmonate acid pathway genes, in addition to repressing the abscisic acid pathway genes. chitosan treatment altered some hormone metabolism pathways. the degs were validated by quantitative real-time pcr , and the results were consistent with the rna-seq data, with a high correlation between the two analyses.


CONCLUSIONS
we expanded the available information regarding induced defense by elicitors in a species of citrus that is susceptible to various diseases and identified the molecular mechanisms by which this defense might be mediated.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
citrusgene expressionmetabolic pathwayrna-seqissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

