BACKGROUND
leptospirosis is caused by pathogenic spirochetes of the genus leptospira spp. this zoonotic disease is distributed globally and affects domestic animals, including cattle. leptospira interrogans serogroup sejroe serovar hardjo and leptospira borgpetersenii serogroup sejroe serovar hardjo remain important species associated with this reproductive disease in livestock production. previous studies on brazilian livestock have reported that l. interrogans serovar hardjo is the most prevalent leptospiral agent in this country and is related to clinical signs of leptospirosis, which lead to economic losses in production. here, we described the isolation of three clinical strains  obtained from leptospirosis outbreaks that occurred in minas gerais state in  <dig> and  <dig> 


RESULTS
serological and molecular typing using housekeeping  and rfb locus  genes were applied for the identification and comparative analysis of leptospira spp. our results identified the three isolates as l. interrogans serogroup sejroe serovar hardjo and confirmed the occurrence of this bacterial strain in brazilian livestock. genetic analysis using orf <dig> and orf <dig> grouped the leptospira into serogroup sejroe and subtype hardjoprajitno. genetic approaches were also applied to compare distinct serovars of l. interrogans strains by verifying the copy numbers of the is <dig> and is <dig> insertion sequences . the is <dig> copy number varied among the analyzed l. interrogans strains.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides evidence that l. interrogans serogroup sejroe serovar hardjo subtype hardjoprajitno causes bovine leptospirosis in brazilian production. the molecular results suggested that rfb locus  could improve epidemiological studies by allowing the identification of leptospira spp. at the serogroup level. additionally, the is <dig> and is <dig> is copy number analysis suggested distinct genomic features among closely related leptospiral strains.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

