BACKGROUND
with the introduction of the first high-throughput qpcr instrument on the market it became possible to perform thousands of reactions in a single run compared to the previous hundreds. in the high-throughput reaction, only limited volumes of highly concentrated cdna or dna samples can be added. this necessity can be solved by pre-amplification, which became a part of the high-throughput experimental workflow. here, we focused our attention on the limits of the specific target pre-amplification reaction and propose the optimal, general setup for gene expression experiment using biomark instrument .


RESULTS
for evaluating different pre-amplification factors following conditions were combined: four human blood samples from healthy donors and five transcripts having high to low expression levels; each cdna sample was pre-amplified at four cycles  and five concentrations . factors identified as critical for a success of cdna pre-amplification were cycle of pre-amplification, total rna concentration, and type of gene. the selected pre-amplification reactions were further tested for optimal cq distribution in a biomark array. the following concentrations combined with pre-amplification cycles were optimal for good quality samples: 20 ng of total rna with 15 cycles of pre-amplification, 20x and 40x diluted; and 5 ng and 20 ng of total rna with 18 cycles of pre-amplification, both 20x and 40x diluted.


CONCLUSIONS
we set up upper limits for the bulk gene expression experiment using gene expression dynamic array and provided an easy-to-obtain tool for measuring of pre-amplification success. we also showed that variability of the pre-amplification, introduced into the experimental workflow of reverse transcription-qpcr, is lower than variability caused by the reverse transcription step.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
high-throughput qpcrexponential pre-amplificationmicrofluidicsgene expressionfluidigmbiomarkdegraded samplesffpeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

