BACKGROUND
proteomic profiling of complex biological mixtures by the proteinchip technology of surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight  mass spectrometry  is one of the most promising approaches in toxicological, biological, and clinic research. the reliable identification of protein expression patterns and associated protein biomarkers that differentiate disease from health or that distinguish different stages of a disease depends on developing methods for assessing the quality of seldi-tof mass spectra. the use of seldi data for biomarker identification requires application of rigorous procedures to detect and discard low quality spectra prior to data analysis.


RESULTS
the systematic variability from plates, chips, and spot positions in seldi experiments was evaluated using biological and technical replicates. systematic biases on plates, chips, and spots were not found. the reproducibility of seldi experiments was demonstrated by examining the resulting low coefficient of variances of five peaks presented in all  <dig> spectra from quality control samples that were loaded randomly on different spots in the chips of six bioprocessor plates. we developed a method to detect and discard low quality spectra prior to proteomic profiling data analysis, which uses a correlation matrix to measure the similarities among seldi mass spectra obtained from similar biological samples. application of the correlation matrix to our seldi data for liver cancer and liver toxicity study and myeloma-associated lytic bone disease study confirmed this approach as an efficient and reliable method for detecting low quality spectra.


CONCLUSIONS
this report provides evidence that systematic variability between plates, chips, and spots on which the samples were assayed using seldi based proteomic procedures did not exist. the reproducibility of experiments in our studies was demonstrated to be acceptable and the profiling data for subsequent data analysis are reliable. correlation matrix was developed as a quality control tool to detect and discard low quality spectra prior to data analysis. it proved to be a reliable method to measure the similarities among seldi mass spectra and can be used for quality control to decrease noise in proteomic profiling data prior to data analysis.

7– <dig> october  <dig> second annual midsouth computational biology and bioinformatics society conference. bioinformatics: a systems approach little rock, ar, usa

