BACKGROUND
mating systems that reduce dispersal and lead to non-random mating might increase the potential for genetic structure to arise at fine geographic scales. greater sage-grouse  have a lek-based mating system and exhibit high site fidelity and skewed mating ratios. we quantified population structure by analyzing variation at  <dig>  single-nucleotide polymorphisms in  <dig> males from ten leks  occurring in a small geographic region in central nevada.


RESULTS
lek complexes, and to a lesser extent individual leks, formed statistically identifiable clusters in ordination analyses, providing evidence for fine-scale geographic genetic differentiation. lek geography predicted genetic differentiation even at a small geographic scale, which could be sharpened by strong site fidelity. relatedness was also higher among individuals within lek complexes , suggesting that reproductive skew, where few males participate in most of the successful matings, could also potentially contribute to genetic differentiation. models incorporating a habitat resistance surface as a proxy for potentially reduced movement due to landscape features indicated that both geographic distance and habitat suitability  predicted genetic structure, with no significant effect of man-made barriers to movement . finally, we illustrate how data sets containing fewer loci  had less statistical precision and failed to detect the full degree of genetic structure.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that habitat features and lek site geography of sage-grouse shape fine scale genetic structure, and highlight how larger data sets can have increased precision and accuracy for quantifying ecologically relevant genetic structure over small geographic scales.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
centrocercus urophasianusgenotyping-by-sequencinglek matingpopulation genomicspopulation structurereproductive skewuniversity of nevada, agricultural experiment stationnevada department of wildlifeu.s. bureau of land management national fish and wildlife foundation nv energy corpuniversity of nevada renohttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000155division of environmental biology1145609division of graduate education 1447692weitzman chava l. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

