BACKGROUND
surveys of ontogenetic development of hearing and sound production in fish are scarce, and the ontogenetic development of acoustic communication has been investigated in only two fish species so far. studies on the labyrinth fish trichopsis vittata and the toadfish halobatrachus didactylus show that the ability to detect conspecific sounds develops during growth. in otophysine fish, which are characterized by weberian ossicles and improved hearing sensitivities, the ontogenetic development of sound communication has never been investigated. we analysed the ontogeny of the auditory sensitivity and vocalizations in the mochokid catfish synodontis schoutedeni. mochokid catfishes of the genus synodontis are commonly called squeakers because they produce broadband stridulation sounds during abduction and adduction of pectoral fin spines. fish from six different size groups - from  <dig> mm standard length to  <dig> mm - were studied. hearing thresholds were measured between  <dig> hz and  <dig> khz using the auditory evoked potentials recording technique; stridulation sounds were recorded and their sound pressure levels determined. finally, absolute sound power spectra were compared to auditory sensitivity curves within each size group.


RESULTS
the smallest juveniles showed the poorest hearing abilities of all size groups between  <dig> and  <dig>  hz and highest hearing sensitivity at  <dig> and  <dig> khz. the duration of abduction and adduction sounds and the pulse period increased and sound pressure level  increased, while the dominant frequency of sounds decreased with size in animals larger than  <dig> mm. comparisons between audiograms and sound spectra revealed that the most sensitive frequencies correlate with the dominant frequencies of stridulation sounds in all s. schoutedeni size groups and that all specimens are able to detect sounds of all size groups.


CONCLUSIONS
this study on the squeaker catfish s. schoutedeni is the first to demonstrate that absolute hearing sensitivity changes during ontogeny in an otophysine fish. this contrasts with prior studies on two cypriniform fish species in which no such change could be observed. furthermore, s. schoutedeni can detect conspecific sounds at all stages of development, again contrasting with prior findings in fishes.

