BACKGROUND
benefits from high-throughput sequencing using  <dig> pyrosequencing technology may be most apparent for species with high societal or economic value but few genomic resources. rapid means of gene sequence and snp discovery using this novel sequencing technology provide a set of baseline tools for genome-level research. however, it is questionable how effective the sequencing of large numbers of short reads for species with essentially no prior gene sequence information will support contig assemblies and sequence annotation.


RESULTS
with the purpose of generating the first broad survey of gene sequences in eucalyptus grandis, the most widely planted hardwood tree species, we used  <dig> technology to sequence and assemble  <dig> mbp of expressed sequences . est sequences were generated from a normalized cdna pool comprised of multiple tissues and genotypes, promoting discovery of homologues to almost half of arabidopsis genes, and a comprehensive survey of allelic variation in the transcriptome. by aligning the sequencing reads from multiple genotypes we detected  <dig>  snps, 83% of which were validated in a sample. genome-wide nucleotide diversity was estimated for  <dig>  contigs using a modified theta  parameter, adapted for measuring genetic diversity from polymorphisms detected by randomly sequencing a multi-genotype cdna pool. diversity estimates in non-synonymous nucleotides were on average 4x smaller than in synonymous, suggesting purifying selection. non-synonymous to synonymous substitutions  among  <dig>  contigs averaged  <dig>  and was skewed to the right, further supporting that most genes are under purifying selection. comparison of these estimates among contigs identified major functional classes of genes under purifying and diversifying selection in agreement with previous researches.


CONCLUSIONS
in providing an abundance of foundational transcript sequences where limited prior genomic information existed, this work created part of the foundation for the annotation of the e. grandis genome that is being sequenced by the us department of energy. in addition we demonstrated that snps sampled in large-scale with  <dig> pyrosequencing can be used to detect evolutionary signatures among genes, providing one of the first genome-wide assessments of nucleotide diversity and ka/ks for a non-model plant species.

