BACKGROUND
oocyte-derived maternal rnas drive early embryogenesis when the newly formed embryo is transcriptionally inactive. recent studies in zebrafish have identified the role of micrornas during the maternal-to-embryonic transition . micrornas are short rnas that bind to the 3' utr of target mrnas to repress their translation and accelerate their decay. newborn ovary homeobox gene  is a transcription factor that is preferentially expressed in oocytes and essential for folliculogenesis in mice. nobox knockout mice are infertile and lack of nobox disrupts expression of many germ-cell specific genes and micrornas. we recently reported the cloning and expression of bovine nobox during early embryonic development and our gene knockdown studies indicate that nobox is a maternal effect gene essential for early embryonic development. as nobox is a maternal transcript critical for development and nobox is depleted during early embryogenesis, we hypothesized that nobox is targeted by micrornas for silencing and/or degradation.


RESULTS
using an algorithm "microinspector", a potential microrna recognition element  for mir-196a was identified in the 3' utr of the bovine nobox mrna. expression analysis of mir-196a in bovine oocytes and during early embryonic development indicated that it is expressed both in oocytes and embryos and tends to increase at the four-cell and eight-cell stages. ectopic expression of nobox and mir-196a in hela cells inhibited the expression of nobox protein compared to the control cells without mir-196a. similarly, the activity of a luciferase construct containing the entire 3' utr of bovine nobox was suppressed, and the regulation was abolished by mutations in the mir-196a binding site indicating that the predicted mre is critical for the direct and specific binding of mir-196a to the nobox mrna. furthermore, ectopic expression of mir-196a mimic in bovine early embryos significantly reduced the nobox expression at the both mrna and protein levels.


CONCLUSIONS
collectively, our results demonstrate that mir-196a is a bona fide negative regulator of nobox during bovine early embryogenesis.

noboxbovineoocyteearly embryogenesismicrornamaternal to zygotic transition

