BACKGROUND
outbreaks of infectious diseases by microbial pathogens can cause substantial losses of stock in aquaculture systems. there are several ways to eliminate these pathogens including the use of antibiotics, biocides and conventional disinfectants, but these leave undesirable chemical residues. conversely, using sunlight for disinfection has the advantage of leaving no chemical residue and is particularly suited to countries with sunny climates. titanium dioxide  is a photocatalyst that increases the effectiveness of solar disinfection. in recent years, several different types of solar photocatalytic reactors coated with tio <dig> have been developed for waste water and drinking water treatment. in this study a thin-film fixed-bed reactor , designed as a sloping flat plate reactor coated with p <dig> degussa tio <dig>  was used.


RESULTS
the level of inactivation of the aquaculture pathogen aeromonas hydrophila atcc  <dig> was determined after travelling across the tffbr under various natural sunlight conditions , at  <dig> different flow rates . bacterial numbers were determined by conventional plate counting using selective agar media, cultured  under conventional aerobic conditions to detect healthy cells and  under conditions designed to neutralise reactive oxygen species , to detect both healthy and sub-lethally injured  cells. the results clearly demonstrate that high sunlight intensities  and low flow rates  provided optimum conditions for inactivation of a. hydrophila atcc  <dig>  with greater overall inactivation and fewer sub-lethally injured cells than at low sunlight intensities or high flow rates. low sunlight intensities resulted in reduced overall inactivation and greater sub-lethal injury at all flow rates.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first demonstration of the effectiveness of the tffbr in the inactivation of aeromonas hydrophila at high sunlight intensities, providing proof-of-concept for the application of solar photocatalysis in aquaculture systems.

