BACKGROUND
fontainea picrosperma, a subcanopy tree endemic to the rainforests of northeastern australia, is of medicinal significance following the discovery of the novel anti-cancer natural product, ebc- <dig>  laboratory synthesis of ebc- <dig> is unlikely to be commercially feasible and consequently production of the molecule is via isolation from f. picrosperma grown in plantations.

successful domestication and plantation production requires an intimate knowledge of a taxon’s life-history attributes and genetic architecture, not only to ensure the maximum capture of genetic diversity from wild source populations, but also to minimise the risk of a detrimental loss in genetic diversity via founder effects during subsequent breeding programs designed to enhance commercially significant agronomic traits.


RESULTS
here we report the use of eleven microsatellite loci  to investigate the partitioning of genetic diversity within and among seven natural populations of f. picrosperma. genetic variation among individuals and within populations was found to be relatively low , although there was marked differentiation among populations . bayesian, upgma and principal coordinates analyses detected three main genotypic clusters , which were present at all seven populations. despite low levels of historical gene flow , inbreeding was negligible ; presumably due to the taxon’s dioecious breeding system.


CONCLUSIONS
the data suggests that f. picrosperma was previously more continuously distributed, but that rainforest contraction and expansion in response to glacial-interglacial cycles, together with significant anthropogenic effects have resulted in significant fragmentation. this research provides important tools to support plantation establishment, selection and genetic improvement of this medicinally significant australian rainforest species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
biodiscoverycancerebc-46population geneticsrainforest refugiawet tropicsecobiotics ltdnahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001796university of the sunshine coastnaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

