BACKGROUND
the myb gene family comprises one of the richest groups of transcription factors in plants. plant myb proteins are characterized by a highly conserved myb dna-binding domain. myb proteins are classified into four major groups namely, 1r-myb, 2r-myb, 3r-myb and 4r-myb based on the number and position of myb repeats. myb transcription factors are involved in plant development, secondary metabolism, hormone signal transduction, disease resistance and abiotic stress tolerance. a comparative analysis of myb family genes in rice and arabidopsis will help reveal the evolution and function of myb genes in plants.


RESULTS
a genome-wide analysis identified at least  <dig> and  <dig> myb genes in rice and arabidopsis, respectively. gene structure analysis revealed that myb family genes possess relatively more number of introns in the middle as compared with c- and n-terminal regions of the predicted genes. intronless myb-genes are highly conserved both in rice and arabidopsis. myb genes encoding r2r <dig> repeat myb proteins retained conserved gene structure with three exons and two introns, whereas genes encoding r1r2r <dig> repeat containing proteins consist of six exons and five introns. the splicing pattern is similar among r1r2r <dig> myb genes in arabidopsis. in contrast, variation in splicing pattern was observed among r1r2r <dig> myb members of rice. consensus motif analysis of 1kb upstream region  of myb gene orfs led to the identification of conserved and over-represented cis-motifs in both rice and arabidopsis. real-time quantitative rt-pcr analysis showed that several members of mybs are up-regulated by various abiotic stresses both in rice and arabidopsis.


CONCLUSIONS
a comprehensive genome-wide analysis of chromosomal distribution, tandem repeats and phylogenetic relationship of myb family genes in rice and arabidopsis suggested their evolution via duplication. genome-wide comparative analysis of myb genes and their expression analysis identified several mybs with potential role in development and stress response of plants.

