BACKGROUND
neural progenitor cells can be isolated from various regions of the adult mammalian brain, including the forebrain structures of the subventricular zone and the olfactory bulb. currently it is unknown whether functional differences in these progenitor cell populations can already be found on the molecular level. therefore, we compared protein expression profiles between progenitor cells isolated from the subventricular zone and the olfactory bulb using a proteomic approach based on two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. the subventricular zone and the olfactory bulb are connected by the rostral migratory stream , in which glial fibrillary acidic protein -positive cells guide neuroblasts. recent literature suggested that these gfap-positive cells possess neurogenic potential themselves. in the current study, we therefore compared the cultured neurospheres for the fraction of gfap-positive cells and their morphology of over a prolonged period of time.


RESULTS
we found significant differences in the protein expression patterns between subventricular zone and olfactory bulb neural progenitor cells. of the differentially expressed protein spots,  <dig> were exclusively expressed in the subventricular zone,  <dig> showed a lower expression and  <dig> a higher expression in the olfactory bulb. the proteomic data showed that more proteins are differentially expressed in olfactory bulb progenitors with regard to proteins involved in differentiation and microenvironmental integration, as compared to the subventricular zone progenitors. compared to 94% of all progenitors of the subventricular zone expressed gfap, nearly none in the olfactory bulb cultures expressed gfap. both gfap-positive subpopulations differed also in morphology, with the olfactory bulb cells showing more branching. no differences in growth characteristics such as doubling time, and passage lengths could be found over  <dig> consecutive passages in the two cultures.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we describe differences in protein expression of neural progenitor populations isolated from two forebrain regions, the subventricular zone and the olfactory bulb. these subpopulations can be characterized by differential expression of marker proteins. we isolated fractions of progenitor cells with gfap expression from both regions, but the gfap-positive cells differed in number and morphology. whereas in vitro growth characteristics of neural progenitors are preserved in both regions, our proteomic and immunohistochemical data suggest that progenitor cells from the two regions differ in morphology and functionality, but not in their proliferative capacity.

