BACKGROUND
cuticular wax production on plant surfaces confers a glaucous appearance and plays important roles in plant stress tolerance. most common wheat cultivars, which are hexaploid, and most tetraploid wheat cultivars are glaucous; in contrast, a wild wheat progenitor, aegilops tauschii, can be glaucous or non-glaucous. a dominant non-glaucous allele, iw <dig>  resides on the short arm of chromosome 2d, which was inherited from ae. tauschii through polyploidization. iw <dig> is one of the major causal genes related to variation in glaucousness among hexaploid wheat. detailed genetic and phylogeographic knowledge of the iw <dig> locus in ae. tauschii may provide important information and lead to a better understanding of the evolution of common wheat.


RESULTS
glaucous ae. tauschii accessions were collected from a broad area ranging from armenia to the southwestern coastal part of the caspian sea. linkage analyses with five mapping populations showed that the glaucous versus non-glaucous difference was mainly controlled by the iw <dig> locus in ae. tauschii. comparative genomic analysis of barley and ae. tauschii was then used to develop molecular markers tightly linked with ae. tauschii iw <dig>  chromosomal synteny around the orthologous iw <dig> regions indicated that some chromosomal rearrangement had occurred during the genetic divergence leading to ae. tauschii, barley, and brachypodium. genetic associations between specific iw2-linked markers and respective glaucous phenotypes in ae. tauschii indicated that at least two non-glaucous accessions might carry other glaucousness-determining loci outside of the iw <dig> locus.


CONCLUSIONS
allelic differences at the iw <dig> locus were the main contributors to the phenotypic difference between the glaucous and non-glaucous accessions of ae. tauschii. our results supported the previous assumption that the d-genome donor of common wheat could have been any ae. tauschii variant that carried the recessive iw <dig> allele.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
allopolyploid speciationcuticluar wax inhibitorsynthetic wheatwheat evolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

