BACKGROUND
compensatory growth is accelerated compared with normal growth and occurs when growth-limiting conditions are overcome. most animals, especially fish, are capable of compensatory growth, but the mechanisms remain unclear. further investigation of the mechanism of compensatory growth in fish is needed to improve feeding efficiency, reduce cost, and explore growth-related genes.


RESULTS
in the study, grass carp, an important farmed fish in china, were subjected to a compensatory growth experiment followed by transcriptome analysis by rna-sequencing. samples of fish from starved and re-feeding conditions were compared with the control. under starved conditions,  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed genes  were detected in muscle and liver tissue when compared the experimental group with control group, respectively. after re-feeding,  <dig> and  <dig> degs were identified in muscle and liver when the two groups were compared. moreover, when samples from experimental group in starved and re-feeding conditions were compared,  <dig> and  <dig> degs were found in muscle and liver. most of these degs were involved in metabolic processes, or encoded enzymes or proteins with catalytic activity or binding functions, or involved in metabolic and biosynthetic pathways. a number of the more significant degs were subjected to further analysis. under fasting conditions, many up-regulated genes were associated with protein ubiquitination or degradation, whereas many down-regulated genes were involved in the metabolism of glucose and fatty acids. under re-feeding conditions, genes participating in muscle synthesis and fatty acid metabolism were up-regulated significantly, and genes related to protein ubiquitination or degradation were down-regulated. moreover, several degs were random selected for confirmation by real-time quantitative pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
global gene expression patterns of grass carp during compensatory growth were determined. to our knowledge, this is a first reported for a teleost fish. the results will enhance our understanding of the mechanism of compensatory growth in teleost fish.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
grass carpcompensatory growthtranscriptome analysisrna sequencingfastingre-feedingdifferentially expressed genesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

