BACKGROUND
the tomato  is the most widely grown vegetable in the world. it was domesticated in latin america and italy and spain are considered secondary centers of diversification. this food crop has experienced severe genetic bottlenecks and modern breeding activities have been characterized by trait introgression from wild species and divergence in different market classes.


RESULTS
with the aim to examine patterns of polymorphism, characterize population structure and identify putative loci under positive selection, we genotyped  <dig> tomato accessions  using a custom-made illumina snp-panel. most of the  <dig> successfully scored snp loci were found to be polymorphic. population structure analysis and estimates of genetic differentiation indicated that landraces constitute distinct sub-populations. furthermore, contemporary varieties could be separated in groups  that are consistent with the recent breeding aimed at market-class specialization. in addition, at the 95% confidence level, we identified  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> loci under positive selection between landraces and each of the groups of commercial variety . their number and genomic locations imply the presence of some extended regions with high genetic variation between landraces and contemporary varieties.


CONCLUSIONS
our work provides knowledge concerning the level and distribution of genetic variation within cultivated tomato landraces and increases our understanding of the genetic subdivision of contemporary varieties. the data indicate that adaptation and selection have led to a genomic signature in cultivated landraces and that the subpopulation structure of contemporary varieties is shaped by directed breeding and largely of recent origin. the genomic characterization presented here is an essential step towards a future exploitation of the available tomato genetic resources in research and breeding programs.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
population structuregenetic differentiationselectiongermplasmsolanum lycopersicumissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013

