BACKGROUND
computational analysis of protein-protein interaction provided the crucial information to increase the binding affinity without a change in basic conformation. several docking programs were used to predict the near-native poses of the protein-protein complex in  <dig> top-rankings. the universal criteria for discriminating the near-native pose are not available since there are several classes of recognition protein. currently, the explicit criteria for identifying the near-native pose of ankyrin-protein complexes  have not been reported yet.


RESULTS
in this study, we established an ensemble computational model for discriminating the near-native docking pose of apks named “ankplex”. a dataset of apks was generated from seven x-ray apks, which consisted of  <dig> internal domains, using the reliable docking tool zdock. the dataset was composed of  <dig> and  <dig>  near-native and non-near-native poses, respectively, and it was used to generate eleven informative features. subsequently, a re-scoring rank was generated by ankplex using a combination of a decision tree algorithm and logistic regression. ankplex achieved superior efficiency with ≥ <dig> near-native complexes in the  <dig> top-rankings for nine x-ray complexes compared to zdock, which only obtained six x-ray complexes. in addition, feature analysis demonstrated that the van der waals feature was the dominant near-native pose out of the potential ankyrin-protein docking poses.


CONCLUSIONS
the ankplex model achieved a success at predicting near-native docking poses and led to the discovery of informative characteristics that could further improve our understanding of the ankyrin-protein complex. our computational study could be useful for predicting the near-native poses of binding proteins and desired targets, especially for ankyrin-protein complexes. the ankplex web server is freely accessible at http://ankplex.ams.cmu.ac.th.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ankyrin-protein complexesnear-native docking posemachine learning methodsdecision treelogistic regression modelankplexthe cluster and program management office the national science and technology development agency thailand research fund the national research council of thailand the health systems research institute the national research university project under the thailand’s office of the commission on higher education the center of biomolecular therapy and diagnostic the mahidol university talent management program to wsthe mahidol university talent management program to kkissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

