BACKGROUND
expansion of multi-c2h <dig> domain zinc finger  genes, including the krüppel-associated box  subfamily, paralleled the evolution of tetrapodes, particularly in mammalian lineages. advances in their cataloging and characterization suggest that the functions of the krab-znf gene family contributed to mammalian speciation.


RESULTS
here, we characterized the human 8q <dig>  znf cluster on the genomic, the phylogenetic, the structural and the transcriptome level. six  of the seven locus members contain exons encoding krab domains, one  does not. they form a paralog group in which the encoded krab and znf protein domains generally share more similarities with each other than with other members of the human znf superfamily. the closest relatives with respect to their dna-binding domain were znf <dig> and znf <dig>  the analysis of orthologs in therian mammalian species revealed strong conservation and purifying selection of the krab-a and zinc finger domains. these findings underscore structural/functional constraints during evolution. gene losses in the murine lineage  and potential protein truncations in primates  illustrate ongoing speciation processes. tissue expression profiling by quantitative real-time pcr showed similar but distinct patterns for all tested znf genes with the most prominent expression in fetal brain. based on accompanying expression signatures in twenty-six other human tissues znf <dig> and znf <dig> revealed the closest expression profiles. together, the 8q <dig>  znf genes can be assigned to a cerebellum, a testis or a prostate/thyroid subgroup. these results are consistent with potential functions of the znf genes in morphogenesis and differentiation. promoter regions of the seven 8q <dig>  znf genes display common characteristics like missing tata-box, cpg island-association and transcription factor binding site  modules. common tfbs modules partly explain the observed expression pattern similarities.


CONCLUSIONS
the znf genes at human 8q <dig>  form a relatively old mammalian paralog group conserved in eutherian mammals for at least  <dig> million years. the members persisted after initial duplications by undergoing subfunctionalizations in their expression patterns and target site recognition. krab-znf mediated repression of transcription might have shaped organogenesis in mammalian ontogeny.

