BACKGROUND
obesity is now a worldwide epidemic disease and poses a major risk for diet related diseases like type  <dig> diabetes, cardiovascular disease, stroke and fatty liver among others. in the present study we employed the murine model of diet-induced obesity to determine the early, tissue-specific, gene expression signatures that characterized progression to obesity and type  <dig> diabetes.


RESULTS
we used the c57bl/6 j mouse which is known as a counterpart for diet-induced human diabetes and obesity model. our initial experiments involved two groups of mice, one on normal diet  and the other on high-fat and high-sucrose . the later were then further separated into subgroups that either received no additional treatment, or were treated with different doses of the ayurvedic formulation kal- <dig>  at different time points  eight different tissues were isolated from mice being fed on different diet compositions. these tissues were used to extract gene-expression data through microarray experiment. simultaneously, we also measured different body parameters like body weight, blood glucose level and cytokines profile  at each time point for all the groups.

using partial least square discriminant analysis  method we identified gene-expression signatures that predict physiological parameters like blood glucose levels, body weight and the balance of pro- versus anti-inflammatory cytokines. the resulting models successfully predicted diet-induced changes in body weight and blood glucose levels, although the predictive power for cytokines profiles was relatively poor. in the former two instances, however, we could exploit the models to further extract the early gene-expression signatures that accurately predict the onset of diabetes and obesity. these extracted genes allowed definition of the regulatory network involved in progression of disease.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified the early gene-expression signature for the onset of obesity and type  <dig> diabetes. further analysis of this data suggests that some of these genes could be used as potential biomarkers for these two disease-states.

obesitytype-ii diabetesgene signaturepartial least square modelbiological classificationshub-proteins

