BACKGROUND
the interaction mechanism between crop and soil microbial communities is a key issue in both agriculture and soil ecology. however, how soil microbial communities respond to crop planting and ultimately affect crop health still remain unclear. in this research, we explored how soil microbial communities shifted during tobacco cultivation under different rotation systems .


RESULTS
our analyses showed that soil microbial communities had a general response pattern to tobacco planting, as the abundances of proteobacteria and planctomycetes increased while acidobacteria and verrucomicrobia decreased during tobacco cultivation, no matter which rotation system was adopted. notably, tobacco decreased the diversity and co-occurrence of soil microorganisms, but maize rotation might suppress tobacco bacterial wilt by alleviating the decrease in biodiversity and co-occurrence. molecular ecological network analysis indicated that there was stronger competition between potential disease suppressive  and inducible bacteria  in maize rotation systems. both soil properties  and microbial communities of tobacco mature period depended on their counterparts of fallow period, and all these factors shaped tobacco disease comprehensively.


CONCLUSIONS
both soil microbial communities of fallow stage and tobacco selection shaped the communities of tobacco mature stage. and effective rotation crop  could decrease the incidence of tobacco bacterial wilt by alleviating the decrease in diversity and co-occurrences of microbial populations. this study would deepen our understanding about succession mechanism of soil microbial communities during crop cultivation and their relationship with crop health.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
soil microbial communitiessuccession mechanismcrop healthillumina sequencingmolecular ecological networkissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

