BACKGROUND
fasciola hepatica causes chronic liver disease, fasciolosis, leading to significant losses in the livestock economy and concerns for human health in many countries. the identification of f. hepatica genes involved in the parasite’s virulence through modulation of host immune system is utmost important to comprehend evasion mechanisms of the parasite and develop more effective strategies against fasciolosis. in this study, to identify the parasite’s putative virulence genes which are associated with host immunomodulation, we explored whole transcriptome of an adult f. hepatica using current transcriptome profiling approaches integrated with detailed in silico analyses. in brief, the comparison of the parasite transcripts with the specialised public databases containing sequence data of non-parasitic organisms  or of numerous pathogens and investigation of the sequences in terms of nucleotide evolution  and cytokine signaling relation were conducted.


RESULTS
ngs of the whole transcriptome resulted in  <dig> , <dig> sequence reads, yielding a total of  <dig>  transcripts . a number of the parasite transcripts  were predicted to be virulence-related on the basis of the exclusive homology with the pathogen-associated data, positive selection or relationship with cytokine signaling. of these, a group of the virulence-related genes , not previously described, were found likely to be associated with immunomodulation based on in silico functional categorisation, showing significant sequence similarities with various immune receptors , cytokines , cluster of differentiations  or molecules associated with other immunomodulatory mechanisms . some of the genes  appeared to be under positive selection , imitating proteins associated with cytokine signaling .


CONCLUSIONS
with a comparative transcriptome profiling approach, we have identified a number of potential immunomodulator genes of f. hepatica , which are firstly described here, could be employed for the development of better strategies  in the battle against both zoonotically and economically important disease, fasciolosis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fasciola hepaticawhole transcriptometrematoderna-seqvirulenceimmunomodulationevasionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

