BACKGROUND
α-amylase inhibitors are attractive candidates for the control of seed weevils, as these insects are highly dependent on starch as an energy source. in this study, we aimed to reveal the structure and diversity of dimeric α-amylase inhibitor genes in wild emmer wheat from israel and to elucidate the relationship between the emmer wheat genes and ecological factors using single nucleotide polymorphism  markers. another objective of this study was to find out whether there were any correlations between snps in functional protein-coding genes and the environment.


RESULTS
the influence of ecological factors on the genetic structure of dimeric α-amylase inhibitor genes was evaluated by specific snp markers. a total of  <dig> dimeric α-amylase inhibitor genes were obtained from  <dig> accessions in  <dig> populations. seventy-five polymorphic positions and  <dig> haplotypes were defined by sequence analysis. sixteen out of the  <dig> snp markers were designed to detect snp variations in wild emmer wheat accessions from different populations in israel. the proportion of polymorphic loci p , the expected heterozygosity he, and shannon's information index in the  <dig> populations were  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively. the populations of wild emmer wheat showed great diversity in gene loci both between and within populations. based on the snp marker data, the genetic distance of pair-wise comparisons of the  <dig> populations displayed a sharp genetic differentiation over long geographic distances. the values of p, he, and shannon's information index were negatively correlated with three climatic moisture factors, whereas the same values were positively correlated by spearman rank correlation coefficients' analysis with some of the other ecological factors.


CONCLUSIONS
the populations of wild emmer wheat showed a wide range of diversity in dimeric α-amylase inhibitors, both between and within populations. we suggested that snp markers are useful for the estimation of genetic diversity of functional genes in wild emmer wheat. these results show significant correlations between snps in the α-amylase inhibitor genes and ecological factors affecting diversity. ecological factors, singly or in combination, explained a significant proportion of the variations in the snps, and the snps could be classified into several categories as ecogeographical predictors. it was suggested that the snps in the α-amylase inhibitor genes have been subjected to natural selection, and ecological factors had an important evolutionary influence on gene differentiation at specific loci.

