BACKGROUND
the apicomplexan parasite toxoplasma gondii is cosmopolitan in nature, largely as a result of its highly flexible life cycle. felids are its only definitive hosts and a wide range of mammals and birds serve as intermediate hosts. the latent bradyzoite stage is orally infectious in all warm-blooded vertebrates and establishes chronic, transmissible infections. when bradyzoites are ingested by felids, they transform into merozoites in enterocytes and expand asexually as part of their coccidian life cycle. in all other intermediate hosts, however, bradyzoites differentiate exclusively to tachyzoites, and disseminate extraintestinally to many cell types. both merozoites and tachyzoites undergo rapid asexual population expansion, yet possess different effector fates with respect to the cells and tissues they develop in and the subsequent stages they differentiate into.


RESULTS
to determine whether merozoites utilize distinct suites of genes to attach, invade, and replicate within feline enterocytes, we performed comparative transcriptional profiling on purified tachyzoites and merozoites. we used high-throughput rna-seq to compare the merozoite and tachyzoite transcriptomes.  <dig> genes were annotated with sequence reads across the two asexually replicating stages of the parasite life cycle. metabolism was similar between the two replicating stages. however, significant stage-specific expression differences were measured, with  <dig> transcripts exclusive to merozoites versus  <dig> exclusive to tachyzoites. genes coding for  <dig> predicted secreted proteins and  <dig> membrane- associated proteins were annotated as merozoite-specific. the vast majority of known dense-granule , microneme , and rhoptry  genes were not expressed in merozoites. in contrast, a large set of surface proteins  was expressed exclusively in merozoites.


CONCLUSIONS
the distinct expression profiles of merozoites and tachyzoites reveal significant additional complexity within the t. gondii life cycle, demonstrating that merozoites are distinct asexual dividing stages which are uniquely adapted to their niche and biological purpose.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
toxoplasma gondiiapicomplexacoccidiacatenteroepithelial developmentmerozoiteschizontcomparative transcriptomicssurface antigenstage-specific gene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

