BACKGROUND
bathymodiolus azoricus is a deep-sea hydrothermal vent mussel found in association with large faunal communities living in chemosynthetic environments at the bottom of the sea floor near the azores islands. investigation of the exceptional physiological reactions that vent mussels have adopted in their habitat, including responses to environmental microbes, remains a difficult challenge for deep-sea biologists. in an attempt to reveal genes potentially involved in the deep-sea mussel innate immunity we carried out a high-throughput sequence analysis of freshly collected b. azoricus transcriptome using gills tissues as the primary source of immune transcripts given its strategic role in filtering the surrounding waterborne potentially infectious microorganisms. additionally, a substantial est data set was produced and from which a comprehensive collection of genes coding for putative proteins was organized in a dedicated database, "deepseavent" the first deep-sea vent animal transcriptome database based on the  <dig> pyrosequencing technology.


RESULTS
a normalized cdna library from gills tissue was sequenced in a full  <dig> gs-flx run, producing  <dig>  sequencing reads. assembly of the high quality reads resulted in  <dig>  contigs of which  <dig>  were singletons. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were conceptually translated into amino-sequences of which  <dig>  matched known proteins in the ncbi non-redundant protein database,  <dig>  revealed conserved protein domains through interpro functional classification and  <dig>  were assigned with gene ontology terms. queries conducted within the database enabled the identification of genes putatively involved in immune and inflammatory reactions which had not been previously evidenced in the vent mussel. their physical counterpart was confirmed by semi-quantitative quantitative reverse-transcription-polymerase chain reactions  and their rna transcription level by quantitative pcr  experiments.


CONCLUSIONS
we have established the first tissue transcriptional analysis of a deep-sea hydrothermal vent animal and generated a searchable catalog of genes that provides a direct method of identifying and retrieving vast numbers of novel coding sequences which can be applied in gene expression profiling experiments from a non-conventional model organism. this provides the most comprehensive sequence resource for identifying novel genes currently available for a deep-sea vent organism, in particular, genes putatively involved in immune and inflammatory reactions in vent mussels.

the characterization of the b. azoricus transcriptome will facilitate research into biological processes underlying physiological adaptations to hydrothermal vent environments and will provide a basis for expanding our understanding of genes putatively involved in adaptations processes during post-capture long term acclimatization experiments, at "sea-level" conditions, using b. azoricus as a model organism.

