BACKGROUND
fungi are ubiquitous in nature and have evolved over time to colonize a wide range of ecosystems including pest control. to date, most research has focused on the hypocrealean genera beauveria bassiana, which is a typical filamentous fungus with a high potential for insect control. the morphology and components of fungi are important during the spores germination and outgrow to mycelia. however, to the best of our knowledge, there is no report on the morphology and components of b. bassiana spores and mycelia. in the work, the growth and metabolism of beauveria bassiana spores and mycelia were studied. high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry  was employed to study the metabolism of b. bassiana spores and mycelia. principal component analysis  based on hplc-ms was conducted to study the different components of the spores and mycelia of the fungus. metabolic network was established based on hplc-ms and kegg database.


RESULTS
through gompertz model based on macroscopic and microscopic techniques, spore elongation length was found to increase exponentially until approximately  <dig>  h after cultivation, and then growth became linear. in the metabolic network, the decrease of glyoxylate, pyruvate, fumarate, alanine, succinate, oxaloacetate, dihydrothymine, ribulose, acetylcarnitine, fructose- <dig>  6-bisphosphate, mycosporin glutamicol, and the increase of betaine, carnitine, ergothioneine, sphingosine, dimethyl guanosine, glycerophospholipids, and in spores indicated that the change of the metabolin can keep spores in inactive conditions, protect spores against harmful effects and survive longer.


CONCLUSIONS
analysis of the metabolic pathway in which these components participate can reveal the metabolic difference between spores and mycelia, which provide the tools for understand and control the process of of spores germination and outgrow to mycelia.

keywords
beauveria bassianagompertz modelpcahplc-mcmetabolismissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

