BACKGROUND
the human gut microbiota comprises approximately  <dig> trillion microbial cells which significantly impact many aspects of human physiology - including metabolism, nutrient absorption and immune function. disturbances in this population have been implicated in many conditions and diseases, including obesity, type- <dig> diabetes and inflammatory bowel disease. this suggests that targeted manipulation or shaping of the gut microbiota, by bacteriocins and other antimicrobials, has potential as a therapeutic tool for the prevention or treatment of these conditions. with this in mind, several studies have used traditional culture-dependent approaches to successfully identify bacteriocin-producers from the mammalian gut. in silico-based approaches to identify novel gene clusters are now also being utilised to take advantage of the vast amount of data currently being generated by next generation sequencing technologies. in this study, we employed an in silico screening approach to mine potential bacteriocin clusters in genome-sequenced isolates from the gastrointestinal tract . more specifically, the bacteriocin genome-mining tool bagel <dig> was used to identify potential bacteriocin producers in the genomes of the git subset of the human microbiome project’s reference genome database. each of the identified gene clusters were manually annotated and potential bacteriocin-associated genes were evaluated.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> clusters of note from  <dig> unique members of the firmicutes, bacteroidetes, actinobacteria, fusobacteria and synergistetes. the most commonly identified class of bacteriocin was the >10 kda class, formerly known as bacteriolysins, followed by lantibiotics and sactipeptides.


CONCLUSIONS
multiple bacteriocin gene clusters were identified in a dataset representative of the human gut microbiota. interestingly, many of these were associated with species and genera which are not typically associated with bacteriocin production.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

