BACKGROUND
with an increasing caseload of veterinary neurology patients in first opinion practice, there is a requirement to establish relevant learning objectives for veterinary neurology encompassing knowledge, skills and attitudes for veterinary undergraduate students in europe. with help of experts in veterinary neurology from the european college of veterinary neurology  and the european society of veterinary neurology  a survey of veterinary neurologic learning objectives using a modified delphi method was conducted. the first phase comprised the development of a draft job description and learning objectives by a working group established by the ecvn. in the second phase, a quantitative questionnaire  covering  <dig> learning objectives and subdivided into  <dig> categories was sent to  <dig> esvn and ecvn members and a return rate of 62%  was achieved.


RESULTS
of these  <dig> learning objectives ecvn diplomates and esvn members considered  <dig>  objectives as not necessary for standard clinical veterinary neurology training,  <dig>  were graded to be learned at a beginner level and  <dig>  at an advanced level. the following objectives were interpreted as the most important day one skills: interpret laboratory tests, perform a neurological examination and establish a neuroanatomical localization. in this survey the three most important diseases of the central nervous system included epilepsy, intervertebral disc disease and inflammatory diseases. the three most important diseases of the peripheral nervous system included polyradiculoneuritis, myasthenia gravis and toxic neuropathies.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study should help to reform the veterinary curriculum regarding neurology and may reduce the phenomenon of “neurophobia”.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
veterinary educationcurriculumlearning objectivesneurologyundergraduateecvnesvneuropeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

