BACKGROUND
the formylpeptide receptor family members fpr and fprl <dig>  expressed in myeloid phagocytes, belong to the g-protein coupled seven transmembrane receptor family . they share a high degree of sequence similarity, particularly in the cytoplasmic domains involved in intracellular signaling. the established model of cell activation through gpcrs states that the receptors isomerize from an inactive to an active state upon ligand binding, and this receptor transformation subsequently activates the signal transducing g-protein. accordingly, the activation of human neutrophil fpr and fprl <dig> induces identical, pertussis toxin-sensitive functional responses and a transient increase in intracellular calcium is followed by a secretory response leading to mobilization of receptors from intracellular stores, as well as a release of reactive oxygen metabolites.


RESULTS
we report that a cell permeable ten amino acid peptide  derived from the phosphatidylinositol  <dig> -bisphosphate  binding region of gelsolin  blocks granule mobilization as well as secretion of oxygen radicals. the inhibitory effect of pbp <dig> is, however, receptor specific and affects the fprl1-, but not the fpr-, induced cellular response. the transient rise in intracellular calcium induced by the active receptors is not affected by pbp <dig>  suggesting that the blockage occurs in a parallel, novel signaling pathway used by fprl <dig> to induce oxygen radical production and secretion. also the fpr can activate neutrophils through a pbp10-sensitive signaling pathway, but this signal is normally blocked by the cytoskeleton.


CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates that the two very closely related chemoattractant receptors, fpr and fprl <dig>  use distinct signaling pathways in activation of human neutrophils. the pip2-binding peptide pbp <dig> selectively inhibits fprl1-mediated superoxide production and granule mobilization. furthermore, the activity of this novel pbp <dig> sensitive pathway in neutrophils is modulated by the actin cytoskeleton network.

