BACKGROUND
mitogen activated protein kinase  signaling is of critical importance in plants and other eukaryotic organisms. the mapk cascade plays an indispensible role in the growth and development of plants, as well as in biotic and abiotic stress responses. the mapks are constitute the most downstream module of the three tier mapk cascade and are phosphorylated by upstream map kinase kinases , which are in turn are phosphorylated by map kinase kinase kinase . the mapks play pivotal roles in regulation of many cytoplasmic and nuclear substrates, thus regulating several biological processes.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> mapks genes were identified from the genome wide analysis of  <dig> species. the sequence analysis has revealed the presence of several n- and c-terminal conserved domains. the mapks were previously believed to be characterized by the presence of tey/tdy activation loop motifs. the present study showed that, in addition to presence of activation loop tey/tdy motifs, mapks are also contain mey, tem, tqm, trm, tvy, tsy, tec and tqy activation loop motifs. phylogenetic analysis of all predicted mapks were clustered into six different groups , and all predicted mapks were assigned with specific names based on their orthology based evolutionary relationships with arabidopsis or oryza mapks.


CONCLUSIONS
we conducted global analysis of the mapk gene family of plants from lower eukaryotes to higher eukaryotes and analyzed their genomic and evolutionary aspects. our study showed the presence of several new activation loop motifs and diverse conserved domains in mapks. advance study of newly identified activation loop motifs can provide further information regarding the downstream signaling cascade activated in response to a wide array of stress conditions, as well as plant growth and development.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mitogen activated protein kinase activation loopconserved motifsorthologsparalogsphylogenyevolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

