BACKGROUND
because candida albicans is resistant to several antifungal antibiotics, there is a need to identify other less toxic natural products, particularly antimicrobial proteins, peptides or bacteriocin like inhibitory substances. an attempt has been made to purify and characterise an anti-candida compound produced by enterococcus faecalis.


RESULTS
an anti-candida protein  produced by e. faecalis active against 8 c. albicans strains was characterised and partially purified. the acp showed a broad-spectrum activity against multidrug resistant c. albicans mtcc  <dig>  mtcc  <dig>  mtcc  <dig>  ncim  <dig>  ncim  <dig> and di. it was completely inactivated by treatment with proteinase k and partially by pronase e.

the acp retained biological stability after heat-treatment at 90°c for  <dig> min, maintained activity over a ph range 6– <dig>  and remained active after treatment with α-amylase, lipase, organic solvents, and detergents. the antimicrobial activity of the e. faecalis strain was found exclusively in the extracellular filtrate produced in the late logarithmic growth phase. the highest activity  against c. albicans mtcc  <dig> was recorded at  <dig> h of incubation, and activity decreased thereafter. the peptide showed very low haemagglutination and haemolytic activities against human red blood cells. the antimicrobial substance was purified by salt-fractionation and chromatography.

partially purified acp had a molecular weight of approximately  <dig> kda in tricine-page analysis. the  <dig> amino acid n terminal sequence was obtained by edman degradation. the peptide was de novo sequenced by esi-ms, and the deduced combined sequence when compared to other bacteriocins and antimicrobial peptide had no significant sequence similarity.


CONCLUSIONS
the inhibitory activity of the test strain is due to the synthesis of an antimicrobial protein. to our knowledge, this is the first report on the isolation of a promising non-haemolytic anti-candida protein from e. faecalis that might be used to treat candidiasis especially in immunocompromised patients.

antimicrobial peptidesantimycotic peptidesanti-candidaampenterococcus faecalis

