BACKGROUND
in omics data integration studies, it is common, for a variety of reasons, for some individuals to not be present in all data tables. missing row values are challenging to deal with because most statistical methods cannot be directly applied to incomplete datasets. to overcome this issue, we propose a multiple imputation  approach in a multivariate framework. in this study, we focus on multiple factor analysis  as a tool to compare and integrate multiple layers of information. mi involves filling the missing rows with plausible values, resulting in m completed datasets. mfa is then applied to each completed dataset to produce m different configurations . finally, the m configurations are combined to yield a single consensus solution.


RESULTS
we assessed the performance of our method, named mi-mfa, on two real omics datasets. incomplete artificial datasets with different patterns of missingness were created from these data. the mi-mfa results were compared with two other approaches i.e., regularized iterative mfa  and mean variable imputation . for each configuration resulting from these three strategies, the suitability of the solution was determined against the true mfa configuration obtained from the original data and a comprehensive graphical comparison showing how the mi-, ri- or mvi-mfa configurations diverge from the true configuration was produced. two approaches i.e., confidence ellipses and convex hulls, to visualize and assess the uncertainty due to missing values were also described. we showed how the areas of ellipses and convex hulls increased with the number of missing individuals. a free and easy-to-use code was proposed to implement the mi-mfa method in the r statistical environment.


CONCLUSIONS
we believe that mi-mfa provides a useful and attractive method for estimating the coordinates of individuals on the first mfa components despite missing rows. mi-mfa configurations were close to the true configuration even when many individuals were missing in several data tables. this method takes into account the uncertainty of mi-mfa configurations induced by the missing rows, thereby allowing the reliability of the results to be evaluated.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
multiple omics data integrationmultivariate factor analysismissing individualsmultiple imputationhot-deck imputationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

