BACKGROUND
advances in second-generation sequencing of rna made a near-complete characterization of transcriptomes affordable. however, the reconstruction of full-length mrnas via de novo rna-seq assembly is still difficult due to the complexity of eukaryote transcriptomes with highly similar paralogs and multiple alternative splice variants. here, we present frama, a genome-independent annotation tool for de novo mrna assemblies that addresses several post-assembly tasks, such as reduction of contig redundancy, ortholog assignment, correction of misassembled transcripts, scaffolding of fragmented transcripts and coding sequence identification.


RESULTS
we applied frama to assemble and annotate the transcriptome of the naked mole-rat and assess the quality of the obtained compilation of transcripts with the aid of publicy available naked mole-rat gene annotations.

based on a de novo transcriptome assembly , frama annotated  <dig>  naked mole-rat mrnas , corresponding to  <dig>  genes. the scaffolding of  <dig> genes increased the median sequence information  <dig> -fold. in total, frama detected and corrected  <dig> misassembled genes, which were predominantly caused by fusion of genes. a comparison with three different sources of naked mole-rat transcripts reveals that frama’s gene models are better supported by rna-seq data than any other transcript set. further, our results demonstrate the competitiveness of frama to state of the art genome-based transcript reconstruction approaches.


CONCLUSIONS
frama realizes the de novo construction of a low-redundant transcript catalog for eukaryotes, including the extension and refinement of transcripts. thereby, results delivered by frama provide the basis for comprehensive downstream analyses like gene expression studies or comparative transcriptomics. frama is available at https://github.com/gengit/frama.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqtranscriptome assemblyfull-length mrnanaked mole-ratleibniz-gesellschaftsenatsausschusswettbewerb 2012platzer matthias http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftpl 173/8-1platzer matthias issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

