BACKGROUND
tropical rainforests cover over 50 % of all known plant and animal species and provide a variety of key resources and ecosystem services to humans, largely mediated by metabolic activities of soil microbial communities. a deep analysis of soil microbial communities and their roles in ecological processes would improve our understanding on biogeochemical elemental cycles. however, soil microbial functional gene diversity in tropical rainforests and causative factors remain unclear. geochip, contained almost all of the key functional genes related to biogeochemical cycles, could be used as a specific and sensitive tool for studying microbial gene diversity and metabolic potential. in this study, soil microbial functional gene diversity in tropical rainforest was analyzed by using geochip technology.


RESULTS
gene categories detected in the tropical rainforest soils were related to different biogeochemical processes, such as carbon , nitrogen  and phosphorus  cycling. the relative abundance of genes related to c and p cycling detected mostly derived from the cultured bacteria. c degradation gene categories for substrates ranging from labile c to recalcitrant c were all detected, and gene abundances involved in many recalcitrant c degradation gene categories were significantly  different among three sampling sites. the relative abundance of genes related to n cycling detected was significantly  different, mostly derived from the uncultured bacteria. the gene categories related to ammonification had a high relative abundance. both canonical correspondence analysis and multivariate regression tree analysis showed that soil available n was the most correlated with soil microbial functional gene structure.


CONCLUSIONS
overall high microbial functional gene diversity and different soil microbial metabolic potential for different biogeochemical processes were considered to exist in tropical rainforest. soil available n could be the key factor in shaping the soil microbial functional gene structure and metabolic potential.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tropical rainforestgeochipmicrobial functional gene diversitymicrobial metabolic potentialavailable nitrogenissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

