BACKGROUND
antimicrobial peptides from plants present mechanisms of action that are different from those of conventional defense agents. they are under-explored but have a potential as commercial antimicrobials. bell pepper leaves  are discarded after harvesting the fruit and are sources of bioactive peptides. this work reports the isolation by peptidomics tools, and the identification and partially characterization by computational tools of an antimicrobial peptide from bell pepper leaves, and evidences the usefulness of records and the in silico analysis for the study of plant peptides aiming biotechnological uses.


RESULTS
aqueous extracts from leaves were enriched in peptide by salt fractionation and ultrafiltration. an antimicrobial peptide was isolated by tandem chromatographic procedures. mass spectrometry, automated peptide sequencing and bioinformatics tools were used alternately for identification and partial characterization of the hevein-like peptide, named hev-cann. the computational tools that assisted to the identification of the peptide included blastp, psi-blast, clustalomega, peptidecutter, and protparam; conventional protein databases  as mascot, protein-db, genbank-db, refseq, swiss-prot, and uniprotkb; specific for peptides db as amper, apd <dig>  camp, lamps, and phytamp; other tools included in expasy for proteomics; the bioactive peptide databases, and the pepper genome database. the hev-cann sequence presented  <dig> amino acid residues,  <dig>  da, theoretical pi-value of  <dig> , and four disulfide bonds. it was stable, and it has inhibited the growth of phytopathogenic bacteria and a fungus. hev-cann presented a chitin-binding domain in their sequence. there was a high identity and a positive alignment of hev-cann sequence in various databases, but there was not a complete identity, suggesting that hev-cann may be produced by ribosomal synthesis, which is in accordance with its constitutive nature.


CONCLUSIONS
computational tools for proteomics and databases are not adjusted for short sequences, which hampered hev-cann identification. the adjustment of statistical tests in large databases for proteins is an alternative to promote the significant identification of peptides. the development of specific db for plant antimicrobial peptides, with information about peptide sequences, functional genomic data, structural motifs and domains of molecules, functional domains, and peptide-biomolecule interactions are valuable and necessary.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hevein-likeantimicrobial peptidebell pepperplant defensepeptidomicscomputational toolsbioinformaticsbiotechnology11th international conference of the ab3c + brazilian symposium of bioinformatics x-meetingsão paulo, brazil 3- <dig> november  <dig> http://x-meeting.com/2015/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

