BACKGROUND
leucomeris decora and nouelia insignis  are narrowly and allopatrically distributed species, separated by the important biogeographic boundary tanaka line in southwest china. previous morphological, cytogenetic and molecular studies suggested that l. decora is sister to n. insignis. however, it is less clear how the two species diverged, whether in full isolation or occurring gene flow across the tanaka line. here, we performed a molecular study at the population level to characterize genetic differentiation and decipher phylogeographic history in two closely related species based on variation examined in plastid and nuclear dnas using a coalescent-based approach.


RESULTS
these morphologically distinct species share plastid dna  haplotypes. in contrast, bayesian analysis of nuclear dna  uncovered two distinct clusters corresponding to l. decora and n. insignis. based on the ima analysis, no strong indication of migration was detected based on both cpdna and ndna sequences. the molecular data pointed to a major west-east split in nuclear dna between the two species corresponding with the tanaka line. the coalescent time estimate for all cpdna haplotypes dated to the mid-late pleistocene. the estimated demographic parameters showed that the population size of l. decora was similar to that of n. insignis and both experienced limited demographic fluctuations recently.


CONCLUSIONS
the study revealed comprehensive species divergence and phylogeographic histories of n. insignis and l. decora divided by the tanaka line. the phylogeographic pattern inferred from cpdna reflected ancestrally shared polymorphisms without post-divergence gene flow between species. the marked genealogical lineage divergence in ndna provided some indication of tanaka line for its role as a barrier to plant dispersal, and lent support to its importance in promoting strong population structure and allopatric divergence.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
leucomeris decoranouelia insignisplastid dnanuclear dnagenetic divergencemigrationtanaka lineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

