BACKGROUND
a validated method for assessing the visual characteristics of body condition from photographs , would be a useful initial screening tool for client-owned dogs.

methods
in this retrospective study, photographs taken before and after weight loss from  <dig> overweight and obese dogs attending a weight management referral clinic were used in designing and testing the feasibility of vbcs. observers with a range of experience examined the photographs, and estimated body condition indirectly  using three different methods. in the first method , the ratio of abdominal width to thoracic width  was measured, and cut-points used to determine body condition; the second method  involved semi-quantitative examination using visual descriptors of bcs; the third  was a combined approach whereby a:t ratio was first determined, and the final score modified if necessary after assessing photographs.


RESULTS
when an experienced observer performed vbcs, there were moderate-to-good associations between body fat  and the three vbcs methods , and also moderate-to-substantial agreement with actual bcs . for operators with a range of experience, moderate-to-substantial agreement was generally seen between actual bcs and the scores determined by all three methods , but the strength of agreement varied amongst observers. age, sex, breed, coat length, and coat colour had no significant effect on vbcs . compared with ideal weight and obese dogs, errors in assessing body condition were more common for overweight dogs  by vbcsadjusted , and vbcssubjective , but not by vbcsmeasured . for vbcsadjusted, body condition was most often overestimated whilst, for vbcssubjective, body condition was most often under-estimated.


CONCLUSIONS
an estimate of body condition can be obtained from an indirect assessment of photographs, but performance varies amongst observers.

keywords
canineobesitybody condition scoreadipose tissuehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003551royal caninjxr10540german alexander j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

