BACKGROUND
the molecular behavior of biological systems can be described in terms of three fundamental components:  the physical entities,  the interactions among these entities, and  the dynamics of these entities and interactions. the mechanisms that drive complex disease can be productively viewed in the context of the perturbations of these components. one challenge in this regard is to identify the pathways altered in specific diseases. to address this challenge, gene set enrichment analysis  and others have been developed, which focus on alterations of individual properties of the entities . however, the dynamics of the interactions with respect to disease have been less well studied .


RESULTS
here, we present a novel method called gene interaction enrichment and network analysis  to identify dysregulated gene interactions, i.e., pairs of genes whose relationships differ between disease and control. four functions are defined to model the biologically relevant gene interactions of cooperation , competition , redundancy , or dependency  among the expression levels. the proposed framework identifies dysregulated interactions and pathways enriched in dysregulated interactions; points out interactions that are perturbed across pathways; and moreover, based on the biological annotation of each type of dysregulated interaction gives clues about the regulatory logic governing the systems level perturbation. we demonstrated the potential of giena using published datasets related to cancer.


CONCLUSIONS
we showed that giena identifies dysregulated pathways that are missed by traditional enrichment methods based on the individual gene properties and that use of traditional methods combined with giena provides coverage of the largest number of relevant pathways. in addition, using the interactions detected by giena, specific gene networks both within and across pathways associated with the relevant phenotypes are constructed and analyzed.

gene-gene interactiondysregulated pathwaysenrichment analysisbad pathway

