BACKGROUND
mango fruits contain a broad spectrum of phenolic compounds which impart potential health benefits; their biosynthesis is catalysed by enzymes in the phenylpropanoid-flavonoid  pathway. the aim of this study was to reveal the variability in genes involved in the pf pathway in three different mango varieties mangifera indica l., a member of the family anacardiaceae: kensington pride , irwin  and nam doc mai  and to determine associations with gene expression and mango flavonoid profiles.


RESULTS
a close evolutionary relationship between mango genes and those from the woody species poplar of the salicaceae family  and grape of the vitaceae family , was revealed through phylogenetic analysis of pf pathway genes. we discovered  <dig> snps in total within coding sequences with an average frequency of one snp every 316 bp. variety iw had the highest snp frequency  while kp and ndm had similar frequencies . the position in the pf pathway appeared to influence the extent of genetic diversity of the encoded enzymes. the entry point enzymes phenylalanine lyase , cinnamate 4-mono-oxygenase  and chalcone synthase  had low levels of snp diversity in their coding sequences, whereas anthocyanidin reductase  showed the highest snp frequency followed by flavonoid 3’-hydroxylase . quantitative pcr revealed characteristic patterns of gene expression that differed between mango peel and flesh, and between varieties.


CONCLUSIONS
the combination of mango expressed sequence tags and availability of well-established reference pf biosynthetic genes from other plant species allowed the identification of coding sequences of genes that may lead to the formation of important flavonoid compounds in mango fruits and facilitated characterisation of single nucleotide polymorphisms between varieties. we discovered an association between the extent of sequence variation and position in the pathway for up-stream genes. the high expression of pal, c4h and chs genes in mango peel compared to flesh is associated with high amounts of total phenolic contents in peels, which suggest that these genes have an influence on total flavonoid levels in mango fruit peel and flesh. in addition, the particularly high expression levels of anr in kp and ndm peels compared to iw peel and the significant accumulation of its product epicatechin gallate  in those extracts reflects the rate-limiting role of anr on ecg biosynthesis in mango.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mango fruitexpressed sequence tagsphenylpropanoid-flavonoid pathwaynucleotide diversitygene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

