BACKGROUND
brachypodium distachyon  has been recognized as a new model species for comparative and functional genomics of cereal and bioenergy crops because it possesses many biological attributes desirable in a model, such as a small genome size, short stature, self-pollinating habit, and short generation cycle. to maximize the utility of brachypodium as a model for basic and applied research it is necessary to develop genomic resources for it. a bac-based physical map is one of them. a physical map will facilitate analysis of genome structure, comparative genomics, and assembly of the entire genome sequence.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  brachypodium bac clones were fingerprinted with the snapshot hicf fingerprinting method and a genome-wide physical map of the brachypodium genome was constructed. the map consisted of  <dig> contigs and  <dig>  clones remained as singletons. the contigs and singletons spanned  <dig> mb. a total of  <dig>  gene-related sequences were detected in the bac end sequences . these gene tags aligned  <dig> contigs with  <dig> mb of rice genome sequence, showing that brachypodium and rice genomes are generally highly colinear. divergent regions were mainly in the rice centromeric regions. a dot-plot of brachypodium contigs against the rice genome sequences revealed remnants of the whole-genome duplication caused by paleotetraploidy, which were previously found in rice and sorghum. brachypodium contigs were anchored to the wheat deletion bin maps with the bes gene-tags, opening the door to brachypodium-triticeae comparative genomics.


CONCLUSIONS
the construction of the brachypodium physical map, and its comparison with the rice genome sequence demonstrated the utility of the snapshot-hicf method in the construction of bac-based physical maps. the map represents an important genomic resource for the completion of brachypodium genome sequence and grass comparative genomics. a draft of the physical map and its comparisons with rice and wheat are available at .

