BACKGROUND
contamination of agricultural commodities with multiple trichothecene mycotoxins, produced by toxigenic fusarium species, is a food safety issue, which greatly affects grain production and marketing worldwide. importantly, exposure to multiple trichothecenes may increase toxicity in animals due to their synergistic and/or additive effects. to address the problem this study aimed to achieve a novel biological trait capable of detoxifying various food and feed contaminating trichothecenes under aerobic and anaerobic conditions and wide range of temperatures.


RESULTS
a highly enriched microbial consortium  capable of transforming eleven trichothecenes to significantly less toxic de-epoxy forms was achieved after prolonged incubation of soil microbial culture with 200 μg/ml deoxynivalenol . dx <dig> demonstrated de-epoxidation activity under aerobic and anaerobic conditions, a greater range of temperatures and around neutral ph. the consortium contains 70% known and 30% unknown bacterial species, dominated by stenotrophomonas species. probably novel bacteria including strains of stenotrophomonas and alkaliphilus-blautia species complex could be involved in aerobic and anaerobic de-epoxidation of trichothecenes, respectively. dx <dig> showed rapid and stable activity by de-epoxidizing 100% of 50 μg/ml deoxynivalenol at 48 h of incubation and retaining de-epoxidation ability after  <dig> subcultures in mineral salts broth . it was able to de-epoxidize high concentration of don , and transformed ten more food contaminating trichothecenes into de-epoxy forms and/or other known/unknown compounds. microbial de-epoxidation rate increased with increasing trichothecene concentrations in the broth media, suggesting that dx <dig> maintains a robust trichothecene detoxifying mechanism. furthermore, the nature of microbial de-epoxidation reaction and inhibition of the reaction by sodium azide and the finding that bacterial cell culture lysate retained activity suggests that certain cytoplasmic reductases may be responsible for the de-epoxidation activity.


CONCLUSIONS
this study reports the enrichment procedure for obtaining an effective and stable microbial consortium dx <dig> capable of de-epoxidizing several food contaminating trichothecene mycotoxins. dx <dig>  which has de-epoxidation ability under wide range of conditions, represents a unique enzymatic source which has great industrial potential for reducing contamination of foods/feeds with multiple trichothecenes, and minimizing their synergistic/additive cytotoxic effects on consumer health.

keywords
biodetoxificationfood contaminationfusarium mycotoxinsmicrobial de-epoxidationtrichothecenesagriculture and agri-food canada/ binational agricultural research and development fund  projectnatural sciences and engineering research council of canada issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

