BACKGROUND
the flavan-3-ols catechin and epicatechin, and their polymerized oligomers, the proanthocyanidins , accumulate to levels of up to 15 % of the total weight of dry seeds of theobroma cacao l. these compounds have been associated with several health benefits in humans. they also play important roles in pest and disease defense throughout the plant. in arabidopsis, the r2r <dig> type myb transcription factor tt <dig> regulates the major genes leading to the synthesis of pa.


RESULTS
to explore the transcriptional regulation of the pa synthesis pathway in cacao, we isolated and characterized an r2r <dig> type myb transcription factor mybpa from cacao. we examined the spatial and temporal gene expression patterns of the tc-mybpa gene and found it to be developmentally expressed in a manner consistent with its involvement in pas and anthocyanin synthesis. functional complementation of an arabidopsis tt <dig> mutant with tc-mybpa suggested that it can functionally substitute the arabidopsis tt <dig> gene. interestingly, in addition to pa accumulation in seeds of the tc-mybpa expressing plants, we also observed an obvious increase of anthocyanidin accumulation in hypocotyls. we observed that overexpression of the tc-mybpa gene resulted in increased expression of several key genes encoding the major structural enzymes of the pa and anthocyanidin pathway, including dfr , ldox  and ban .


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the tc-mybpa gene that encodes an r2r <dig> type myb transcription factor is an arabidopsis tt <dig> like transcription factor, and may be involved in the regulation of both anthocyanin and pa synthesis in cacao. this research may provide molecular tools for breeding of cacao varieties with improved disease resistance and enhanced flavonoid profiles for nutritional and pharmaceutical applications.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
theobroma cacaoproanthocyanidintranscription factortt2issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

