BACKGROUND
it is well known that salinization  has been considered as a major environmental threat to agricultural systems. the aim of this study was to investigate the differences between salt stress and alkali stress in metabolic profiles and nutrient accumulation of wheat; these parameters were also evaluated to determine the physiological adaptive mechanisms by which wheat tolerates alkali stress.


RESULTS
the harmful effect of alkali stress on the growth and photosynthesis of wheat were stronger than those of salt stress. high-ph of alkali stress induced the most of phosphate and metal ions to precipitate; as a result, the availability of nutrients significantly declined. under alkali stress, ca sharply increased in roots, however, it decreased under salt stress. in addition, we detected the  <dig> metabolites that were different among the treatments according to gc-ms analysis, including organic acids, amino acids, sugars/polyols and others. the metabolic data showed salt stress and alkali stress caused different metabolic shifts; alkali stress has a stronger injurious effect on the distribution and accumulation of metabolites than salt stress. these outcomes correspond to specific detrimental effects of a highly ph environment.


CONCLUSIONS
ca had a significant positive correlation with alkali tolerates, and increasing ca concentration can immediately trigger sos na exclusion system and reduce the na injury. salt stress caused metabolic shifts toward gluconeogenesis with increased sugars to avoid osmotic stress; energy in roots and active synthesis in leaves were needed by wheat to develop salt tolerance. alkali stress  significantly inhibited photosynthetic rate; thus, sugar production was reduced, n metabolism was limited, amino acid production was reduced, and glycolysis was inhibited.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
wheatsalt stressalkali stressgrowthphotosynthesismetal elementsfree ionsmetabolitesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

