BACKGROUND
arabidopsis plants were grown on the international space station within specialized hardware that combined a plant growth habitat with a camera system that can capture images at regular intervals of growth. the imaging hardware delivers telemetric data from the iss, specifically images received in real-time from experiments on orbit, providing science without sample return. comparable ground controls were grown in a sister unit that is maintained in the orbital environment simulator at kennedy space center. one of many types of biological data that can be analyzed in this fashion is root morphology. arabidopsis seeds were geminated on orbit on nutrient gel petri plates in a configuration that encouraged growth along the surface of the gel. photos were taken every six hours for the  <dig> days of the experiment.


RESULTS
in the absence of gravity, but the presence of directional light, spaceflight roots remained strongly negatively phototropic and grew in the opposite direction of the shoot growth; however, cultivars ws and col- <dig> displayed two distinct, marked differences in their growth patterns. first, cultivar ws skewed strongly to the right on orbit, while cultivar col- <dig> grew with little deviation away from the light source. second, the spaceflight environment also impacted the rate of growth in arabidopsis. the size of the flight plants  was uniformly smaller than comparably aged ground control plants in both cultivars.


CONCLUSIONS
skewing and waving, thought to be gravity dependent phenomena, occur in spaceflight plants. in the presence of an orienting light source, phenotypic trends in skewing are gravity independent, and the general patterns of directional root growth typified by a given genotype in unit gravity are recapitulated on orbit, although overall growth patterns on orbit are less uniform. skewing appears independent of axial orientation on the iss – suggesting that other tropisms  do not influence skewing. an aspect of the spaceflight environment also retards the rate of early arabidopsis growth.

