BACKGROUND
bone-eating osedax worms have proved to be surprisingly diverse and widespread. including the initial description of this genus in  <dig>  five species that live at depths between  <dig> and  <dig>  m in the eastern and western pacific and in the north atlantic have been named to date. here, we provide molecular and morphological evidence for  <dig> additional evolutionary lineages from monterey bay, california. to assess their phylogenetic relationships and possible status as new undescribed species, we examined dna sequences from two mitochondrial  and three nuclear genes .


RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses identified  <dig> distinct evolutionary lineages. levels of sequence divergence among the undescribed lineages were similar to those found among the named species. the  <dig> lineages clustered into five well-supported clades that also differed for a number of key morphological traits. attempts to determine the evolutionary age of osedax depended on prior assumptions about nucleotide substitution rates. according to one scenario involving a molecular clock calibrated for shallow marine invertebrates, osedax split from its siboglinid relatives about  <dig> million years ago when archeocete cetaceans first appeared and then diversified during the late oligocene and early miocene when toothed and baleen whales appeared. alternatively, the use of a slower clock calibrated for deep-sea annelids suggested that osedax split from its siboglinid relatives during the cretaceous and began to diversify during the early paleocene, at least  <dig> million years before the origin of large marine mammals.


CONCLUSIONS
to help resolve uncertainties about the evolutionary age of osedax, we suggest that the fossilized bones from cretaceous marine reptiles and late oligocene cetaceans be examined for possible trace fossils left by osedax roots. regardless of the outcome, the present molecular evidence for strong phylogenetic concordance across five separate genes suggests that the undescribed osedax lineages comprise evolutionarily significant units that have been separate from one another for many millions of years. these data coupled with ongoing morphological analyses provide a solid foundation for their future descriptions as new species.

