BACKGROUND
biomphalaria glabrata is an intermediate snail host for schistosoma mansoni, one of the important schistosomes infecting man. b. glabrata/s. mansoni provides a useful model system for investigating the intimate interactions between host and parasite. examining differential gene expression between s. mansoni-exposed schistosome-resistant and susceptible snail lines will identify genes and pathways that may be involved in snail defences.


RESULTS
we have developed a  <dig> element cdna microarray for b. glabrata containing clones from orestes  libraries, suppression subtractive hybridization  libraries and clones identified in previous expression studies. snail haemocyte rna, extracted from parasite-challenged resistant and susceptible snails,  <dig> to  <dig> h post-exposure to s. mansoni, was hybridized to the custom made cdna microarray and  <dig> differentially expressed genes or gene clusters were identified,  <dig> resistant-associated and  <dig> susceptible-associated. quantitative pcr analysis verified the cdna microarray results for representative transcripts. differentially expressed genes were annotated and clustered using gene ontology  terminology and kyoto encyclopaedia of genes and genomes  pathway analysis. 61% of the identified differentially expressed genes have no known function including the  <dig> susceptible strain-specific transcripts. resistant strain-specific expression of genes implicated in innate immunity of invertebrates was identified, including hydrolytic enzymes such as cathepsin l, a cysteine proteinase involved in lysis of phagocytosed particles; metabolic enzymes such as ornithine decarboxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the production of polyamines, important in inflammation and infection processes, as well as scavenging damaging free radicals produced during production of reactive oxygen species; stress response genes such as hsp70; proteins involved in signalling, such as importin  <dig> and copine  <dig>  cytoplasmic intermediate filament  protein and transcription enzymes such as elongation factor 1α and ef- <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
production of the first cdna microarray for profiling gene expression in b. glabrata provides a foundation for expanding our understanding of pathways and genes involved in the snail internal defence system . we demonstrate resistant strain-specific expression of genes potentially associated with the snail ids, ranging from signalling and inflammation responses through to lysis of proteinacous products  and processing/degradation of these targeted products by ubiquitination.

