BACKGROUND
streptococcus agalactiae is a major cause of bovine mastitis, which is the dominant health disorder affecting milk production within the dairy industry and is responsible for substantial financial losses to the industry worldwide. however, there is considerable evidence for host adaptation  within s. agalactiae, with both bovine and human sourced isolates showing a high degree of distinctiveness, suggesting differing ability to cause mastitis. here, we  generate rnaseq data from three s. agalactiae isolates  and  compare publicly available whole genome shotgun sequence data from an additional  <dig> isolates, obtained from six host species, to elucidate possible genetic factors/adaptations likely important for s. agalactiae growth and survival in the bovine mammary gland.


RESULTS
tests for differential expression showed distinct expression profiles for the three isolates when grown in bovine milk. a key finding for the two putatively bovine adapted isolates was the up regulation of a lactose metabolism operon  that was strongly correlated with the bovine environment . multi locus sequence typing of all genome sequences and phylogenetic analysis using conserved operon genes from 44 s. agalactiae isolates and  <dig> additional streptococcus species provided strong evidence for acquisition of the operon via multiple lateral gene transfer events, with all streptococcus species known to be major causes of mastitis, identified as possible donors. furthermore, lactose fermentation tests were only positive for isolates possessing lac. <dig>  combined, these findings suggest that lactose metabolism is likely an important adaptation to the bovine environment. additional up regulation in the bovine adapted isolates included genes involved in copper homeostasis, metabolism of purine, pyrimidine, glycerol and glucose, and possibly aminoglycoside antibiotic resistance.


CONCLUSIONS
we detected several genetic factors likely important in s. agalactiae’s adaptation to the bovine environment, in particular lactose metabolism. of concern is the up regulation of a putative antibiotic resistance gene  that might reflect an adaptation to the use of aminoglycoside antibiotics within this environment.

streptococcus agalactiaebovine adaptedrnaseqlactose operonlateral gene transfermastitisdifferential gene expression

