BACKGROUND
pose generation error is usually quantified as the difference between the geometry of the pose generated by the docking software and that of the same molecule co-crystallised with the considered protein. surprisingly, the impact of this error on binding affinity prediction is yet to be systematically analysed across diverse protein-ligand complexes.


RESULTS
against commonly-held views, we have found that pose generation error has generally a small impact on the accuracy of binding affinity prediction. this is also true for large pose generation errors and it is not only observed with machine-learning scoring functions, but also with classical scoring functions such as autodock vina. furthermore, we propose a procedure to correct a substantial part of this error which consists of calibrating the scoring functions with re-docked, rather than co-crystallised, poses. in this way, the relationship between vina-generated protein-ligand poses and their binding affinities is directly learned. as a result, test set performance after this error-correcting procedure is much closer to that of predicting the binding affinity in the absence of pose generation error . we evaluated several strategies, obtaining better results for those using a single docked pose per ligand than those using multiple docked poses per ligand.


CONCLUSIONS
binding affinity prediction is often carried out on the docked pose of a known binder rather than its co-crystallised pose. our results suggest than pose generation error is in general far less damaging for binding affinity prediction than it is currently believed. another contribution of our study is the proposal of a procedure that largely corrects for this error. the resulting machine-learning scoring function is freely available at http://istar.cse.cuhk.edu.hk/rf-score- <dig> tgz
and http://ballester.marseille.inserm.fr/rf-score- <dig> tgz.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
molecular dockingbinding affinitydrug discoverymachine learning11th international meeting on computational intelligence methods for bioinformatics and biostatistics  cibb 2014cambridge, uk 26- <dig> june  <dig> http://www.cussb.unisr.it/cibb2014/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

