BACKGROUND
the nasopharyngeal  microbiota plays an important role in bovine health, comprising a rich and diverse microbial community. the nasopharynx is also the niche for potentially pathogenic agents which are associated with bovine respiratory disease , a serious and costly illness in feedlot cattle. we used  <dig> beef heifers from a closed and disease-free herd to assess the dynamics of the np microbiota of cattle that are transported to a feedlot. cattle were sampled prior to transport to the feedlot  and at days  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> 


RESULTS
the structure of the np microbiota changed significantly over the course of the study, with the largest shift occurring between day  <dig>  and day  <dig> . phylogenetic diversity and richness increased following feedlot placement . the genera pasteurella, bacillus, and proteus were enriched at day  <dig>  streptococcus and acinetobacter at day  <dig>  bifidobacterium at day  <dig>  and mycoplasma at day  <dig>  the functional potential of the np microbiota was assessed using picrust, revealing that replication and repair, as well as translation pathways, were more relatively abundant in day  <dig> samples. these differences were driven mostly by mycoplasma. although eight cattle were culture-positive for the brd-associated bacterium pasteurella multocida at one or more sampling times, none were culture-positive for mannheimia haemolytica or histophilus somni.


CONCLUSIONS
this study investigated the effect that feedlot placement has on the np microbiota of beef cattle over a 14-d period. within two days of transport to the feedlot, the np microbiota changed significantly, increasing in both phylogenetic diversity and richness. these results demonstrate that there is an abrupt shift in the np microbiota of cattle after transportation to a feedlot. this may have importance for understanding why cattle are most susceptible to brd after feedlot placement.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cattlenasopharyngeal microbiotamicrobiomefeedlotbovine respiratory disease16s rrna genelivestockalberta livestock and meat agency ltd. beef cattle research council issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

