BACKGROUND
differences in cranial morphology arise due to changes in fundamental cell processes like migration, proliferation, differentiation and cell death driven by genetic programs. signaling between fibroblast growth factors  and their receptors  affect these processes during head development and mutations in fgfrs result in congenital diseases including fgfr-related craniosynostosis syndromes. current research in model organisms focuses primarily on how these mutations change cell function local to sutures under the hypothesis that prematurely closing cranial sutures contribute to skull dysmorphogenesis. though these studies have provided fundamentally important information contributing to the understanding of craniosynostosis conditions, knowledge of changes in cell function local to the sutures leave change in overall three-dimensional cranial morphology largely unexplained. here we investigate growth of the skull in two inbred mouse models each carrying one of two gain-of-function mutations in fgfr <dig> on neighboring amino acids  that in humans cause apert syndrome, one of the most severe fgfr-related craniosynostosis syndromes. we examine late embryonic skull development and suture patency in fgfr <dig> apert syndrome mice between embryonic day  <dig>  and birth and quantify the effects of these mutations on 3d skull morphology, suture patency and growth.


RESULTS
we show in mice what studies in humans can only infer: specific cranial growth deviations occur prenatally and worsen with time in organisms carrying these fgfr <dig> mutations. we demonstrate that: 1) distinct skull morphologies of each mutation group are established by e <dig> ; 2) cranial suture patency patterns differ between mice carrying these mutations and their unaffected littermates; 3) the prenatal skull grows differently in each mutation group; and 4) unique fgfr2-related cranial morphologies are exacerbated by late embryonic growth patterns.


CONCLUSIONS
our analysis of mutation-driven changes in cranial growth provides a previously missing piece of knowledge necessary for explaining variation in emergent cranial morphologies and may ultimately be helpful in managing human cases carrying these same mutations. this information is critical to the understanding of craniofacial development, disease and evolution and may contribute to the evaluation of incipient therapeutic strategies.

fibroblast growth factor receptor signalingcranial developmentskull growthsuturecraniosynostosisapert syndrome

