BACKGROUND
guanonine-protein  is known as molecular switches inside cells, and is very important in signals transmission from outside to inside cell. especially in transport protein, most of g-proteins play an important role in membrane trafficking; necessary for transferring proteins and other molecules to a variety of destinations outside and inside of the cell. the function of membrane trafficking is controlled by g-proteins via guanosine triphosphate  binding sites. the gtp binding sites active g-proteins initiated to membrane vesicles by interacting with specific effector proteins. without the interaction from gtp binding sites, g-proteins could not be active in membrane trafficking and consequently cause many diseases, i.e., cancer, parkinson… thus it is very important to identify gtp binding sites in membrane trafficking, in particular, and in transport protein, in general.


RESULTS
we developed the proposed model with a cross-validation and examined with an independent dataset. we achieved an accuracy of  <dig> % for evaluating with cross-validation and  <dig> % for examining the performance with the independent data set. for newly discovered transport protein sequences, our approach performed remarkably better than similar methods such as gtpbinder, nsitepred and targetsos. moreover, a friendly web server was developed for identifying gtp binding sites in transport proteins available for all users.


CONCLUSIONS
we approached a computational technique using pssm profiles and saaps for identifying gtp binding residues in transport proteins. when we included saaps into pssm profiles, the predictive performance achieved a significant improvement in all measurement metrics. furthermore, the proposed method could be a power tool for determining new proteins that belongs into gtp binding sites in transport proteins and can provide useful information for biologists.

keywords
transport proteingtp binding siteposition specific scoring matrixsignificant amino acid pairsradial basis function network15th international conference on bioinformatics  incob 2016queenstown, singapore 21- <dig> september  <dig> http://incob <dig> apbionet.org/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

