BACKGROUND
there is a need to improve vaccination against respiratory pathogens in calves by stimulation of local immunity at the site of pathogen entry at an early stage in life. ideally such a vaccine preparation would not be inhibited by the maternally derived antibodies. additionally, localized immune response at the site of infection is also crucial to control infection at the site of entry of virus. the present study investigated the response to an intranasal bovine parainfluenza  <dig> virus  antigen preparation encapsulated in plga  nanoparticles in the presence of pre-existing anti-bpi3v antibodies in young calves and comparing it to a commercially available bpi3v respiratory vaccine.


RESULTS
there was a significant  increase in bpi3v-specific iga in the nasal mucus of the bpi3v nanoparticle vaccine group alone. following administration of the nanoparticle vaccine an early immune response was induced that continued to grow until the end of study and was not observed in the other treatment groups. virus specific serum igg response to both the nanoparticle vaccine and commercial live attenuated vaccine showed a significant  rise over the period of study. however, the cell mediated immune response observed didn’t show any significant rise in any of the treatment groups.


CONCLUSIONS
calves administered the intranasal nanoparticle vaccine induced significantly greater mucosal iga responses, compared to the other treatment groups. this suggests an enhanced, sustained mucosal-based immunological response to the bpi3v nanoparticle vaccine in the face of pre-existing antibodies to bpi3v, which are encouraging and potentially useful characteristics of a candidate vaccine. however, ability of nanoparticle vaccine in eliciting cell mediated immune response needs further investigation. more sustained local mucosal immunity induced by nanoparticle vaccine has obvious potential if it translates into enhanced protective immunity in the face of virus outbreak.

keywords
nanoparticleplgalivestockvaccinebovine respiratory diseaseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

