BACKGROUND
candida parapsilosis is known to show limited genetic variability, despite different karyotypes and phenotypes have been described. to further investigate this aspect, a collection of  <dig> sensu strictu c. parapsilosis independent isolates from  <dig> geographic regions  and different body sites  were analysed for their genetic and phenotypic traits. amplification fragment length polymorphism  analysis was used to confirm species identification and to evaluate intraspecific genetic variability. phenotypic characterisation included clinically relevant traits, such as drug susceptibility, in vitro biofilm formation and aspartyl protease secretion.


RESULTS
aflp genotyping showed little variation among isolates, when the presence/absence of bands was considered. however, when aflp profiles were compared by relative intensity for each fragment, a significant level of variation and geographical clustering was observed. all isolates were found to be susceptible to commonly used antifungals, although a reduced susceptibility to echinocandins was observed in all isolates. c. parapsilosis isolates from different geographic origins varied in the number of biofilm producers, with a higher prevalence of producers isolated in hungary and argentina. the frequency of secreted proteinase producers also varied in isolates obtained from different areas, with a higher number of proteinase producers found in italy and new zealand. interestingly, biofilm production and proteinase secretion were negatively correlated. this finding could be explained by assuming that proteinase activity plays a role in detachment and release from a mature biofilm, via degradation of c. parapsilosis adhesins and/or extracellular matrix components, as observed for other microorganisms.


CONCLUSIONS
the low number of polymorphic aflp bands  obtained for c. parapsilosis isolates is in agreement with the limited sequence variability described for this species. however, when band intensity was included in the analysis, geographical clustering was observed. expression of virulence factors varied among strains isolated from different geographical regions, with biofilm and proteinase producers more frequently isolated from hungary and italy, respectively.

