BACKGROUND
the continuous and non-synchronous nature of postnatal male germ-cell development has impeded stage-specific resolution of molecular events of mammalian meiotic prophase in the testis. here the juvenile onset of spermatogenesis in mice is analyzed by combining cytological and transcriptomic data in a novel computational analysis that allows decomposition of the transcriptional programs of spermatogonia and meiotic prophase substages.


RESULTS
germ cells from testes of individual mice were obtained at two-day intervals from  <dig> to 18 days post-partum , prepared as surface-spread chromatin and immunolabeled for meiotic stage-specific protein markers . eight stages were discriminated cytologically by combinatorial antibody labeling, and rna-seq was performed on the same samples. independent principal component analyses of cytological and transcriptomic data yielded similar patterns for both data types, providing strong evidence for substage-specific gene expression signatures. a novel permutation-based maximum covariance analysis  was developed to map co-expressed transcripts to one or more of the eight meiotic prophase substages, thereby linking distinct molecular programs to cytologically defined cell states. expression of meiosis-specific genes is not substage-limited, suggesting regulation of substage transitions at other levels.


CONCLUSIONS
this integrated analysis provides a general method for resolving complex cell populations. here it revealed not only features of meiotic substage-specific gene expression, but also a network of substage-specific transcription factors and relationships to potential target genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
meiosisspermatogenesismaximum covariance analysismousetranscriptomerna-seqhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000057national institute of general medical sciences gm99640http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001691japan society for the promotion of science http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000054national cancer institute ca034196issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

