BACKGROUND
jasmonic acid  is a well-characterized signaling molecule in plant
defense responses. however, its relationships with other signal molecules in
secondary metabolite production induced by endophytic fungus are largely
unknown. atractylodes lancea  is a traditional chinese
medicinal plant that produces antimicrobial volatiles oils. we incubated
plantlets of a. lancea with the fungus gilmaniella sp.
al <dig>  to research how ja interacted with other signal molecules in volatile
oil production.


RESULTS
fungal inoculation increased ja generation and volatile oil accumulation. to
investigate whether ja is required for volatile oil production, plantlets
were treated with ja inhibitors ibuprofen  and nordihydroguaiaretic
acid. the inhibitors suppressed both ja and volatile oil production, but
fungal inoculation could still induce volatile oils. plantlets were further
treated with the nitric oxide -specific scavenger
2-- <dig> , <dig> -tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3-oxide potassium
salt , the h2o <dig> inhibitors diphenylene iodonium
 and catalase , and the salicylic acid  biosynthesis
inhibitors paclobutrazol and 2-aminoindan-2-phosphonic acid. with fungal
inoculation, ibu did not inhibit no production, and ja generation was
significantly suppressed by cptio, showing that ja may act as a downstream
signal of the no pathway. exogenous h2o <dig> could reverse
the inhibitory effects of cptio on ja generation, indicating that no
mediates ja induction by the fungus through
h2o2-dependent pathways. with fungal inoculation, the
h2o <dig> scavenger dpi/cat could inhibit ja
generation, but ibu could not inhibit h2o <dig> production,
implying that h2o <dig> directly mediated ja generation.
finally, ja generation was enhanced when sa production was suppressed, and
vice versa.


CONCLUSIONS
jasmonic acid acts as a downstream signaling molecule in no- and
h2o2-mediated volatile oil accumulation induced by
endophytic fungus and has a complementary interaction with the sa signaling
pathway.

atractylodes lanceaendophytic fungivolatile oiljasmonic acidmedicinal herb

