BACKGROUND
the devastating viral disease of small ruminants namely peste des petits ruminants  declared as target for “global eradication” in  <dig> by the food and agriculture organization  and the world organization for animal health . for a successful eradication campaign, molecular diagnostic tools are preferred for their specificity, efficacy and robustness to compliment prophylactic measures and surveillance methods. however, molecular tools have a few limitations including, costly equipment, multi-step template preparation protocols, target amplification and analysis that restrict their use to the sophisticated laboratory settings. as reverse transcription-loop mediated isothermal amplification assay  has such an intrinsic potential for point of care diagnosis, this study focused on the genetic detection of causative ppr virus  in field conditions. it involves the use of a sample buffer that can precipitate out virus envelope and capsid proteins through ammonium sulphate precipitation and exposes viral rna, present in the clinical sample, to the lamp reaction mixture.


RESULTS
the test was evaluated using  <dig> pprv cultures, and a total of  <dig> nasal swabs . the rt-lamp was compared with the reverse transcription-pcr  and real-time quantitative rt-pcr  for its relative specificity, sensitivity and robustness. rt-lamp detected pprv in all pprv cultures in or less than 30 min. its detection limit was of  <dig> tcid <dig>  per ml with 10-fold higher sensitivity than that of rt-pcr. in  <dig> % of the field samples, rt-lamp detected pprv within 35– <dig> min. the analytical sensitivity and specificity of the rt-lamp were equivalent to that of the rt-qpcr. the time of detection of pprv decreased by at least forty minutes or 3– <dig> h in case of in the rt-lamp as compared with the rt-qpcr and the rt-pcr, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
the sensitive and specific rt-lamp test developed in this study targeting a small fragment of the n gene of pprv is a rapid, reliable and applicable molecular diagnostic test of choice under the field conditions. rt-lamp requiring minimal training offers a very useful tool for ppr diagnosis especially during the “global ppr eradication campaign”.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
peste des petits ruminants virus reverse-transcription loop mediated isothermal amplification nucleocapsid gene robust diagnosishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004493international atomic energy agency14567khan qaiser mahmood issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

