BACKGROUND
the increased availability of high-throughput datasets has revealed a need for reproducible and accessible analyses which can quantitatively relate molecular changes to phenotypic behavior. existing tools for quantitative analysis generally require expert knowledge.


RESULTS
cellpd  facilitates quantitative phenotype analysis, allowing users to fit mathematical models of cell population dynamics without specialized training. cellpd requires one input  and generates multiple outputs including parameter estimation reports, high-quality plots, and minable xml files. we validated cellpd’s estimates by comparing it with a previously published tool  and with microsoft excel’s built-in functions. cellpd correctly estimates the net growth rate of cell cultures and is more robust to data sparsity than cellgrowth. when we tested cellpd’s usability, biologists  ran cellpd correctly on sample data within 30 min. to demonstrate cellpd’s ability to aid in the analysis of high throughput data, we created a synthetic high content screening  data set, where a simulated cell line is exposed to two hypothetical drug compounds at several doses. cellpd correctly estimates the drug-dependent birth, death, and net growth rates. furthermore, cellpd’s estimates quantify and distinguish between the cytostatic and cytotoxic effects of both drugs—analyses that cannot readily be performed with spreadsheet software such as microsoft excel or without specialized computational expertise and programming environments.


CONCLUSIONS
cellpd is an open source tool that can be used by scientists  to quantify key aspects of cell phenotypes . early applications of cellpd may include drug effect quantification, functional analysis of gene knockout experiments, data quality control, minable big data generation, and integration of biological data with computational models.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
phenotype digitizergrowth ratenet birth ratephenotype comparisoncell population dynamicsparameter estimationcomputational modelingmathematical modelsopen sourceuser friendlymulticelldshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of health5u54ca1439071r01ca180149agus david b. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100001006breast cancer research foundationagus david b. james h. zumberge research and innovation fundusc provost's phd fellowship issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

