BACKGROUND
integrin activation in response to inside-out signaling serves as the basis for rapid leukocyte arrest on endothelium, migration, and mobilization of immune cells. integrin-dependent adhesion is controlled by the conformational state of the molecule, which is regulated by seven-transmembrane guanine nucleotide binding protein-coupled receptors . α4β1-integrin  is expressed on leukocytes, hematopoietic progenitors, stem cells, hematopoietic cancer cells, and others. vla- <dig> conformation is rapidly up-regulated by inside-out signaling through gαi-coupled gpcrs and down-regulated by gαs-coupled gpcrs. however, other signaling pathways, which include nitric oxide-dependent signaling, have been implicated in the regulation of cell adhesion. the goal of the current report was to study the effect of nitric oxide/cgmp signaling pathway on vla- <dig> conformational regulation.


RESULTS
using fluorescent ligand binding to evaluate the integrin activation state on live cells in real-time, we show that several small molecules, which specifically modulate nitric oxide/cgmp signaling pathway, as well as a cell permeable cgmp analog, can rapidly down-modulate binding of a vla- <dig> specific ligand on cells pre-activated through three gαi-coupled receptors: wild type cxcr <dig>  cxcr <dig> , and a non-desensitizing mutant of formyl peptide receptor . upon signaling, we detected rapid changes in the ligand dissociation rate. the dissociation rate after inside-out integrin de-activation was similar to the rate for resting cells. in a vla-4/vcam-1-specific myeloid cell adhesion system, inhibition of the vla- <dig> affinity change by nitric oxide had a statistically significant effect on real-time cell aggregation.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that nitric oxide/cgmp signaling pathway can rapidly down-modulate the affinity state of the vla- <dig> binding pocket, especially under the condition of sustained gαi-coupled gpcr signaling, generated by a non-desensitizing receptor mutant. this suggests a fundamental role of this pathway in de-activation of integrin-dependent cell adhesion.

