BACKGROUND
habitat fragmentation has accelerated within the last century, but may have been ongoing over longer time scales. we analyzed the timing and genetic consequences of fragmentation in two isolated lake-dwelling brown trout populations. they are from the same river system  and have been isolated from downstream anadromous trout by dams established ca. 600– <dig> years ago. for reference, we included ten other anadromous populations and two hatchery strains. based on analysis of  <dig> microsatellite loci we investigated if the lake populations have been naturally genetically differentiated from anadromous trout for thousands of years, or have diverged recently due to the establishment of dams.


RESULTS
divergence time estimates were based on 1) approximate bayesian computation and 2) a coalescent-based isolation-with-gene-flow model. both methods suggested divergence times ca. 600– <dig> years bp, providing strong evidence for establishment of dams in the medieval as the factor causing divergence. bayesian cluster analysis showed influence of stocked trout in several reference populations, but not in the focal lake and anadromous populations. estimates of effective population size using a linkage disequilibrium method ranged from  <dig> to >  <dig>  in all but one anadromous population, but were lower  in the lake populations.


CONCLUSIONS
we show that genetic divergence of lake-dwelling trout in two danish lakes reflects establishment of water mills and impassable dams ca. 600– <dig> years ago rather than a natural genetic population structure. although effective population sizes of the two lake populations are not critically low they may ultimately limit response to selection and thereby future adaptation. our results demonstrate that populations may have been affected by anthropogenic disturbance over longer time scales than normally assumed.

approximate bayesian computationdivergence timeeffective population sizehabitat fragmentationisolation-with-gene-flow modelmicrosatellite dna

