BACKGROUND
each caulobacter crescentus cell division yields two distinct cell types: a flagellated swarmer cell and a non-motile stalked cell. the swarmer cell is further distinguished from the stalked cell by an inability to reinitiate dna replication, by the physical properties of its nucleoid, and its discrete program of gene expression. specifically, with regard to the latter feature, many of the genes involved in dna replication are not transcribed in swarmer cells.


RESULTS
we show that for one of these genes involved in dna replication, gyrb, its pattern of temporal expression depends upon an  <dig> base pair promoter region with strong resemblance to the caulobacter crescentus σ <dig> consensus promoter sequence; regulation does not appear to be affected by the general strength of the promoter activity, as mutations that increased its conformity with the consensus did not affect its cell-cycle expression pattern. transcription from the gyrb promoter in vitro required only the presence of the σ <dig> rna polymerase  and the requisite nucleoside triphosphates, although a distinct binding activity, present in crude whole-cell extracts, formed a complex gyrb promoter dna. we also assayed the effect on gyrb expression in strains containing mutations in either smc or dps, two genes encoding proteins that condense dna. however we found there was no change in the temporal pattern of gyrb transcription in strains containing deletions in either of these genes.


CONCLUSIONS
these experiments demonstrate that gyrb transcription does not require any auxiliary factors, suggesting that temporal regulation is not dependent upon an activator protein. swarmer-specific silencing may not be attributable to the observed physical difference in the swarmer cell nucleoid, since mutations in either smc or dps, two genes encoding proteins that condense dna, did not alter the temporal pattern of gyrb transcription in strains containing deletions in either of these genes. rather a repressor that specifically recognizes sequences in the gyrb promoter region that are also probably essential for transcription, is likely to be responsible for controlling cell cycle expression.

