BACKGROUND
two nuclear localization sequences  in influenza a virus nucleoprotein  have been demonstrated to be critical for nuclear import of np and viral ribonucleoprotein complexes. however, a deletion mutant lacking these two signals was still able to localize to the nucleus suggesting the presence of yet another  potential nls in the np protein. in order to identify the nature of this potential nls signal in the np of a ws/33l influenza virus a strain, we utilized the tools of bioinformatics coupled with functional experimental analyses in the present study.


RESULTS
comparison of the deduced aa sequence of np of ws/33l strain with the published ws/ <dig> np sequences revealed that a single amino acid  change  at position  <dig> results in converting the flanking regions  into two classical overlapping bipartite nls . genbank search revealed that  <dig> out of  <dig> published np sequences contain a similar arg at position  <dig>  with a 100% homology to the obpnls region. various np-green fluorescent protein  fusion constructs with and without the signal  were utilized to understand the functional nature of this signal. we analyzed the transport competency of the expressed chimeric proteins in terms of their cellular localization by confocal immunofluorescence assay. our analysis revealed that all np-gfp constructs containing the wild-type  sequence localized predominantly to the nucleus. constructs lacking the obpnls or constructs with reverse mutation  on the other hand exhibited predominant cytoplasmic localization pattern. interestingly, when the  <dig> aa obpnls was fused with an unrelated viral protein  that has been known to be cytoplasmic protein, the chimeric protein  was efficiently transported into the nucleus, indicating an efficient nuclear transport function of the 32-residue obpnls in the np of ws/33l strain of influenza a virus.


CONCLUSIONS
this report while not only establishing a new nls in the influenza a virus strain, it also reinforces the idea that proper application of bioinformatics-coupled experimental analysis serves as a powerful tool in identifying new functional signals in proteins of interest.

