BACKGROUND
plant micrornas  are involved in various biological pathways and stress responses as negative regulators at the posttranscriptional level. abscisic acid  is a key signaling molecule that mediates plant stress response by activating many stress-related genes. although some mirnas in plants are previously identified to respond to aba, a comprehensive profile of aba-responsive mirnas has not yet been elucidated.


RESULTS
here, we identified mirnas responding to exogenous application of aba, and their predicted target genes in the model plant organism tomato . deep sequencing of small rnas from aba-treated and untreated tomatoes revealed that mirnas can be up- or down-regulated upon treatment with aba. a total of  <dig> mirnas were detected , of those,  <dig> mirnas which had an abundance over two tpm  were selected for differential expression analysis. we identified  <dig>  mirnas that respond to exogenous aba treatment with a change in expression level of |log2fc|≥ <dig> .  <dig> of these mirnas  were expressed at significantly different levels |log2fc|≥ <dig> between treatments. furthermore, stem-loop rt-pcr was applied to validate the rna-seq data. target prediction and analysis of the corresponding aba-responsive transcriptome data uncovered that differentially expressed mirnas are involved in condition stress and pathogen resistance, growth and development. among them, approximately  <dig> mirnas were predicted to target transcription factors and pathogen resistance genes. some mirnas had functional overlap in biotic and abiotic stress. most of these mirnas were down-regulated following exposure to exogenous aba, while their related target genes were inversely up-regulated, which is consistent with their negative regulatory role in gene expression.


CONCLUSIONS
exogenous aba application influences the composition and expression level of tomato mirnas. aba mainly down-regulates mirnas that their target genes involve in abiotic stress adaption and disease resistance. aba might increase expression of stress-related genes via mirna-mediated posttranscriptional regulation, and our results indicate that aba treatment has the potential to improve both abiotic stress tolerance and pathogen resistance. this study presents a comprehensive profile of aba-regulated mirnas in the tomato, and provides a robust database for further investigation of aba regulatory mechanisms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
micrornasabscisic acid tomato rna-seqtranscription factorcondition stress tolerancepathogen resistanceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

