BACKGROUND
characterization of mature protein n-termini by large scale proteomics is challenging. this is especially true for proteins undergoing cleavage of transit peptides when they are targeted to specific organelles, such as mitochondria or chloroplast. protein neo-n-termini can be located up to 100– <dig> amino acids downstream from the initiator methionine and are not easily predictable. although some bioinformatics tools are available, they usually require extensive manual validation to identify the exact n-terminal position. the situation becomes even more complex when post-translational modifications take place at the neo-n-terminus. although n-terminal acetylation occurs mostly in the cytosol, it is also observed in some organelles such as chloroplast. to date, no bioinformatics tool is available to define mature protein starting positions, the associated n-terminus acetylation status and/or yield for each proteoform. in this context, we have developed the encounter tool  to score all characterized peptides using discriminating parameters to identify bona fide mature protein n-termini and  to determine the n-terminus acetylation yield of the most reliable ones.


RESULTS
based on large scale proteomics analyses using the silpronaq methodology, tandem mass spectrometry favoured the characterization of thousands of peptides. data processing using the encounter tool provided an efficient and rapid way to extract the most reliable mature protein n-termini. selected peptides were subjected to n-terminus acetylation yield determination. in an a. thaliana cell lysate,  <dig> distinct proteotypic n-termini were characterized of which  <dig> were located at the predicted protein n-terminus  and  <dig> were located further downstream . a large number of these n-termini were associated with various well-defined maturation processes occurring on organelle-targeted proteins , secreted proteins or membrane-targeted proteins. it was also possible to highlight some protein alternative starts, splicing variants or erroneous protein sequence predictions.


CONCLUSIONS
the encounter tool provides a unique way to extract accurately the most relevant mature proteins n-terminal peptides from large scale experimental datasets. such data processing allows the identification of the exact n-terminus position and the associated acetylation yield.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
n-terminal modificationsprotein maturationacetylationquantitationprocessing toolorganelle proteinstransit peptidecleavage sitehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001665agence nationale de la rechercheanr-13-bsv6-0004bienvenut willy vincent lidex biglabex saclay plant science-spsanr-10-labx-0040-spsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

