BACKGROUND
pine wilt disease , caused by the pinewood nematode , damages and kills pine trees and is causing serious economic damage worldwide. although the ecological mechanism of infestation is well described, the plant’s molecular response to the pathogen is not well known. this is due mainly to the lack of genomic information and the complexity of the disease. high throughput sequencing is now an efficient approach for detecting the expression of genes in non-model organisms, thus providing valuable information in spite of the lack of the genome sequence. in an attempt to unravel genes potentially involved in the pine defense against the pathogen, we hereby report the high throughput comparative sequence analysis of infested and non-infested stems of pinus pinaster  and pinus pinea .


RESULTS
four cdna libraries from infested and non-infested stems of p. pinaster and p. pinea were sequenced in a full  <dig> gs flx run, producing a total of  <dig> , <dig> reads. the putative amino acid sequences encoded by the assembled transcripts were annotated according to gene ontology, to assign pinus contigs into biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions categories. most of the annotated transcripts corresponded to picea genes- <dig> - <dig> %, whereas a smaller percentage, matched pinus genes,  <dig> - <dig> %, probably a consequence of more public genomic information available for picea than for pinus. the comparative transcriptome analysis showed that when p. pinaster was infested with pwn, the genes malate dehydrogenase, aba, water deficit stress related genes and par <dig> were highly expressed, while in pwn-infested p. pinea, the highly expressed genes were ricin b-related lectin, and genes belonging to the snare and high mobility group families. quantitative pcr experiments confirmed the differential gene expression between the two pine species.


CONCLUSIONS
defense-related genes triggered by nematode infestation were detected in both p. pinaster and p. pinea transcriptomes utilizing  <dig> pyrosequencing technology. p. pinaster showed higher abundance of genes related to transcriptional regulation, terpenoid secondary metabolism  and pathogen attack. p. pinea showed higher abundance of genes related to oxidative stress and higher levels of expression in general of stress responsive genes. this study provides essential information about the molecular defense mechanisms utilized by p. pinaster and p. pinea against pwn infestation and contributes to a better understanding of pwd.

