BACKGROUND
reactive oxygen species  are essential for normal physiological functioning of the brain. however, uncompensated increase in ros levels may results in oxidative stress. phospholipase a <dig>  is one of the key players activated by elevated ros levels resulting in the hydrolysis of various products from the plasmamembrane such as peroxidized fatty acids. free fatty acids  and fatty acid metabolites are often implicated to the genesis of cognitive impairment. previously we have shown that age-, and experimentally induced oxidative stress causes pla2-dependent long-term memory  failure in an aversive operant conditioning model in lymnaea stagnalis. in the present study, we investigate the effects of experimentally induced oxidative stress and the role of elevated levels of circulating ffas on ltm function using a non-aversive appetitive classical conditioning paradigm.


RESULTS
we show that intracoelomic injection of exogenous pla <dig> or pro-oxidant induced pla <dig> activation negatively affects ltm performance in our learning paradigm. in addition, we show that experimental induction of oxidative stress causes significant temporal changes in circulating ffa levels. importantly, the time of training coincides with the peak of this change in lipid metabolism. however, intracoelomic injection with exogenous arachidonic acid, one of the main ffas released by pla <dig>  does not affect ltm function. moreover, sequestrating circulating ffas with the aid of bovine serum albumin does not rescue pro-oxidant induced appetitive ltm failure.


CONCLUSIONS
our data substantiates previous evidence linking lipid peroxidation and pla <dig> activation to age- and oxidative stress-related cognitive impairment, neuronal dysfunction and disease. in addition however, our data indicate that lipid peroxidation induced increased levels of circulating oxidized ffas are not a factor in oxidative stress induced ltm impairment.

cognitive impairmentlipid peroxidationclassical conditioninginvertebratephospholipase a2arachidonic acidmolluscoxidative stressfree fatty acid

