BACKGROUND
as global climate change and exponential human population growth intensifies pressure on agricultural systems, the need to effectively manage invasive insect pests is becoming increasingly important to global food security. drosophila suzukii is an invasive pest that drastically expanded its global range in a very short time since  <dig>  spreading to most areas in north america and many countries in europe and south america. preliminary ecological modeling predicted a more restricted distribution and, for this reason, the invasion of d. suzukii to northern temperate regions is especially unexpected. investigating d. suzukii phenology and seasonal adaptations can lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms through which insects express phenotypic plasticity, which likely enables invasive species to successfully colonize a wide range of environments.


RESULTS
we describe seasonal phenotypic plasticity in field populations of d. suzukii. specifically, we observed a trend of higher proportions of flies with the winter morph phenotype, characterized by darker pigmentation and longer wing length, as summer progresses to winter. a laboratory-simulated winter photoperiod and temperature  were sufficient to induce the winter morph phenotype in d. suzukii. this winter morph is associated with increased survival at 1 °c when compared to the summer morph, thus explaining the ability of d. suzukii to survive cold winters. we then used rna sequencing to identify gene expression differences underlying seasonal differences in d. suzukii physiology. winter morph gene expression is consistent with known mechanisms of cold-hardening such as adjustments to ion transport and up-regulation of carbohydrate metabolism. in addition, transcripts involved in oogenesis and dna replication were down-regulated in the winter morph, providing the first molecular evidence of a reproductive diapause in d. suzukii.


CONCLUSIONS
to date, d. suzukii cold resistance studies suggest that this species cannot overwinter in northern locations, e.g. canada, even though they are established pests in these regions. combining physiological investigations with rna sequencing, we present potential mechanisms by which d. suzukii can overwinter in these regions. this work may contribute to more accurate population models that incorporate seasonal variation in physiological parameters, leading to development of better management strategies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
drosophila suzukiiphenotypic plasticitycold tolerancediapausehigh-throughput sequencingtranscriptomehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100005825national institute of food and agriculture2010-51181-21167shearer peter w. clarence and estelle endowmenthttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000057national institute of general medical sciencesgm56765gm083894http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000011howard hughes medical institute52005892http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000154division of integrative organismal systemsios-1456297chiu joanna c. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

