BACKGROUND
previous studies by our group suggest that extracellular dopamine  and noradrenaline  may be co-released from noradrenergic nerve terminals in the cerebral cortex. we recently demonstrated that the concomitant release of da and na could be elicited in the cerebral cortex by electrical stimulation of the locus coeruleus . this study analyses the effect of both single train and repeated electrical stimulation of lc on na and da release in the medial prefrontal cortex , occipital cortex , and caudate nucleus. to rule out possible stressful effects of electrical stimulation, experiments were performed on chloral hydrate anaesthetised rats.


RESULTS
twenty min electrical stimulation of the lc, with burst type pattern of pulses, increased na and da both in the mpfc and in the occ. na in both cortices and da in the mpfc returned to baseline within  <dig> min after the end of the stimulation period, while da in the occ reached a maximum increase during  <dig> min post-stimulation and remained higher than baseline values at  <dig> min post-stimulation. local perfusion with tetrodotoxin  markedly reduced baseline na and da in the mpfc and occ and totally suppressed the effect of electrical stimulation in both areas.

a sequence of five  <dig> min stimulations at  <dig> min intervals were delivered to the lc. each stimulus increased na to the same extent and duration as the first stimulus, whereas da remained elevated at the time next stimulus was delivered, so that baseline da progressively increased in the mpfc and occ to reach about  <dig> and 200% the initial level, respectively.

in the presence of the na transport  blocker desipramine , multiple lc stimulation still increased extracellular na and da levels.

electrical stimulation of the lc increased na levels in the homolateral caudate nucleus, but failed to modify da level.


CONCLUSIONS
the results confirm and extend that lc stimulation induces a concomitant release of da and na in the mpfc and occ.

the different time-course of lc-induced elevation of da and na suggests that their co-release may be differentially controlled.

