BACKGROUND
traditional submerged fermentation mainly accumulates intracellular orange pigments with absorption maxima at 470 nm, whereas extractive fermentation of monascus spp. with triton x- <dig> can promote the export of intracellular pigments to extracellular broth, mainly obtaining extracellular yellow pigments with absorption maxima at approximately 410 nm. in this study, a strain of monascus  that produces high yields of pigments was employed to investigate the differences in pigment fingerprint profiles between submerged and extractive fermentations.


RESULTS
using extractive fermentation with this high-yield strain, the extracellular pigments exhibited an absorption maximum at 430 nm, not 410 nm, as previously observed. by comparing the pigment fingerprint profiles between submerged and extractive fermentations, extractive fermentation was found to not only export intracellular pigments to the extracellular broth, but also to form four other yellow pigments  that accounted for a large proportion of the extracellular pigments and that were not produced in submerged fermentation. the yields of y1-y <dig> were closely related to the concentration and feeding time point of triton x- <dig>  y1-y <dig> presented identical uv-vis spectra with absorption maxima at 430 nm and fluorescence spectra with absorption maxima  at 565 nm. hplc-ms and the spectral analysis showed that the four pigments  had not been previously reported. the results indicated that these pigments may rely on the bioconversion of orange pigments .


CONCLUSIONS
using extractive fermentation with m. anka led to a high yield of extracellular yellow pigments , and the pigment fingerprint profile significantly differed compared to the results of traditional submerged fermentation. these results provide information and a detailed view of the composition and variation of pigments in extractive fermentation and could also contribute to characterizing pigment metabolism during extractive fermentation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
monascus ankaextractive fermentationpigment profilenew yellow pigmentsbioconversionnational natural science foundation of china 31271925wu zhenqiang special project on the integration of industry, education and research of guangdong province, china2013b090600015wu zhenqiang science and technology program of guangzhou, china2014j4100192wu zhenqiang issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

