BACKGROUND
maize breeding germplasm used in southwest china has high complexity because of the diverse ecological features of this area. in this study, the population structure, genetic diversity, and linkage disequilibrium decay distance of  <dig> important inbred lines collected from the breeding program of southwest china were characterized using the maizesnp <dig> beadchip with  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms .


RESULTS
with respect to population structure, two , three , four  and six  subgroups were identified. with increasing k value, the temperate group showed pronounced hierarchical structure with division into further subgroups. the genetic diversity of each group was also estimated, and the tropical group was more diverse than the temperate group. seven low-genetic-diversity and one high-genetic-diversity regions were collectively identified in the temperate, tropical groups, and the entire panel. snps with significant variation in allele frequency between the tropical and temperate groups were also evaluated. among them, a region located at 130 mb on chromosome  <dig> showed the highest genetic diversity, including both number of snps with significant variation and the ratio of significant snps to total snps. linkage disequilibrium decay distance in the temperate group was greater  than that in the entire panel  and the tropical group . a large region at 30–120 mb of chromosome  <dig> was concluded to be a region conserved during the breeding process by comparison between s <dig>  which was considered a representative tropical line in southwest china, and its  <dig> most similar derived lines.


CONCLUSIONS
for the panel covered most of widely used inbred lines in southwest china, this work representatively not only illustrates the foundation and evolution trend of maize breeding resource as a theoretical reference for the improvement of heterosis, but also provides plenty of information for genetic researches such as genome-wide association study and marker-assisted selection in the future.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
maizesouthwest chinasnp arraypopulation structurediversitytropical grouptemperate groupbreedingdupont-pioneerhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3147151131361140364gao shibin china agriculture research systemcars-02gao shibin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

