BACKGROUND
the united states swine industry was first confronted with porcine epidemic diarrhea virus  in  <dig>  in young pigs, the virus is highly pathogenic and the associated morbidity and mortality has a significant negative impact on the swine industry. we have applied the idea model to better understand the  <dig> pedv outbreak in ontario, canada. using our simple, 2-parameter idea model, we have evaluated the early epidemic dynamics of pedv on ontario swine farms.


RESULTS
we estimated the best-fit r <dig> and control parameter  for the between farm transmission component of the outbreak by fitting the model to publically available cumulative incidence data. we used maximum likelihood to compare model fit estimates for different combinations of the r <dig> and d parameters. using our initial findings from the iterative fitting procedure, we projected the time course of the epidemic using only a subset of the early epidemic data. the idea model projections showed excellent agreement with the observed data based on a 7-day generation time estimate. the best-fit estimate for r <dig> was  <dig>   and for the control parameter  was  <dig>  . using data from the first three generations of the outbreak, our iterative fitting procedure suggests that r <dig> and d had stabilized sufficiently to project the time course of the outbreak with reasonable accuracy.


CONCLUSIONS
the emergence and spread of pedv represents an important agricultural emergency. the virus presents a significant ongoing threat to the canadian swine industry. developing an understanding of the important epidemiological characteristics and disease transmission dynamics of a novel pathogen such as pedv is critical for helping to guide the implementation of effective, efficient, and economically feasible disease control and prevention strategies that are able to help decrease the impact of an outbreak.

keywords
porcine epidemic diarrhea viruspedvswinepigsmodelingepidemicdisease dynamicsforecastinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002784canada excellence research chairs, government of canadanatural sciences and engineering research council of canada issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

