BACKGROUND
type  <dig> diabetes  is one of the most common chronic metabolic diseases characterized by insulin resistance and the decrease of insulin secretion. genetic variation can only explain part of the heritability of t2d, so there need new methods to detect the susceptibility genes of the disease. epigenetics could establish the interface between the environmental factor and the t2d pathological mechanism.


RESULTS
based on the network theory and by combining epigenetic characteristics with human interactome, the weighted human dna methylation network  was constructed, and a t2d-related subnetwork  was obtained through t2d-related differentially methylated genes. it is found that tmsn had a t2d specific network structure that non-fatal metabolic disease causing genes were often located in the topological and functional periphery of network. combined with chromatin modifications, the weighted chromatin modification network  was built, and a t2d-related chromatin modification pattern subnetwork was obtained by the tmsn gene set. tcsn had a densely connected network community, indicating that tmsn and tcsn could represent a collection of t2d-related epigenetic dysregulated sub-pathways. using the cumulative hypergeometric test,  <dig> interplay modules of dna methylation and chromatin modifications were identified. by the analysis of gene expression in human t2d islet tissue, it is found that there existed genes with the variant expression level caused by the aberrant dna methylation and  chromatin modifications, which might affect and promote the development of t2d.


CONCLUSIONS
here we have detected the potential interplay modules of dna methylation and chromatin modifications for t2d. the study of t2d epigenetic networks provides a new way for understanding the pathogenic mechanism of t2d caused by epigenetic disorders.

dna methylationchromatin modificationsnetworkmodulet2d17- <dig> january  <dig> the twelfth asia pacific bioinformatics conference  shanghai, china

