BACKGROUND
in pigs, the perinatal period is the most critical time for survival. piglet maturation, which occurs at the end of gestation, leads to a state of full development after birth. therefore, maturity is an important determinant of early survival. skeletal muscle plays a key role in adaptation to extra-uterine life, e.g. glycogen storage and thermoregulation. in this study, we performed microarray analysis to identify the genes and biological processes involved in piglet muscle maturity. progeny from two breeds with extreme muscle maturity phenotypes were analyzed at two time points during gestation . the large white  breed is a selected breed with an increased rate of mortality at birth, whereas the meishan  breed produces piglets with extremely low mortality at birth. the impact of the parental genome was analyzed with reciprocal crossed fetuses.


RESULTS
microarray analysis identified  <dig>  differentially expressed probes for gestational age and genotype. such a high number reflects an important transcriptomic change that occurs between  <dig> and  <dig> days of gestation.  <dig>  probes, corresponding to  <dig>  unique annotated genes, involved more particularly in the maturation process were further studied. functional enrichment and graph inference studies underlined genes involved in muscular development around  <dig> days of gestation, and genes involved in metabolic functions, such as gluconeogenesis, around  <dig> days of gestation. moreover, a difference in the expression of key genes, e.g. pck <dig>  ldha or pgk <dig>  was detected between ms and lw just before birth. reciprocal crossing analysis resulted in the identification of  <dig> genes with an expression preferentially regulated by one parental genome. most of these genes  were regulated by the paternal genome. among these paternally regulated genes, some known imprinted genes, such as magel <dig> or igf <dig>  were identified and could have a key role in the maturation process.


CONCLUSIONS
these results reveal the biological mechanisms that regulate muscle maturity in piglets. maturity is also under the conflicting regulation of the parental genomes. crucial genes, which could explain the biological differences in maturity observed between lw and ms breeds, were identified. these genes could be excellent candidates for a key role in the maturity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
maturitysurvivalbirthmusclemicroarraysystems biologypigissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

