BACKGROUND
high ambient temperatures cause stress in poultry, especially for broiler lines, which are genetically selected for rapid muscle growth. rna-seq technology provides powerful insights into environmental response from a highly metabolic tissue, the liver. we investigated the effects of acute  and chronic  heat stress on the liver transcriptome of 3-week-old chicks of a heat-susceptible broiler line, a heat-resistant fayoumi line, and their advanced intercross line .


RESULTS
transcriptome sequencing of  <dig> male chickens using illumina hiseq  <dig> technology yielded an average of  <dig>  million,  <dig> base-pair, single-end reads per sample. there were  <dig> times more differentially expressed genes   in broilers  than fayoumis  when comparing the acute-heat samples to the control  samples. contrasting genetic lines under similar heat treatments, the highest number of degs appeared between fayoumi and broiler lines. principal component analysis of gene expression and analysis of the number of degs suggested that the ail had a transcriptomic response more similar to the fayoumi than the broiler line during acute heat stress. the number of degs also suggested that acute heat stress had greater impact on the broiler liver transcriptome than chronic heat stress. the angiopoietin-like  <dig>  gene was identified as differentially expressed among all  <dig> contrasts. ingenuity pathway analysis  created a novel network that combines the heat shock protein family with immune response genes.


CONCLUSIONS
this study extends our understanding of the liver transcriptome response to different heat exposure treatments in distinct genetic chicken lines and provides information necessary for breeding birds to be more resilient to the negative impacts of heat. the data strongly suggest angptl <dig> as a candidate gene for improvement of heat tolerance in chickens.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
heat stresschickenlivertranscriptomehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100005825national institute of food and agriculture2011-67003-30228lamont susan j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

