BACKGROUND
porphyromonas gingivalis is a gram-negative intracellular pathogen associated with periodontal disease. we have previously reported on whole-cell quantitative proteomic analyses to investigate the differential expression of virulence factors as the organism transitions from an extracellular to intracellular lifestyle. the original results with the invasive strain p. gingivalis atcc  <dig> were obtained using the genome sequence available at the time, strain w <dig> . we present here a re-processed dataset using the recently published genome annotation specific for strain atcc  <dig>  and an analysis of differential abundance based on metabolic pathways rather than individual proteins.


RESULTS
qualitative detection was observed for  <dig> proteins using the strain atcc  <dig> annotation for  <dig> hour internalized p. gingivalis within human gingival epithelial cells and controls exposed to gingival cell culture medium, an improvement of 7% over the w <dig> annotation. internalized cells showed increased abundance of proteins in the energy pathway from asparagine/aspartate amino acids to atp. the pathway producing one short chain fatty acid, propionate, showed increased abundance, while that of another, butyrate, trended towards decreased abundance. the translational machinery, including ribosomal proteins and trna synthetases, showed a significant increase in protein relative abundance, as did proteins responsible for transcription.


CONCLUSIONS
use of the atcc  <dig> specific genome annotation resulted in improved proteome coverage with respect to the number of proteins observed both qualitatively in terms of protein identifications and quantitatively in terms of the number of calculated abundance ratios. pathway analysis showed a significant increase in overall protein synthetic and transcriptional machinery in the absence of significant growth. these results suggest that the interior of host cells provides a more energy rich environment compared to the extracellular milieu. shifts in the production of cytotoxic fatty acids by intracellular p. gingivalis may play a role in virulence. moreover, despite extensive genomic re-arrangements between strains w <dig> and  <dig>  there is sufficient sequence similarity at the peptide level for proteomic abundance trends to be largely accurate when using the heterologous strain annotated genome as the reference for database searching.

