BACKGROUND
forestomach fermentation in australian marsupials such as wallabies and kangaroos, though analogous to rumen fermentation, results in lower methane emissions. insights into hydrogenotrophy in these systems could help in devising strategies to reduce ruminal methanogenesis. reductive acetogenesis may be a significant hydrogen sink in these systems and previous molecular analyses have revealed a novel diversity of putative acetogens in the tammar wallaby forestomach.


RESULTS
methanogen-inhibited enrichment cultures prepared from tammar wallaby forestomach contents consumed hydrogen and produced primarily acetate. functional gene  analyses revealed a restricted diversity of clostridiales species as the putative acetogens in the cultures. a new acetogen  designated isolate twa <dig>  was obtained from the cultures. isolate twa <dig> classified within the lachnospiraceae and demonstrated >97% rrs identity to previously isolated kangaroo acetogens. isolate twa <dig> was a potent hydrogenotroph and demonstrated excellent mixotrophic growth  with glycerol. mixotrophic growth of isolate twa <dig> on glycerol resulted in increased cell densities and acetate production compared to autotrophic growth. co-cultures with an autotrophic methanogen methanobrevibacter smithii revealed that isolate twa <dig> performed reductive acetogenesis under high hydrogen concentration , but not at low concentrations. under heterotrophic growth conditions, isolate twa <dig> did not significantly stimulate methanogenesis in a co-culture with m. smithii contrary to the expectation for organisms growing fermentatively.


CONCLUSIONS
the unique properties of tammar wallaby acetogens might be contributing factors to reduced methanogen numbers and methane emissions from tammar wallaby forestomach fermentation, compared to ruminal fermentation. the macropod forestomach may be a useful source of acetogens for future strategies to reduce methane emissions from ruminants, particularly if these strategies also include some level of methane suppression and/or acetogen stimulation, for example by harnessing mixotrophic growth capabilities

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
acetogenacetogenesistammar wallabyrumenmethanogenesisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

