BACKGROUND
we have collected a comprehensive set of multi-unit data on dissociated cortical cultures. previous studies of the development of the electrical activity of dissociated cultures of cortical neurons each focused on limited aspects of its dynamics, and were often based on small numbers of observed cultures. we followed  <dig> cultures of different densities –  <dig> to  <dig>  neurons on areas of  <dig> to  <dig> mm <dig> – growing on multi-electrode arrays  during the first five weeks of their development.


RESULTS
plating density had a profound effect on development. while the aggregate spike detection rate scaled linearly with density, as expected from the number of cells in proximity to electrodes, dense cultures started to exhibit bursting behavior earlier in development than sparser cultures. analysis of responses to electrical stimulation suggests that axonal outgrowth likewise occurred faster in dense cultures. after two weeks, the network activity was dominated by population bursts in most cultures. in contrast to previous reports, development continued with changing burst patterns throughout the observation period. burst patterns were extremely varied, with inter-burst intervals between  <dig> and  <dig> s, different amounts of temporal clustering of bursts, and different firing rate profiles during bursts. during certain stages of development bursts were organized into tight clusters with highly conserved internal structure.


CONCLUSIONS
dissociated cultures of cortical cells exhibited a much richer repertoire of activity patterns than previously reported. except for the very sparsest cultures, all cultures exhibited globally synchronized bursts, but bursting patterns changed over the course of development, and varied considerably between preparations. this emphasizes the importance of using multiple preparations – not just multiple cultures from one preparation – in any study involving neuronal cultures.

these results are based on  <dig> half-hour-long recordings. to encourage further investigation of the rich range of behaviors exhibited by cortical cells in vitro, we are making the data available to other researchers, together with matlab code to facilitate access.

