BACKGROUND
the mozambique tilapia oreochromis mossambicus has the ability to adapt to a broad range of environmental salinities and has long been used for investigating iono-osmoregulation. however, to date most studies have focused mainly on several key molecules or parameters hence yielding a limited perspective of the versatile iono-osmoregulation in the euryhaline fish. this study aimed to capture transcriptome-wide differences between the freshwater- and seawater-acclimated gills of the mozambique tilapia.


RESULTS
we have identified over  <dig> annotated gene transcripts with high homology  to human genes that were differentially expressed in freshwater- and seawater-acclimated gills of the mozambique tilapia. these putative human homologs were found to be significantly associated with over  <dig> canonical signaling pathways that are operating in at least  <dig> biological processes in relation to branchial iono-osmoregulation and cellular remodeling. the analysis revealed multiple signaling pathways in freshwater-acclimated gills acting in concert to maintain cellular homeostasis under hypo-osmotic environment while seawater-acclimated gills abounded with molecular signals to cope with the higher cellular turn-over rate, energetics and iono-regulatory demands under hyper-osmostic stress. additionally, over  <dig> transcripts encoding putative inorganic ion transporters/channels were identified, of which several are well established in gill iono-regulation while the remainder are lesser known. we have also validated the expression profiles of  <dig> representative genes in freshwater- and seawater-acclimated gills, as well as in hypersaline-acclimated  gills. the findings confirmed that many of these responsive genes retained their expression profiles in hypersaline-acclimated gills as in seawater-acclimated gills, although several genes had changed significantly in their expression level/direction in hypersaline-acclimated gills.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study that has provided an unprecedented transcriptomic-wide perspective of gill iono-osmoregulation since such studies were initiated more than 80 years ago. it has expanded our molecular perspective from a relatively few well-studied molecules to a plethora of gene transcripts and a myriad of canonical signaling pathways driving various biological processes that are operating in gills under hypo-osmotic and hyper-osmotic stresses. these findings would provide insights and resources to fuel future studies on gill iono-osmoregulation and cellular remodeling in response to salinity challenge and acclimation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomic analysisrna sequencinggene expressionsignaling pathwaysiono-osmoregulationcellular remodelingeuryhaline fish gillsmozambique tilapia oreochromis mossambicusissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

