BACKGROUND
avian β-defensins  possess broad-spectrum antimicrobial, lps neutralizing and chemotactic properties. avbd- <dig> is a chemoattractant for avian immune cells and mammalian dendritic cells  — a unique feature that is relevant to the applications of avbds as chemotherapeutic agents in mammalian hosts. to identify the structural components essential to various biological functions, we have designed and evaluated seven avbd analogues.


RESULTS
in the first group of analogues, the three conserved disulfide bridges were eliminated by replacing cysteines with alanine and serine residues, peptide hydrophobicity and charge were increased by changing negatively charged amino acid residues to hydrophobic  or positively charged residues . all three analogues in this group showed improved antimicrobial activity, though avbd-12a <dig>  with a net positive charge of + <dig>  hydrophobicity of 40% and a predicted ccr <dig> binding domain, was the most potent antimicrobial peptide. avbd-12a <dig> also retained more than 50% of wild type chemotactic activity. in the second group of analogues , one to three disulfide bridges were removed via substitution of cysteines with isosteric amino acids. their antimicrobial activity was compromised and chemotactic activity abolished. the third type of analogue was a hybrid that had the backbone of avbd- <dig> and positively charged amino acid residues avbd- <dig>  the antimicrobial and chemotactic activities of the hybrid resembled that of avbd- <dig> and avbd- <dig>  respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
while the net positive charge and charge distribution have a dominating effect on the antimicrobial potency of avbds, the three conserved disulfide bridges are essential to the chemotactic property and the maximum antimicrobial activity. analogue avbd-12a <dig> with a high net positive charge, a moderate degree of hydrophobicity and a ccr2-binding domain can serve as a template for the design of novel antimicrobial peptides with chemotactic property and salt resistance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
avian β-defensin analoguesantimicrobial activitychemotactic activitynet positive chargehydrophobicitydisulfide bridgesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

