BACKGROUND
many flowering plants produce bicellular pollen. the two cells of the pollen grain are destined for separate fates in the male gametophyte, which provides a unique opportunity to study genetic interactions that govern guided single-cell polar expansion of the growing pollen tube and the coordinated control of germ cell division and sperm cell fate specification. we applied the agilent  <dig> k tobacco gene chip to conduct the first transcriptomic analysis of the tobacco male gametophyte. in addition, we performed a comparative study of the arabidopsis root-hair trichoblast transcriptome to evaluate genetic factors and common pathways involved in polarized cell-tip expansion.


RESULTS
progression of pollen grains from freshly dehisced anthers to pollen tubes  <dig> h after germination is accompanied with >  <dig>   gametophyte-specific expressed probes active in at least one of the developmental stages. in contrast, >  <dig>   probes were preferentially expressed in the sporophyte. our comparative approach identified a subset of  <dig> pollen tube-expressed genes that overlap with root-hair trichoblasts. reverse genetic analysis of selected candidates demonstrated that cu/zn superoxide dismutase  <dig> , a wd- <dig> containing protein , and replication factor c <dig>  are among the central regulators of pollen-tube tip growth. extension of our analysis beyond the second haploid mitosis enabled identification of an opposing-dynamic accumulation of core regulators of cell proliferation and cell fate determinants in accordance with the progression of the germ cell cycle.


CONCLUSIONS
the current study provides a foundation to isolate conserved regulators of cell tip expansion and those that are unique for pollen tube growth to the female gametophyte. a transcriptomic data set is presented as a benchmark for future functional studies using developing pollen as a model. our results demonstrated previously unknown functions of certain genes in pollen-tube tip growth. in addition, we highlighted the molecular dynamics of core cell-cycle regulators in the male gametophyte and postulated the first genetic model to account for the differential timing of spermatogenesis among angiosperms and its coordination with female gametogenesis.

