BACKGROUND
herbivore-induced defence responses are often specific - different herbivores induce different defence responses in plants - and their specificity is largely mediated by chemical cues  in insect oral or oviposition secretions. however, the specificity and the mechanisms of hae-induced defence have not been investigated in the context of the evolutionary relationships among plant species. here we compare the responses of six closely related nicotiana species to a synthetic elicitor, n-linolenoyl-glutamic acid  and hae of two insect herbivores .


RESULTS
hae-induced defences are highly specific among closely related nicotiana species at three perspectives. 1) a single nicotiana species can elicit distinct responses to different haes. n. pauciflora elicited increased levels of ja and trypsin proteinase inhibitors  in response to c18:3-glu and the oral secretions of m. sexta  but not to oral secretions of s. littoralis . in contrast, n. miersii only responded to ossl but not to the other two haes. the specific responses to different haes in nicotiana species are likely due to the perception by the plant of each specific component of the hae. 2) one hae can induce different defence responses among closely related nicotiana species. osms and c18:3-glu induced ja and tpi accumulations in n. linearis, n. attenuata, n. acuminata and n. pauciflora, but not in n. miersii and n. obtusifolia. 3) the effect of hae-induced defences differ for the solanaceae specialist m. sexta and the generalist s. littoralis. among the four tested nicotiana species, while the growth rate of m. sexta was only reduced by the induced defences elicited by c18:3-glu; the growth rate of s. littoralis can be reduced by the induced defences elicited by all three haes. this is likely due to differences in the susceptibility of the specialist m. sexta and generalist s. littoralis to induced defences of their host.


CONCLUSIONS
closely related nicotiana species elicit highly specific defence responses to herbivore associated elicitors and provide an ideal framework for investigating the molecular mechanisms and evolutionary divergence of induced resistance in plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
specificity of herbivore induced defencenicotianajasmonic acidtrypsin proteinase inhibitorinduced resistancespecialist and generalistissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

