BACKGROUND
durum wheat  is a tetraploid cereal grown in the medium to low-precipitation areas of the mediterranean basin, north america and south-west asia. genomics applications in durum wheat have the potential to boost exploitation of genetic resources and to advance understanding of the genetics of important complex traits . a dense and accurate consensus map specific for t. durum will greatly facilitate genetic mapping, functional genomics and marker-assisted improvement.


RESULTS
high quality genotypic data from six core recombinant inbred line populations were used to obtain a consensus framework map of  <dig> simple sequence repeats  and diversity array technology®  anchor markers . interpolation of unique markers from  <dig> maps allowed us to position a total of  <dig>  markers in a consensus map of  <dig>  cm. the t. durum a and b genomes were covered in their near totality based on the reference ssr hexaploid wheat map. the consensus locus order compared to those of the single component maps showed good correspondence, . differences in marker order and local recombination rate were observed between the durum and hexaploid wheat consensus maps. the consensus map was used to carry out a whole-genome search for genetic differentiation signatures and association to heading date in a panel of  <dig> accessions adapted to the mediterranean areas. linkage disequilibrium was found to decay below the r <dig> threshold =  <dig>  within  <dig>  cm, on average. strong molecular differentiations among sub-populations were mapped to  <dig> chromosome regions. a genome-wide association scan for heading date from  <dig> field trials in the mediterranean basin and in mexico yielded  <dig> chromosome regions with evidences of association in multiple environments.


CONCLUSIONS
the consensus map presented here was used as a reference for genetic diversity and mapping analyses in t. durum, providing nearly complete genome coverage and even marker density. markers previously mapped in hexaploid wheat constitute a strong link between the two species. the consensus map provides the basis for high-density single nucleotide polymorphic  marker implementation in durum wheat.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
triticum durum desfconsensus maplinkage disequilibriumgenome-wide association mappingheading dateqtlissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

