BACKGROUND
methylation at arginine residues  is an important post-translational modification that regulates a myriad of essential cellular processes in eukaryotes, such as transcriptional regulation, rna processing, signal transduction and dna repair. arginine methylation is catalyzed by a family of enzymes known as protein arginine methyltransferases . prmts are classified as type i or type ii, depending on the position of the methyl group on the guanidine of the methylated arginine. previous reports have linked symmetric r methylation to transcriptional repression, while asymmetric r methylation is generally associated with transcriptional activation. however, global studies supporting this conclusion are not available.


RESULTS
here we compared side by side the physiological and molecular roles of the best characterized plant prmts, the type ii prmt <dig> and the type i prmt <dig>  also known as carm <dig> in mammals. we found that prmt <dig> and prmt4a;4b mutants showed similar alterations in flowering time, photomorphogenic responses and salt stress tolerance, while only prmt <dig> mutants exhibited alterations in circadian rhythms. an rna-seq analysis revealed that expression and splicing of many differentially regulated genes was similarly enhanced or repressed by prmt <dig> and prmt4s. furthermore, prmt <dig> and prmt4s co-regulated the expression and splicing of key regulatory genes associated with transcription, rna processing, responses to light, flowering, and abiotic stress tolerance, being candidates to mediate the physiological alterations observed in the mutants.


CONCLUSIONS
our global analysis indicates that two of the most important type i and type ii arginine methyltransferases, prtm <dig> and prmt <dig>  have mostly overlapping as well as specific, but not opposite, roles in the global regulation of gene expression in plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

