BACKGROUND
the passion fruit  is a tropical crop of economic importance both for juice production and consumption as fresh fruit. the juice is also used in concentrate blends that are consumed worldwide. however, very little is known about the genome of the species. therefore, improving our understanding of passion fruit genomics is essential and to some degree a pre-requisite if its genetic resources are to be used more efficiently. in this study, we have constructed a large-insert bac library and provided the first view on the structure and content of the passion fruit genome, using bac-end sequence  data as a major resource.


RESULTS
the library consisted of  <dig>  clones and its levels of organellar dna were very low. the library represents six haploid genome equivalents, and the average insert size was 108 kb. to check its utility for gene isolation, successful macroarray screening experiments were carried out with probes complementary to eight passiflora gene sequences available in public databases. bacs harbouring those genes were used in fluorescent in situ hybridizations and unique signals were detected for four bacs in three chromosomes . then, we explored  <dig>  bes and we identified reads likely to contain repetitive mobile elements , simple sequence repeats and putative proteins, and to estimate the gc content  of the reads. around  <dig> % of all bes were found to have high levels of similarity to plant genes and ontological terms were assigned to more than half of the sequences analysed . the vast majority of the top-hits made by our sequences were to populus trichocarpa , theobroma cacao , ricinus communis , vitis vinifera  and prunus persica .


CONCLUSIONS
we generated the first large-insert library for a member of passifloraceae. this bac library provides a new resource for genetic and genomic studies, as well as it represents a valuable tool for future whole genome study. remarkably, a number of bac-end pair sequences could be mapped to intervals of the sequenced arabidopsis thaliana, v. vinifera and p. trichocarpa chromosomes, and putative collinear microsyntenic regions were identified.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
passiflorapassion fruitgenomicsbac-end sequencingrepetitive elementsgene contentmicrosyntenyfluorescent in situ hybridizationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

