BACKGROUND
the degeneracy of the genetic code makes it possible for the same amino acid string to be coded by different messenger rna  sequences. these “synonymous mrnas” may differ largely in a number of aspects related to their overall translational efficiency, such as secondary structure content and availability of the encoded transfer rnas . consequently, they may render different yields of the translated polypeptides. these mrna features related to translation efficiency are also playing a role locally, resulting in a non-uniform translation speed along the mrna, which has been previously related to some protein structural features and also used to explain some dramatic effects of “silent” single-nucleotide-polymorphisms . in this work we perform the first large scale analysis of the relationship between three experimental proxies of mrna local translation efficiency and the local features of the corresponding encoded proteins.


RESULTS
we found that a number of protein functional and structural features are reflected in the patterns of ribosome occupancy, secondary structure and trna availability along the mrna. one or more of these proxies of translation speed have distinctive patterns around the mrna regions coding for certain protein local features. in some cases the three patterns follow a similar trend. we also show specific examples where these patterns of translation speed point to the protein’s important structural and functional features.


CONCLUSIONS
this support the idea that the genome not only codes the protein functional features as sequences of amino acids, but also as subtle patterns of mrna properties which, probably through local effects on the translation speed, have some consequence on the final polypeptide. these results open the possibility of predicting a protein’s functional regions based on a single genomic sequence, and have implications for heterologous protein expression and fine-tuning protein function.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

