BACKGROUND
to promote the clinical application of next-generation sequencing, it is important to obtain accurate and consistent variants of target genomic regions at low cost. ion proton, the latest updated semiconductor-based sequencing instrument from life technologies, is designed to provide investigators with an inexpensive platform for human whole exome sequencing that achieves a rapid turnaround time. however, few studies have comprehensively compared and evaluated the accuracy of variant calling between ion proton and illumina sequencing platforms such as hiseq  <dig>  which is the most popular sequencing platform for the human genome. the ion proton sequencer combined with the ion targetseq™ exome enrichment kit together make up targetseq-proton, whereas sureselect-hiseq is based on the agilent sureselect human all exon v <dig> kit and the hiseq  <dig> sequencer.


RESULTS
here, we sequenced exonic dna from four human blood samples using both targetseq-proton and sureselect-hiseq. we then called variants in the exonic regions that overlapped between the two exome capture kits . the rates of shared variant loci called by two sequencing platforms were from  <dig>  to  <dig>  % in four samples, whereas the concordance of co-detected variant loci reached 99 %. sanger sequencing validation revealed that the validated rate of concordant single nucleotide polymorphisms   was higher than the snps specific to targetseq-proton  or specific to sureselect-hiseq . with regard to 1-bp small insertions and deletions , the sanger sequencing validated rates of concordant variants  and sureselect-hiseq-specific  were higher than those of targetseq-proton-specific .


CONCLUSIONS
in the sequencing of exonic regions, a combination of using of two sequencing strategies  increased the variant calling specificity for concordant variant loci and the sensitivity for variant loci called by any one platform. however, for the sequencing of platform-specific variants, the accuracy of variant calling by hiseq  <dig> was higher than that of ion proton, specifically for the indel detection. moreover, the variant calling software also influences the detection of snps and, specifically, indels in ion proton exome sequencing.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
exome sequencingvariant callingaccuracyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

