BACKGROUND
spontaneous repair is limited after cns injury or degeneration because neurogenesis and axonal regrowth rarely occur in the adult brain. as a result, cell transplantation has raised much interest as potential treatment for patients with cns lesions. several types of cells have been considered as candidates for such cell transplantation and replacement therapies. foetal brain tissue has already been shown to have significant effects in patients with parkinson's disease. clinical use of the foetal brain tissue is, however, limited by ethical and technical problems as it requires high numbers of grafted foetal cells and immunosuppression. alternatively, several reports suggested that mesenchymal stem cells, isolated from adult bone marrow, are multipotent cells and could be used in autograft approach for replacement therapies.


RESULTS
in this study, we addressed the question of the possible influence of mesenchymal stem cells on neural stem cell fate. we have previously reported that adult rat mesenchymal stem cells are able to express nestin in defined culture conditions  and we report here that nestin-positive  mesenchymal stem cells are able to favour the astroglial lineage in neural progenitors and stem cells cultivated from embryonic striatum. the increase of the number of gfap-positive cells is associated with a significant decrease of the number of tuj1- and o4-positive cells. using quantitative rt-pcr, we demonstrate that mesenchymal stem cells express lif, cntf, bmp <dig> and bmp <dig> mrnas, four cytokines known to play a role in astroglial fate decision. in this model, bmp <dig> is responsible for the astroglial stimulation and oligodendroglial inhibition, as 1) this cytokine is present in a biologically-active form only in nestin-positive mesenchymal stem cells conditioned medium and 2) anti-bmp <dig> antibodies inhibit the nestin-positive mesenchymal stem cells conditioned medium inducing effect on astrogliogenesis.


CONCLUSIONS
when thinking carefully about mesenchymal stem cells as candidates for cellular therapy in neurological diseases, their effects on resident neural cell fate have to be considered.

