BACKGROUND
systematic research on fish immunogenetics is indispensable in understanding the origin and evolution of immune systems. this has long been a challenging task because of the limited number of deep sequencing technologies and genome backgrounds of non-model fish available. the newly developed solexa/illumina rna-seq and digital gene expression  are high-throughput sequencing approaches and are powerful tools for genomic studies at the transcriptome level. this study reports the transcriptome profiling analysis of bacteria-challenged lateolabrax japonicus using rna-seq and dge in an attempt to gain insights into the immunogenetics of marine fish.


RESULTS
rna-seq analysis generated  <dig>  non-redundant consensus sequences, among which  <dig>  functional transcripts with complete or various length encoding regions were identified. more than 52% of these transcripts are possibly involved in approximately  <dig> known metabolic or signalling pathways, while  <dig>  transcripts were associated with immune-relevant genes. in addition, approximately 8% of the transcripts appeared to be fish-specific genes that have never been described before. dge analysis revealed that the host transcriptome profile of vibrio harveyi-challenged l. japonicus is considerably altered, as indicated by the significant up- or down-regulation of  <dig>  strong infection-responsive transcripts. results indicated an overall conservation of the components and transcriptome alterations underlying innate and adaptive immunity in fish and other vertebrate models. analysis suggested the acquisition of numerous fish-specific immune system components during early vertebrate evolution.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provided a global survey of host defence gene activities against bacterial challenge in a non-model marine fish. results can contribute to the in-depth study of candidate genes in marine fish immunity, and help improve current understanding of host-pathogen interactions and evolutionary history of immunogenetics from fish to mammals.

