BACKGROUND
segmental duplications are an abundant source for novel gene functions and evolutionary adaptations. this mechanism of generating novelty was very active during the evolution of primates particularly in the human lineage. here, we characterize the evolution and function of the spata <dig> gene family , which was previously shown to be among the gene families with the strongest signal of positive selection in hominoids. the mouse homologue for this gene family is a single copy gene expressed during spermatogenesis.


RESULTS
we show that in primates, the spata <dig> gene duplicated into spata31a and spata31c types and broadened the expression into many tissues. each type became further segmentally duplicated in the line towards humans with the largest number of full-length copies found for spata31a in humans. copy number estimates of spata31a based on digital pcr show an average of  <dig>  with a range of 5– <dig> copies per diploid genome among human individuals. the primate spata <dig> genes also acquired new protein domains that suggest an involvement in uv response and dna repair. we generated antibodies and show that the protein is re-localized from the nucleolus to the whole nucleus upon uv-irradiation suggesting a uv damage response. we used crispr/cas mediated mutagenesis to knockout copies of the gene in human primary fibroblast cells. we find that cell lines with reduced functional copies as well as naturally occurring low copy number hff cells show enhanced sensitivity towards uv-irradiation.


CONCLUSIONS
the acquisition of new spata <dig> protein functions and its broadening of expression may be related to the evolution of the diurnal life style in primates that required a higher uv tolerance. the increased segmental duplications in hominoids as well as its fast evolution suggest the acquisition of further specific functions particularly in humans.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
segmental duplicationscore dupliconsspata <dig> gene familycomparative genomicscopy number variationuv responsehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000781european research councilga322564tautz diethard tubitak112t421bekpen cemalettin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

