BACKGROUND
prediction of short stretches in protein sequences capable of forming amyloid-like fibrils is important in understanding the underlying cause of amyloid illnesses thereby aiding in the discovery of sequence-targeted anti-aggregation pharmaceuticals. due to the constraints of experimental molecular techniques in identifying such motif segments, it is highly desirable to develop computational methods to provide better and affordable in silico predictions.


RESULTS
accurate in silico prediction techniques of amyloidogenic peptide regions rely on the cooperation between informative features and classifier design. in this research article, we propose one such efficient fibril prediction implementation exploiting heterogeneous features based on bio-physio-chemical  properties, auto-correlation function of carefully selected amino acid indices and atomic composition within a protein fragment of amino acids in a window. in an attempt to get an optimal number of bpc features, an evolutionary support vector machine  integrating a novel implementation of hybrid genetic algorithm termed memetic algorithm and svm is utilized. five prediction modules designed using artificial neural network  models are trained with independent and integrated features in order to validate the fibril forming motifs. the results provide evidence that incorporating new feature namely auto-correlation function besides bpc, attempt to strengthen the sequence interaction effect in forming the feature vector thereby obtaining better prediction quality in terms of sensitivity, specificity, mathews correlation coefficient and area under the receiver operating characteristics curve.


CONCLUSIONS
a significant improvement in performance is observed by introducing features like auto-correlation function that maintains sequence order effect, in addition to the conventional bpc properties selected through a novel optimization strategy to predict the peptide status – amyloidogenic or non-amyloidogenic. the proposed approach achieves acceptable results, comparable to most online predictors. besides, it compensates the lacuna in existing amyloid fibril prediction tools by maintaining equilibrium between sensitivity and specificity.

 <dig> november- <dig> december  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  tenth international conference on bioinformatics – first iscb asia joint conference  <dig>  kuala lumpur, malaysia

