BACKGROUND
there are several studies describing loss of genes through reductive evolution in microbes, but how selective forces are associated with genome expansion due to horizontal gene transfer  has not received similar attention. the aim of this study was therefore to examine how selective pressures influence genome expansion in  <dig> fully sequenced and assembled escherichia coli strains. we also explored potential connections between genome expansion and the attainment of virulence factors. this was performed using estimations of several genomic parameters such as at content, genomic drift , genome size and estimated hgt size, which were subsequently compared to analogous parameters computed from the core genome consisting of  <dig> genes common to the  <dig> e. coli strains. moreover, we analyzed how selective pressures , acting on the e. coli core genome, influenced lineage and phylogroup formation.


RESULTS
hierarchical clustering of ds and dn estimations from the e. coli core genome resulted in phylogenetic trees with topologies in agreement with known e. coli taxonomy and phylogroups. high values of ds, compared to dn, indicate that the e. coli core genome has been subjected to substantial purifying selection over time; significantly more than the non-core part of the genome . this is further supported by a linear association between strain-wise ds and dn values . the non-core part of the genome was also significantly more at-rich  than the core genome and e. coli genome size correlated with estimated hgt size . in addition, genome size , at content  as well as estimated hgt size  were all associated with the presence of virulence factors, suggesting that pathogenicity traits in e. coli are largely attained through hgt. no associations were found between selective pressures operating on the e. coli core genome, as estimated using relative entropy, and genome size .


CONCLUSIONS
on a larger time frame, genome expansion in e. coli, which is significantly associated with the acquisition of virulence factors, appears to be independent of selective forces operating on the core genome.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

