BACKGROUND
grain development in maize is an essential process in the plant’s life cycle and is vital for use of the plant as a crop for animals and humans. however, little is known regarding the protein regulatory networks that control grain development. here, isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification  technology was used to analyze temporal changes in protein expression during maize grain development.


RESULTS
maize grain proteins and changes in protein expression at eight developmental stages from  <dig> to  <dig> d after pollination  were performed using itraq-based proteomics. overall,  <dig> proteins were identified;  <dig> of these were quantified and  <dig> showed at least  <dig> -fold changes in expression levels at different developmental stages and were identified as differentially expressed proteins . the deps were involved in different cellular and metabolic processes with a preferential distribution to protein synthesis/destination and metabolism categories. a k-means clustering analysis revealed coordinated protein expression associated with different functional categories/subcategories at different development stages.


CONCLUSIONS
our results revealed developing maize grain display different proteomic characteristics at distinct stages, such as numerous deps for cell growth/division were highly expressed during early stages, whereas those for starch biosynthesis and defense/stress accumulated in middle and late stages, respectively. we also observed coordinated expression of multiple proteins of the antioxidant system, which are essential for the maintenance of reactive oxygen species  homeostasis during grain development. particularly, some deps, such as zinc metallothionein class ii, pyruvate orthophosphate dikinase  and 14-3- <dig> proteins, undergo major changes in expression at specific developmental stages, suggesting their roles in maize grain development. these results provide a valuable resource for analyzing protein function on a global scale and also provide new insights into the potential protein regulatory networks that control grain yield and quality.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
maizegrain developmentproteomicsitraqstarchhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3117149731371576dong shuting liu peng national basic research program of china2011cb100105dong shuting special fund for agro-scientific research in the public interest of china201203096201203100dong shuting liu peng project of shandong province higher educational science and technology programj14lf10li geng issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

