BACKGROUND
indole alkaloids, which characteristically contain an indole nucleus, have pharmaceutical potential in a diverse range of applications. uv-b can elicit the accumulation of indole alkaloids. the indole alkaloid  carboxylic acid methyl ester with cytotoxic activity was found to accumulate in clematis terniflora dc. leaves after exposure to high level of uv-b irradiation and the dark. however, a more in-depth analysis of the process behind this response has not yet been performed. therefore, an integrated approach involving metabolomic, proteomic, and transcriptomic analyses is essential to detail the biosynthetic mechanisms of the regulation of indole alkaloid under binary stress.


RESULTS
indole alkaloid  carboxylic acid methyl ester was found to increase 7-fold in c. terniflora leaves post-treatment with high level of uv-b irradiation followed by an incubation in the dark compared with pre-treatment. analysis by proteomics and metabolomics indicates a decrease in photosynthesis and carbohydrate metabolism, respectively. by contrast, amino acid metabolism was activated by this binary stress, and, specifically, the genes involved in the metabolic pathway converting shikimate to l-tryptophan were concurrently upregulated. metabolites involved in indole biosynthesis  pathway were anthranilate, indole, and l-tryptophan, which increased 2-, 441-, and 1-fold, respectively. in addition, there was an increase of 2- and 9-fold in l-serine deaminase  and l-tryptophan synthase activity in c. terniflora leaves after exposure to high level of uv-b irradiation and the dark.


CONCLUSIONS
 carboxylic acid methyl ester was found to increase in response to high level of uv-b irradiation followed by an incubation in the dark, implying that indole alkaloid biosynthesis was activated in c. terniflora leaves. analysis of perturbations in metabolism in these leaves demonstrated that amino acid metabolism was specifically activated by this binary stress. in addition, an enhancement in serine level and l-sd activity was noted, which likely leads to an accumulation of pyruvate that, in turn, supplies shikimate metabolic pathway. the genes, metabolites, and l-tryptophan synthase activity that are involved in the metabolic pathway leading from shikimate to l-tryptophan all increased under the experimental binary stress, resulting in an enhancement of indole biosynthesis  pathway. therefore, the metabolic process to indole alkaloids in c. terniflora was enhanced after exposure to high level of uv-b irradiation followed by the dark.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ultraviolet-b irradiationclematis terniflora dc.metabolomicsproteomicsamino acid metabolismindole alkaloid biosynthesisthe national science foundation of china 81274033the research project of chinese ministry of education113037athe zhejiang provincial natural science foundation of chinalz14h280001issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

