BACKGROUND
transitions from marine to intertidal and terrestrial habitats resulted in a significant adaptive radiation within the panpulmonata . this clade comprises several groups that invaded the land realm independently and in different time periods, e.g., ellobioidea, systellomatophora, and stylommatophora. thus, mitochondrial genomes of panpulmonate gastropods are promising to screen for adaptive molecular signatures related to land invasions.


RESULTS
we obtained three complete mitochondrial genomes of terrestrial panpulmonates, i.e., the ellobiid carychium tridentatum, and the stylommatophorans arion rufus and helicella itala. our dataset consisted of  <dig> mitogenomes comprising almost all major panpulmonate lineages. the phylogenetic tree based on mitochondrial genes supports the monophyly of the clade panpulmonata. terrestrial lineages were sampled from ellobioidea  and stylommatophora . the branch-site test of positive selection detected significant non-synonymous changes in the terrestrial branches leading to carychium  and stylommatophora. these convergent changes occurred in the cob and nad <dig> genes .


CONCLUSIONS
the convergence of the non-synonymous changes in cob and nad <dig> suggest possible ancient episodes of positive selection related to adaptations to non-marine habitats. the positively selected sites in our data are in agreement with previous results in vertebrates suggesting a general pattern of adaptation to the new metabolic requirements. the demand for energy due to the colonization of land  and the necessity to tolerate new conditions of abiotic stress may have changed the physiological constraints in the early terrestrial panpulmonates and triggered adaptations at the mitochondrial level.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
codon modelsland invasionmitogenomicspanpulmonatapositive selectionconsejo nacional de ciencia, tecnología e innovación tecnológica 291-2014-fondecytromero pedro e. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

