BACKGROUND
the availability of multiple avian genome sequence assemblies greatly improves our ability to define overall genome organization and reconstruct evolutionary changes. in birds, this has previously been impeded by a near intractable karyotype and relied almost exclusively on comparative molecular cytogenetics of only the largest chromosomes. here, novel whole genome sequence information from  <dig> avian genome sequences  made available on an interactive browser  was analyzed.


RESULTS
focusing on the six best-assembled genomes allowed us to assemble a putative karyotype of the dinosaur ancestor for each chromosome. reconstructing evolutionary events that led to each species’ genome organization, we determined that the fastest rate of change occurred in the zebra finch and budgerigar, consistent with rapid speciation events in the passeriformes and psittaciformes. intra- and interchromosomal changes were explained most parsimoniously by a series of inversions and translocations respectively, with breakpoint reuse being commonplace. analyzing chicken and zebra finch, we found little evidence to support the hypothesis of an association of evolutionary breakpoint regions with recombination hotspots but some evidence to support the hypothesis that microchromosomes largely represent conserved blocks of synteny in the majority of the  <dig> species analyzed. all but one species showed the expected number of microchromosomal rearrangements predicted by the haploid chromosome count. ostrich, however, appeared to retain an overall karyotype structure of 2n =  <dig> despite undergoing a large number  of hitherto un-described interchromosomal changes.


CONCLUSIONS
results suggest that mechanisms exist to preserve a static overall avian karyotype/genomic structure, including the microchromosomes, with widespread interchromosomal change occurring rarely . of the species analyzed, the chicken lineage appeared to have undergone the fewest changes compared to the dinosaur ancestor.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ancestral karyotypeavian genomechromosome evolutiondinosaurissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

