BACKGROUND
vitreoscilla hemoglobin  is a type of hemoglobin found in the gram-negative aerobic bacterium vitreoscilla that has been shown to contribute to the tolerance of anaerobic stress in multiple plant species. maize  is susceptible to waterlogging, causing significant yield loss. in this study, we approached this problem with the introduction of an exogenous vhb gene.


RESULTS
we overexpressed the vhb gene in arabidopsis and maize under the control of the camv35s promoter. after 14 days of waterlogging treatment, the transgenic vhb arabidopsis plants remained green, while the controls died. under waterlogging, important plant growth traits of vhb plants, including seedling height, primary root length, lateral root number, and shoot dry weight were significantly improved relative to those of the controls. the vhb gene was also introduced into a maize line through particle bombardment and was then transferred to two elite maize inbred lines through marker-assisted backcrossing. the introduction of vhb significantly enhanced plant growth under waterlogging stress on traits, including seedling height, primary root length, lateral root number, root dry weight, and shoot dry weight, in both zheng <dig> and cml <dig> maize backgrounds. under the waterlogging condition, transgenic vhb maize seedlings exhibited elevated expression of alcohol dehydrogenase  and higher peroxidase  enzyme activity. the two vhb-containing lines, zheng <dig>  and cml <dig> , exhibited higher tolerance to waterlogging than their negative control lines .


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate that the exogenous vhb gene confers waterlogging tolerance to the transgenic maize line. in maize in the place of to the transgenic maize line, the vhb gene is a useful molecular tool for the improvement of waterlogging and submergence-tolerance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
arabidopsis thalianamaize vitreoscilla hemoglobinwaterlogginggenetic transformationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

