BACKGROUND
the evolution of insecticide resistance in spodoptera frugiperda  has resulted in large economic losses and disturbances to the environment and agroecosystems. resistance to lufenuron, a chitin biosynthesis inhibitor insecticide, was recently documented in brazilian populations of s. frugiperda. thus, we utilized large-scale cdna sequencing  to compare the pattern of gene expression between lufenuron-resistant  and susceptible  s. larvae in an attempt to identify the molecular basis behind the resistance mechanism of s. frugiperda to this insecticide.


RESULTS
a transcriptome was assembled using approximately  <dig>  million 100 bp-long single-end reads, which generated  <dig>  transcripts with a n <dig> of 996 bp. a search against the ncbi non-redundant database generated  <dig>  %  functionally annotated transcripts. a large portion of the alignments were homologous to insects, with the majority  being similar to sequences of bombyx mori . moreover, 10 % of the alignments were similar to sequences of various species of spodoptera , with 3 % of them being similar to sequences of s. frugiperda. a comparative analysis of the gene expression between luf-r and luf-s s. frugiperda larvae identified  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts . six of them were associated with cuticle metabolism. of those, four were overexpressed in luf-r larvae. the machinery involved with the detoxification process was represented by  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts;  <dig> of them belonging to p <dig> monooxygenases, four to glutathione-s-transferases, six to carboxylases and one to sulfotransferases. rna-seq analysis was validated for a number of selected candidate transcripts by using quantitative real time pcr .


CONCLUSIONS
the gene expression profile of luf-r larvae of s. frugiperda differs from luf-s larvae. in general, gene expression is much higher in resistant larvae when compared to the susceptible ones, particularly for those genes involved with pathways for xenobiotic detoxification, mainly represented by p <dig> monooxygenases transcripts. our data indicate that enzymes involved with the detoxification process, and mostly the p <dig>  are one of the resistance mechanisms employed by the luf-r s. frugiperda larvae against lufenuron.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

