BACKGROUND
thiamine  is synthesized de novo by certain yeast, fungi, plants, protozoans, bacteria and archaea. the pathway of thiamine biosynthesis by archaea is poorly understood, particularly the route of sulfur relay to form the thiazole ring. archaea harbor structural homologs of both the bacterial  and eukaryotic  proteins that mobilize sulfur to thiazole ring precursors by distinct mechanisms.


RESULTS
based on comparative genome analysis, halophilic archaea are predicted to synthesize the pyrimidine moiety of thiamine by the bacterial pathway, initially suggesting that also a bacterial this-thif type mechanism for synthesis of the thiazole ring is used in which the sulfur carrier this is first activated by thif-catalyzed adenylation. the only thif homolog of haloferax volcanii  was deleted but this had no effect on growth in the absence of thiamine. usage of the eukaryotic thi4-type sulfur relay was initially considered less likely for thiamine biosynthesis in archaea, since the active-site cysteine residue of yeast thi4p that donates the sulfur to the thiazole ring by a suicide mechanism is replaced by a histidine residue in many archaeal thi <dig> homologs and these are described as d-ribose- <dig> -bisphosphate isomerases. the thi <dig> homolog of the halophilic archaea, including hfx. volcanii  was found to differ from that of methanogens and thermococci by having a cysteine residue  corresponding to the conserved active site cysteine of yeast thi4p . deletion of hvo_ <dig> generated a thiamine auxotroph that was trans-complemented by a wild-type copy of hvo_ <dig>  but not the modified gene encoding an hvthi <dig> c165a variant.


CONCLUSIONS
based on our results, we conclude that the archaeon hfx. volcanii uses a yeast thi4-type mechanism for sulfur relay to form the thiazole ring of thiamine. we extend this finding to a relatively large group of archaea, including haloarchaea, ammonium oxidizing archaea, and some methanogen and pyrococcus species, by observing that these organisms code for thi <dig> homologs that have a conserved active site cysteine residue which is likely used in thiamine biosynthesis. thus, archaeal members of ipr <dig> thi <dig> family that have a conserved cysteine active site should be reexamined for a function in thiamine biosynthesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
vitamin b1coenzyme biosynthesisthiaminesulfur relayarchaeaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

