BACKGROUND
cyclodipeptides and their derivatives constitute a large class of peptide natural products with noteworthy biological activities. in some yeasts and bacterial species, pulcherriminic acid derived from cyclo-l-leucyl-l-leucyl is excreted and chelates free ferric ions to form the pulcherrimin. in bacillus subtilis, the enzymes yvmc and cypx are known to be involved in pulcherriminic acid biosynthesis. however, the mechanisms controlling the transcription of the yvmc-cypx operon are still unknown.


RESULTS
in this work, we demonstrated that the b. subtilis yvmb marr-like regulator is the major transcription factor controlling yvmc-cypx expression. a comprehensive quantitative proteomic analysis revealed a wide and prominent effect of yvmb deletion on proteins involved in cellular processes depending on iron availability. in addition, expression of yvmb depends on iron availability. further analysis with real-time in vivo transcriptional profiling allowed us to define the yvmb regulon. we identified yvmba, yvmc-cypx and yvnb for negative regulation and yisi for positive regulation. in combination with genetic approaches, gel mobility shift assays indicated that a 14-bp palindromic motif constitutes the yvmb binding site. it was unexpected that yvmb controls expression of yisi, whose encoding protein plays a negative role in the regulation of the sporulation initiation pathway. yvmb appears as an additional regulatory element into the cell’s decision to grow or sporulate.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings reveal a possible role of the b. subtilis yvmb regulator in the regulatory networks connected to iron metabolism and to the control of proper timing of sporulation. yvmb was renamed as pchr controlling the pulcherriminic acid biosynthetic pathway of b. subtilis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pulcherriminic acidyvmbmarr-type regulatorb. subtilisiron metabolismsporulationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004963seventh framework programme317338randazzo paola issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

