BACKGROUND
accurate protein loop structure models are important to understand functions of many proteins. identifying the native or near-native models by distinguishing them from the misfolded ones is a critical step in protein loop structure prediction.


RESULTS
we have developed a pareto optimal consensus  method, which is a consensus model ranking approach to integrate multiple knowledge- or physics-based scoring functions. the procedure of identifying the models of best quality in a model set includes: 1) identifying the models at the pareto optimal front with respect to a set of scoring functions, and 2) ranking them based on the fuzzy dominance relationship to the rest of the models. we apply the poc method to a large number of decoy sets for loops of 4- to 12-residue in length using a functional space composed of several carefully-selected scoring functions: rosetta, dope, ddfire, opls-aa, and a triplet backbone dihedral potential developed in our lab. our computational results show that the sets of pareto-optimal decoys, which are typically composed of ~20% or less of the overall decoys in a set, have a good coverage of the best or near-best decoys in more than 99% of the loop targets. compared to the individual scoring function yielding best selection accuracy in the decoy sets, the poc method yields 23%, 37%, and 64% less false positives in distinguishing the native conformation, indentifying a near-native model  as top-ranked, and selecting at least one near-native model in the top-5-ranked models, respectively. similar effectiveness of the poc method is also found in the decoy sets from membrane protein loops. furthermore, the poc method outperforms the other popularly-used consensus strategies in model ranking, such as rank-by-number, rank-by-rank, rank-by-vote, and regression-based methods.


CONCLUSIONS
by integrating multiple knowledge- and physics-based scoring functions based on pareto optimality and fuzzy dominance, the poc method is effective in distinguishing the best loop models from the other ones within a loop model set.

