BACKGROUND
the saprophytic pathogen listeria monocytogenes has to cope with a variety of acidic habitats during its life cycle. the impact of low-temperature coupled with ph decrease for global gene expression and subsequent virulence properties, however, has not been elucidated.


RESULTS
qrt-pcr revealed for the first time a transient, acid triggered prfa induction of approximately 4-fold,  <dig> -fold, 7-fold and  <dig> -fold  <dig> to  <dig> min after acid shock of l. monocytogenes at 37°c, 25°c, 18°c, and 10°c, respectively. comparable data were obtained for seven different l. monocytogenes strains, demonstrating that prfa induction under these conditions is a general response of l. monocytogenes. transcriptome analysis revealed that the in vivo-relevant genes bsh, clpp, glpd, hfq, inla, inlb, inle, lisr, and lpla <dig> as well as many other genes with a putative role during infection are transiently induced upon acid shock conducted at 25°c and 37°c. twenty-five genes repressed upon acid shock are known to be down regulated during intracellular growth or by virulence regulators. these data were confirmed by qrt-pcr of twelve differentially regulated genes and by the identification of acid shock-induced genes influenced by σb. to test if up regulation of virulence genes at temperatures below 37°c correlates with pathogenicity, the capacity of l. monocytogenes to invade epithelial cells after acid shock at 25°c was measured. a 12-fold increased number of intracellular bacteria was observed  that was reduced after adaptation to the level of the unshocked control. this increased invasiveness was shown to be in line with the induction of inlab. using a nematode infection assay, we demonstrated that caenorhabditis elegans fed with acid-shocked l. monocytogenes exhibits a shorter time to death of 50%  of the worms  compared to infection with unshocked bacteria .


CONCLUSIONS
prfa and other listerial virulence genes are induced by an inorganic acid in a temperature-dependent manner. the data presented here suggest that low ph serves as a trigger for listerial pathogenicity at environmental temperatures.

listeria monocytogenesvirulence genesacidic phprfainvertebratestranscriptomeglobal responseinvasion

