BACKGROUND
rhodococcus jostii rha <dig> growing on different substrates is capable of accumulating simultaneously three types of carbon storage compounds: glycogen, polyhydroxyalkanoates , and triacylglycerols . under nitrogen-limited  condition, the level of storage increases as is commonly observed for other bacteria. the proportion of each storage compound changes with substrate, but it remains unclear what modelling approach should be adopted to predict the relative composition of the mixture of the storage compounds. we analyzed the growth of r. jostii rha <dig> under n-limited conditions using a genome-scale metabolic modelling approach to determine which global metabolic objective function could be used for the prediction.


RESULTS
the r. jostii rha <dig> model  produced during this study contains  <dig>  balanced metabolites,  <dig>  unique reactions, and  <dig>  open reading frames .

seven objective functions used with flux balance analysis  were compared for their capacity to predict the mixture of storage compounds accumulated after the sudden onset of n-limitation. predictive abilities were determined using a bayesian approach. experimental data on storage accumulation mixture  were obtained for batch cultures grown on glucose or acetate. the best fba simulation results were obtained using a novel objective function for the n-limited condition which combined the maximization of the storage fluxes and the minimization of metabolic adjustments  with the preceding non-limited conditions . the fba solutions for the non-limited growth conditions were simply constrained by the objective function of growth rate maximization. measurement of central metabolic fluxes by 13c-labelling experiments of amino acids further supported the application of the environmental moma principle in the context of changing environment. finally, it was found that the quantitative predictions of the storage mixture during n-limited storage accumulation were fairly sensitive to the biomass composition, as expected.


CONCLUSIONS
the genome-scale metabolic model analysis of r. jostii rha <dig> cultures suggested that the intracellular reaction flux profile immediately after the onset of n-limited condition are impacted by the values of the same fluxes during the period of non-limited growth. pha turned out to be the main storage pool of the mixture in r. jostii rha <dig> 

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

