BACKGROUND
insect neuropeptides are involved in diverse physiological functions and can be released as neurotransmitters or neuromodulators acting within the central nervous system, and as circulating neurohormones in insect hemolymph. the insect short neuropeptide f  peptides, related to the vertebrate neuropeptide y  peptides, have been implicated in the regulation of food intake and body size, and play a gonadotropic role in the ovaries of some insect species. recently the snpf peptides were localized in the brain of larval and adult drosophila. however, the location of the snpf receptor, a g protein-coupled receptor , has not yet been investigated in brains of any adult insect. to elucidate the sites of action of the snpf peptide, the snpf receptor tissue expression and cellular localization were analyzed in queens of the red imported fire ant, solenopsis invicta buren , an invasive social insect.


RESULTS
in the queen brains and subesophageal ganglion about  <dig> cells distributed in distinctive cell clusters  or as individual cells  were immuno-positive for the snpf receptor. most of these neurons are located in or near important sensory neuropils including the mushroom bodies, the antennal lobes, the central complex, and in different parts of the protocerebrum, as well as in the subesophageal ganglion. the localization of the snpf receptor broadly links the receptor signaling pathway with circuits regulating learning and feeding behaviors. in ovaries from mated queens, the detection of snpf receptor signal at the posterior end of oocytes in mid-oogenesis stage suggests that the snpf signaling pathway may regulate processes at the oocyte pole.


CONCLUSIONS
the analysis of snpf receptor immunolocalization shows that the snpf signaling cascade may be involved in diverse functions, and the snpf peptide may act in the brain as neurotransmitter or neuromodulator, and in the ovaries as neurohormone. to our knowledge, this is the first report of the cellular localization of a snpf receptor on the brain and ovaries of adult insects.

