BACKGROUND
human bitter taste receptors are encoded by a gene family consisting of  <dig> functional tas2r loci. in addition, humans carry  <dig> tas2r pseudogenes, some of which display evidence for substantial diversification among species, showing lineage-specific loss of function. since bitter taste is thought to help prevent the intake of toxic substances, diversity at tas2r genes could reflect the action of natural selection on the ability to recognize some bitter compounds rather than others. whether species-specific variation in tas2r pseudogenes is solely the result of genetic drift or whether it may have been influenced by selection due to different feeding behaviors has been an open question.


RESULTS
in this study, we analyzed patterns of variation at human tas2r pseudogenes in both african and non-african populations, and compared them to those observable in nonhuman primates and archaic human species. our results showed a similar worldwide distribution of allelic variation for most of the pseudogenes, with the exception of the tas2r6p and tas2r18p loci, both of which presented an unexpected higher frequency of derived alleles outside africa. at the tas2r6p locus, two snps were found in strong linkage disequilibrium  with variants in the functional tas2r <dig> gene, which showed signatures of selection. the human tas2r18p carried a species-specific stop-codon upstream of four polymorphic insertions in the reading frame. snps at this locus showed significant positive values in a number of neutrality statistics, and age estimates indicated that they arose after the homo-chimp divergence.


CONCLUSIONS
the similar distribution of variation of many human bitter receptor pseudogenes among human populations suggests that they arose from the ancestral forms by a unidirectional loss of function. however we explain the higher frequency of tas2r6p derived alleles outside africa as the effect of the balancing selection acting on the closely linked tas2r <dig> gene. in contrast, tas2r18p displayed a more complex history, suggesting an acquired function followed by a recent pseudogenization that predated the divergence of human modern and archaic species, which we hypothesize was associated with adaptions to dietary changes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bitter tasteevolutiongenetic polymorphismspseudogenizationtas2rsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

