BACKGROUND
helitrons are dna transposable elements that are proposed to replicate via a rolling circle mechanism. non-autonomous helitron elements have captured gene fragments from many genes in maize  but only a handful of genes in arabidopsis . this observation suggests very different histories for helitrons in these two species, but it is unclear which species contains helitrons that are more typical of plants.


RESULTS
we performed computational searches to identify helitrons in maize and rice genomic sequence data. using  <dig> previously identified helitrons as a seed set, we identified  <dig> helitrons in maize, five of which were polymorphic among a sample of inbred lines. our total sample of maize helitrons contained fragments of  <dig> captured genes. twenty-one of  <dig> of these helitrons did not cluster with other elements into closely related groups, suggesting substantial diversity in the maize element complement. we identified over  <dig> helitrons in the japonica rice genome. more than 70% of these were found in a collinear location in the indica rice genome, and  <dig> clustered as a single large subfamily. the japonica rice elements contained fragments of only  <dig> genes, a number similar to that in arabidopsis. given differences in gene capture between maize and rice, we examined sequence properties that could contribute to differences in capture rates, focusing on 3' palindromes that are hypothesized to play a role in transposition termination. the free energy of folding for maize helitrons were significantly lower than those in rice, but the direction of the difference differed from our prediction.


CONCLUSIONS
maize helitrons are clearly unique relative to those of rice and arabidopsis in the prevalence of gene capture, but the reasons for this difference remain elusive. maize helitrons do not seem to be more polymorphic among individuals than those of arabidopsis; they do not appear to be substantially older or younger than the helitrons in either species; and our analyses provided little evidence that the 3' hairpin plays a role.

