BACKGROUND
few serological tests are available for detecting antibodies against mycoplasma capricolum subsp. capripneumoniae, the causal agent of contagious caprine pleuropneumonia . the complement fixation test, the test prescribed for international trade purposes, uses a crude antigen that cross-reacts with all the other mycoplasma species of the “mycoides cluster” frequently infecting goat herds. the lack of a more specific test has been a real obstacle to the evaluation of the prevalence and economic impact of ccpp worldwide. a new competitive elisa kit for ccpp, based on a previous blocking elisa, was formatted at cirad and used to evaluate the prevalence of ccpp in some regions of kenya, ethiopia, mauritius, tajikistan and pakistan in an international collaborative study.


RESULTS
the strict specificity of the test was confirmed in ccpp-free goat herds exposed to other mycoplasma species of the “mycoides cluster”. prevalence studies were performed across the enzootic range of the disease in africa and asia. seroprevalence was estimated at  <dig> % in the afar region of ethiopia, whereas all the herds presented for ccpp vaccination in kenya tested positive . in mauritius, where ccpp emerged in  <dig>  nine of  <dig> herds tested positive. in central asia, where the disease was confirmed only recently, no positive animals were detected in the wakhan district of afghanistan or across the border in neighboring areas of tajikistan, whereas seroprevalence varied between  <dig> % and  <dig> % in the other districts investigated and in northern pakistan. the test was also used to monitor seroconversion in vaccinated animals.


CONCLUSIONS
this newly formatted ccpp celisa kit has retained the high specificity of the original kit. it can therefore be used to evaluate the prevalence of ccpp in countries or regions without vaccination programs. it could also be used to monitor the efficacy of vaccination campaigns as high-quality vaccines induce high rates of seroconversion.

contagious caprine pleuropneumoniacompetitive elisaseroprevalencekenyaethiopiamauritiustajikistanafghanistanpakistanvaccine quality control

