BACKGROUND
aptamer-protein interacting pairs play a variety of physiological functions and therapeutic potentials in organisms. rapidly and effectively predicting aptamer-protein interacting pairs is significant to design aptamers binding to certain interested proteins, which will give insight into understanding mechanisms of aptamer-protein interacting pairs and developing aptamer-based therapies.


RESULTS
in this study, an ensemble method is presented to predict aptamer-protein interacting pairs with hybrid features. the features for aptamers are extracted from pseudo k-tuple nucleotide composition  while the features for proteins incorporate discrete cosine transformation , disorder information, and bi-gram position specific scoring matrix . we investigate predictive capabilities of various feature spaces. the proposed ensemble method obtains the best performance with youden’s index of  <dig> , using the hybrid feature space of pseknc, dct, bi-gram pssm, and disorder information by 10-fold cross validation. the relief-incremental feature selection  method is adopted to obtain the optimal feature set. based on the optimal feature set, the proposed method achieves a balanced performance with a sensitivity of  <dig>  and a specificity of  <dig>  on the training dataset, which indicates that this method can solve the imbalanced data problem effectively. to evaluate the prediction performance objectively, an independent testing dataset is used to evaluate the proposed method. encouragingly, our proposed method performs better than previous study with a sensitivity of  <dig>  and a youden’s index of  <dig> .


CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that the proposed method can be a potential candidate for aptamer-protein interacting pair prediction, which may contribute to finding novel aptamer-protein interacting pairs and understanding the relationship between aptamers and proteins.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aptamer-protein interacting pairsensemble methodhybrid featuresimbalanced data problemnational nature science foundation of china611740446147333561174218zhang chengjin gao rui natural science foundation of shandong province of chinazr2015pg004song qing doctoral foundation of university of jinanxbs1334song qing issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

