BACKGROUND
gene duplication followed by adaptive selection is a well-accepted process leading to toxin diversification in venoms. however, emergent genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic evidence now challenges this role to be at best equivocal to other processess . cnidaria are arguably the most ancient phylum of the extant metazoa that are venomous and such provide a definitive ancestral anchor to examine the evolution of this trait.

methods
here we compare predicted toxins from the translated genome of the coral acropora digitifera to putative toxins revealed by proteomic analysis of soluble proteins discharged from nematocysts, to determine the extent to which gene duplications contribute to venom innovation in this reef-building coral species. a new bioinformatics tool called hhcompare was developed to detect potential gene duplications in the genomic data, which is made freely available .


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> potential toxin encoding genes could be predicted from the a. digitifera genome, of which  <dig>  had likely arisen by gene duplication as evinced using the hhcompare tool and verified using two standard phylogeny methods. surprisingly, only 22 %  of the potential toxin repertoire could be detected following rigorous proteomic analysis, for which only half  of the toxin proteome could be accounted for as peptides encoded by the gene duplicates. biological activities of these toxins are dominatedby putative phospholipases and toxic peptidases.


CONCLUSIONS
gene expansions in a. digitifera venom are the most extensive yet described in any venomous animal, and gene duplication plays a significant role leading to toxin diversification in this coral species. since such low numbers of toxins were detected in the proteome, it is unlikely that the venom is evolving rapidly by prey-driven positive natural selection. rather we contend that the venom has a defensive role deterring predation or harm from interspecific competition and overgrowth by fouling organisms. factors influencing translation of toxin encoding genes perhaps warrants more profound experimental consideration.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
coralnematocystvenomproteomeevolutionhidden markov model issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

