BACKGROUND
expression of recombinant proteins in green algal chloroplast holds substantial promise as a platform for the production of human therapeutic proteins. a number of proteins have been expressed in the chloroplast of chlamydomonas reinhardtii, including complex mammalian proteins, but many of these proteins accumulate to significantly lower levels than do endogenous chloroplast proteins. we examined if recombinant protein accumulation could be enhanced by genetically fusing the recombinant reporter protein, luciferase, to the carboxy-terminal end of an abundant endogenous protein, the large subunit of ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase . additionally, as recombinant proteins fused to endogenous proteins are of little clinical or commercial value, we explored the possibility of engineering our recombinant protein to be cleavable from the endogenous protein in vivo. this strategy would obviate the need for further in vitro processing steps in order to produce the desired recombinant protein. to achieve this, a native protein-processing site from preferredoxin  was placed between the rubisco lsu and luciferase coding regions in the fusion protein construct.


RESULTS
the luciferase from the fusion protein accumulated to significantly higher levels than luciferase expressed alone. by eliminating the endogenous rubisco large subunit gene , we achieved a further increase in luciferase accumulation with respect to luciferase expression in the wt background. importantly, near-wild type levels of functional rubisco holoenzyme were generated following the proteolytic removal of the fused luciferase, while luciferase activity for the fusion protein was almost ~ <dig> times greater than luciferase expressed alone. these data demonstrate the utility of using fusion proteins to enhance recombinant protein accumulation in algal chloroplasts, and also show that engineered proteolytic processing sites can be used to liberate the exogenous protein from the endogenous fusion partner, allowing for the purification of the intended mature protein.


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate the utility of fusion proteins in algal chloroplast as a method to increase accumulation of recombinant proteins that are difficult to express. since rubisco is ubiquitous to land plants and green algae, this strategy may also be applied to higher plant transgenic expression systems.

