BACKGROUND
vanyn, encoded by the dbv <dig> gene  of the biosynthetic cluster devoted to a <dig> production, is a novel protein involved in the mechanism of self-resistance in nonomuraea sp. atcc  <dig>  this filamentous actinomycete is an uncommon microorganism, difficult-to-handle but biotechnologically valuable since it produces the glycopeptide antibiotic a <dig>  which is the precursor of the second-generation dalbavancin in phase iii of clinical development. in order to investigate vanyn role in glycopeptide resistance in the producer actinomycete an appropriate host-vector expression system is required.


RESULTS
the cloning strategy of vanyn gene  in the expression vector pij <dig> yielded a recombinant protein with a tag encoding for a histidine hexamer added at the c-terminus  or at the n-terminus . these plasmids were used to transform three streptomyces spp., which are genetically-treatable high g-c content gram-positive bacteria taxonomically related to the homologous producer nonomuraea sp.. highest yield of protein expression and purification  was achieved in streptomyces venezuelae atcc  <dig>  that is a fast growing streptomyces susceptible to glycopeptides. vanyn is a transmembrane protein which was easily detached and recovered from the cell wall fraction. purified c-his6-vanyn showed d,d-carboxypeptidase and d,d-dipeptidase activities on synthetic analogs of bacterial peptidoglycan  precursors. c-his6-vanyn over-expression conferred glycopeptide resistance to s. venezuelae. on the contrary, the addition of his6-tag at the n-terminus of the protein abolished its biological activity either in vitro or in vivo assays.


CONCLUSIONS
heterologous expression of vanyn from nonomuraea sp. atcc  <dig> in s. venezuelae was successfully achieved and conferred the host an increased level of glycopeptide resistance. cellular localization of recombinant vanyn together with its enzymatic activity as a d,d-peptidase/d,d-carboxypeptidase agree with its role in removing the last d-ala from the pentapeptide pg precursors and reprogramming cell wall biosynthesis, as previously reported in glycopeptide resistant pathogens.

streptomycesheterologous protein productiond,d-carboxypeptidasesglycopeptide productionglycopeptide resistancedalbavancin

