BACKGROUND
to survive herbivore attack, plants have evolved potent mechanisms of mechanical or chemical defense that are either constitutively present or inducible after herbivore attack. due to the costs of defense deployment, plants often regulate their biosynthesis using various transcription factors . myc <dig> regulators belong to the bhlh family of transcription factors that are involved in many aspects of plant defense and development. in this study, we identified a novel myc <dig> tf from n. attenuata and characterized its regulatory function using a combination of molecular, analytic and ecological methods.


RESULTS
the transcript and targeted metabolite analyses demonstrated that namyc <dig> is mainly involved in the regulation of the biosynthesis of nicotine and phenolamides in n. attenuata. in addition, using broadly-targeted metabolite analysis, we identified a number of other metabolite features that were regulated by namyc <dig>  which, after full annotation, are expected to broaden our understanding of plant defense regulation. unlike previous reports, the biosynthesis of jasmonates and some ja-/nacoi1-dependent metabolites  were not strongly regulated by namyc <dig>  suggesting the involvement of other independent regulators. no significant differences were observed in the performance of m. sexta on myc2-silenced plants, consistent with the well-known ability of this specialist insect to tolerate nicotine.


CONCLUSIONS
by regulating the biosynthesis of nicotine, namyc <dig> is likely to enhance plant resistance against non-adapted herbivores and contribute to plant fitness; however, multiple ja/nacoi1-dependent mechanisms  that regulate separate defense responses are likely to exist in n. attenuata. the considerable variation observed amongst different plant families in the responses regulated by jasmonate signaling highlights the sophistication with which plants craft highly specific and fine-tuned responses against the herbivores that attack them.

bhlhmanduca sextamyc2transcription factorsnicotiana attenuatanicotinephenolamidesplant-insect interactionstranscriptional regulation

