BACKGROUND
osmosensing and associated signal transduction pathways have not yet been described in obligately halophilic bacteria. chromohalobacter salexigens is a halophilic bacterium with a broad range of salt tolerance. in response to osmotic stress, it synthesizes and accumulates large amounts of the compatible solutes ectoine and hydroxyectoine. in a previous work, we showed that ectoines can be also accumulated upon transport from the external medium, and that they can be used as carbon sources at optimal, but not at low salinity. this was related to an insufficient ectoine transport under these conditions.


RESULTS
a c. salexigens tn1732-induced mutant  showed a delayed growth with glucose at low and optimal salinities, could not grow at high salinity, and was able to use ectoines as carbon sources at low salinity. chr <dig> was affected in the transport and/or metabolism of glucose, and showed a deregulated ectoine uptake at any salinity, but it was not affected in ectoine metabolism. transposon insertion in chr <dig> caused deletion of three genes, csal0865-csal0867: acs, encoding an acetyl-coa synthase, mntr, encoding a transcriptional regulator of the dtxr/mntr family, and eupr, encoding a putative two-component response regulator with a luxr_c-like dna-binding helix-turn-helix domain. a single mntr mutant was sensitive to manganese, suggesting that mntr encodes a manganese-dependent transcriptional regulator. deletion of eupr led to salt-sensitivity and enabled the mutant strain to use ectoines as carbon source at low salinity. domain analysis included eupr as a member of the narl/fixj family of two component response regulators. finally, the protein encoded by csal <dig>  located three genes downstream of eupr was suggested to be the cognate histidine kinase of eupr. this protein was predicted to be a hybrid histidine kinase with one transmembrane and one cytoplasmic sensor domain.


CONCLUSIONS
this work represents the first example of the involvement of a two-component response regulator in the osmoadaptation of a true halophilic bacterium. our results pave the way to the elucidation of the signal transduction pathway involved in the control of ectoine transport in c. salexigens.

