BACKGROUND
it was recently reported that dairy cows fed a polyphenol-rich grape seed and grape marc meal extract  during the transition period had an increased milk yield, but the underlying reasons remained unclear. as polyphenols exert a broad spectrum of metabolic effects, we hypothesized that feeding of gsgme influences metabolic pathways in the liver which could account for the positive effects of gsgme in dairy cows. in order to identify these pathways, we performed genome-wide transcript profiling in the liver and lipid profiling in plasma of dairy cows fed gsgme during the transition period at 1 week postpartum.


RESULTS
transcriptomic analysis of the liver revealed  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts, from which  <dig> were up- and  <dig> were down-regulated, between cows fed gsgme and control cows. gene set enrichment analysis of the  <dig> up-regulated mrnas showed that the most enriched gene ontology  biological process terms were dealing with cell cycle regulation and the most enriched kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes pathways were p <dig> signaling and cell cycle. functional analysis of the  <dig> down-regulated mrnas revealed that a great part of these genes are involved in endoplasmic reticulum  stress-induced unfolded protein response  and inflammatory processes. accordingly, protein folding, response to unfolded protein, unfolded protein binding, chemokine activity and heat shock protein binding were identified as one of the most enriched go biological process and molecular function terms assigned to the down-regulated genes. in line with the transcriptomics data the plasma concentrations of the acute phase proteins serum amyloid a  and haptoglobin were reduced in cows fed gsgme compared to control cows. lipidomic analysis of plasma revealed no differences in the concentrations of individual species of major and minor lipid classes between cows fed gsgme and control cows.


CONCLUSIONS
analysis of hepatic transcript profile in cows fed gsgme during the transition period at 1 week postpartum indicates that polyphenol-rich feed components are able to inhibit er stress-induced upr and inflammatory processes, both of which are considered to contribute to liver-associated diseases and to impair milk performance in dairy cows, in the liver of dairy cows during early lactation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomicslipidomicsdairy cowearly lactationliverpolyphenolsgrape seed and grape marc meal extractendoplasmic reticulum stressinflammationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

