BACKGROUND
the fibre type attributes and the relationships among their properties play an important role in the differences in muscle capabilities and features. comprehensive characterisation of the skeletal muscles should study the degree of association between them and their involvement in muscle functionality. the purposes of the present study were to characterise the fibre type composition of a trunk  and a limb  muscle in the bovine species and to study the degree of coordination among contractile, metabolic and histological properties of fibre types. immunohistochemical, histochemical and histological techniques were used.


RESULTS
the fibre type composition was delineated immunohistochemically in calf muscle samples, identifying three pure  and two hybrid type fibres . most of the fibres in fd were types i and iia, while pure iix were absent. all fibre types were found in pm, the iix type being the most frequent. compared to other species, small populations of hybrid fibres were detected. the five fibre types, previously identified, were ascribed to three different acid and alkaline matpase activity patterns. type i fibres had the highest oxidative capacity and the lowest glycolytic capacity. the reverse was true for the iix fibres, whereas the type iia fibres showed intermediate properties. regarding the histological properties, type i fibres tended to be more capillarised than the ii types. correlations among contractile, metabolic and histological features on individual fibres were significantly different from zero . hybrid fibre values were positioned between their corresponding pure types, and their positions were different regarding their metabolic and contractile properties.


CONCLUSIONS
coordination among the contractile, metabolic and histological properties of fibres has been observed. however, the magnitude of the correlation among them is always below  <dig> , suggesting that the properties of muscles are not fully explained by the fibre composition. these results support the concept that, to some extent, muscle plasticity can be explained by the fibre type composition, and by the properties derived from their metabolic and histological profiles.

