BACKGROUND
autophagy is a cellular degradation process that is highly evolutionarily-conserved in yeast, plants, and animals. in plants, autophagy plays important roles in regulating intracellular degradation and recycling of amino acids in response to nutrient starvation, senescence, and other environmental stresses. foxtail millet  has strong resistance to stresses and has been proposed as an ideal material for use in the study of the physiological mechanisms of abiotic stress tolerance in plants. although the genome sequence of foxtail millet  is available, the characteristics and functions of abiotic stress-related genes remain largely unknown for this species.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> putative atg  genes in the foxtail millet genome were identified. gene duplication analysis revealed that both segmental and tandem duplication events have played significant roles in the expansion of the atg gene family in foxtail millet. comparative synteny mapping between the genomes of foxtail millet and rice suggested that the atg genes in both species have common ancestors, as their atg genes were primarily located in similar syntenic regions. gene expression analysis revealed the induced expression of  <dig> siatg genes by one or more phytohormone treatments,  <dig> siatg genes by drought, salt and cold,  <dig> siatg genes by darkness and  <dig> siatg genes by nitrogen starvation. results of qrt-pcr showing that among  <dig> siatg genes, the expression level of siatg8a was the highest after nitrogen starvation treatment  <dig> h, suggesting its potential role in tolerance to nutrient starvation. moreover, the heterologous expression of siatg8a in rice improved nitrogen starvation tolerance. compared to wild type rice, the transgenic rice performed better and had higher aboveground total nitrogen content when the plants were grown under nitrogen starvation conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
our results deepen understanding about the characteristics and functions of atg genes in foxtail millet and also identify promising new genetic resources that should be of use in future efforts to develop varieties of foxtail millet and other crop species that have resistance to nitrogen deficiency stress.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
foxtail milletautophagy-associated genesexpression patternfunctional identificationnitrogen starvationnational key project for research on transgenic biology2016zx08002-002chen ming national key project for research on transgenic biology 2016zx08002-005chen ming graduate innovation fund of harbin normal universityhsdbscx2012-04li weiwei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

