BACKGROUND
postnatal muscle growth is largely depending on the number and size of muscle fibers. the number of myofibers and to a large extent their metabolic and contractile properties, which also influence their size, are determined prenatally during the process of myogenesis. hence identification of genes and their networks governing prenatal development of skeletal muscles will provide insight into the control of muscle growth and facilitate finding the source of its variation. so far most of the genes involved in myogenesis were identified by in vitro studies using gene targeting and transgenesis. profiling of transcriptome changes during the myogenesis in vivo promises to obtain a more complete picture. in order to address this, we performed transcriptome profiling of prenatal skeletal muscle using differential display rt-pcr as on open system with the potential to detect novel transcripts. seven key stages of myogenesis  were studied in two breeds, pietrain and duroc, differing markedly in muscularity and muscle structure.


RESULTS
eighty prominent cdna fragments were sequenced,  <dig> showing stage-associated and  <dig> showing breed-associated differences in the expression, respectively. out of the resulting  <dig> unique expressed sequence tags, est,  <dig> could be assigned to known genes. the most frequent functional categories represented genes encoding myofibrillar proteins , genes involved in cell adhesion, cell-cell signaling and extracellular matrix synthesis/remodeling , genes regulating gene expression , and metabolism genes . some of the est that showed no identity to any known transcripts in the databases are located in introns of known genes and most likely represent novel exons . expression of thirteen transcripts along with five reference genes was further analyzed by means of real-time quantitative pcr. nine of the target transcripts showed higher than twofold differences in the expression between the two breeds .


CONCLUSIONS
the present study revealed several genes and novel transcripts not previously associated with myogenesis and expands our knowledge of genetic factors operating during myogenesis. genes that exhibited differences between the divergent breeds represent candidate genes for muscle growth and structure.

