BACKGROUND
in escherichia coli, nagd, yrfg, yjjg, yieh, yigl, sure, and yfbr encode 5′-nucleotidases that hydrolyze the phosphate group of 5′-nucleotides. in bacillus subtilis, genes encoding 5′-nucleotidase have remained to be identified.


RESULTS
we found that b. subtilis ycse, aral, yutf, ysaa, and yqeg show suggestive similarities to nagd. here, we expressed them in e. coli to purify the respective his6-tagged proteins. ycse exhibited significant 5′-nucleotidase activity with a broader specificity, whereas the other four enzymes had rather weak but suggestive activities with various capacities and substrate specificities. in contrast, b. subtilis yktc shares high similarity with e. coli suhb encoding an inositol monophosphatase. yktc exhibited inositol monophosphatase activity as well as 5′-nucleotidase activity preferential for gmp and imp. the ycse, yktc, and yqeg genes are induced by oxidative stress and were dispensable, although yqeg was required to maintain normal growth on solid medium. in the presence of diamide, only mutants lacking yktc exhibited enhanced growth defects, whereas the other mutants without ycse or yqeg did not.


CONCLUSIONS
accordingly, in b. subtilis, at least ycse and yktc acted as major 5′-nucleotidases and the four minor enzymes might function when the intracellular concentrations of substrates are sufficiently high. in addition, yktc is involved in resistance to oxidative stress caused by diamide, while yqeg is necessary for normal colony formation on solid medium.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacillus subtilishaloacid dehalogenase superfamilyinositol monophosphataseinositol phosphatenucleoside/nucleotide metabolism5′-nucleotidaseoxidative stressphosphataseprotein motifhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001700ministry of education, culture, sports, science, and technologyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

