BACKGROUND
fungal plant pathogens belonging to the genus venturia cause damaging scab diseases of members of the rosaceae. in terms of economic impact, the most important of these are v. inaequalis, which infects apple, and v. pirina, which is a pathogen of european pear. given that venturia fungi colonise the sub-cuticular space without penetrating plant cells, it is assumed that effectors that contribute to virulence and determination of host range will be secreted into this plant-pathogen interface. thus the predicted secretomes of a range of isolates of venturia with distinct host-ranges were interrogated to reveal putative proteins involved in virulence and pathogenicity.


RESULTS
genomes of venturia pirina  and venturia inaequalis  were sequenced and the predicted secretomes of each isolate identified. rna-seq was conducted on the apple-specific v. inaequalis isolate vi <dig>  to highlight virulence and pathogenicity components of the secretome. genes encoding over  <dig> small secreted proteins  were identified, most of which are novel to venturia, with expansion of putative effector families a feature of the genus. numerous genes with similarity to leptosphaeria maculans avrlm <dig> and the verticillium spp. ave <dig> were identified. candidates for avirulence effectors with cognate resistance genes involved in race-cultivar specificity were identified, as were putative proteins involved in host-species determination. candidate effectors were found, on average, to be in regions of relatively low gene-density and in closer proximity to repeats , compared with core eukaryotic genes.


CONCLUSIONS
comparative secretomics has revealed candidate effectors from venturia fungal plant pathogens that attack pome fruit. effectors that are putative determinants of host range were identified; both those that may be involved in race-cultivar and host-species specificity. since many of the effector candidates are in close proximity to repetitive sequences this may point to a possible mechanism for the effector gene family expansion observed and a route to diversification via transposition and repeat-induced point mutation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
venturia inaequalisventuria pirinaapplemalus x domesticaeuropean pearpyrus communissecretomeeffectorthe new zealand foundation for research, science and technologyc06x <dig> c06x0207victorian life sciences computation initiative’s  life sciences computation centrevictorian life sciences computation initiative’s  life sciences computation centrehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001215la trobe universityvictorian life sciences computation initiativeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

