BACKGROUND
spiders are known for their predatory efficiency and for their high capacity of digesting relatively large prey. they do this by combining both extracorporeal and intracellular digestion. whereas many high throughput  techniques focus on biomolecules in spider venom, so far this approach has not yet been applied to investigate the protein composition of spider midgut diverticula  and digestive fluid .


RESULTS
we here report on our investigations of both md and df of the spider nephilingis  cruentata through the use of next generation sequencing and shotgun proteomics. this shows that the df is composed of a variety of hydrolases including peptidases, carbohydrases, lipases and nuclease, as well as of toxins and regulatory proteins. we detect  <dig> astacins in the df. phylogenetic analysis of the corresponding transcript in arachnida suggests that astacins have acquired an unprecedented role for extracorporeal digestion in araneae, with different orthologs used by each family. the results of a comparative study of spiders in distinct physiological conditions allow us to propose some digestion mechanisms in this interesting animal taxon.


CONCLUSIONS
all the high throughput data allowed the demonstration that df is a secretion originating from the md. we identified enzymes involved in the extracellular and intracellular phases of digestion. besides that, data analyses show a large gene duplication event in araneae digestive process evolution, mainly of astacin genes. we were also able to identify proteins expressed and translated in the digestive system, which until now had been exclusively associated to venom glands.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
astacindigestionenzymehigh throughput  techniquesspiderarachnidanephilingis http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003593conselho nacional de desenvolvimento científico e tecnológico 237706/2012-1fuzita felipe j. netherlands proteomic centreissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

