BACKGROUND
the safety of mutagenized and genetically transformed plants remains a subject of scrutiny. data gathered and communicated on the phenotypic and molecular variation induced by gene transfer technologies will provide a scientific-based means to rationally address such concerns. in this study, genomic structural variation  and single nucleotide polymorphism rates were assessed among a sample of soybean cultivars, fast neutron-derived mutants, and five genetically transformed plants developed through agrobacterium based transformation methods.


RESULTS
on average, the number of genes affected by structural variations in transgenic plants was one order of magnitude less than that of fast neutron mutants and two orders of magnitude less than the rates observed between cultivars. structural variants in transgenic plants, while rare, occurred adjacent to the transgenes, and at unlinked loci on different chromosomes. dna repair junctions at both transgenic and unlinked sites were consistent with sequence microhomology across breakpoints. the single nucleotide substitution rates were modest in both fast neutron and transformed plants, exhibiting fewer than  <dig> substitutions genome-wide, while inter-cultivar comparisons identified over one-million single nucleotide polymorphisms.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, these patterns provide a fresh perspective on the genomic variation associated with high-energy induced mutagenesis and genetically transformed plants. the genetic transformation process infrequently results in novel genetic variation and these rare events are analogous to genetic variants occurring spontaneously, already present in the existing germplasm, or induced through other types of mutagenesis. it remains unclear how broadly these results can be applied to other crops or transformation methods.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
somaclonal variationstructural variationgenetic engineeringbiotechnologytransgenic cropssoybeanunited soybean board1520-532-5601stupar robert m. united soybean board1520-532-5603stupar robert m. minnesota soybean research and promotion council18-15cstupar robert m. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationios-1127083stupar robert m. mndrive  <dig> global food ventures fellowshipissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

