BACKGROUND
the complex geological history of mesoamerica provides the opportunity to study the impact of multiple biogeographic barriers on population differentiation. we examine phylogeographic patterns in a clade of lowland salamanders  using two mitochondrial genes and one nuclear gene. we use several phylogeographic analyses to infer the history of this clade and test hypotheses regarding the geographic origin of species and location of genetic breaks within species. we compare our results to those for other taxa to determine if historical events impacted different species in a similar manner.


RESULTS
deep genetic divergence between species indicates that they are relatively old, and two of the three widespread species show strong phylogeographic structure. comparison of mtdna and nuclear gene trees shows no evidence of hybridization or introgression between species. isolated populations of bolitoglossa rufescens from los tuxtlas region constitute a separate lineage based on molecular data and morphology, and divergence between los tuxtlas and other areas appears to predate the arrival of b. rufescens in other areas west of the isthmus of tehuantepec. the isthmus appears responsible for pliocene vicariance within b. rufescens, as has been shown for other taxa. the motagua-polochic fault system does not appear to have caused population vicariance, unlike in other systems.


CONCLUSIONS
species of nanotriton have responded to some major geological events in the same manner as other taxa, particularly in the case of the isthmus of tehuantepec. the deep divergence of the los tuxtlas populations of b. rufescens from other populations highlights the contribution of this volcanic system to patterns of regional endemism, and morphological differences observed in the los tuxtlas populations suggests that they may represent an undescribed species of bolitoglossa. the absence of phylogeographic structure in b. nympha, in contrast to the other widespread species in the subgenus, may be due to historical forest contraction and more recent range expansion in the region. phylogeographic data provide substantial insight into the evolutionary history of these morphologically similar species of salamanders, and contribute to our understanding of factors that have generated the high biodiversity of mesoamerica.

salamanderphylogeographymesoamericaisthmus of tehuantepecbiogeographybolitoglossa

