BACKGROUND
reproductive skew, the uneven distribution of reproductive success among individuals, is a common feature of many animal populations. several scenarios have been proposed to favour either high or low levels of reproductive skew. particularly a male-biased operational sex ratio and the asynchronous arrival of females is expected to cause high variation in reproductive success among males. recently it has been suggested that the type of benefits provided by males  could also strongly impact individual mating patterns, and thereby affecting reproductive skew. we tested this hypothesis in hyalinobatrachium valerioi, a neotropical glass frog with prolonged breeding and paternal care.


RESULTS
we monitored and genetically sampled a natural population in southwestern costa rica during the breeding season in  <dig> and performed parentage analysis of adult frogs and tadpoles to investigate individual mating frequencies, possible mating preferences, and estimate reproductive skew in males and females. we identified a polygamous mating system, where high proportions of males  and females  reproduced successfully. the variance in male mating success could largely be attributed to differences in time spent calling at the reproductive site, but not to body size or relatedness. female h. valerioi were not choosy and mated indiscriminately with available males.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings support the hypothesis that dilutable male benefits - such as parental care - can favour female polyandry and maintain low levels of reproductive skew among males within a population, even in the presence of direct male-male competition and a highly male-biased operational sex ratio. we hypothesize that low male reproductive skew might be a general characteristic in prolonged breeders with paternal care.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

