BACKGROUND
the different regions of a genome do not evolve at the same rate. for example, comparative genomic studies have suggested that the sex chromosomes and the regions harbouring the immune defence genes in the major histocompatability complex  may evolve faster than other genomic regions. the advent of the next generation sequencing technologies has made it possible to study which genomic regions are evolutionary liable to change and which are static, as well as enabling an increasing number of genome studies of non-model species. however, de novo sequencing of the whole genome of an organism remains non-trivial. in this study, we present the draft genome of the black grouse, which was developed using a reference-guided assembly strategy.


RESULTS
we generated 133 gbp of sequence data from one black grouse individual by the solid platform and used a combination of de novo assembly and chicken reference genome mapping to assemble the reads into  <dig> scaffolds with a total length of 1022 mb. the draft genome well covers the main chicken chromosomes 1 ~  <dig> and z which have a total length of 1001 mb. the draft genome is fragmented, but has a good coverage of the homologous chicken genes. especially,  <dig> % of the coding regions of the homologous genes have more than 90% proportion of their sequences covered. in addition, we identified ~1 m snps from the genome and identified  <dig> genomic regions which had a high nucleotide divergence between black grouse and chicken or between black grouse and turkey.


CONCLUSIONS
our results support the hypothesis that the chromosome x  evolves faster than the autosomes and our data are consistent with the mhc regions being more liable to change than the genome average. our study demonstrates how a moderate sequencing effort can be combined with existing genome references to generate a draft genome for a non-model species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

