BACKGROUND
transketolase  is a key enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway , the calvin cycle and the ribulose monophosphate  cycle. bacillus methanolicus is a facultative rump pathway methylotroph. b. methanolicus mga <dig> harbors two genes putatively coding for tkts; one located on the chromosome  and one located on the natural occurring plasmid pbm <dig> .


RESULTS
both enzymes were produced in recombinant escherichia coli, purified and shown to share similar biochemical parameters in vitro. they were found to be active as homotetramers and require thiamine pyrophosphate for catalytic activity. the inactive apoform of the tkts, yielded by dialysis against buffer containing 10 mm edta, could be reconstituted most efficiently with mn2+ and mg2+. both tkts were thermo stable at physiological temperature  with the highest activity at neutral ph. ni2+, atp and adp significantly inhibited activity of both tkts. unlike the recently characterized rump pathway enzymes fructose  <dig> -bisphosphate aldolase  and fructose  <dig> -bisphosphatase/sedoheptulose  <dig> -bisphosphatase  from b. methanolicus mga <dig>  both tkts exhibited similar kinetic parameters although they only share 76% identical amino acids. the kinetic parameters were determined for the reaction with the substrates xylulose 5-phosphate  and ribulose 5-phosphate  as well as for the reaction with the substrates glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  and fructose 6-phosphate .


CONCLUSIONS
based on the kinetic parameters no major tkt of b. methanolicus could be determined. increased expression of tkt
p
, but not of tkt
c
 during growth with methanol  argues for tktp being the major tkt relevant in the rump pathway. neither tkt exhibited activity as dihydroxyacetone synthase, as found in methylotrophic yeast, or as the evolutionary related 1-deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate synthase. the biological significance of the two tkts for b. methanolicus methylotrophy is discussed.

bacillus methanolicusmethylotrophyribulose monophosphate  pathwaytransketolase thiamine pyrophosphate  dependent enzyme

