BACKGROUND
the main limitation in performing genome-wide gene-expression profiling is the assay of low-expression genes. approaches with high throughput and high sensitivity for assaying low-expression transcripts are urgently needed for functional genomic studies. combination of the suppressive subtractive hybridization  and cdna microarray techniques using the subtracted cdna clones as probes printed on chips has greatly improved the efficiency for fishing out the differentially expressed clones and has been used before. however, it remains tedious and inefficient sequencing works for identifying genes including the great number of redundancy in the subtracted amplicons, and sacrifices the original advantages of high sensitivity of ssh in profiling low-expression transcriptomes.


RESULTS
we modified the previous combination of ssh and microarray methods by directly using the subtracted amplicons as targets to hybridize the pre-made cdna microarrays . mrna prepared from three pairs of hepatoma and non-hepatoma liver tissues was subjected to the ssh/microarray assays, as well as directly to regular cdna microarray assays for comparison. as compared to the original ssh and microarray combination assays, the modified ssh/microarray assays allowed for much easier inspection of the subtraction efficiency and identification of genes in the subtracted amplicons without tedious and inefficient sequencing work. on the other hand,  <dig> of the  <dig> genes originally filtered out by the regular cdna microarray assays because of low expression became analyzable by the ssh/microarray assays. moreover, the ssh/microarray assays detected about ten times more  hcc differentially expressed genes , particularly for those with rare transcripts, than did the regular cdna microarray assays. the differential expression was validated in  <dig> randomly selected genes in  <dig> pairs of hepatoma/non-hepatoma liver tissues using quantitative rt-pcr. the ssh/microarray approaches resulted in identifying many differentially expressed genes implicated in the regulation of cell cycle, cell death, signal transduction and cell morphogenesis, suggesting the involvement of multi-biological processes in hepato-carcinogenesis.


CONCLUSIONS
the modified ssh/microarray approach is a simple but high-sensitive and high-efficient tool for differentially profiling the low-expression transcriptomes. it is most adequate for applying to functional genomic studies.

