BACKGROUND
the human bacterial pathogen campylobacter jejuni contains two subspecies: c. jejuni subsp. jejuni  and c. jejuni subsp. doylei . although cjd strains are isolated infrequently in many parts of the world, they are obtained primarily from human clinical samples and result in an unusual clinical symptomatology in that, in addition to gastroenteritis, they are associated often with bacteremia. in this study, we describe a novel multiplex pcr method, based on the nitrate reductase  locus, that can be used to unambiguously subspeciate c. jejuni isolates.


RESULTS
internal and flanking napa and napb primer sets were designed, based on existing c. jejuni and campylobacter coli genome sequences to create two multiplex pcr primer sets, nap mpx <dig> and nap mpx <dig>  genomic dna from  <dig> c. jejuni subsp. jejuni  and  <dig> c. jejuni subsp. doylei  strains were amplified with these multiplex primer sets. the cjd strains could be distinguished clearly from the cjj strains using either nap mpx <dig> or mpx <dig>  in addition, combination of either nap multiplex method with an existing lpxa speciation multiplex method resulted in the unambiguous and simultaneous speciation and subspeciation of the thermophilic campylobacters. the cjd nap amplicons were also sequenced: all cjd strains tested contained identical  <dig> bp deletions in napa and several cjd strains contained deletions in napb.


CONCLUSIONS
the nap multiplex pcr primer sets are robust and give a 100% discrimination of c. jejuni subspecies. the ability to rapidly subspeciate c. jejuni as well as speciate thermophilic campylobacter species, most of which are pathogenic in humans, in a single amplification will be of value to clinical laboratories in strain identification and the determination of the environmental source of campylobacterioses caused by cjd. finally, the sequences of the cjd napa and napb loci suggest that cjd strains arose from a common ancestor, providing clues as to the potential evolutionary origin of cjd.

