BACKGROUND
many fruit-tree species, including relevant citrus spp varieties exhibit a reproductive biology that impairs breeding and strongly constrains genetic improvements. in citrus, juvenility increases the generation time while sexual sterility, inbreeding depression and self-incompatibility prevent the production of homozygous cultivars. genomic technology may provide citrus researchers with a new set of tools to address these various restrictions. in this work, we report a valuable genomics-based protocol for the structural analysis of deletion mutations on an heterozygous background.


RESULTS
two independent fast neutron mutants of self-incompatible clementine  were the subject of the study. both mutants, named 39b <dig> and 39e <dig>  were expected to carry dna deletions in hemizygous dosage. array-based comparative genomic hybridization  using a citrus cdna microarray allowed the identification of underrepresented genes in these two mutants. subsequent comparison of citrus deleted genes with annotated plant genomes, especially poplar, made possible to predict the presence of a large deletion in 39b <dig> of about  <dig> kb and at least two deletions of approximately  <dig> and  <dig> kb in 39e <dig>  the deletion in 39b <dig> was further characterized by pcr on available citrus bacs, which helped us to build a partial physical map of the deletion. among the deleted genes, clpc-like gene coding for a putative subunit of a multifunctional chloroplastic protease involved in the regulation of chlorophyll b synthesis was directly related to the mutated phenotype since the mutant showed a reduced chlorophyll a/b ratio in green tissues.


CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we report the use of array-cgh for the successful identification of genes included in a hemizygous deletion induced by fast neutron irradiation on citrus clementina. the study of gene content and order into the 39b <dig> deletion also led to the unexpected conclusion that microsynteny and local gene colinearity in this species were higher with populus trichocarpa than with the phylogenetically closer arabidopsis thaliana. this work corroborates the potential of citrus genomic resources to assist mutagenesis-based approaches for functional genetics, structural studies and comparative genomics, and hence to facilitate citrus variety improvement.

