BACKGROUND
the paper mulberry  is one of the multifunctional tree species in agroforestry system and is also commonly utilized in traditional medicine in china and other asian countries. to identify the transcription factors  and comprehensively understand their regulatory roles in the growth of the paper mulberry, a global transcriptomics tf prediction and the differential expression analysis among root, shoot and leaf were performed by using rna-seq.


RESULTS
results indicate that there is  <dig>  tfs encoded by the paper mulberry and they belong to the  <dig> well-characterized tf families. based on the phylogenetic analysis, the tfs exist extensively in all organisms are more conservative than those exclusively exist in plant and the paper mulberry has the closest relationship with the mulberry. according to the results of differential expression analysis, there are  <dig> tfs which exhibit the differential expression profiles in root, shoot and leaf. arr-bs, arfs, nacs and bhlhs together with other root-specific and highly expressed tfs might account for the developed lateral root and unconspicuous taproot in the paper mulberry. meanwhile, five tcps highly expressed in shoot of the paper mulberry might negatively regulate the expression of  <dig> lbds in shoot. besides, lbds, which could directly or indirectly cooperate with arfs, bhlhs and nacs, seem to be the center knot involving in the regulation of the shoot development in the paper mulberry.


CONCLUSIONS
our study provides the comprehensive transcriptomics identification of tfs in the paper mulberry without genome reference. a large number of lateral organ growth regulation related tfs exhibiting the tissue differential expression may entitle the paper mulberry the developed lateral roots, more branches and rapid growth. it will increase our knowledge of the structure and composition of tfs in tree plant and it will substantially contribute to the improving of this tree.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
lateral organ developmentpaper mulberryphylogenyroot hair elongationtranscription factorsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

