BACKGROUND
this study aimed to identify markers for muscle growth rate and the different cellular contributors to cattle muscle and to link the muscle growth rate markers to specific cell types.


RESULTS
the expression of two groups of genes in the longissimus muscle  of  <dig> brahman steers of similar age, significantly enriched for “cell cycle” and “ecm  organization” gene ontology  terms was correlated with average daily gain/kg liveweight  of the animals. however, expression of the same genes was only partly related to growth rate across a time course of postnatal lm development in two cattle genotypes, piedmontese x hereford  and wagyu x hereford . the deposition of intramuscular fat  altered the relationship between the expression of these genes and growth rate. k-means clustering across the development time course with a large set of genes  with similar expression profiles to the ecm genes was undertaken. the locations in the clusters of published markers of different cell types in muscle were identified and used to link clusters of genes to the cell type most likely to be expressing them. overall correspondence between published cell type expression of markers and predicted major cell types of expression in cattle lm was high. however, some exceptions were identified: expression of sox <dig> previously attributed to muscle satellite cells was correlated with angiogenesis. analysis of the clusters and cell types suggested that the “cell cycle” and “ecm” signals were from the fibro/adipogenic lineage. significant contributions to these signals from the muscle satellite cells, angiogenic cells and adipocytes themselves were not as strongly supported. based on the clusters and cell type markers, sets of five genes predicted to be representative of fibro/adipogenic precursors  and endothelial cells, and/or ecm remodelling and angiogenesis were identified.


CONCLUSIONS
gene sets and gene markers for the analysis of many of the major processes/cell populations contributing to muscle composition and growth have been proposed, enabling a consistent interpretation of gene expression datasets from cattle lm. the same gene sets are likely to be applicable in other cattle muscles and in other species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
adipogenesisadgangiogenesiscattle muscledevelopmentextracellular matrixissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

