BACKGROUND
naturally growing populations of olive trees are found in the mediterranean garrigue and maquis in israel. here, we used the simple sequence repeat  genetic marker technique to investigate whether these represent wild var. sylvestris. leaf samples were collected from a total of  <dig> trees at six sites of naturally growing olive populations in israel. the genetic analysis included a multi-locus lineage  analysis, rousset’s genetic distances, fst values, private alleles, other diversity values and a structure analysis. the analyses also included scions and suckers of old cultivated olive trees, for which the dominance of one clone in scions  and a second in suckers  had been shown earlier.


RESULTS
the majority of trees from a judean mts. population and from one population from the galilee showed close genetic similarity to scions of old cultivated trees. different from that, site-specific and a high number of single occurrence mlls were found in four olive populations from the galilee and carmel which also were genetically more distant from old cultivated trees, had relatively high genetic diversity values and higher numbers of private alleles. whereas in two of these populations mll <dig>  were found in low frequency, the two other populations did not contain these mlls and were very similar in their genetic structure to suckers of old cultivated olive trees that originated from sexual reproduction.


CONCLUSIONS
the genetic distinctness from old cultivated olive trees, particularly of one population from galilee and one from carmel, suggests that trees at these sites might represent wild var. sylvestris. the similarity in genetic structure of these two populations with the suckers of old cultivated trees implies that wild trees were used as rootstocks. alternatively, trees at these two sites may be remnants of old cultivated trees in which the scion-derived trunk died and was replaced by suckers. however, considering landscape and topographic environment at the two sites this second interpretation is less likely.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
crop domesticationcultivated old olive treesgene flowgraftinghistorical agricultureoleastervar. sylvestrisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

