BACKGROUND
the sepsidae family of flies is a model for investigating how sexual selection shapes courtship and sexual dimorphism in a comparative framework. however, like many non-model systems, there are few molecular resources available. large-scale sequencing and assembly have not been performed in any sepsid, and the lack of a closely related genome makes investigation of gene expression challenging. our goal was to develop an automated pipeline for de novo transcriptome assembly, and to use that pipeline to assemble and analyze the transcriptome of the sepsid themira biloba.


RESULTS
our bioinformatics pipeline uses cloud computing services to assemble and analyze the transcriptome with off-site data management, processing, and backup. it uses a multiple k-mer length approach combined with a second meta-assembly to extend transcripts and recover more bases of transcript sequences than standard single k-mer assembly. we used  <dig> sequencing to generate  <dig>  million reads from cdna generated from embryo, larva, and pupae of t. biloba and assembled a transcriptome consisting of  <dig>  contigs. annotation identified  <dig>  transcripts, including those involved in embryogenesis and limb patterning. we assembled transcriptomes from an additional three non-model organisms to demonstrate that our pipeline assembled a higher-quality transcriptome than single k-mer approaches across multiple species.


CONCLUSIONS
the pipeline we have developed for assembly and analysis increases contig length, recovers unique transcripts, and assembles more base pairs than other methods through the use of a meta-assembly. the t. biloba transcriptome is a critical resource for performing large-scale rna-seq investigations of gene expression patterns, and is the first transcriptome sequenced in this dipteran family.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
multiple k-merde novo assemblysepsidaetranscriptomepipelinecloud computingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

