BACKGROUND
plants that utilize the highly efficient c <dig> pathway of photosynthesis typically possess kranz-type leaf anatomy that consists of two morphologically and functionally distinct photosynthetic cell types, the bundle sheath  and mesophyll  cells. these two cell types differentially express many genes that are required for c <dig> capability and function. in mature c <dig> leaves, the plastidic rbcl gene, encoding the large subunit of the primary co <dig> fixation enzyme rubisco, is expressed specifically within bs cells. numerous studies have demonstrated that bs-specific rbcl gene expression is regulated predominantly at post-transcriptional levels, through the control of translation and mrna stability. the identification of regulatory factors associated with c <dig> patterns of rbcl gene expression has been an elusive goal for many years.


RESULTS
rlsb, encoded by the nuclear rlsb gene, is an s1-domain rna binding protein purified from c <dig> chloroplasts based on its specific binding to plastid-encoded rbcl mrna in vitro. co-localized with lsu to chloroplasts, rlsb is highly conserved across many plant species. most significantly, rlsb localizes specifically to leaf bundle sheath  cells in c <dig> plants. comparative analysis using maize  and arabidopsis  reveals its tight association with rbcl gene expression in both plants. reduced rlsb expression  led to reductions in rbcl mrna accumulation and lsu production. additional developmental effects, such as virescent/yellow leaves, were likely associated with decreased photosynthetic function and disruption of associated signaling networks.


CONCLUSIONS
reductions in rlsb expression, due to insertion mutation or gene silencing, are strictly correlated with reductions in rbcl gene expression in both maize and arabidopsis. in both plants, accumulation of rbcl mrna as well as synthesis of lsu protein were affected. these findings suggest that specific accumulation and binding of the rlsb binding protein to rbcl mrna within bs chloroplasts may be one determinant leading to the characteristic cell type-specific localization of rubisco in c <dig> plants. evolutionary modification of rlsb expression, from a c <dig> “default” state to bs cell-specificity, could represent one mechanism by which rbcl expression has become restricted to only one cell type in c <dig> plants.

c <dig> photosynthesiss1-domain rna binding proteinrbcl gene expressioncell-type specificitypost transcriptional controlc <dig> maizec3arabidopsis

