BACKGROUND
meiotic recombination has traditionally been explained based on the structural requirement to stabilize homologous chromosome pairs to ensure their proper meiotic segregation. competing hypotheses seek to explain the emerging findings of significant heterogeneity in recombination rates within and between genomes, but intraspecific comparisons of genome-wide recombination patterns are rare. the honey bee  exhibits the highest rate of genomic recombination among multicellular animals with about five cross-over events per chromatid.


RESULTS
here, we present a comparative analysis of recombination rates across eight genetic linkage maps of the honey bee genome to investigate which genomic sequence features are correlated with recombination rate and with its variation across the eight data sets, ranging in average marker spacing ranging from  <dig> mbp to  <dig> kbp. overall, we found that gc content explained best the variation in local recombination rate along chromosomes at the analyzed  <dig> kbp scale. in contrast, variation among the different maps was correlated to the abundance of microsatellites and several specific tri- and tetra-nucleotides.


CONCLUSIONS
the combined evidence from eight medium-scale recombination maps of the honey bee genome suggests that recombination rate variation in this highly recombining genome might be due to the dna configuration instead of distinct sequence motifs. however, more fine-scale analyses are needed. the empirical basis of eight differing genetic maps allowed for robust conclusions about the correlates of the local recombination rates and enabled the study of the relation between dna features and variability in local recombination rates, which is particularly relevant in the honey bee genome with its exceptionally high recombination rate.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
meiotic recombinationgenome evolutionred queen hypothesishotspotsgc contentsocialitycomparative genomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

