BACKGROUND
intense consumer pressure strongly affects the structural organization and function of marine ecosystems, while also having a profound effect on the phenotype of both predator and prey. allelochemicals produced by prey often render their tissues unpalatable or toxic to a majority of potential consumers, yet some marine consumers have evolved resistance to host chemical defenses. a key challenge facing marine ecologists seeking to explain the vast differences in consumer tolerance of dietary allelochemicals is understanding the biochemical and molecular mechanisms underlying diet choice. the ability of marine consumers to tolerate toxin-laden prey may involve the cooperative action of biotransformation enzymes, including the inducible cytochrome p450s , which have received little attention in marine invertebrates despite the importance of allelochemicals in their evolution.


RESULTS
here, we investigated the diversity, transcriptional response, and enzymatic activity of cyps possibly involved in allelochemical detoxification in the generalist gastropod cyphoma gibbosum, which feeds exclusively on chemically defended gorgonians. twelve new genes in cyp family  <dig> were identified from the digestive gland of c. gibbosum. laboratory-based feeding studies demonstrated a  <dig> - to  <dig> -fold induction of cyphoma cyp4bk and cyp4bl transcripts following dietary exposure to the gorgonian plexaura homomalla, which contains high concentrations of anti-predatory prostaglandins. phylogenetic analysis revealed that c. gibbosum cyp4bk and cyp4bl were most closely related to vertebrate cyp4a and cyp4f, which metabolize pathophysiologically important fatty acids, including prostaglandins. experiments involving heterologous expression of selected allelochemically-responsive c. gibbosum cyp4s indicated a possible role of one or more cyp4bl forms in eicosanoid metabolism. sequence analysis further demonstrated that cyphoma cyp4bk/4bl and vertebrate cyp4a/4f forms share identical amino acid residues at key positions within fatty acid substrate recognition sites.


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate differential regulation of cyp transcripts in a marine consumer feeding on an allelochemical-rich diet, and significantly advance our understanding of both the adaptive molecular mechanisms that marine consumers use to cope with environmental chemical pressures and the evolutionary history of allelochemical-metabolizing enzymes in the cyp superfamily.

