BACKGROUND
myocardial hypoxic-ischemic injury is the cause of significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. the cardiomyocyte response to hypoxic-ischemic injury is known to include changes in cell cycle regulators. the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p57kip <dig> is involved in cell cycle control, differentiation, stress signaling and apoptosis. in contrast to other cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, p57kip <dig> expression diminishes during postnatal life and is reactivated in the adult heart under conditions of cardiac stress. overexpression of p57kip <dig> has been previously shown to prevent apoptotic cell death in vitro by inhibiting stress-activated kinases. therefore, we hypothesized that p57kip <dig> has a protective role in cardiomyocytes under hypoxic conditions. to investigate this hypothesis, we created a transgenic mouse  that expresses p57kip <dig> specifically in cardiac tissue under the ventricular cardiomyocyte promoter mlc2v.


RESULTS
transgenic mice with cardiac specific overexpression of p57kip <dig> are viable, fertile and normally active and their hearts are morphologically indistinguishable from the control hearts and have similar heart weight/body weight ratio. the baseline functional parameters, including left ventricular systolic pressure , left ventricular end diastolic pressure , lvdp/dtmax, heart rate  and rate pressure product  were not significantly different between the different groups as assessed by the langendorff perfused heart preparation. however, after subjecting the heart ex vivo to  <dig> minutes of ischemia-reperfusion injury, the p57kip <dig> overexpressing hearts demonstrated preserved cardiac function compared to control mice with higher left ventricular developed pressure , rate pressure product  and coronary flow .


CONCLUSIONS
these data suggest that forced cardiac expression of p57kip <dig> does not affect myocardial growth, differentiation and baseline function but attenuates injury from ischemia-reperfusion in the adult mouse heart.

