BACKGROUND
so-called cyathane type diterpenoids are produced as secondary metabolites by basidiomycetes. based on their antibacterial, fungicidal, and cytotoxic properties, cyathane type terpenoids represent interesting target compounds in fungal biotechnology.


RESULTS
an indirect competitive enzyme linked immunosorbent assay has been developed for detection of cyathane type diterpenoids. rabbit polyclonal antibodies were raised against a mixture of striatal a and b conjugated to bovine serum albumin. the conditions for direct attachment of the hapten striatal b to a solid phase by passive adsorption were optimized. the cross reactivities of the striatals a, c and d, of the striatins a and b, and of the erinacines c and p to striatal b were determined. the validation study showed that the elisa was precise and sensitive. the average ic <dig> of striatal b was  <dig>  ng ml− <dig> with an inter-assay coefficient of variation  of  <dig> % . recoveries from striatal b spiked samples in the assay were in the range of  <dig>  –  <dig> %. a good correlation between the striatal b concentration measured by the elisa and by hplc-dad  was obtained from linear regression analysis. the suitability of the elisa for detection of cyathane type diterpenoids in submerged cultures and fruiting bodies of h. erinaceus was studied. it showed cross reactivity with supernatants from submerged cultures and extracts thereof, but did not show cross reactivity with extracts from fruiting bodies.


CONCLUSIONS
the developed method is appropriate for qualitative and quantitative detection of cyathane diterpenoids in complex mixtures. due to its high sensitivity and specificity, it represents an ideal screening method for discovering new cyathane diterpenoids and new potential producers of them.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cyathane diterpenoidselisahericium erinaceusstriatalerinacineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

