BACKGROUND
phylogenetic analyses strongly associate nonsocial ancestors of cooperatively-breeding or eusocial species with monogamy. because monogamy creates high-relatedness family groups, kin selection has been concluded to drive the evolution of cooperative breeding . although kin selection is criticized as inappropriate for modeling and predicting the evolution of cooperation, there are no examples where specific inclusive fitness-based predictions are intrinsically wrong. the monogamy hypothesis may be the first case of such a flawed calculation.


RESULTS
a simulation model mutated helping alleles into non-cooperative populations where females mated either once or multiply. although multiple mating produces sibling broods of lower relatedness, it also increases the likelihood that one offspring will adopt a helper role. examining this tradeoff showed that under a wide range of conditions polygamy, rather than monogamy, allowed helping to spread more rapidly through populations. further simulations with mating strategies as heritable traits confirmed that multiple-mating is selectively advantageous. although cooperation evolves similarly regardless of whether dependent young are close or more distant kin, it does not evolve if they are unrelated.


CONCLUSIONS
the solitary ancestral species to cooperative breeders may have been predominantly monogamous, but it cannot be concluded that monogamy is a predisposing state for the evolution of helping behavior. monogamy may simply be coincidental to other more important life history characteristics such as nest defense or sequential provisioning of offspring. the differing predictive outcome from a gene-based model also supports arguments that inclusive fitness formulations poorly model some evolutionary questions. nevertheless, cooperation only evolves when benefits are provided for kin: helping alleles did not increase in frequency in the absence of potential gains in indirect fitness. the key question, therefore, is not whether kin selection occurs, but how best to elucidate the differing evolutionary advantages of genetic relatedness versus genetic diversity.

