BACKGROUND
the canine transmissible venereal tumour  is a contagious cancer that is naturally transmitted between dogs by the allogeneic transfer of living cancer cells during coitus. ctvt first arose several thousand years ago and has been reported in dog populations worldwide; however, its precise distribution patterns and prevalence remain unclear.


RESULTS
we analysed historical literature and obtained ctvt prevalence information from  <dig> veterinarians and animal health workers in  <dig> countries in order to estimate ctvt’s former and current global distribution and prevalence. this analysis confirmed that ctvt is endemic in at least  <dig> countries worldwide across all inhabited continents. ctvt is estimated to be present at a prevalence of one percent or more in dogs in at least  <dig> countries in south and central america as well as in at least  <dig> countries in africa and  <dig> countries in asia. in the united states and australia, ctvt was reported to be endemic only in remote indigenous communities. comparison of current and historical reports of ctvt indicated that its prevalence has declined in northern europe, possibly due to changes in dog control laws during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. analysis of factors influencing ctvt prevalence showed that presence of free-roaming dogs was associated with increased ctvt prevalence, while dog spaying and neutering were associated with reduced ctvt prevalence. our analysis indicated no gender bias for ctvt and we found no evidence that animals with ctvt frequently harbour concurrent infectious diseases. vincristine was widely reported to be the most effective therapy for ctvt.


CONCLUSIONS
our results provide a survey of the current global distribution of ctvt, confirming that ctvt is endemic in at least  <dig> countries worldwide. additionally, our analysis highlights factors that continue to modify ctvt’s prevalence around the world and implicates free-roaming dogs as a reservoir for the disease. our analysis also documents the disappearance of the disease from the united kingdom during the twentieth century, which appears to have been an unintentional result of the introduction of dog control policies.

canine transmissible venereal tumourtransmissible cancerepidemiologyoncology

