BACKGROUND
light plays an important role in plant growth and development. in this study, the impact of light on physiology of 20-d-old arabidopsis leaves was examined through transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic analysis. since the energy-generating electron transport chains in chloroplasts and mitochondria are encoded by both nuclear and organellar genomes, sequencing total rna after removal of ribosomal rnas provides essential information on transcription of organellar genomes. the changes in the levels of adp, atp, nadp+, nadph and  <dig> metabolites upon illumination were also quantified.


RESULTS
upon illumination, while the transcription of the genes encoded by the plastid genome did not change significantly, the transcription of nuclear genes encoding different functional complexes in the photosystem are differentially regulated whereas members of the same complex are co-regulated with each other. the abundance of mrnas and proteins encoded by all three genomes are, however, not always positively correlated. one such example is the negative correlation between mrna and protein abundances of the photosystem components, which reflects the importance of post-transcriptional regulation in plant physiology.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides systems-wide datasets which allow plant researchers to examine the changes in leaf transcriptomes, proteomes and key metabolites upon illumination and to determine whether there are any correlations between changes in transcript and protein abundances of a particular gene or pathway upon illumination. the integration of data of the organelles and the photosystems, calvin-benson cycle, carbohydrate metabolism, glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle and respiratory chain, thereby provides a more complete picture to the changes in plant physiology upon illumination than has been attained to date.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
atpchloroplastmitochondriametabolomicsproteomicstranscriptomicshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003803university of hong kong 201011159168lim boon leong http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002920research grants council, university grants committee, hong kong hku772012mlim boon leong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

