BACKGROUND
under limited iron  availability maize, a strategy ii plant, improves fe acquisition through the release of phytosiderophores  into the rhizosphere and the subsequent uptake of fe-ps complexes into root cells. occurrence of strategy-i-like components and interactions with phosphorous  nutrition has been hypothesized based on molecular and physiological studies in grasses.


RESULTS
in this report transcriptomic analysis  of fe deficiency response revealed that maize roots modulated the expression levels of  <dig> genes . as expected, roots of fe-deficient maize plants overexpressed genes involved in the synthesis and release of 2’-deoxymugineic acid . a strong modulation of genes involved in regulatory aspects, fe translocation, root morphological modification, primary metabolic pathways and hormonal metabolism was induced by the nutritional stress. genes encoding transporters for fe2+  and p  were also up-regulated under fe deficiency.

fe-deficient maize plants accumulated higher amounts of p than the fe-sufficient ones, both in roots and shoots. the supply of 1 μm 59fe, as soluble  or sparingly soluble  sources to deficient plants, caused a rapid down-regulation of genes coding for ps and fe-ps transport, as well as of zmnramp <dig> and zmpht1; <dig> 

levels of 32p absorption essentially followed the rates of 59fe uptake in fe-deficient plants during fe resupply, suggesting that p accumulation might be regulated by fe uptake in maize plants.


CONCLUSIONS
the transcriptional response to fe-deficiency in maize roots confirmed the modulation of known genes involved in the strategy ii and revealed the presence of strategy i components usually described in dicots. moreover, data here presented provide evidence of a close relationship between two essential nutrients for plants, fe and p, and highlight a key role played by fe and p transporters to preserve the homeostasis of these two nutrients in maize plants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
zea maysironfe-sourcegene expressionmineral nutritionnrampphosphate transporterphosphorous uptakeroot acquisitionstrategy iiministero dell’istruzione, dell’università e della ricerca rbfr127wj9tomasi nicola issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

