BACKGROUND
the neprilysin  family of endopeptidases are zinc-metalloenzymes, the majority of which are type ii integral membrane proteins. the best characterised of this family is neprilysin, which has important roles in inactivating signalling peptides involved in modulating neuronal activity, blood pressure and the immune system. other family members include the endothelin converting enzymes , which are responsible for the final step in the synthesis of potent vasoconstrictor endothelins. the eces, as well as neprilysin, are considered valuable therapeutic targets for treating cardiovascular disease. other members of the m <dig> family have not been functionally characterised, but are also likely to have biological roles regulating peptide signalling. the recent sequencing of animal genomes has greatly increased the number of m <dig> family members in protein databases, information which can be used to reveal evolutionary relationships and to gain insight into conserved biological roles.


RESULTS
the phylogenetic analysis successfully resolved vertebrate m <dig> peptidases into seven classes, one of which appears to be specific to mammals, and insect genes into five functional classes and a series of expansions, which may include inactive peptidases. nematode genes primarily resolved into groups containing no other taxa, bar the two nematode genes associated with drosophila dmenep <dig> and dmenep <dig>  this analysis reconstructed only one relationship between chordate and invertebrate clusters, that of the ece sub-group and the dmenep <dig> related genes. analysis of amino acid utilisation in the active site of m <dig> peptidases reveals a basis for their biochemical properties. a relatively invariant s1' subsite gives the majority of m <dig> peptidases their strong preference for hydrophobic residues in p1' position. the greater variation in the s2' subsite may be instrumental in determining the specificity of m <dig> peptidases for their substrates and thus allows m <dig> peptidases to fulfil a broad range of physiological roles.


CONCLUSIONS
the m <dig> family of peptidases have diversified extensively in all species examined, indicating wide ranging roles in numerous physiological processes. it is predicted that differences in the s2' subsite are fundamental to determining the substrate specificities that facilitate this functional diversity.

