BACKGROUND
of the >  <dig> serovars of salmonella enterica subspecies i, most cause self-limiting gastrointestinal disease in a wide range of mammalian hosts. however, s. enterica serovars typhi and paratyphi a are restricted to the human host and cause the similar systemic diseases typhoid and paratyphoid fever. genome sequence similarity between paratyphi a and typhi has been attributed to convergent evolution via relatively recent recombination of a quarter of their genomes. the accumulation of pseudogenes is a key feature of these and other host-adapted pathogens, and overlapping pseudogene complements are evident in paratyphi a and typhi.


RESULTS
we report the  <dig>  mbp genome of a clinical isolate of paratyphi a, strain aku_ <dig>  completely sequenced using capillary techniques and subsequently checked using illumina/solexa resequencing. comparison with the published genome of paratyphi a atcc <dig> revealed the two are collinear and highly similar, with  <dig> single nucleotide polymorphisms and  <dig> insertions/deletions. a comparative analysis of pseudogene complements of these and two finished typhi genomes  identified several pseudogenes that had been overlooked in prior genome annotations of one or both serovars, and identified  <dig> pseudogenes shared between serovars. by determining whether each shared and serovar-specific pseudogene had been recombined between paratyphi a and typhi, we found evidence that most pseudogenes have accumulated after the recombination between serovars. we also divided pseudogenes into relative-time groups: ancestral pseudogenes inherited from a common ancestor, pseudogenes recombined between serovars which likely arose between initial divergence and later recombination, serovar-specific pseudogenes arising after recombination but prior to the last evolutionary bottlenecks in each population, and more recent strain-specific pseudogenes.


CONCLUSIONS
recombination and pseudogene-formation have been important mechanisms of genetic convergence between paratyphi a and typhi, with most pseudogenes arising independently after extensive recombination between the serovars. the recombination events, along with divergence of and within each serovar, provide a relative time scale for pseudogene-forming mutations, affording rare insights into the progression of functional gene loss associated with host adaptation in salmonella.

