BACKGROUND
big sagebrush  is one of the most widely distributed and ecologically important shrub species in western north america. this species serves as a critical habitat and food resource for many animals and invertebrates. habitat loss due to a combination of disturbances followed by establishment of invasive plant species is a serious threat to big sagebrush ecosystem sustainability. lack of genomic data has limited our understanding of the evolutionary history and ecological adaptation in this species. here, we report on the sequencing of expressed sequence tags  and detection of single nucleotide polymorphism  and simple sequence repeat  markers in subspecies of big sagebrush.


RESULTS
cdna of a. tridentata sspp. tridentata and vaseyana were normalized and sequenced using the  <dig> gs flx titanium pyrosequencing technology. assembly of the reads resulted in  <dig>  contig consensus sequences in ssp. tridentata and  <dig>  contigs in ssp. vaseyana. a blastx search against the non-redundant  protein database using  <dig>  consensus sequences obtained from a combined assembly resulted in  <dig>  sequences with significant blast alignments . a total of  <dig>  snps and  <dig> polymorphic ssrs were detected between the two subspecies. snps were validated through various methods including sequence capture. validation of snps in different individuals uncovered a high level of nucleotide variation in est sequences. est sequences of a third, tetraploid subspecies  obtained by illumina sequencing were mapped to the consensus sequences of the combined  <dig> est assembly. approximately one-third of the snps between sspp. tridentata and vaseyana identified in the combined assembly were also polymorphic within the two geographically distant ssp. wyomingensis samples.


CONCLUSIONS
we have produced a large est dataset for artemisia tridentata, which contains a large sample of the big sagebrush leaf transcriptome. snp mapping among the three subspecies suggest the origin of ssp. wyomingensis via mixed ancestry. a large number of snp and ssr markers provide the foundation for future research to address questions in big sagebrush evolution, ecological genetics, and conservation using genomic approaches.

