BACKGROUND
the filamentous cyanobacterium nostoc sp. strain pcc  <dig> can fix n <dig> when combined nitrogen is not available. furthermore, it has to cope with reactive oxygen species generated as byproducts of photosynthesis and respiration. we have previously demonstrated the synthesis of ser/thr kinase pkn <dig> as an important survival response of nostoc to oxidative damage. in this study we wished to investigate the possible involvement of this kinase in signalling peroxide stress and nitrogen deprivation.


RESULTS
quantitative rt-pcr experiments revealed that the pkn <dig> gene is induced in response to peroxide stress and to combined nitrogen starvation. electrophoretic motility assays indicated that the pkn <dig> promoter is recognized by the global transcriptional regulators fura and ntca. transcriptomic analysis comparing a pkn22-insertion mutant and the wild type strain indicated that this kinase regulates genes involved in important cellular functions such as photosynthesis, carbon metabolism and iron acquisition. since metabolic changes may lead to oxidative stress, we investigated whether this is the case with nitrogen starvation. our results rather invalidate this hypothesis thereby suggesting that the function of pkn <dig> under nitrogen starvation is independent of its role in response to peroxide stress.


CONCLUSIONS
our analyses have permitted a more complete functional description of ser/thr kinase in nostoc. we have decrypted the transcriptional regulation of the pkn <dig> gene, and analysed the whole set of genes under the control of this kinase in response to the two environmental changes often encountered by cyanobacteria in their natural habitat: oxidative stress and nitrogen deprivation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cyanobacterianostocser/thr kinaseoxidative stressnitrogen starvationsignallingmicroarrayissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

