BACKGROUND
nematodes are the most numerous animals in the soil. insect parasitic nematodes of the genus heterorhabditis are capable of selectively seeking, infecting and killing their insect-hosts in the soil. the infective juvenile  stage of the heterorhabditis nematodes is analogous to caenorhabditis elegans dauer juvenile stage, which remains in ‘arrested development’ till it finds and infects a new insect-host in the soil. h. indica is the most prevalent species of heterorhabditis in india. to understand the genes and molecular processes that govern the biology of the ij stage, and to create a resource to facilitate functional genomics and genetic exploration, we sequenced the transcriptome of h. indica ijs.


RESULTS
the de-novo sequence assembly using velvet-oases pipeline resulted in  <dig>  unique transcripts at n <dig> of  <dig>  bp, of which 53 % were annotated by blastx. h. indica transcripts showed higher orthology with parasitic nematodes as compared to free living nematodes. in-silico expression analysis showed 30 % of transcripts expressing with ≥ <dig> fpkm value. all the four canonical dauer formation pathways like cgmp-pkg, insulin, dafachronic acid and tgf-β were active in the ij stage. several other signaling pathways were highly represented in the transcriptome. twenty-four orthologs of c. elegans rnai pathway effector genes were discovered in h. indica, including nrde- <dig> that is reported for the first time in any of the parasitic nematodes. an ortholog of c. elegans tol- <dig> was also identified. further,  <dig> kinases belonging to 137 groups, and several previously unidentified members of important gene classes were identified.


CONCLUSIONS
we generated high-quality transcriptome sequence data from h. indica ijs for the first time. the transcripts showed high similarity with the parasitic nematodes, m. hapla, and a. suum as opposed to c. elegans, a species to which h. indica is more closely related. the high representation of transcripts from several signaling pathways in the ijs indicates that despite being a developmentally arrested stage; ijs are a hotbed of signaling and are actively interacting with their environment.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001503indian council of agricultural researchissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

