BACKGROUND
nuchal crest adiposity in horses and ponies has been associated with an enhanced risk of metabolic health problems. however, there is no current information on the prevalence of, and risk factors specific to, nuchal crest adiposity in horses and ponies. in addition, the cresty neck score has not previously been utilised across different seasons within a uk leisure population, it is not know whether nuchal crest adiposity shows the same seasonal trends as general obesity.


RESULTS
a cresty neck score  was given to  <dig> horses with access to pasture  at the end of winter and at the end of summer in order to obtain two prevalence estimates. risk factors were assessed using the single outcome cresty neck/no cresty neck in either season , from owner questionnaires and analysed using a mixed effects logistic regression model . agreement between winter and summer scores was assessed using weighted kappa methods.

winter cns values were significantly higher than summer cns values  indicating a systematic bias. the prevalence of a cns ≥ 3/ <dig> was  <dig> % at the end of winter, falling to  <dig> % at the end of summer and was higher in ponies  than horses  in both seasons. this may reflect a real winter increase in regional fat deposition, or an increased difficulty in obtaining an accurate estimate of regional adiposity in winter months. breed was the strongest risk factor for cns ≥3/ <dig> in both seasons, with native uk breeds appearing to be most at risk . in a separate, small validation study, the cns showed good inter-observer reliability.


CONCLUSIONS
the prevalence of a cns ≥3/ <dig> was higher at the end of winter than at the end of summer, which was the opposite pattern seasonal variation to that observed for general obesity. further studies are required to investigate the potential influence of time of year upon cns interpretation and studies utilising the cns should consider potential seasonal variability in nuchal crest adiposity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
horseponyequinecresty neckcresty neck scoreobesityseasonbody conditionprevalencerisk factorsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

