BACKGROUND
dna gel electrophoresis is a molecular biology technique for separating different sizes of dna fragments. applications of dna gel electrophoresis include dna fingerprinting , size estimation of dna, and dna separation for southern blotting. accurate interpretation of dna banding patterns from electrophoretic images can be laborious and error prone when a large number of bands are interrogated manually. although many bio-imaging techniques have been proposed, none of them can fully automate the typing of dna owing to the complexities of migration patterns typically obtained.


RESULTS
we developed an image-processing tool that automatically calls genotypes from dna gel electrophoresis images. the image processing workflow comprises three main steps: 1) lane segmentation, 2) extraction of dna bands and 3) band genotyping classification. the tool was originally intended to facilitate large-scale genotyping analysis of sugarcane cultivars. we tested the proposed tool on  <dig> gel images  obtained from polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  of pcr amplicons for detecting intron length polymorphisms  on one locus of the sugarcanes. these gel images demonstrated many challenges in automated lane/band segmentation in image processing including lane distortion, band deformity, high degree of noise in the background, and bands that are very close together . using the proposed bio-imaging workflow, lanes and dna bands contained within are properly segmented, even for adjacent bands with aberrant migration that cannot be separated by conventional techniques. the software, called gelect, automatically performs genotype calling on each lane by comparing with an all-banding reference, which was created by clustering the existing bands into the non-redundant set of reference bands. the automated genotype calling results were verified by independent manual typing by molecular biologists.


CONCLUSIONS
this work presents an automated genotyping tool from dna gel electrophoresis images, called gelect, which was written in java and made available through the imagej framework. with a novel automated image processing workflow, the tool can accurately segment lanes from a gel matrix, intelligently extract distorted and even doublet bands that are difficult to identify by existing image processing tools. consequently, genotyping from dna gel electrophoresis can be performed automatically allowing users to efficiently conduct large scale dna fingerprinting via dna gel electrophoresis. the software is freely available from http://www.biotec.or.th/gi/tools/gelect.

gelectdna gel electrophoresisgenotypingsugarcaneimage processingautomation9- <dig> september  <dig> joint 26th genome informatics workshop and asia pacific bioinformatics network  14th international conference on bioinformatics  tokyo, japan

