BACKGROUND
whole genome duplications  have been proposed to have made a significant impact on vertebrate evolution. two rounds of wgd  occurred in the common ancestor of gnathostomata and cyclostomata, followed by the third-round wgd  in a common ancestor of all modern teleosts. the 3r-derived paralogs are good models for understanding the evolution of genes after wgd, which have the potential to facilitate phenotypic diversification. however, the recent studies of 3r-derived paralogs tend to be based on in silico analyses. here we analyzed the paralogs encoding teleost olfactory marker protein , which was shown to be specifically expressed in mature olfactory sensory neurons and is expected to be involved in olfactory transduction.


RESULTS
our genome database search identified two omps  in teleosts, whereas only one was present in other vertebrates. phylogenetic and synteny analyses suggested that omp <dig> and  <dig> were derived from 3r. both omps showed distinct expression patterns in zebrafish; omp <dig> was expressed in the deep layer of the olfactory epithelium , which is consistent with previous studies of mice and zebrafish, whereas omp <dig> was sporadically expressed in the superficial layer. interestingly, omp <dig> was expressed in a very restricted region of the retina as well as in the oe. in addition, the analysis of transcriptome data of spotted gar, a non-teleost fish, revealed that single omp gene was expressed in the eyes.


CONCLUSIONS
we found distinct expression patterns of zebrafish omp <dig> and  <dig> at the tissue and cellular level. these differences in expression patterns may be explained by subfunctionalization as the model of molecular evolution. namely, single omp gene was speculated to be originally expressed in the oe and the eyes in the common ancestor of all osteichthyes . then, two omp gene paralogs derived from 3r-wgd reduced and specialized the expression patterns. this study provides a good example for analyzing a functional subdivision of the teleost oe and eyes as revealed by 3r-derived paralogs of omps.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
olfactory marker proteinwhole genome duplicationsubfunctionalizationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

