BACKGROUND
as global climate change transforms average temperature and rainfall, species distributions may meet, increasing the potential for hybridization and altering individual fitness and population growth. altered rainfall specifically may shift the strength and direction of selection, also manipulating population trajectories. here, we investigated the role of interspecific hybridization and selection imposed by rainfall on the evolution of weedy life-history in non-hybrid  and hybrid  populations using a life table response experiment.


RESULTS
in documenting long-term population dynamics, we determined intrinsic  and asymptotic  population growth rates and sensitivities, a measure of selection imposed on demographic rates. hybrid populations experienced  <dig> - <dig>  times stronger selection than wild populations for increased seedling survival. whereas crop populations generally exhibit little dormancy and wild populations often exhibit dormancy, non-hybrid populations experienced 10% stronger selection than hybrid populations for exhibiting seed dormancy. selection on survival-to-flowering in wild, not hybrid, populations declined marginally with increasing soil moisture. hybrid populations exhibited greater r, but not λ, than wild populations regardless of moisture environment. in general, fecundity contributed most to differences in λ but fecundity only contributed positively to hybrid λ relative to wild λ when precipitation was altered  and not under control watering conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
selection on key demographic traits may not change dramatically in response to rainfall, and hybridization may more strongly influence the demography of these weedy species than rainfall. if hybrid populations can respond to selection for increased dormancy, this may make it more difficult to deplete weed seed banks and increase the persistence of crop genes in weed populations.

keywords
: demographyexperimental evolutiongene flowglobal climate changelife table response experimentraphanus raphanistrumraphanus sativusrain-out shelterhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007891ryerson universitystart-up fundscampbell lesley g. shell sustainability grant at rice universitno numbercampbell lesley g. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canada402325-2011campbell lesley g. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

