BACKGROUND
planarians are considered to be among the extant animals close to one of the earliest groups of organisms that acquired a central nervous system  during evolution. planarians have a bilobed brain with nine lateral branches from which a variety of external signals are projected into different portions of the main lobes. various interneurons process different signals to regulate behavior and learning/memory. furthermore, planarians have robust regenerative ability and are attracting attention as a new model organism for the study of regeneration. here we conducted large-scale est analysis of the head region of the planarian dugesia japonica to construct a database of the head-region transcriptome, and then performed comparative analyses among related species.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  high-quality est reads were obtained from a head library of the planarian dugesia japonica, and  <dig>  unigene sequences were produced by de novo assembly. a new method devised here revealed that proteins related to metabolism and defense mechanisms have high flexibility of amino-acid substitutions within the planarian family. eight-two cns-development genes were found in the planarian . comparative analysis revealed that 91% of the planarian cns-development genes could be mapped onto the schistosome genome, but one-third of these shared genes were not expressed in the schistosome.


CONCLUSIONS
we constructed a database that is a useful resource for comparative planarian transcriptome studies. analysis comparing homologous genes between two planarian species showed that the potential of genes is important for accumulation of amino-acid substitutions. the presence of many cns-development genes in our database supports the notion that the planarian has a fundamental brain with regard to evolution and development at not only the morphological/functional, but also the genomic, level. in addition, our results indicate that the planarian cns-development genes already existed before the divergence of planarians and schistosomes from their common ancestor.

