BACKGROUND
the processing ability of poultry meat is highly related to its ultimate ph, the latter being mainly determined by the amount of glycogen in the muscle at death. the genetic determinism of glycogen and related meat quality traits has been established in the chicken but the molecular mechanisms involved in variations in these traits remain to be fully described. in this study, chicken genome arrays  were used to compare muscle gene expression profiles of chickens from fat  and lean  lines that exhibited high and low muscle glycogen content, respectively, and of individuals exhibiting extremely high  or low  muscle glycogen content originating from the f <dig> cross between the fat and lean lines. real-time rt-pcr was subsequently performed to validate the differential expression of genes either selected from the microarray analysis or whose function in regulating glycogen metabolism was well known.


RESULTS
among the genes found to be expressed in chicken p. major muscle,  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts appeared to be differentially expressed on microarrays for the f vs. l and the g+ vs. g- comparisons, respectively. some involved particularly in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism were selected for further validation studies by real-time rt-pcr. we confirmed that, as in mammals, the down-regulation of cebpb and rgs <dig> coincides with a decrease in peripheral adiposity in the chicken, but these genes are also suggested to affect muscle glycogen turnover through their role in the camp-dependent signalling pathway. several other genes were suggested to have roles in the regulation of glycogen storage in chicken muscle. pdk <dig> may act as a glycogen sensor in muscle, ugdh may compete for glycogen synthesis by using udp-glucose for glucoronidation, and prkab <dig>  prkag <dig>  and phkd may impact on glycogen turnover in muscle, through amp-activated signalling pathways.


CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first stage in the understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying variations in poultry meat quality. large scale analyses are now required to validate the role of the genes identified and ultimately to find molecular markers that can be used for selection or to optimize rearing practices.

