BACKGROUND
gastrointestinal nematodes are an important cause of reduced performance in cattle. previous studies in europe showed that after anthelmintic treatment an average gain in milk production of around  <dig> kg per day/cow can be expected. however,  these studies have mainly evaluated group-based anthelmintic treatments during the grazing season or at housing and  little is known about parameters affecting variations in the treatment response amongst cows. a better knowledge of such parameters could help to select animals that benefit most from treatment and thus lead to a more rational use of anthelmintics. therefore, a randomized, non-blinded, controlled clinical trial was performed on  <dig> commercial dairy farms  in belgium, aiming  to study the effect of eprinomectin treatment at calving on milk production and  to investigate whether the milk yield response was related to non-invasive animal parameters such that these could be used to inform targeted selective treatment decisions.


RESULTS
analyses show that eprinomectin treatment around calving resulted in an average  increase of  <dig>   kg in daily milk yield that was followed up over  <dig> days on average. milk yield responses were higher in multiparous compared to primiparous cows and in cows with a high  anti-o. ostertagi antibody level in a milk sample from the previous lactation. nonetheless, high responses were also seen in animals with a low  anti-o. ostertagi antibody level. in addition, positive treatment responses were associated with higher faecal egg counts and a moderate body condition score at calving .


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study provides novel insights into the production response after anthelmintic treatment at calving and factors which influence this. the data could be used to support the development of evidence-based targeted selective anthelmintic treatment strategies in dairy cattle.

keywords
dairy cattlegastrointestinal nematodestargeted selective treatmentanti-o. ostertagi antibody levelfaecal egg countseprinomectinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

