BACKGROUND
flax  is an agriculturally important crop with seed oil enriched in α-linolenic acid . this polyunsaturated fatty acid  is the major determinant for the quality of flax seed oil in food, nutraceuticals and industrial applications. the recently identified enzyme: phosphatidylcholine diacylglycerol cholinephosphotransferase , catalyzes the interconversion between phosphatidylcholine  and diacylglycerol , and has been shown to play an important role in pufa accumulation in arabidopsis thaliana seeds.

methods
two flax pdct genes were identified using homology-based approach.


RESULTS
in this study, we describe the isolation and characterization of two pdct genes from flax  with very high nucleotide sequence identity  whose deduced amino acid sequences exhibited approximately 55% identity with that of a. thaliana pdct . the genes encoded functionally active enzymes that were strongly expressed in developing embryos. complementation studies with the a. thaliana rod <dig> mutant demonstrated that the flax pdcts were capable of restoring pufa levels in planta. furthermore, pufa levels increased in saccharomyces cerevisiae when the flax pdcts were co-expressed with fatty acid desaturases , fad <dig> and fad <dig>  while seed-specific expression of lupdct <dig> and lupdct <dig> in a. thaliana resulted in  <dig> % and  <dig> % increases in c18-pufas, respectively, with a concomitant decrease in the proportion of oleic acid .


CONCLUSIONS
the two novel pdct homologs from flax are capable of increasing c18-pufa levels substantially in metabolically engineered yeast and transgenic a. thaliana seeds. these flax pdct proteins appear to play an important dual role in the determination of pufa content by efficiently channelling monounsaturated fas into pc for desaturation and moving the resulting pufas out of pc for subsequent use in tag synthesis. these results indicate that flax pdcts would be useful for bioengineering of oil crops to increase pufa levels for applications in human food and nutritional supplements, animal feed and industrial bioproducts.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
α-linolenic acidlinum usitatissimumphosphatidylcholine-diacyglycerol interconversionatrod1pufasaccharomyces cerevisiaeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

