BACKGROUND
cronobacter spp. , are a group of gram-negative pathogens that have been implicated as causative agents of meningitis and necrotizing enterocolitis in infants. the pathogens are linked to infant formula; however, they have also been isolated from a wide range of foods and environmental samples.


RESULTS
in this study,  <dig> samples of food, infant formula and environment were screened for the presence of cronobacter spp. in an attempt to find its source. twenty nine strains were isolated from samples of spices, herbs, infant foods, and dust obtained from household vacuum cleaners. among the  <dig> samples of infant food, infant formula, milk powder and non-milk dairy products tested, only one sample of infant food contained cronobacter spp. . the other cronobacter spp. isolates recovered include two from household vacuum dust, and  <dig> from  <dig> samples of herbs and spices. among the food categories analyzed, herbs and spices harbored the highest number of isolates, indicating plants as a possible reservoir of this pathogen. initial screening with api 20e test strips yielded  <dig> presumptive isolates. further characterization using  <dig> chromogenic media  and  <dig> sets of pcr primers detecting its , 16s rrna, zpx, glua, glub, ompa genes followed by nucleotide sequencing of some pcr amplicons did not confirm the identity of all the isolates as none of the methods proved to be free of both false positives or false negatives. the final confirmation step was done by 16s rrna sequence analysis identifying only  <dig> of the  <dig> isolates as cronobacter spp.


CONCLUSIONS
our studies showed that cronobacter spp. are highly diverse and share many phenotypic traits with other enterobacteriaceae members highlighting the need to use several methods to confirm the identity of this pathogen. none of the biochemical, chromogenic or pcr primers proved to be a reliable method for confirmation of the identity of the isolates as all of them gave either false positives or false negatives or both. it is therefore concluded that 16s rrna sequencing is pivotal to confirm the identity of the isolates.

