BACKGROUND
stem cells or immune cells targeting the central nervous system  bear significant promises for patients affected by cns disorders. brain or spinal cord delivery of therapeutic cells is limited by the blood-brain barrier  which remains one of the recognized rate-limiting steps. osmotic bbb disruption  has been shown to improve small molecule chemotherapy for brain tumors, but successful delivery of cells in conjunction with bbbd has never been reported.

we have used a clinically relevant model  of bbbd to attempt brain delivery of tall- <dig>  a human leukemic t cell line. tall- <dig> cells are potent tumor killers and have demonstrated potential for systemic tumor therapy. the pig model used is analogous to the clinical bbbd procedure. cells were injected in the carotid artery after labeling with the mri t <dig> contrast agent gdhpdo3a. contrast ct scans were used to quantify bbbd and mri was used to detect gd++-loaded cells in the brain. transcranial doppler was used to monitor cerebral blood flow. eeg recordings were used to detect seizures. immunocytochemical detection  was performed.


RESULTS
at the concentration used tall- <dig> cells were tolerated. incomplete bbbd did not allow cell entry into the brain. mri scans at  <dig> and  <dig> hours post-injection allowed visualization of topographically segregated cells in the hemisphere that underwent successful bbbd. perivascular location of tall- <dig> was confirmed in the bbbd hemisphere by cresyl violet and cd <dig> immunocytochemistry. no significant alteration in cbf or eeg activity was recorded during cell injections.


CONCLUSIONS
our data show that targeted cns cell therapy requires blood-brain barrier disruption. mri-detectable cytotoxic anti-neoplastic cells can be forced to transverse the bbb and accumulate in the perivascular space. the virtual absence of toxicity, the high anti-tumor activity of tall- <dig>  and the clinical feasibility of human osmotic bbbd suggest that this approach may be adopted to treat brain or spinal cord tumors. in addition, bbbd may favor cns entry of other cells that normally lack cns tropism.

