BACKGROUND
acinetobacter baumannii is a major health problem. the most common infection caused by a. baumannii is hospital acquired pneumonia, and the associated mortality rate is approximately 50 %. neither in vivo nor ex vivo expression profiling has been performed at the proteomic or transcriptomic level for pneumonia caused by a. baumannii. in this study, we characterized the proteome of a. baumannii under conditions that simulate those found in the airways, to gain some insight into how a. baumannii adapts to the host and to improve knowledge about the pathogenesis and virulence of this bacterium. a clinical strain of a. baumannii was grown under different conditions: in the presence of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from infected rats, of raw  <dig>  cells to simulate conditions in the respiratory tract and in control conditions. we used itraq labelling and lc-maldi-tof/tof to investigate how a. baumannii responds on exposure to macrophages/balf.


RESULTS
 <dig> proteins showed differential expression. in both models, proteins involved in the following processes were over-expressed:  pathogenesis and virulence ;  cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis ;  energy production and conversion ; and  translation . proteins involved in the following were under-expressed:  lipid metabolism ;  amino acid metabolism and transport ;  unknown function ; and  inorganic ion transport and metabolism .


CONCLUSIONS
we observed alterations in cell wall synthesis and identified  <dig> upregulated virulence-associated proteins with > <dig> peptides/protein in both ex vivo models , suggesting that these proteins are fundamental for pathogenesis and virulence in the airways. this study is the first comprehensive overview of the ex vivo proteome of a. baumannii and is an important step towards identification of diagnostic biomarkers, novel drug targets and potential vaccine candidates in the fight against pneumonia caused by a. baumannii.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
proteomeacinetobacter baumanniihost-pathogen interactionex vivovirulenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

