BACKGROUND
since traditional drug research and development is often time-consuming and high-risk, there is an increasing interest in establishing new medical indications for approved drugs, referred to as drug repositioning, which provides a relatively low-cost and high-efficiency approach for drug discovery. with the explosive growth of large-scale biochemical and phenotypic data, drug repositioning holds great potential for precision medicine in the post-genomic era. it is urgent to develop rational and systematic approaches to predict new indications for approved drugs on a large scale.


RESULTS
in this paper, we propose the two-pass random walks with restart on a heterogenous network, tp-nrwrh for short, to predict new indications for approved drugs. rather than random walk on bipartite network, we integrated the drug-drug similarity network, disease-disease similarity network and known drug-disease association network into one heterogenous network, on which the two-pass random walks with restart is implemented. we have conducted performance evaluation on two datasets of drug-disease associations, and the results show that our method has higher performance than six existing methods. a case study on the alzheimer’s disease showed that nine of top  <dig> predicted drugs have been approved or investigational for neurodegenerative diseases. the experimental results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in predicting new indications for approved drugs.


CONCLUSIONS
we proposed a two-pass random walk with restart on the drug-disease heterogeneous network, referred to as tp-nrwrh, to predict new indications for approved drugs. performance evaluation on two independent datasets showed that tp-nrwrh achieved higher performance than six existing methods on 10-fold cross validations. the case study on the alzheimer’s disease showed that nine of top  <dig> predicted drugs have been approved or are investigational for neurodegenerative diseases. the results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in predicting new indications for approved drugs.

keywords
drug positioningrandom walkheterogenous networkthe 27th international conference on genome informatics shanghai, china 3- <dig> october  <dig> http://admis.fudan.edu.cn/giw2016/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

