BACKGROUND
orb-web and cob-web weaving spiders spin dragline silk fibers that are among the strongest materials known. draglines are primarily composed of masp <dig> and masp <dig>  two spidroins  expressed in the major ampullate  silk glands. prior genetic studies of dragline silk have focused mostly on determining the sequence of these spidroins, leaving other genetic aspects of silk synthesis largely uncharacterized.


RESULTS
here, we used deep sequencing to profile gene expression patterns in the western black widow, latrodectus hesperus. we sequenced millions of 3′-anchored “tags” of cdnas derived either from ma glands or control tissue  mrnas, then associated the tags with genes by compiling a reference database from our newly constructed normalized l. hesperus cdna library and published l. hesperus sequences. we were able to determine transcript abundance and alternative polyadenylation of each of three loci encoding masp <dig>  the ratio of masp1:masp <dig> transcripts varied between individuals, but on average was similar to the estimated ratio of masp1:masp <dig> in dragline fibers. we also identified transcription of tusp <dig> in ma glands, another spidroin family member that encodes the primary component of egg-sac silk, synthesized in tubuliform glands. in addition to the spidroin paralogs, we identified  <dig> genes that are more abundantly represented in ma glands than cephalothoraxes and represent new candidates for involvement in spider silk synthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
modulating expression rates of masp <dig> variants as well as masp <dig> and tusp <dig> could lead to differences in mechanical properties of dragline fibers. many of the newly identified candidate genes likely encode secreted proteins, suggesting they could be incorporated into dragline fibers or assist in protein processing and fiber assembly. our results demonstrate previously unrecognized transcript complexity in spider silk glands.

spidroinmajor ampullate glandsalternative polyadenylationmasp1spidertag profiling

