BACKGROUND
erythropoietin  is a glycoprotein hormone that plays a principal regulatory role in erythropoiesis and initiates cell homeostatic responses to environmental challenges. the qinghai-tibet plateau is a natural laboratory for hypoxia adaptation. gymnocypris dobula is a highly specialized plateau schizothoracine fish that is restricted to > 4500 m high-altitude freshwater rivers and ponds in the qinghai-tibet plateau. the role of epo in the adaptation of schizothoracine fish to hypoxia is unknown.


RESULTS
the epo and epo receptor genes from g. dobula and four other schizothoracine fish from various altitudinal habitats were characterized. schizothoracine epos are predicted to possess 2–3 n-glycosylation  sites, 4– <dig> casein kinase ii phosphorylation  sites, 1– <dig> protein kinase c  phosphorylation sites, and four conserved cysteine residues within four helical domains, with variations in the numbers of ngs and ck <dig> sites in g. dobula. paml analysis indicated a dn/ds value  =  <dig>  in the g. dobula lineage, and a few amino acids potentially under lineage-specific positive selection were detected within the g. dobula epo. similarly, epo receptors of the two high-altitude schizothoracines , were found to be statistically on the border of positive selection using the branch-site model , and some amino acids located in the ligand-binding domain and the fibronectin type iii domain were identified as potentially positive selection sites. tissue epo expression profiling based on transcriptome sequencing of three schizothoracines  showed significant upregulation of epo expression in the brain and less significantly in the gill of g. dobula. the elevated expression together with the rapid evolution of the epo gene in g. dobula suggested a possible role for epo in adaptation to hypoxia. to test this hypothesis, gd-epo and sp-epo were cloned into an expression vector and transfected into the cultured cell line 293 t. significantly higher cell viability was observed in cells transfected with gd-epo than cells harboring sp-epo when challenged by hypoxia.


CONCLUSIONS
the deduced epo proteins of the schizothoracine fish contain characteristic structures and important domains similar to epos from other taxa. the presence of potentially positive selection sites in both epo and epor in g. dobula suggest possible adaptive evolution in the ligand-receptor binding activity of the epo signaling cascade in g. dobula. functional study indicated that the epo from high-altitude schizothoracine species demonstrated features of hypoxic adaptation by reducing toxic effects or improving cell survival when expressed in cultured cells, providing evidence of molecular adaptation to hypoxic conditions in the qinghai-tibet plateau.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
epoqinghai-tibet plateauschizothoracine fishhypoxia adaptationpositive selectionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 31130049chen liangbiao research project of the chinese ministry of education213013axu qianghua “shuguang program” supported by the shanghai education development foundation and the shanghai municipal education commission13sg51xu qianghua http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 91131006xu qianghua shanghai municipal project for first-class discipline of fishery to shanghai ocean universityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

