BACKGROUND
although extensive studies have investigated radiation-induced injuries in particular gastrointestinal  segments, a systematic comparison among the different segments on the basis of mode, magnitude and mechanism has not been reported. here, a comparative study of segment-specific molecular and cellular responses was performed on jejunum, ileum and colon obtained at three time points  from non-human primate  models exposed to  <dig>  gy or  <dig>  gy total body irradiation .


RESULTS
pathway analysis on the gene expression profiles identified radiation-induced time-, dose- and segment-dependent activation of tumor necrosis factor α  cascade, tight junction, apoptosis, cell cycle control/dna damage repair and coagulation system signaling. activation of these signaling pathways suggests that colon sustained the severest mucosal barrier disruption and inflammation, and jejunum the greatest dna damage, apoptosis and endothelial dysfunction. these more pronounced alterations correlate with the high incidence of macroscopic pathologies that are observed in the colon after tbi. compared to colon and jejunum, ileum was resistant to radiation injury. in addition to the identification a marked increase of tnfα cascade, this study also identified radiation induced strikingly up-regulated tight junction gene cldn <dig> , matrix degradation genes such as mmp <dig> , and anoikis mediated gene eda2r that mediate mucosal shedding and barrier disruption.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first systematic comparative study of the molecular and cellular responses to radiation injury in jejunum, ileum and colon. the strongest activation of tnfα cascades and the striking up-regulation of its down-stream matrix-dissociated genes suggest that tnfα modulation could be a target for mitigating radiation-induced mucosal barrier disruption.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
total body irradiationtumor necrosis factor αgastrointestinal injuryissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

