BACKGROUND
to date, only a limited number of transcriptional regulatory interactions have been uncovered. in a pilot study integrating sequence data with microarray data, a position weight matrix  performed poorly in inferring transcriptional interactions , which represent physical interactions between transcription factors  and upstream sequences of target genes. inferring a ti means that the promoter sequence of a target is inferred to match the consensus sequence motifs of a potential tf, and their interaction type such as at or rt is also predicted. thus, a robust pwm  was developed to search for consensus sequence motifs. in addition to rpwm, one feature extracted from chip-chip data was incorporated to identify potential tis under specific conditions. an interaction type classifier was assembled to predict activation/repression of potential tis using microarray data. this approach, combining an adaptive  fuzzy inference system and an interaction type classifier to predict transcriptional regulatory networks, was named adafuzzy.


RESULTS
adafuzzy was applied to predict tis using real genomics data from saccharomyces cerevisiae. following one of the latest advances in predicting tis, constrained probabilistic sparse matrix factorization , and using  <dig> transcription factors , we compared adafuzzy to four well-known approaches using over-representation analysis and gene set enrichment analysis. adafuzzy outperformed these four algorithms. furthermore, adafuzzy was shown to perform comparably to 'chip-experimental method' in inferring tis identified by two sets of large scale chip-chip data, respectively. adafuzzy was also able to classify all predicted tis into one or more of the four promoter architectures. the results coincided with known promoter architectures in yeast and provided insights into transcriptional regulatory mechanisms.


CONCLUSIONS
adafuzzy successfully integrates multiple types of data  to predict transcriptional regulatory networks. the validated success in the prediction results implies that adafuzzy can be applied to uncover tis in yeast.

