BACKGROUND
a fundamental assumption of all widely-used multiple sequence alignment techniques is that the left- and right-most positions of the input sequences are relevant to the alignment. however, the position where a sequence starts or ends can be totally arbitrary due to a number of reasons: arbitrariness in the linearisation  of a circular molecular structure; or inconsistencies introduced into sequence databases due to different linearisation standards. these scenarios are relevant, for instance, in the process of multiple sequence alignment of mitochondrial dna, viroid, viral or other genomes, which have a circular molecular structure. a solution for these inconsistencies would be to identify a suitable rotation  for each sequence; these refined sequences may in turn lead to improved multiple sequence alignments using the preferred multiple sequence alignment program.


RESULTS
we present mars, a new heuristic method for improving multiple circular sequence alignment using refined sequences. mars was implemented in the c++ programming language as a program to compute the rotations  required to best align a set of input sequences. experimental results, using real and synthetic data, show that mars improves the alignments, with respect to standard genetic measures and the inferred maximum-likelihood-based phylogenies, and outperforms state-of-the-art methods both in terms of accuracy and efficiency. our results show, among others, that the average pairwise distance in the multiple sequence alignment of a dataset of widely-studied mitochondrial dna sequences is reduced by around 5% when mars is applied before a multiple sequence alignment is performed.


CONCLUSIONS
analysing multiple sequences simultaneously is fundamental in biological research and multiple sequence alignment has been found to be a popular method for this task. conventional alignment techniques cannot be used effectively when the position where sequences start is arbitrary. we present here a method, which can be used in conjunction with any multiple sequence alignment program, to address this problem effectively and efficiently.

keywords
multiple circular sequence alignmentcircular sequencesq-gramsprogressive alignmenthttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000266engineering and physical sciences research councilep/m50788x/1ayad lorraine a. k. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

