BACKGROUND
gossypium raimondii is a verticillium wilt-resistant cotton species whose genome encodes numerous disease resistance genes that play important roles in the defence against pathogens. however, the characteristics of resistance gene analogues  and verticillium dahliae response loci  have not been investigated on a global scale. in this study, the characteristics of rga genes were systematically analysed using bioinformatics-driven methods. moreover, the potential vdrls involved in the defence response to verticillium wilt were identified by rna-seq and correlations with known resistance qtls.


RESULTS
the g. raimondii genome encodes  <dig> rga genes, and most of these genes cluster in homology groups based on high levels of similarity. interestingly, nearly half of the rga genes occurred in  <dig> rga-gene-rich clusters . the homology analysis showed that sequence exchanges and tandem duplications frequently occurred within rgrcs, and segmental duplications took place among the different rgrcs. an rna-seq analysis showed that the rga genes play roles in cotton defence responses, forming  <dig> vdrls inside in the rgrcs after being inoculated with v. dahliae. a correlation analysis found that  <dig> vdrls were adjacent to the known verticillium wilt resistance qtls, and that  <dig> were rich in nb-arc domain-containing disease resistance genes.


CONCLUSIONS
the cotton genome contains numerous rga genes, and nearly half of them are located in clusters, which evolved by sequence exchanges, tandem duplications and segmental duplications. in the rgrcs,  <dig> loci were induced by the v. dahliae inoculation, and  <dig> are in the vicinity of known verticillium wilt resistance qtls.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cottonverticillium wilt-resistantresistance gene analoguesrga-gene-rich clustersverticillium dahliae response lociissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

