BACKGROUND
erhualian pigs, one of chinese taihu pig breeds, are known to have the largest recorded litter size in the world. a lower prenatal death rate is the major contributing factor to the prolificacy of taihu pigs. cross-breeding experiments have demonstrated that taihu sows exhibit a strong maternal effect and that their large litter sizes are mainly caused by maternal genes. the growth and development of porcine embryos on gestation day   <dig> are dependent on histotroph secreted by endometrium. embryonic loss of taihu pigs on gd <dig> is lower than that of western pigs. here, endometrial samples were collected from pregnant erhualian sows  and landrace × large white  sows  on gd <dig>  digital gene expression profiling  was used to measure the gene expression in the endometrium of the two breeds.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  genes were differentially expressed between the two breeds . gene ontology  analysis showed that the differential genes involved in reproduction and growth. pathway analysis revealed that the differentially expressed genes significantly enriched in  <dig> kegg pathways. quantitative real-time rt-pcr confirmed the differential expression of eight genes. analyses of the differentially expressed genes suggested possible reasons for the difference in embryonic survival ratio between the two breeds. specifically, these findings point to a higher ratio of pge2:pgf2α in the endometrium of erhualian pigs, which facilitates the establishment and maintenance of pregnancy. we also suggest that the differences in the uterine environment lead to higher uterine capacity in erhualian pigs.


CONCLUSIONS
the dge expression profiles of erhualian and ll endometrium demonstrated differential expression of genes. our results will increase understanding of the molecular mechanisms of the low rate of embryonic loss in chinese taihu pigs, facilitate the identification of major genes that affect litter size, and be valuable for porcine transcriptomic studies.

