BACKGROUND
the transgenic rodent mutation reporter assay provides an efficient approach to identify mutagenic agents in vivo. a major advantage of this assay is that mutant reporter transgenes can be sequenced to provide information on the mode of action of a mutagen and to identify clonally expanded mutations. however, conventional dna sequence analysis is laborious and expensive for long transgenes, such as lacz , and is not normally implemented in routine screening.

methods
we developed a high-throughput next-generation sequencing  approach to simultaneously sequence large numbers of barcoded mutant lacz transgenes from different animals. we collected  <dig> mutants derived from the bone marrow dna of six muta™mouse males exposed to the well-established mutagen benzopyrene  and six solvent-exposed controls. mutants within animal samples were pooled, barcoded, and then sequenced using ngs.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> mutant sequences from  <dig> independent mutations that underwent clonal expansion. this deep sequencing analysis of mutation spectrum demonstrated that bap causes primarily guanine transversions , which is highly consistent with previous studies employing sanger sequencing. furthermore, we identified novel mutational hotspots in the lacz transgene that were previously uncharacterized by sanger sequencing. deep sequencing also allowed for an unprecedented ability to correct for clonal expansion events, improving the sensitivity of the mutation reporter assay by  <dig> %.


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate that the high-throughput nature and reduced costs offered by ngs provide a sensitive and fast approach for elucidating and comparing mutagenic mechanisms of various agents among tissues and enabling improved evaluation of genotoxins.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mutation spectranext-generation sequencingtransgenic rodent assaybenzopyrenemuta™mouseissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

