BACKGROUND
the current knowledge of eukaryote signalling originates from phenotypically diverse organisms. there is a pressing need to identify conserved signalling components among eukaryotes, which will lead to the transfer of knowledge across kingdoms. two useful properties of a eukaryote model for signalling are  reduced signalling complexity, and  conservation of signalling components. the alga ostreococcus tauri is described as the smallest free-living eukaryote. with less than  <dig>  genes, it represents a highly constrained genomic palette.


RESULTS
our survey revealed  <dig> protein kinases and  <dig> protein phosphatases . we conducted phosphoproteomic experiments and constructed domain structures and phylogenies for the catalytic protein-kinases. for each of the major kinases families we review the completeness and divergence of o. tauri representatives in comparison to the well-studied kinomes of the laboratory models arabidopsis thaliana and saccharomyces cerevisiae, and of homo sapiens. many kinase clades in o. tauri were reduced to a single member, in preference to the loss of family diversity, whereas tkl and abc <dig> clades were expanded. we also identified kinases that have been lost in a. thaliana but retained in o. tauri. for three, contrasting eukaryotic pathways – tor, mapk, and the circadian clock – we established the subset of conserved components and demonstrate conserved sites of substrate phosphorylation and kinase motifs.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that o. tauri satisfies our two central requirements. several of its kinases are more closely related to h. sapiens orthologs than s. cerevisiae is to h. sapiens. the greatly reduced kinome of o. tauri is therefore a suitable model for signalling in free-living eukaryotes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
conserved eukaryote signallingprotein kinase phylogenyostreococcus taurimodel kinomephosphorylationtor signallingmapk cascadecircadian clockissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

