BACKGROUND
hutchinson-gilford progeria syndrome  is a rare sporadic disorder with an incidence of approximately  <dig> per  <dig> million live births. the phenotypic appearance consists of short stature, sculptured nose, alopecia, prominent scalp veins, small face, loss of subcutaneous fat, faint mid-facial cyanosis, and dystrophic nails. hgps is caused by mutations in lmna, the gene that encodes nuclear lamins a and c. the most common mutation in subjects with hgps is a de novo single-base pair substitution, g608g , within exon  <dig> of lmna. this creates an abnormal splice donor site, leading to expression of a truncated protein.


RESULTS
we studied a new case of a  <dig> year-old girl with hgps and found a heterozygous point mutation, g608g, in lmna. complementary dna sequencing of rna showed that this mutation resulted in the deletion of  <dig> amino acids in the carboxyl-terminal tail domain of prelamin a. we characterized a primary dermal fibroblast cell line derived from the subject's skin. these cells expressed the mutant protein and exhibited a normal growth rate at early passage in primary culture but showed alterations in nuclear morphology. expression levels and overall distributions of nuclear lamins and emerin, an integral protein of the inner nuclear membrane, were not dramatically altered. ultrastructural analysis of the nuclear envelope using electron microscopy showed that chromatin is in close association to the nuclear lamina, even in areas with abnormal nuclear envelope morphology. the fibroblasts were hypersensitive to heat shock, and demonstrated a delayed response to heat stress.


CONCLUSIONS
dermal fibroblasts from a subject with hgps expressing a mutant truncated lamin a have dysmorphic nuclei, hypersensitivity to heat shock, and delayed response to heat stress. this suggests that the mutant protein, even when expressed at low levels, causes defective cell stability, which may be responsible for phenotypic abnormalities in the disease.

