BACKGROUND
amycolatopsis orientalis is the type species of the genus and its industrial strain hccb <dig>  derived from atcc  <dig>  has been used for large-scale production of the vital antibiotic vancomycin. however, to date, neither the complete genomic sequence of this species nor a systemic characterization of the vancomycin biosynthesis cluster  has been reported. with only the whole genome sequence of amycolatopsis mediterranei available, additional complete genomes of other species may facilitate intra-generic comparative analysis of the genus.


RESULTS
the complete genome of a. orientalis hccb <dig> comprises an  <dig> ,591-bp circular chromosome and a  <dig> -bp dissociated plasmid. in total,  <dig>  protein-coding sequences were predicted, and the species-specific genomic features of a. orientalis were analyzed in comparison with that of a. mediterranei. the common characteristics of amycolatopsis genomes were revealed via intra- and inter-generic comparative genomic analyses within the domain of actinomycetes, and led directly to the development of sequence-based amycolatopsis molecular chemotaxonomic characteristics . the chromosomal core/quasi-core and non-core configurations of the a. orientalis and the a. mediterranei genome were analyzed reciprocally, with respect to further understanding both the discriminable criteria and the evolutionary implementation. in addition,  <dig> gene clusters related to secondary metabolism, including the 64-kb vcm cluster, were identified in the genome. employing a customized pcr-targeting-based mutagenesis system along with the biochemical identification of vancomycin variants produced by the mutants, we were able to experimentally characterize a halogenase, a methyltransferase and two glycosyltransferases encoded in the vcm cluster. the broad substrate spectra characteristics of these modification enzymes were inferred.


CONCLUSIONS
this study not only extended the genetic knowledge of the genus amycolatopsis and the biochemical knowledge of vcm-related post-assembly tailoring enzymes, but also developed methodology useful for in vivo studies in a. orientalis, which has been widely considered as a barrier in this field.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
amycolatopsis orientaliscomplete genome sequencingmolecular taxonomic characteristicsvancomycin biosynthesisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

