BACKGROUND
colletotrichum truncatum is a haploid, hemibiotrophic, ascomycete fungal pathogen that causes anthracnose disease on many economically important leguminous crops. this pathogen exploits sequential biotrophic- and necrotrophic- infection strategies to colonize the host. transition from biotrophy to a destructive necrotrophic phase called the biotrophy-necrotrophy switch is critical in symptom development. c. truncatum likely secretes an arsenal of proteins that are implicated in maintaining a compatible interaction with its host. some of them might be transition specific.


RESULTS
a directional cdna library was constructed from mrna isolated from infected lens culinaris leaflet tissues displaying the biotrophy-necrotrophy switch of c. truncatum and  <dig> expressed sequence tags  with an average read of >  <dig> bp from the 5-prime end were generated. nearly 39% of the ests were predicted to encode proteins of fungal origin and among these,  <dig> ests were predicted to contain n-terminal signal peptides  in their deduced open reading frames . the  <dig> sequences could be assembled into  <dig> tentative unigenes comprising  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons. sequence analyses of unigenes revealed four potential groups: hydrolases, cell envelope associated proteins , candidate effectors and other proteins. eleven candidate effector genes were identified based on features common to characterized fungal effectors, i.e. they encode small, soluble , cysteine-rich proteins with a putative sp. for a selected subset of ceaps and candidate effectors, semiquantitative rt-pcr showed that these transcripts were either expressed constitutively in both in vitro and in planta or induced during plant infection. using potato virus x  based transient expression assays, we showed that one of the candidate effectors, i. e. contig  <dig> that encodes a cerato-platanin  domain containing protein, unlike cp proteins from other fungal pathogens was unable to elicit a hypersensitive response .


CONCLUSIONS
the current study catalogues proteins putatively secreted at the in planta biotrophy-necrotrophy transition of c. truncatum. some of these proteins may have a role in establishing compatible interaction with the host plant.

