BACKGROUND
pseudofactin ii is a recently identified biosurfactant secreted by pseudomonas fluorescens bd <dig>  the strain obtained from freshwater from the arctic archipelago of svalbard. pseudofactin ii is a novel compound identified as cyclic lipopeptide with a palmitic acid connected to the terminal amino group of eighth amino acid in peptide moiety. the c-terminal carboxylic group of the last amino acid forms a lactone with the hydroxyl of thr <dig> 

adhesion is the first stage of biofilm formation and the best moment for the action of antiadhesive and anti-biofilm compounds. adsorption of biosurfactants to a surface e.g. glass, polystyrene, silicone modifies its hydrophobicity, interfering with the microbial adhesion and desorption processes. in this study the role and applications of pseudofactin ii as a antiadhesive compound has been investigated from medicinal and therapeutic perspectives.


RESULTS
pseudofactin ii lowered the adhesion to three types of surfaces  of bacterial strains of five species: escherichia coli, enterococcus faecalis, enterococcus hirae, staphylococcus epidermidis, proteus mirabilis and two candida albicans strains. pretreatment of a polystyrene surface with  <dig>  mg/ml pseudofactin ii inhibited bacterial adhesion by 36-90% and that of c. albicans by 92-99%. the same concentration of pseudofactin ii dislodged 26-70% of preexisting biofilms grown on previously untreated surfaces. pseudofactin ii also caused a marked inhibition of the initial adhesion of e. faecalis, e. coli, e. hirae and c. albicans strains to silicone urethral catheters. the highest concentration tested  caused a total growth inhibition of s. epidermidis, partial  inhibition of other bacteria and 8-9% inhibition of c. albicans growth.


CONCLUSIONS
pseudofactin ii showed antiadhesive activity against several pathogenic microorganisms which are potential biofilm formers on catheters, implants and internal prostheses. up to 99% prevention could be achieved by  <dig>  mg/ml pseudofactin ii. in addition, pseudofactin ii dispersed preformed biofilms. pseudofactin ii can be used as a disinfectant or surface coating agent against microbial colonization of different surfaces, e.g. implants or urethral catheters.

biosurfactantlipopeptideadhesionbiofilmuropathogenic microorganisms

