BACKGROUND
members of the hemipteran suborder auchenorrhyncha  are unusual among insects known to harbor endosymbiotic bacteria in that they are associated with diverse assemblages of bacterial endosymbionts. early light microscopic surveys of species representing the two major lineages of auchenorrhyncha , found that most examined species harbored at least two morphologically distinct bacterial endosymbionts, and some harbored as many as six. recent investigations using molecular techniques have identified multiple obligate bacterial endosymbionts in cicadomorpha; however, much less is known about endosymbionts of fulgoroidea. in this study, we present the initial findings of an ongoing pcr-based survey  of planthopper-associated bacteria to document endosymbionts with a long-term history of codiversification with their fulgoroid hosts.


RESULTS
results of pcr surveys and phylogenetic analyses of 16s rdna recovered a monophyletic clade of betaproteobacteria associated with planthoppers; this clade included vidania fulgoroideae, a recently described bacterium identified in exemplars of the planthopper family cixiidae. we surveyed  <dig> planthopper species representing  <dig> fulgoroid families, and detected vidania in  <dig> species . further, we detected the sulcia endosymbiont  in  <dig> of the  <dig> species harboring vidania. concordance of the vidania phylogeny with the phylogeny of the planthopper hosts  was supported by statistical tests of codiversification. codiversification tests also supported concordance of the sulcia phylogeny with the phylogeny of the planthopper hosts, as well as concordance of planthopper-associated vidania and sulcia phylogenies.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the betaproteobacterium vidania is an ancient endosymbiont that infected the common ancestor of fulgoroidea at least  <dig> million years ago. comparison of our findings with the early light-microscopic surveys conducted by müller suggests that vidania is müller’s x-symbiont, which he hypothesized to have codiversified with most lineages of planthoppers and with the sulcia endosymbiont.

endosymbiontplanthoppersfulgoroideavidaniasulciacodiversification

