BACKGROUND
there is a lack information on the effects of the most commonly used anticoagulants for equine platelet rich plasmas  elaboration on cell counts and growth factor release from platelet rich gels . the aims of this study were 1) to compare the effects of the anticoagulants sodium citrate , acid citrate dextrose solution a  and acd-b on platelet , leukocyte  and on some parameters associated to platelet activation including mean platelet volume  and platelet distribution width  between whole blood, pure prp  and platelet-poor plasma ; 2) to compare transforming growth factor beta  <dig>  and platelet-derived growth factor isoform bb  concentrations in supernatants from pure prg , platelet-poor gel , p-prp lysate  and plasma ; 3) to establish the possible correlations between all the studied cellular and molecular parameters.


RESULTS
in all cases the three anticoagulants produced p-prps with significantly higher plt counts compared with whole blood and ppp. the concentrations of wbcs were similar between p-prp and whole blood, but significantly lower in ppp. the type of anticoagulant did not significantly affect the cell counts for each blood component. the anticoagulants also did not affect the mpv and pdw parameters. independently of the anticoagulant used, all blood components presented significantly different concentrations of pdgf-bb and tgf-β <dig>  the highest growth factor  concentrations were observed from p-prp lysates, followed by prg supernatants, ppp lysates, ppg supernatants and plasma. significant correlations were observed between plt and wbc counts , plt count and tgf-β <dig> concentration , plt count and pdgf-bb concentration  and pdgf-bb and tgf-β <dig> concentrations . the type of anticoagulant was not correlated with any of the variables evaluated.


CONCLUSIONS
the anticoagulants did not significantly influence cell counts or gf concentrations in equine prp. however, acd-b was apparently the worst anticoagulant evaluated. it is necessary to perform additional research to determine the effect of anticoagulants on the kinetics of gf elution from p-prg.

keywords
anticoagulanthorseplatelet concentratetransforming growth factor beta 1platelet derived growth factor isoform bbregenerative therapyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

