BACKGROUND
cell biology research is fundamentally limited by the number of intracellular components, particularly proteins, that can be co-measured in the same cell. therefore, cell-to-cell heterogeneity in unmeasured proteins can lead to completely different observed relations between the same measured proteins. attempts to infer such relations in a heterogeneous cell population can yield uninformative average relations if only one underlying biochemical network is assumed. to address this, we developed a method that recursively couples an iterative unmixing process with a bayesian analysis of each unmixed subpopulation.


RESULTS
our approach enables to identify the number of distinct cell subpopulations, unmix their corresponding observations and resolve the network structure of each subpopulation. using simulations of the mapk pathway upon egf and ngf stimulations we assess the performance of the method. we demonstrate that the presented method can identify better than clustering approaches the number of subpopulations within a mixture of observations, thus resolving correctly the statistical relations between the proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
coupling the unmixing of multiplexed observations with the inference of statistical relations between the measured parameters is essential for the success of both of these processes. here we present a conceptual and algorithmic solution to achieve such coupling and hence to analyze data obtained from a natural mixture of cell populations. as the technologies and necessity for multiplexed measurements are rising in the systems biology era, this work addresses an important current challenge in the analysis of the derived data.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bayesian analysiscluster analysisintercellular variabilitynetwork analysisprotein networksreverse engineeringunmixingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

