BACKGROUND
the recent emergence of high-throughput automated image acquisition technologies has forever changed how cell biologists collect and analyze data. historically, the interpretation of cellular phenotypes in different experimental conditions has been dependent upon the expert opinions of well-trained biologists. such qualitative analysis is particularly effective in detecting subtle, but important, deviations in phenotypes. however, while the rapid and continuing development of automated microscope-based technologies now facilitates the acquisition of trillions of cells in thousands of diverse experimental conditions, such as in the context of rna interference  or small-molecule screens, the massive size of these datasets precludes human analysis. thus, the development of automated methods which aim to identify novel and biological relevant phenotypes online is one of the major challenges in high-throughput image-based screening. ideally, phenotype discovery methods should be designed to utilize prior/existing information and tackle three challenging tasks, i.e. restoring pre-defined biological meaningful phenotypes, differentiating novel phenotypes from known ones and clarifying novel phenotypes from each other. arbitrarily extracted information causes biased analysis, while combining the complete existing datasets with each new image is intractable in high-throughput screens.


RESULTS
here we present the design and implementation of a novel and robust online phenotype discovery method with broad applicability that can be used in diverse experimental contexts, especially high-throughput rnai screens. this method features phenotype modelling and iterative cluster merging using improved gap statistics. a gaussian mixture model  is employed to estimate the distribution of each existing phenotype, and then used as reference distribution in gap statistics. this method is broadly applicable to a number of different types of image-based datasets derived from a wide spectrum of experimental conditions and is suitable to adaptively process new images which are continuously added to existing datasets. validations were carried out on different dataset, including published rnai screening using drosophila embryos , dataset for cell cycle phase identification using hela cells  and synthetic dataset using polygons, our methods tackled three aforementioned tasks effectively with an accuracy range of 85%–90%. when our method is implemented in the context of a drosophila genome-scale rnai image-based screening of cultured cells aimed to identifying the contribution of individual genes towards the regulation of cell-shape, it efficiently discovers meaningful new phenotypes and provides novel biological insight. we also propose a two-step procedure to modify the novelty detection method based on one-class svm, so that it can be used to online phenotype discovery. in different conditions, we compared the svm based method with our method using various datasets and our methods consistently outperformed svm based method in at least two of three tasks by 2% to 5%. these results demonstrate that our methods can be used to better identify novel phenotypes in image-based datasets from a wide range of conditions and organisms.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that our method can detect various novel phenotypes effectively in complex datasets. experiment results also validate that our method performs consistently under different order of image input, variation of starting conditions including the number and composition of existing phenotypes, and dataset from different screens. in our findings, the proposed method is suitable for online phenotype discovery in diverse high-throughput image-based genetic and chemical screens.

