BACKGROUND
pathways in biological system often cooperate with each other to function. changes of interactions among pathways tightly associate with alterations in the properties and functions of the cell and hence alterations in the phenotype. so, the pathway interactions and especially their changes over time corresponding to specific phenotype are critical to understanding cell functions and phenotypic plasticity.

methods
with prior-defined pathways and incorporated protein-protein interaction  data, we counted ppis between corresponding gene sets of each pair of distinct pathways to construct a comprehensive pathway network. then we proposed a novel concept, characteristic sub pathway network , to realize the phenotype-specific pathway interactions. by adding gene expression data regarding a given phenotype, angiogenesis, active ppis corresponding to stimulation of interleukin- <dig>  and tumor necrosis factor α  on human umbilical vein endothelial cells  respectively were derived. two kinds of cspn, namely the static or the dynamic cspn, were detected by counting active ppis.


RESULTS
a comprehensive pathway network containing  <dig> signalling pathways as nodes and  <dig> pathway interactions were obtained. two phenotype-specific cspns for angiogenesis, corresponding to stimulation of il- <dig> and tnf-α on huvec respectively, were addressed. from phenotype-specific cspns, a static cspn involving interactions among b cell receptor, t cell receptor, toll-like receptor, mapk, vegf, and erbb signalling pathways, and a dynamic cspn involving interactions among tgf-β, wnt, p <dig> signalling pathways and cell cycle pathway, were detected for angiogenesis on huvec after stimulation of il- <dig> and tnf-α respectively. we inferred that, in certain case, the static cspn maintains related basic functions of the cells, whereas the dynamic cspn manifests the cells' plastic responses to stimulus and therefore reflects the cells' phenotypic plasticity.


CONCLUSIONS
the comprehensive pathway network helps us realize the cooperative behaviours among pathways. moreover, two kinds of potential cspns found in this work, the static cspn and the dynamic cspn, are helpful to deeply understand the specific function of huvec and its phenotypic plasticity in regard to angiogenesis.

18- <dig> january  <dig> the eighth asia pacific bioinformatics conference  bangalore, india

