BACKGROUND
mice lacking kalirin- <dig> , a rho gdp/gtp exchange factor, self-administer cocaine at a higher rate than wildtype mice, and show an exaggerated locomotor response to experimenter-administered cocaine. kal <dig>  which localizes to post-synaptic densities at glutamatergic synapses, interacts directly with the glun2b subunit of the n-methyl-d-aspartate  receptor. consistent with these observations, kal <dig> plays an essential role in nmda receptor dependent long term potentiation and depression, and glutamatergic transmission plays a key role in the response to chronic cocaine. a number of genetic studies have implicated altered kalirin expression in schizophrenia and other disorders such as alzheimer’s disease.


RESULTS
a comparison of the effects of experimenter-administered cocaine on mice lacking all kalirin isoforms to its effects on mice lacking only kalirin- <dig> identified kal <dig> as the key isoform whose deletion produces exaggerated locomotor responses to cocaine. pretreatment of kal7ko mice with a low dose of ifenprodil, a selective glun2b antagonist, eliminated their enhanced locomotor response to cocaine, revealing an important role for glun2b in this behavior. selective knockout of kalirin in dopamine transporter expressing neurons produced a transient enhancement of cocaine-induced locomotion, while knockout of kalirin in drd1a- or drd2-dopamine receptor expressing neurons was without effect. as observed in kalirin global knockout mice, eliminating kalirin expression in drd2-expressing neurons increased exploratory behavior in the elevated zero maze, an effect eliminated by pretreatment with ifenprodil.


CONCLUSIONS
the cocaine-sensitive neuronal pathways which are most sensitive to altered kalirin function may be the pathways most dependent on glun2b and drd <dig> 

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cre recombinasegdp/gtp exchange factorgeftrioanxietylocomotor sensitizationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthda018274da023082eipper betty a. mains richard e. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

