BACKGROUND
the type-2c protein phosphatases , negatively regulating aba responses and mapk cascade pathways, play important roles in stress signal transduction in plants. brachypodium distachyon is a new model plant for exploring the functional genomics of temperate grasses, cereals and biofuel crops. to date, genome-wide identification and analysis of the pp2c gene family in b. distachyon have not been investigated.


RESULTS
in this study,  <dig> pp2c genes in b. distachyon were identified. domain-based analyses of pp2c proteins showed that they all contained the phosphatase domains featured as  <dig> conserved signature motifs. although not all phosphatase domains of bdpp2c members included all  <dig> motifs, tertiary structure analysis showed that four residues contributing to magnesium/manganese ions  coordination were conserved, except for two noncanonical members. the analysis of their chromosomal localizations showed that most of the bdpp2c genes were located within the low cpg density region. phylogenetic tree and synteny blocks analyses among b. distachyon, arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa revealed that all pp2c members from the three species can be phylogenetically categorized into  <dig> subgroups  and bdpp2cs were evolutionarily more closely related to ospp2cs than to atpp2cs. segmental duplications contributed particularly to the expansion of the bdpp2c gene family and all duplicated bdpp2cs evolved mainly from purifying selection. real-time quantitative reverse transcription pcr  analysis showed that bdpp2cs were broadly expressed in disparate tissues. we also found that almost all members displayed up-regulation in response to abiotic stresses such as cold, heat, peg and nacl treatments, but down-regulation to biotic stresses such as ph <dig>  guy <dig> and f <dig> infection.


CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, a comprehensive analysis of genome-wide identification and characterization of protein domains, phylogenetic relationship, gene and protein structure, chromosome location and expression pattern of the pp2c gene family was carried out for the first time in a new model monocot, i.e., b. distachyon. our results provide a reference for genome-wide identification of the pp2c gene family of other species and also provide a foundation for future functional research on pp2c genes in b. distachyon.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
b. distachyonprotein phosphatases 2c phylogenetic analysisgene expression profilingshanghai landscaping administrative bureaug152423chu zhaoqing http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002843shanghai institutes for biological sciences, chinese academy of sciences g152423chu zhaoqing issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

