BACKGROUND
cellular processes are known to be modular and are realized by groups of proteins implicated in common biological functions. such groups of proteins are called functional modules, and many community detection methods have been devised for their discovery from protein interaction networks  data. in current agglomerative clustering approaches, vertices with just a very few neighbors are often classified as separate clusters, which does not make sense biologically. also, a major limitation of agglomerative techniques is that their computational efficiency do not scale well to large pins. finally, pin data obtained from large scale experiments generally contain many false positives, and this makes it hard for agglomerative clustering methods to find the correct clusters, since they are known to be sensitive to noisy data.


RESULTS
we propose a local similarity premetric, the relative vertex clustering value, as a new criterion allowing to decide when a node can be added to a given node's cluster and which addresses the above three issues. based on this criterion, we introduce a novel and very fast agglomerative clustering technique, fac-pin, for discovering functional modules and protein complexes from a pin data.


CONCLUSIONS
our proposed fac-pin algorithm is applied to nine pin data from eight different species including the yeast pin, and the identified functional modules are validated using gene ontology  annotations from david bioinformatics resources. identified protein complexes are also validated using experimentally verified complexes. computational results show that fac-pin can discover functional modules or protein complexes from pins more accurately and more efficiently than hc-pin and cnm, the current state-of-the-art approaches for clustering pins in an agglomerative manner.

protein complexesweighted networksfunctional modulesnetwork clustering criterionprotein interaction networks21- <dig> august  <dig> the 9th iapr conference on pattern recognition in bioinformatics stockholm, sweden

