BACKGROUND
calcium-dependent protein kinases  play vital roles in plant growth and development, biotic and abiotic stress responses, and hormone signaling. little is known about the cdpk gene family in grapevine.


RESULTS
in this study, we performed a genome-wide analysis of the 12x grape genome  and identified nineteen cdpk genes. comparison of the structures of grape cdpk genes allowed us to examine their functional conservation and differentiation. segmentally duplicated grape cdpk genes showed high structural conservation and contributed to gene family expansion. additional comparisons between grape and arabidopsis thaliana demonstrated that several grape cdpk genes occured in the corresponding syntenic blocks of arabidopsis, suggesting that these genes arose before the divergence of grapevine and arabidopsis. phylogenetic analysis divided the grape cdpk genes into four groups. furthermore, we examined the expression of the corresponding nineteen homologous cdpk genes in the chinese wild grape  under various conditions, including biotic stress, abiotic stress, and hormone treatments. the expression profiles derived from reverse transcription and quantitative pcr suggested that a large number of vpcdpks responded to various stimuli on the transcriptional level, indicating their versatile roles in the responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. moreover, we examined the subcellular localization of vpcdpks by transiently expressing six vpcdpk-gfp fusion proteins in arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts; this revealed high variability consistent with potential functional differences.


CONCLUSIONS
taken as a whole, our data provide significant insights into the evolution and function of grape cdpks and a framework for future investigation of grape cdpk genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
grapevine  cdpksynteny analysisphylogenetic treesubcellular localizationexpression profilesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

