BACKGROUND
observation of gene expression changes implying gene regulations using a repetitive experiment in time course has become more and more important. however, there is no effective method which can handle such kind of data. for instance, in a clinical/biological progression like inflammatory response or cancer formation, a great number of differentially expressed genes at different time points could be identified through a large-scale microarray approach. for each repetitive experiment with different samples, converting the microarray datasets into transactional databases with significant singleton genes at each time point would allow sequential patterns implying gene regulations to be identified. although traditional sequential pattern mining methods have been successfully proposed and widely used in different interesting topics, like mining customer purchasing sequences from a transactional database, to our knowledge, the methods are not suitable for such biological dataset because every transaction in the converted database may contain too many items/genes.


RESULTS
in this paper, we propose a new algorithm called ctgr-span  to efficiently mine ctgr-sps  even on larger datasets where traditional algorithms are infeasible. the ctgr-span includes several biologically designed parameters based on the characteristics of gene regulation. we perform an optimal parameter tuning process using a go enrichment analysis to yield ctgr-sps more meaningful biologically. the proposed method was evaluated with two publicly available human time course microarray datasets and it was shown that it outperformed the traditional methods in terms of execution efficiency. after evaluating with previous literature, the resulting patterns also strongly correlated with the experimental backgrounds of the datasets used in this study.


CONCLUSIONS
we propose an efficient ctgr-span to mine several biologically meaningful ctgr-sps. we postulate that the biologist can benefit from our new algorithm since the patterns implying gene regulations could provide further insights into the mechanisms of novel gene regulations during a biological or clinical progression. the java source code, program tutorial and other related materials used in this program are available at http://websystem.csie.ncku.edu.tw/ctgr-span.rar.

4- <dig> october  <dig> ieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine  <dig> philadelphia, pa, usa

