BACKGROUND
human α-synuclein is a small-sized, natively unfolded protein that in fibrillar form is the primary component of lewy bodies, the pathological hallmark of parkinson’s disease. experimental evidence suggests that α-synuclein aggregation is the key event that triggers neurotoxicity although additional findings have proposed a protective role of α-synuclein against oxidative stress. one way to address the mechanism of this protective action is to evaluate α-synuclein-mediated protection by delivering this protein inside cells using a chimeric protein fused with the tat-transduction domain of hiv tat, named tat-α-synuclein.


RESULTS
a reliable protocol was designed to efficiently express and purify two different forms of human α-synuclein. the synthetic cdnas encoding for the native α-synuclein and the fusion protein with the transduction domain of tat protein from hiv were overexpressed in a bl <dig> e. coli strain as his-tagged proteins. the recombinant proteins largely localized  to the periplasmic space. by using a quick purification protocol, based on recovery of periplasmic space content and metal-chelating chromatography, the recombinant α-synuclein protein forms could be purified in a single step to ≥ 95% purity. both α-synuclein recombinant proteins form fibrils and the tat-α-synuclein is also cytotoxic in the micromolar concentration range.


CONCLUSIONS
to further characterize the molecular mechanisms of α-synuclein neurotoxicity both in vitro and in vivo and to evaluate the relevance of extracellular α-synuclein for the pathogenesis and progression of parkinson’s disease, a suitable method to produce different high-quality forms of this pathological protein is required. our optimized expression and purification procedure offers an easier and faster means of producing different forms  of soluble recombinant α-synuclein than previously described procedures.

α-synucleintat-fusion proteinrecombinant proteinsparkinson’s diseaseoxidative stressprotein aggregation

