BACKGROUND
in contrast to dna-mediated transposable elements , retrotransposons, particularly non-long terminal repeat retrotransposons , are generally considered to have a much lower propensity towards horizontal transfer. detailed studies on site-specific non-ltr families have demonstrated strict vertical transmission. more studies are needed with non-site-specific non-ltr families to determine whether strict vertical transmission is a phenomenon related to site specificity or a more general characteristic of all non-ltrs. juan is a jockey clade non-ltr retrotransposon first discovered in mosquitoes that is widely distributed in the mosquito family culicidae. being a non-site specific non-ltr, juan offers an opportunity to further investigate the hypothesis that non-ltrs are genomic elements that are primarily vertically transmitted.


RESULTS
systematic analysis of the ~ <dig>  gbp aedes aegypti  genome sequence suggests that juan-a is the only juan-type non-ltr in aedes aegypti. juan-a is highly reiterated and comprises approximately 3% of the genome. using minimum cutoffs of 90% length and 70% nucleotide  identity,  <dig> copies were found by blast using the published juan-a sequence as the query. all  <dig> copies are at least 95% identical to juan-a, while  <dig> of these copies are 99% identical to juan-a, indicating that the juan-a family has been transposing recently in evolutionary history. using the  <dig>  kb 5' utr as the query, over  <dig> copies were identified that may contain internal promoters, leading to questions on the genomic impact of juan-a. juan sequences were obtained by pcr, library screening, and database searches for  <dig> mosquito species of six genera including aedes, ochlerotatus, psorophora, culex, deinocerites, and wyeomyia. comparison of host and juan phylogenies shows overall congruence with few exceptions.


CONCLUSIONS
juan-a is a major genomic component in ae. aegypti and it has been retrotransposing recently in evolutionary history. there are also indications that juan has been recently active in a wide range of mosquito species. furthermore, our research demonstrates that a jockey clade non-ltr without target site-specificity has been sustained by vertical transmission in the mosquito family. these results strengthen the argument that non-ltrs tend to be genomic elements capable of persistence by vertical descent over a long evolutionary time.

