BACKGROUND
stripe rust  and powdery mildew  are important diseases of wheat  worldwide. similar mechanisms and gene transcripts are assumed to be involved in the host defense response because both pathogens are biotrophic fungi. the main objective of our study was to identify co-regulated mrnas that show a change in expression pattern after inoculation with pst or bgt, and to identify mrnas specific to the fungal stress response.


RESULTS
the transcriptome of the hexaploid wheat line n <dig> inoculated with the chinese pst race cyr  <dig> was compared with that of the same line inoculated with bgt race e <dig> at  <dig>   <dig>  and 3 days post-inoculation. infection by pst and bgt affected transcription of  <dig> % of all t. aestivum genes. infection by bgt triggered a more robust alteration in gene expression in n <dig> compared with the response to pst infection. an array of overlapping gene clusters with distinctive expression patterns provided insight into the regulatory differences in the responses to bgt and pst infection. the differentially expressed genes were grouped into seven enriched kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes pathways in bgt-infected leaves and four pathways in pst-infected leaves, while only two pathways overlapped. in the plant–pathogen interaction pathway, n <dig> activated a higher number of genes and pathways in response to bgt infection than in response to pst invasion. genomic analysis revealed that the wheat genome shared some microbial genetic fragments, which were specifically induced in response to bgt and pst infection.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our findings indicate that the responses of wheat n <dig> to infection by bgt and pst shows differences in the pathways and genes activated. the mass sequence data for wheat–fungus interaction generated in this study provides a powerful platform for future functional and molecular research on wheat–fungus interactions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bread wheatstripe rustpowdery mildewrna-seqgene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

