BACKGROUND
the order picornavirales represents a diverse group of positive-stranded rna viruses with small non-enveloped icosahedral virions. recently, bats have been identified as an important reservoir of several highly pathogenic human viruses. since many members of the picornaviridae family cause a wide range of diseases in humans and animals, this study aimed to characterize members of the order picornavirales in fruit bat populations located in the southwest region of cameroon. these bat populations are frequently in close contact with humans due to hunting, selling and eating practices, which provides ample opportunity for interspecies transmissions.


RESULTS
fecal samples from  <dig> fruit bats , were combined into  <dig> pools and analyzed using viral metagenomics. in total, picornavirales reads were found in  <dig> pools, and  complete genomes of  <dig> picorna-like viruses were obtained from  <dig> of these pools. the picorna-like viruses possessed varied genomic organizations , and arrangements of gene cassettes. some of the viruses belonged to established families, including the picornaviridae, whereas others clustered distantly from known viruses and most likely represent novel genera and families. phylogenetic and nucleotide composition analyses suggested that mammals were the likely host species of bat sapelovirus, bat kunsagivirus and bat crohivirus, whereas the remaining viruses  were most likely diet-derived.


CONCLUSIONS
the existence of a vast genetic variability of picorna-like viruses in fruit bats may increase the probability of spillover infections to humans especially when humans and bats have direct contact as the case in this study site. however, further screening for these viruses in humans will fully indicate their zoonotic potential.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
batpicornaviralespicornavirusesviromeunbiased sequencinghttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004040ku leuvenejx-c9928-stg/15/020bfmatthijnssens jelle issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

