BACKGROUND
there are  <dig> variants of linker histone h <dig> in mammalian cells. beyond their shared abilities to stabilize and condense chromatin, the h <dig> variants have been found to have non-redundant functions, the mechanisms of which are not fully understood. like core histones, there are both replication-dependent and replication-independent linker histone variants. the histone chaperones and other factors that regulate linker histone dynamics in the cell are largely unknown. in particular, it is not known whether replication-dependent and replication-independent linker histones interact with distinct or common sets of proteins. to better understand linker histone dynamics and assembly, we used chromatography and mass spectrometry approaches to identify proteins that are associated with replication-dependent and replication-independent h <dig> variants. we then used a variety of in vivo analyses to validate the functional relevance of identified interactions.


RESULTS
we identified proteins that bind to all linker histone variants and proteins that are specific for only one class of variant. the factors identified include histone chaperones, transcriptional regulators, rna binding proteins and ribosomal proteins. the nuclear pore complex protein tpr, which was found to associate with only replication-dependent linker histones, specifically promoted their stability.


CONCLUSIONS
replication-dependent and replication-independent linker histone variants can interact with both common and distinct sets of proteins. some of these factors are likely to function as histone chaperones while others may suggest novel links between linker histones and rna metabolism. the nuclear pore complex protein tpr specifically interacts with histone h <dig>  and h <dig>  but not h1x and can regulate the stability of these replication-dependent linker histones.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chromatinhistonehistone chaperonelinker histoneh1tprhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000057national institute of general medical sciencesgm062970parthun mark r. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

