BACKGROUND
d-myo-inositol phosphates  are a series of phosphate esters. myo-inositol hexakisphosphate  is the most abundant ip and has negative effects on animal and human nutrition. ips play important roles in plant development, stress responses, and signal transduction. however, the metabolic pathways and possible regulatory mechanisms of ips in maize are unclear. in this study, the b <dig>  and qi <dig>  lines were selected for rna-seq analysis from  <dig> inbred lines based on a screening of ip levels. by integrating the metabolite data with the rna-seq data at three different kernel developmental stages , co-regulatory networks were constructed to explore ip metabolism and its interactions with other pathways.


RESULTS
differentially expressed gene analyses showed that the expression of mips and itpk was related to differences in ip metabolism in qi <dig> and b <dig>  moreover, wrky and ethylene-responsive transcription factors  were common among the differentially expressed tfs, and are likely to be involved in the regulation of ip metabolism.

six co-regulatory networks were constructed, and three were chosen for further analysis. based on network analyses, we proposed that the ga pathway interacts with the ip pathway through the ubiquitination pathway, and that ca2+ signaling functions as a bridge between ips and other pathways. ip pools were found to be transported by specific atp-binding cassette  transporters. finally, three candidate genes  were identified and validated using arabidopsis lines with mutations in orthologous genes or rna interference -transgenic maize lines. some mutant or rnai lines exhibited seeds with a low-phytic-acid phenotype, indicating perturbation of ip metabolism. mf <dig> likely encodes an enzyme involved in ip synthesis, dh <dig> encodes a transporter responsible for ip transport across organs and cb <dig> encodes a transporter involved in ip co-transport into vesicles.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides new insights into ip metabolism and regulation, and facilitates our development of a better understanding of the functions of ips and how they interact with other pathways involved in plant development and stress responses. three new genes were discovered and preliminarily validated, thereby increasing our knowledge of ip metabolism.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
inositol phosphatesmetabolismco-regulatory networkwgcnacandidate genethe national special program for gmo development of china2013zx08003-002chen rumei the national basic research program of china2014cb138205chen rumei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

