BACKGROUND
microsatellites are frequently used genetic markers in a wide range of applications, primarily due to their high length polymorphism levels that can easily be genotyped by fragment length analysis. however, the mode of microsatellite evolution is yet not fully understood, and the role of interrupting motifs for the stability of microsatellites remains to be explored in more detail. here we present a sequence analysis of mutation events and a description of the structure of repeated regions in the hypervariable, pentanucleotide microsatellite locus hru <dig> in barn swallows  and tree swallows .


RESULTS
in a large-scale parentage analysis in barn swallows and tree swallows, broods were screened for mutations at the hru <dig> locus. in  <dig> cases in the barn swallows and  <dig> cases in the tree swallows, mutations corresponding to the loss or gain of one or two repeat units were detected. the parent and mutant offspring alleles were sequenced for  <dig> of these instances . replication slippage was considered the most likely mutational process. we tested the hypothesis that hru <dig>  a microsatellite with a wide allele size range, has an increased probability of introductions of interruptive motifs  with increasing length of the repeated region. indeed, the number and length of the ims was strongly positively correlated with the total length of the microsatellite. however, there was no significant correlation with the length of the longest stretch of perfectly repeated units, indicating a threshold level for the maximum length of perfectly repeated pentanucleotide motifs in stable hru <dig> alleles. the combination of sequence and pedigree data revealed that  <dig> barn swallow mutations  produced alleles that were size homoplasic to other alleles in the data set.


CONCLUSIONS
our results give further insights into the mode of microsatellite evolution, and support the assumption of increased slippage rate with increased microsatellite length and a stabilizing effect of interrupting motifs for microsatellite regions consisting of perfect repeats. in addition, the observed extent of size homoplasy may impose a general caution against using hypervariable microsatellites in genetic diversity measures when alleles are identified by fragment length analysis only.

