BACKGROUND
oncolytic herpes simplex virus  vectors that specifically replicate in and kill tumor cells sparing normal cells are a promising cancer therapy. traditionally, recombinant hsv vectors have been generated through homologous recombination between the hsv genome and a recombination plasmid, which usually requires laborious screening or selection and can take several months. recent advances in bacterial artificial chromosome  technology have enabled cloning of the whole hsv genome as a bac plasmid and subsequent manipulation in e. coli. thus, we sought a method to generate recombinant oncolytic hsv vectors more easily and quickly using bac technology.


RESULTS
we have developed an hsv-bac system, termed the flip-flop hsv-bac system, for the rapid generation of oncolytic hsv vectors. this system has the following features:  two site-specific recombinases, cre and flpe, are used sequentially to integrate desired sequences and to excise the bac sequences, respectively; and  the size of the hsv-bac-insert genome exceeds the packaging limit of hsv so only correctly recombined virus grows efficiently. we applied this to the construction of an hsv-bac plasmid that can be used for the generation of transcriptionally-targeted hsv vectors. bac sequences were recombined into the ul <dig> gene of hsv icp4-deletion mutant d <dig> to generate m24-bac virus, from which hsv-bac plasmid pm24-bac was isolated. an icp <dig> expression cassette driven by an exogenous promoter was re-introduced to pm24-bac by cre-mediated recombination and nearly pure preparations of recombinant virus were obtained typically in two weeks. insertion of the icp <dig> coding sequence alone did not restore viral replication and was only minimally better than an icp4-null construct, whereas insertion of a cmvie promoter-icp <dig> transgene  efficiently drove viral replication. the levels of bm24-cmv replication in tumor cells varied considerably compared to hrr <dig> .


CONCLUSIONS
our flip-flop hsv-bac system enables rapid generation of hsv vectors carrying transgene inserts. by introducing a tumor-specific-promoter-driven icp <dig> cassette into pm24-bac using this system, one should be able to generate transcriptionally-targeted oncolytic hsv vectors. we believe this system will greatly facilitate the screening of a plethora of clinically useful tumor-specific promoters in the context of oncolytic hsv vectors.

