BACKGROUND
bilateral subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation  of parkinson’s disease  patients has demonstrated to improve motor performance and to reduce dopa-induced dyskinesia. an association between the occurrence of dyskinesias and lrrk <dig>  g2019s gene mutations has recently been suggested. the aim of this study is to discover the impact of the g2019s mutation  on the symptom response of pd in patients who underwent stn-dbs.

methods
we carried out a comparative statistical study for the clinical evaluation and neuropsychological assessment of  <dig> algerian pd stn-dbs patients, both g2019s mutation carriers  and non-carriers . a multiple correspondence analysis  was then conducted to compare the results with those from groups of individuals with similar modalities.


RESULTS
the mca revealed that mc and nc pd patients showed two different patterns of clinical evaluations. the group of idiopathic patients showed some differences compared to the clinical evaluations, depending on gender. no association was found between the g2019s mutation and the mini mental state examination scores , and mc patients appeared more susceptible to dyskinesia than nc patients. in nc patients, we found two cases with parkin mutations who had a different “honeymoon” period and different initial symptoms. the results showed considerable improvement of motor unified parkinson’s disease rating scale iii  in a situation of stimulation without medication in the mc patients with a percentage of improvement  over the required 30 % compared to the nc patients . the same result was observed for the schwab and england’s activities of daily living scale , which thus demonstrated a greater effectiveness of dbs for mc patients than for nc patients. however, the hoehn and yahr scale  showed the same significance in a situation of stimulation for mc and nc patients. in this later group, the best scores of updrs-iii were observed for patients with the parkin mutation before they underwent surgery.


CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that surgical treatment probably has a more significant impact on lrrk <dig> g2019s mc than on idiopathic patients.

keywords
subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation parkinson’s disease lrrk <dig>  g2019s gene mutationsmutation carrier non-carriers multiple correspondence analysis mini mental state examination unified parkinson’s disease rating scale iii schwab and england’s activities of daily living scale hoehn and yahr scale issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

