BACKGROUND
phylogenetic diversity and evolutionary distinctiveness are highly valuable components of biodiversity, but they are rarely considered in conservation practices. focusing on a biodiversity hotspot, the mediterranean basin, we aimed to identify those areas where evolutionary history is highly threatened and range-restricted in the region. using null models, we first compared the spatial distributions of three indices: two measured threatened evolutionary history—expected pdloss and heightened evolutionary distinctiveness and global endangerment—and one measured endemic evolutionary history—biogeographically evolutionary distinctiveness. we focused on three vertebrate groups with high proportions of endemic, threatened species: amphibians, squamates and terrestrial mammals. second, we estimated the spatial overlap of hotspots of threatened and endemic evolutionary history within the network of protected areas under several conservation scenarios.


RESULTS
areas that concentrate evolutionary history of conservation interest greatly differed among taxa and indices, although a large proportion of hotspots were identified in the maghreb, in the east of the mediterranean basin as well as in islands. we found that, in a minimum conservation scenario, there was a significant proportion of hotspots for amphibians and squamates that were protected but not for terrestrial mammals. however, in a strong conservation scenario, only few hotspots overlapped with protected areas and they were significantly less protected than in a model where hotspots were chosen randomly.


CONCLUSIONS
some sites concentrate highly threatened and range-restricted evolutionary history of the mediterranean basin and their conservation could be much improved. these sites are relevant for conservation studies aimed at designing new conservation actions to preserve evolutionary history and the option values it represents.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
amphibiansevolutionary distinctivenessendemismmammalsmediterranean basinphylogenetic diversityprotected areassquamateslabex bcdivissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

