BACKGROUND
the laboratory mouse is the most commonly used model for studying variation in complex traits relevant to human disease. here we present the whole-genome sequences of two inbred strains, lg/j and sm/j, which are frequently used to study variation in complex traits as diverse as aging, bone-growth, adiposity, maternal behavior, and methamphetamine sensitivity.


RESULTS
we identified small nucleotide variants  and structural variants  in the lg/j and sm/j strains relative to the reference genome and discovered novel variants in these two strains by comparing their sequences to other mouse genomes. we find that 39% of the lg/j and sm/j genomes are identical-by-descent . we characterized amino-acid changing mutations using three algorithms: lrt, polyphen- <dig> and sift. we also identified polymorphisms between lg/j and sm/j that fall in regulatory regions and highly informative transcription factor binding sites . we intersected these functional predictions with quantitative trait loci  mapped in advanced intercrosses of these two strains. we find that qtl are both over-represented in non-ibd regions and highly enriched for variants predicted to have a functional impact. variants in qtl associated with metabolic  and developmental  traits were interrogated and we highlight candidate quantitative trait genes  and nucleotides  in a qtl on chr <dig> associated with variation in basal glucose levels and in a qtl on chr <dig> associated with variation in tibia length.


CONCLUSIONS
we show how integrating genomic sequence with qtl reduces the qtl search space and helps researchers prioritize candidate genes and nucleotides for experimental follow-up. additionally, given the lg/j and sm/j phylogenetic context among inbred strains, these data contribute important information to the genomic landscape of the laboratory mouse.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mouse modelsquantitative trait loci complex traitsidentity-by-descent predicted deleterious mutationsquantitative trait gene quantitative trait nucleotide candidate lociwhole genome sequencesmall nucleotide variant issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

