BACKGROUND
understanding the relationship between a stimulus and how it is perceived reveals fundamental principles about the mechanisms of sensory perception. while this stimulus-percept problem is mostly understood for color vision and tone perception, it is not currently possible to predict how a given molecule smells. while there has been some progress in predicting the pleasantness and intensity of an odorant, perceptual data for a larger number of diverse molecules are needed to improve current predictions. towards this goal, we tested the olfactory perception of  <dig> structurally and perceptually diverse molecules at two concentrations using a panel of  <dig> healthy human subjects.


RESULTS
for each stimulus, we collected data on perceived intensity, pleasantness, and familiarity. in addition, subjects were asked to apply  <dig> semantic odor quality descriptors to these stimuli, and were offered the option to describe the smell in their own words. using this dataset, we replicated several previous correlations between molecular features of the stimulus and olfactory perception. the number of sulfur atoms in a molecule was correlated with the odor quality descriptors “garlic,” “fish,” and “decayed,” and large and structurally complex molecules were perceived to be more pleasant. we discovered a number of correlations in intensity perception between molecules. we show that familiarity had a strong effect on the ability of subjects to describe a smell. many subjects used commercial products to describe familiar odorants, highlighting the role of prior experience in verbal reports of olfactory perception. nonspecific descriptors like “chemical” were applied frequently to unfamiliar odorants, and unfamiliar odorants were generally rated as neither pleasant nor unpleasant.


CONCLUSIONS
we present a very large psychophysical dataset and use this to correlate molecular features of a stimulus to olfactory percept. our work reveals robust correlations between molecular features and perceptual qualities, and highlights the dominant role of familiarity and experience in assigning verbal descriptors to odorants.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
olfactionpsychophysicscheminformatics perceptual variabilitystructure-odor-relationshipodor descriptorsperceptual familiarityhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000011howard hughes medical institutenih ncrrul1rr024143vosshall leslie b. branco weiss science in society fellowshipissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

