BACKGROUND
dna methylation, which mainly occurs at cpg dinucleotides, is a dynamic epigenetic regulation mechanism in most eukaryotic genomes. it is already known that methylated cpg dinucleotides can lead to a high rate of c to t mutation at these sites. however, less is known about whether and how the methylation level causes a different mutation rate, especially at the single-base resolution.


RESULTS
in this study, we used genome-wide single-base resolution methylation data to perform a comprehensive analysis of the mutation rate of methylated cytosines from human embryonic stem cell. through the analysis of the density of single nucleotide polymorphisms, we first confirmed that the mutation rate in methylated cpg sites is greater than that in unmethylated cpg sites. then, we showed that among methylated cpg sites, the mutation rate is markedly increased in low-intermediately  to intermediately methylated cpg sites  of the human genome. this mutation pattern was observed regardless of dna strand direction and the sequence coverage over the site on which the methylation level was calculated. moreover, this highly non-random mutation pattern was found more apparent in intergenic and intronic regions than in promoter regions and cpg islands. our investigation suggested this pattern appears primarily in autosomes rather than sex chromosomes. further analysis based on human-chimpanzee divergence confirmed these observations. finally, we observed a significant correlation between the methylation level and cytosine allele frequency.


CONCLUSIONS
our results showed a high mutation rate in low-intermediately to intermediately methylated cpg sites at different scales, from the categorized genomic region, whole chromosome, to the whole genome level, thereby providing the first supporting evidence of mutation rate variation at human methylated cpg sites using the genome-wide sing-base resolution methylation data.

22- <dig> april  <dig> the international conference on intelligent biology and medicine  nashville, tn, usa

