BACKGROUND
next-generation sequencing has provided a wealth of plastid genome sequence data from an increasingly diverse set of green plants . although these data have helped resolve the phylogeny of numerous clades , their utility for inferring relationships across all green plants is uncertain. viridiplantae originated 700- <dig> million years ago and may comprise as many as  <dig>  species. this clade represents a major source of photosynthetic carbon and contains an immense diversity of life forms, including some of the smallest and largest eukaryotes. here we explore the limits and challenges of inferring a comprehensive green plant phylogeny from available complete or nearly complete plastid genome sequence data.


RESULTS
we assembled protein-coding sequence data for  <dig> genes from  <dig> diverse green plant taxa with complete or nearly complete plastid genome sequences available from genbank. phylogenetic analyses of the plastid data recovered well-supported backbone relationships and strong support for relationships that were not observed in previous analyses of major subclades within viridiplantae. however, there also is evidence of systematic error in some analyses. in several instances we obtained strongly supported but conflicting topologies from analyses of nucleotides versus amino acid characters, and the considerable variation in gc content among lineages and within single genomes affected the phylogenetic placement of several taxa.


CONCLUSIONS
analyses of the plastid sequence data recovered a strongly supported framework of relationships for green plants. this framework includes: i) the placement of zygnematophyceace as sister to land plants , ii) a clade of extant gymnosperms  with cycads + ginkgo sister to remaining extant gymnosperms and with gnetophytes  sister to non-pinaceae conifers , and iii) within the monilophyte clade , equisetales + psilotales are sister to marattiales + leptosporangiate ferns. our analyses also highlight the challenges of using plastid genome sequences in deep-level phylogenomic analyses, and we provide suggestions for future analyses that will likely incorporate plastid genome sequence data for thousands of species. we particularly emphasize the importance of exploring the effects of different partitioning and character coding strategies.

composition biasphylogenomicsplastid genome sequencesplastomesry-codingviridiplantae

