BACKGROUND
potassium channels play a fundamental role in resetting the resting membrane potential of excitable cells. determining the intracellular trafficking and localization mechanisms of potassium channels provides a platform to fully characterize their maturation and functionality. previous investigations have discovered residues or motifs that exist in their primary structure, which directly promote anterograde trafficking of nascent potassium channels. recently, a non-conical di-acidic motif  has been discovered in the c-terminus of the mammalian homologue of the shaker voltage-gated potassium channel subfamily member  <dig> , and was shown to disrupt the anterograde trafficking of kv <dig> .


RESULTS
we have further investigated the intracellular trafficking requirements of kv <dig>  both in vivo and in vitro. first, three alternative c-terminal acidic residues, e <dig>  e <dig>  e <dig> were probed for their involvement within the early secretory pathway of kv <dig> . single point  and double point  mutations exhibited no significant changes in their endoplasmic reticulum  retention. the triple point mutant e443a-e445a-e447a displayed a modest er retention while deletion of the c-terminus showed dramatic er retention. second, we demonstrate in vivo the requirement for the sec24a isoform to confer anterograde trafficking using a sirna knockdown assay. third, we show in vitro the association of recombinantly expressed kv <dig>  and sec24a proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
these results expand upon previous studies aimed at deciphering the kv <dig>  secretory trafficking mechanisms and further show in vitro evidence of the association between kv <dig>  and the copii cargo adaptor subunit isoform sec24a.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
early secretory pathwayanterograde intracellular traffickingcopiiendoplasmic reticulumvoltage-gated potassium channeldi-acidic motifsirnaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

