BACKGROUND
gastrointestinal microbiota, particularly gut microbiota, is associated with human health. the biodiversity of gut microbiota is affected by ethnicities and environmental factors such as dietary habits or medicine intake, and three enterotypes of the human gut microbiome were announced in  <dig>  these enterotypes are not significantly correlated with gender, age, or body weight but are influenced by long-term dietary habits. however, to date, only two enterotypes  have shown these characteristics in previous research; the third enterotype remains ambiguous. understanding the enterotypes can improve the knowledge of the relationship between microbiota and human health.


RESULTS
we obtained  <dig> human fecal samples from adults in taiwan. microbiota compositions were analyzed using next-generation sequencing  technology, which is a culture-independent method of constructing microbial community profiles by sequencing 16s ribosomal dna . in these samples,  <dig> , <dig> sequencing reads were sequenced, and on average,  <dig> operational taxonomic units  were identified for each sample. in this study, the major bacteria in the enterotypes identified from the fecal samples were bacteroides, prevotella, and enterobacteriaceae, and their correlation with dietary habits was confirmed. a microbial interaction network in the gut was observed on the basis of the amount of short-chain fatty acids, ph value of the intestine, and composition of the bacterial community . finally, a decision tree was derived to provide a predictive model for the three enterotypes. the accuracies of this model in training and independent testing sets were  <dig>  and  <dig> %, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
we used ngs technology to characterize the microbiota and constructed a predictive model. the most significant finding was that enterobacteriaceae, the predominant subtype, could be a new subtype of enterotypes in the asian population.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
enterotype16s rdnanext-generation sequencinggut microbiomepredictive modelthe 27th international conference on genome informatics shanghai, china 3- <dig> october  <dig> http://admis.fudan.edu.cn/giw2016/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

