BACKGROUND
nuclear ribosomal dna  genes and transcribed spacers are highly utilized as taxonomic markers in metazoans despite the lack of a cohesive understanding of their evolution. here we follow the evolution of the rdna second internal transcribed spacer  and the mitochondrial dna cytochrome oxidase i subunit in the malaria mosquito anopheles longirostris from papua new guinea . this morphospecies inhabits a variety of ecological environments indicating that it may comprise a complex of morphologically indistinguishable species. using collections from over  <dig> sites in png, the mtdna was assessed via direct dna sequencing while the its <dig> was assessed at three levels - crude sequence variation through restriction digest, intragenomic copy variant organisation  through heteroduplex analysis and dna sequencing via cloning.


RESULTS
genetic evaluation of over  <dig> individuals revealed that a. longirostris comprises eight its <dig> pcr-rflp genotypes and nine its <dig> heteroduplex genotypes showing distinct copy variant organization profiles after pcr amplification. seven of these nine genotypes were found to be sympatric with other genotypes. phylogenetic analysis of cloned its <dig> pcr products and mtdna coi confirmed all nine clades with evidence of reproductive isolation at the rdna locus. compensatory base changes in the its <dig> secondary structure or in pseudoknots were absent when closely related species were assessed. individuals from each its <dig> genotype showed the same copy variant heteroduplex profile suggesting that the rdna array is fixed within each genotype.


CONCLUSIONS
the centromere-proximal position of the rdna array in anopheles mosquitoes has probably reduced interchromosomal recombination leaving intrachromosomal events responsible for the observed pattern of concerted evolution we see in these mosquitoes. the stability of these intragenomic its <dig> copy variants within individuals and interbreeding populations suggests that rdna is moving as a single evolutionary unit through natural populations to fixation and has provided a complementary diagnostic tool to the restriction digest for studying genetic discontinuities and species boundaries. in this, the utility of the its <dig> as a universal taxonomic marker is probably contingent on several factors pertaining to spacer dimensions and the genomic location of the rdna array with respect to recombination and proximity to regions potentially under selection.

