BACKGROUND
small nucleolar rnas  are one of the most ancient families amongst non-protein-coding rnas. they are ubiquitous in archaea and eukarya but absent in bacteria. their main function is to target chemical modifications of ribosomal rnas. they fall into two classes, box c/d snornas and box h/aca snornas, which are clearly distinguished by conserved sequence motifs and the type of chemical modification that they govern. similarly to micrornas, snornas appear in distinct families of homologs that affect homologous targets. in animals, snornas and their evolution have been studied in much detail. in plants, however, their evolution has attracted comparably little attention.


RESULTS
in order to chart the phylogenetic distribution of individual snorna families in plants, we applied a sophisticated approach for identifying homologs of known plant snornas across the plant kingdom. in response to the relatively fast evolution of snornas, information on conserved sequence boxes, target sequences, and secondary structure is combined to identify additional snornas. we identified  <dig> families of snornas in  <dig> species and traced their evolution throughout the plant kingdom. many of the plant snorna families comprise paralogs. we also found that targets are well-conserved for most snorna families.


CONCLUSIONS
the sequence conservation of snornas is sufficient to establish homologies between phyla. the degree of this conservation tapers off, however, between land plants and algae. plant snornas are frequently organized in highly conserved spatial clusters. as a resource for further investigations we provide carefully curated and annotated alignments for each snorna family under investigation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
snornasevolutionsmall rnassnorna targetsdeutsche forschungsgemeinschaftgr 3526/ <dig>  ju 205/ <dig> deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftcrc <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

