BACKGROUND
alternative splicing  regulates multiple biological processes including flowering, circadian and stress response in plant. although accumulating evidences indicate that as is developmentally regulated, how as responds to developmental cues is not well understood. early fruit growth mainly characterized by active cell division and cell expansion contributes to the formation of fruit morphology and quality traits. transcriptome profiling has revealed the coordinated complex regulation of gene expression in the process. high throughput rna sequencing  technology is advancing the genome-wide analysis of as events in plant species, but the landscape of as in early growth fruit is still not available for tomato , a model plant for fleshy fruit development study.


RESULTS
using rna-seq, we surveyed the as patterns in tomato seedlings, flowers and young developing fruits and found that  <dig>  % of expressed multi-exon genes underwent as in these tissues. the predominant type of as events is intron retention, followed by alternative splice donor and acceptor, whereas exon skipping has the lowest frequency. although the frequencies of as events are similar among seedlings, flowers and early growth fruits, the fruits generated more splice variants per gene. further comparison of gene expression in early growth fruits at  <dig>   <dig> and 10 days post anthesis revealed that  <dig> multi-exon genes had at least one splice variants differentially expressed during early fruit development, whereas only  <dig> out of them showed differential expression at gene level. we also identified  <dig> multi-exon genes showing differential splicing during early fruit growth. in addition, the study discovered  <dig> new transcription regions  unlinked to the annotated chromosomal regions, from where  <dig> putative protein coding transcripts and  <dig> putative long non-coding rnas were identified.


CONCLUSIONS
our genome-wide analysis of as events reveals a distinctive as pattern in early growth tomato fruits. the landscape of as obtained in this study will facilitate future investigation on transcriptome complexity and as regulation during early fruit growth in tomato. the newly found ntrs will also be useful for updating the tomato genome annotation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
alternative splicingnew transcription regions rna-seqtranscriptomefruittomatoissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

