BACKGROUND
tankyrases are poly-ribose polymerases that contribute to biological processes as diverse as modulation of wnt signaling, telomere maintenance, vesicle trafficking, and microtubule-dependent spindle pole assembly during mitosis. at interphase, polarized reshaping of the microtubule network fosters oriented cell migration. this is attained by association of adenomatous polyposis coli with the plus end of microtubules at the cortex of cell membrane protrusions and microtubule-based centrosome reorientation towards the migrating front.


RESULTS
here we report a new function for tankyrases, namely, regulation of directional cell locomotion. using a panel of lung cancer cell lines as a model system, we found that abrogation of tankyrase activity by two different, structurally unrelated small-molecule inhibitors  or by rna interference-based genetic silencing weakened cell migration, invasion, and directional movement induced by the motogenic cytokine hepatocyte growth factor. mechanistically, the anti-invasive outcome of tankyrase inhibition could be ascribed to sequential deterioration of the distinct events that govern cell directional sensing. in particular, tankyrase blockade negatively impacted  microtubule dynamic instability;  adenomatous polyposis coli plasma membrane targeting; and  centrosome reorientation.


CONCLUSIONS
collectively, these findings uncover an unanticipated role for tankyrases in influencing at multiple levels the interphase dynamics of the microtubule network and the subcellular distribution of related polarity signals. these results encourage the further exploration of tankyrase inhibitors as therapeutic tools to oppose dissemination and metastasis of cancer cells.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cancer cell invasioncell migrationhgfmicrotubulespolarity signalstankyraseitalian association for cancer research1557111852bertotti andrea fondazione piemontese per la ricerca sul cancro-onlusnot applicabletrusolino livio issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

