BACKGROUND
understanding the molecular mechanisms of flowering and maturity is important for improving the adaptability and yield of seed crops in different environments. in soybean, a facultative short-day plant, genetic variation at four maturity genes, e <dig> to e <dig>  plays an important role in adaptation to environments with different photoperiods. however, the molecular basis of natural variation in time to flowering and maturity is poorly understood. using a cross between early-maturing soybean cultivars, we performed a genetic and molecular study of flowering genes. the progeny of this cross segregated for two maturity loci, e <dig> and e <dig>  the latter locus was subjected to detailed molecular analysis to identify the responsible gene.


RESULTS
fine mapping, sequencing, and expression analysis revealed that e <dig> is ft2a, an ortholog of arabidopsis flowering locus t. regardless of daylength conditions, the e <dig> allele was transcribed at a very low level in comparison with the e <dig> allele and delayed flowering. despite identical coding sequences, a number of single nucleotide polymorphisms and insertions/deletions were detected in the promoter, untranslated regions, and introns between the two cultivars. furthermore, the e <dig> allele had a ty1/copia–like retrotransposon, sore- <dig>  inserted in the first intron. comparison of the expression levels of different alleles among near-isogenic lines and photoperiod-insensitive cultivars indicated that the sore- <dig> insertion attenuated ft2a expression by its allele-specific transcriptional repression. sore- <dig> was highly methylated, and did not appear to disrupt ft2a rna processing.


CONCLUSIONS
the soybean maturity gene e <dig> is ft2a, and its recessive allele delays flowering because of lower transcript abundance that is caused by allele-specific transcriptional repression due to the insertion of sore- <dig>  the ft2a transcript abundance is thus directly associated with the variation in flowering time in soybean. the e <dig> allele may maintain vegetative growth in early-flowering genetic backgrounds, and also be useful as a long-juvenile allele, which causes late flowering under short-daylength conditions, in low-latitude regions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
maturity gene e9flowering locus tft2asoybean floweringty1/copia-like retrotransposonsore-1methylationgrants-in-aid for scientific research from the ministry of education, culture, sports, science, and technology of japan23380001abe jun ministry of agriculture, forestry and fisheries of japan sfc1003watanabe satoshi natural science foundation of china314300653137164331571686liu baohui kong fanjiang the open foundation of the key laboratory of soybean molecular design breeding, chinese academy of sciences; the strategic action plan for science and technology innovation of the chinese academy of sciencesxda08030108kong fanjiang issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

