BACKGROUND
bacteria rely on efficient gene regulatory mechanisms to switch between genetic programs when they are facing new environments. although this regulation can occur at many different levels, one of the key steps is the initiation of transcription. identification of the first nucleotide transcribed by the rna polymerase is therefore essential to understand the underlying regulatory processes, since this provides insight on promoter strength and binding sites for transcriptional regulators, and additionally reveals the exact 5’ untranslated region of the transcripts, which often contains elements that regulate translation.


RESULTS
here we present data from a novel tss-emote assay  to precisely map the transcription initiation sites of four entire transcriptomes. tss-emote is a variation of the drna-seq method, which has been combined with the emote protocol, in order to increase detection of longer transcripts and limit biases introduced by pcr amplification of the illumina sequencing library. using tss-emote,  <dig> promoters were detected in the opportunistic pathogen staphylococcus aureus, and detailed consensus sequences could be obtained for the rna polymerase recognition elements . the data also revealed a 94 nt median length of the 5’ untranslated region in s. aureus, giving important insights for future work on translational regulation. additionally, the transcriptomes of three other opportunistic pathogens, staphylococcus epidermidis, acinetobacter baumannii and enterobacter aerogenes, were examined, and the identified promoter locations were then used to generate a map of the operon structure for each of the four organisms.


CONCLUSIONS
mapping transcription start sites, and subsequent correlation with the genomic sequence, provides a multitude of important information about the regulation of gene expression, both at the transcriptional and translational level, by defining 5’ untranslated regions and sigma-factor binding sites. we have here mapped transcription start sites in four important pathogens using tss-emote, a method that works with both long and 3’-phosphorylated rna molecules, and which incorporates unique molecular identifiers  to allow unbiased quantification.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tss-emotetranscriptome-widetranscription initiationtranscription start sitesigma factor bindingpromotor usagestaphylococcus aureusstaphylococcus epidermidisacinetobacter baumanniienterobacter aerogenesnovartis consumer health foundationernst and lucie schmidheiny foundationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001711schweizerischer nationalfonds zur förderung der wissenschaftlichen forschungissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

