BACKGROUND
the resistance to leaf rust  caused by puccinia triticina in wheat  has been well studied over the past decades with over  <dig> lr genes being mapped on different chromosomes and numerous qtls  being detected or mapped using dna markers. such resistance is often divided into race-specific and race-nonspecific resistance. the race-nonspecific resistance can be further divided into resistance to most or all races of the same pathogen and resistance to multiple pathogens. at the molecular level, these three types of resistance may cover across the whole spectrum of pathogen specificities that are controlled by genes encoding different protein families in wheat. the objective of this study is to predict and analyze genes in three such families: nbs-lrr , start  and abc  transporter. the focus of the analysis is on the patterns of relationships between these protein-coding genes within the gene families and qtls detected for leaf rust resistance.


RESULTS
we predicted  <dig> abc,  <dig> nlr and  <dig> start genes in the hexaploid wheat genome through a domain analysis of wheat proteome. of the  <dig> snps from leaf rust resistance qtls in seedling and adult stages of wheat,  <dig> snps were found within coding regions of these genes or their neighborhood . forty-three of these snps for adult resistance and  <dig> snps for seedling resistance reside within coding or neighboring regions of the abc genes whereas  <dig> snps for adult resistance and  <dig> snps for seedling resistance reside within coding or neighboring regions of the nlr gene. moreover, we found  <dig> nonsynonymous snps for adult resistance and five snps for seedling resistance in the abc genes, and five nonsynonymous snps for adult resistance and six snps for seedling resistance in the nlr genes. most of these coding snps were predicted to alter encoded amino acids and such information may serve as a starting point towards more thorough molecular and functional characterization of the designated lr genes. using the primer sequences of  <dig> known non-snp markers from leaf rust resistance qtls, we found candidate genes closely linked to these markers, including lr <dig> with distances to its two gene-specific markers being  <dig> bases  and  <dig> bases .


CONCLUSIONS
this study represents a comprehensive analysis of abc, nlr and start genes in the hexaploid wheat genome and their physical relationships with qtls for leaf rust resistance at seedling and adult stages. our analysis suggests that the abc  genes are more likely to be co-located with qtls for race-nonspecific, adult resistance whereas the nlr genes are more likely to be co-located with qtls for race-specific resistance that would be often expressed at the seedling stage. though our analysis was hampered by inaccurate or unknown physical positions of numerous qtls due to the incomplete assembly of the complex hexaploid wheat genome that is currently available, the observed associations between  qtls for race-specific resistance and nlr genes and  qtls for nonspecific resistance and abc genes will help discover snp variants for leaf rust resistance at seedling and adult stages. the genes containing nonsynonymous snps are promising candidates that can be investigated in future studies as potential new sources of leaf rust resistance in wheat breeding.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
abc transporternlr startrust resistance genesmolecular markerssingle nucleotide polymorphism bread wheattriticum aestivumgenome analysisgrowing forward  <dig> research opportunities and innovation internal initiativesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

