BACKGROUND

escherichia coli suffer from osmotic stress during succinic acid  production, which reduces the performance of this microbial factory.


RESULTS
here, we report that a point mutation leading to a single amino acid change  within the β-subunit of dna-dependent rna polymerase  significantly improved the osmotolerance of e. coli. importation of the d654y mutation of rpob into the parental strain, suc-t <dig>  increased cell growth and sa production by more than 40% compared to that of the control under high glucose osmolality. the transcriptome profile, determined by rna-sequencing, showed two distinct stress responses elicited by the mutated rpob that counterbalanced the osmotic stress. under non-stressed conditions, genes involved in the synthesis and transport of compatible solutes such as glycine-betaine, glutamate or proline were upregulated even without osmotic stimulation, suggesting a “pre-defense” mechanism maybe formed in the rpob mutant. under osmotic stressed conditions, genes encoding diverse sugar transporters, which should be down-regulated in the presence of high osmotic pressure, were derepressed in the rpob mutant. additional genetic experiments showed that enhancing the expression of the mal regulon, especially for genes that encode the glycoporin lamb and maltose transporter, contributed to the osmotolerance phenotype.


CONCLUSIONS
the d654y single amino acid substitution in rpob rendered e. coli cells resistant to osmotic stress, probably due to improved cell growth and viability via enhanced sugar uptake under stressed conditions, and activated a potential “pre-defense” mechanism under non-stressed conditions. the findings of this work will be useful for bacterial host improvement to enhance its resistance to osmotic stress and facilitate bio-based organic acids production.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
osmotolerancerpobsuccinic acidsugar transporterrna-seqkey deployment project of the chinese academy of scienceszdrw-zs-2016-3zhang xueli national high technology research and development program of china2014aa021205zhu xinna http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china3152200231300089zhu xinna zhang xueli tianjin key technology rd program of tianjin municipal science and technology commission13zczdsy05300issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

