BACKGROUND
heavy-metals exert considerable stress on the environment worldwide. this study assessed the resistance to and bioremediation of heavy-metals by selected protozoan and bacterial species in highly polluted industrial-wastewater. specific variables  and the growth/die-off-rates of test organisms were measured using standard methods. heavy-metal removals were determined in biomass and supernatant by the inductively couple plasma optical emission spectrometer. a parallel experiment was performed with dead microbial cells to assess the biosorption ability of test isolates.


RESULTS
the results revealed that the industrial-wastewater samples were highly polluted with heavy-metal concentrations exceeding by far the maximum limits  of  <dig> -co,  <dig> -ni,  <dig> -mn,  <dig> -v,  <dig> -pb,  <dig> -cu,  <dig> -zn and  <dig> -cd, prescribed by the un-fao. industrial-wastewater had no major effects on pseudomonas putida, bacillus licheniformis and peranema sp.  compared to other test isolates. this was also revealed with significant cod increases  in culture media inoculated with living bacterial isolates  compared to protozoan isolates . living pseudomonas putida demonstrated the highest removal rates of heavy metals  followed by bacillus licheniformis  and peranema sp. . none of the dead cells were able to remove more than 25% of the heavy metals. bacterial isolates contained the genes copc, chrb, cnra <dig> and ncca encoding the resistance to cu, cr, co-ni and cd-ni-co, respectively. protozoan isolates contained only the genes encoding cu and cr resistance . peranema sp. was the only protozoan isolate which had an additional resistant gene cnra <dig> encoding co-ni resistance.


CONCLUSIONS
significant differences  observed between dead and living microbial cells for metal-removal and the presence of certain metal-resistant genes indicated that the selected microbial isolates used both passive  and active  mechanisms to remove heavy metals from industrial wastewater. this study advocates the use of peranema sp. as a potential candidate for the bioremediation of heavy-metals in wastewater treatment, in addition to pseudomonas putida and bacillus licheniformis.

industrial wastewaterheavy metalbioremediationbacteriaprotozoametal toxicitypollutionmetal-resistance

