BACKGROUND
in therian mammals heteromorphic sex chromosomes are subject to meiotic sex chromosome inactivation  during meiotic prophase i while the autosomes maintain transcriptional activity. the evolution of this sex chromosome silencing is thought to result in retroposition of genes required in spermatogenesis from the sex chromosomes to autosomes. in birds sex chromosome specific silencing appears to be absent and global transcriptional reductions occur through pachytene and sex chromosome-derived autosomal retrogenes are lacking. egg laying monotremes are the most basal mammalian lineage, feature a complex and highly differentiated xy sex chromosome system with homology to the avian sex chromosomes, and also lack autosomal retrogenes. in order to delineate the point of origin of sex chromosome specific silencing in mammals we investigated whether msci exists in platypus.


RESULTS
our results show that platypus sex chromosomes display only partial or transient colocalisation with a repressive histone variant linked to therian sex chromosome silencing and surprisingly lack a hallmark msci epigenetic signature present in other mammals. remarkably, platypus instead feature an avian like period of general low level transcription through prophase i with the sex chromosomes and the future mammalian x maintaining association with a nucleolus-like structure.


CONCLUSIONS
our work demonstrates for the first time that in mammals meiotic silencing of sex chromosomes evolved after the divergence of monotremes presumably as a result of the differentiation of the therian xy sex chromosomes. we provide a novel evolutionary scenario on how the future therian x chromosome commenced the trajectory toward msci.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
meiosismeiotic sex chromosome inactivationmeiotic silencingmonotremesgeneticshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000923australian research councildp110105396grutzner frank issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

