BACKGROUND
water temperature greatly influences the physiology and behaviour of teleost fish as other aquatic organisms. while fish are able to cope with seasonal temperature variations, thermal excursions outside their normal thermal range might exceed their ability to respond leading to severe diseases and death.

profound differences exist in thermal tolerance across fish species living in the same geographical areas, promoting for investigating the molecular mechanisms involved in susceptibility and resistance to low and high temperatures toward a better understanding of adaptation to environmental challenges. the gilthead sea bream, sparus aurata, is particularly sensitive to cold and the prolonged exposure to low temperatures may lead to the "winter disease", a metabolic disorder that significantly affects the aquaculture productions along the northern mediterranean coasts during winter-spring season. while sea bream susceptibility to low temperatures has been extensively investigated, the cascade of molecular events under such stressful condition is not fully elucidated.


RESULTS
in the present study two groups of wild sea bream were exposed for 21 days to two temperature regimes: 16 ±  <dig> °c  and  <dig>  ±  <dig> °c  and dna microarray analysis of liver transcriptome was carried out at different time points during cold exposure.

a large set of genes was found to be differentially expressed upon cold-exposure with increasingly relevant effects being observed after three weeks at low temperature. all major known responses to cold  were found to be conserved in the gilthead sea bream, while, evidence for a key role of unfolded protein response  to endoplasmic reticulum  stress, during short- and long-term exposure to cold is reported here for the first time.


CONCLUSIONS
transcriptome data suggest a scenario where oxidative stress, altered lipid metabolism, atp depletion and protein denaturation converge to induce er stress. the resulting upr activation further promotes conditions for cell damage, and the inability to resolve er stress leads to severe liver dysfunction and potentially to death.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gilthead sea breamwinter syndromecold stressmicroarraygene expressionliverissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

