BACKGROUND
a close association between maize roots and burkholderia cepacia complex  bacteria has been observed in different locations globally. in this study we investigated by multilocus restriction typing  the genetic diversity and relationships among burkholderia cenocepacia iiib and bcc <dig> populations associated with roots of maize plants cultivated in geographically distant countries , in order to provide new insights into their population structure, evolution and ecology.


RESULTS
the  <dig> b. cenocepacia iiib and  <dig> bcc <dig> isolates gave rise to  <dig> and  <dig> different restriction types , respectively. two pairs of isolates of b. cenocepacia iiib and bcc <dig>  recovered from both italian and mexican maize rhizospheres, were found to share the same rt. the eburst  analysis of mlrt data grouped all the b. cenocepacia iiib isolates into four clonal complexes, with the rt-4-complex including the 42% of them, while the majority of the bcc <dig> isolates  were grouped into the rt-104-complex. these two main clonal complexes included rts shared by both italian and mexican maize rhizospheres and a clear relationship between grouping and maize variety was also found. grouping established by eburst correlated well with the assessment using unweighted-pair group method with arithmetic mean . the standardized index of association values obtained in both b. cenocepacia iiib and bcc <dig> suggests an epidemic population structure in which occasional clones emerge and spread.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together our data demonstrate a wide dispersal of certain b. cenocepacia iiib and bcc <dig> isolates in mexican and italian maize rhizospheres. despite the clear relationship found between the geographic origin of isolates and grouping, identical rts and closely related isolates were observed in geographically distant regions. ecological factors and selective pressure may preferably promote some genotypes within each local microbial population, favouring the spread of a single clone above the rest of the recombinant population.

