BACKGROUND
a lack of competence to form adventitious roots by cuttings of chrysanthemum  is an obstacle for the rapid fixation of elite genotypes. we performed a proteomic analysis of cutting bases of chrysanthemum cultivar ‘jinba’ during adventitious root formation  in order to identify rooting ability associated protein and/or to get further insight into the molecular mechanisms controlling adventitious rooting.


RESULTS
the protein profiles during arf were analyzed by comparing the 2-de gels between 0-day-old  and 5-day-old cutting bases of chrysanthemum. a total of  <dig> differentially accumulated protein spots  were excised and analyzed using maldi-tof/tof, among which  <dig> protein spots  were confidently identified using the ncbi database. the results demonstrated that 19% proteins were related to carbohydrate and energy metabolism, 16% to photosynthesis, 10% to protein fate, 7% to plant defense, 6% to cell structure, 7% to hormone related, 3% to nitrate metabolism, 3% to lipid metabolism, 3% to ascorbate biosynthesis and 3% to rna binding, 23% were unknown proteins. twenty types of differentially accumulated proteins including acc oxidase  were further analyzed at the transcription level, most of which were in accordance with the results of 2-de. moreover, the protein abundance changes of cmaco are supported by western blot experiments. ethylene evolution was higher during the arf compared with day  <dig> after cutting, while silver nitrate, an inhibitor of ethylene synthesis, pretreatment delayed the arf. it suggested that acc oxidase plays an important role in arf of chrysanthemum.


CONCLUSIONS
the proteomic analysis of cutting bases of chrysanthemum allowed us to identify proteins whose expression was related to arf. we identified auxin-induced protein pcnt <dig> and acc oxidase positively or negatively correlated to arf, respectively. several other proteins related to carbohydrate and energy metabolism, protein degradation, photosynthetic and cell structure were also correlated to arf. the induction of protein cmaco provide a strong case for ethylene as the immediate signal for arf. this strongly suggests that the proteins we have identified will be valuable for further insight into the molecular mechanisms controlling arf.

chrysanthemumanatomyadventitious rootproteomicswestern blot

