BACKGROUND
epidermal growth factor  is an important growth factor in regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, survival and apoptosis. studies showed that food-grade lactococcus lactis  and nice expression system have superior performance in exogenous protein expression. this study aimed to construct and express porcine egf , and use l. lactis as vehicle for producing and delivering pegf. furthermore, investigating biological activity of pegf and exploring applications feasibility of combination effects of l. lactis and pegf on early weaned piglets’ production.


RESULTS
a recombinant lactococcus lactis which produced and secreted pegf at  <dig> ng/ml in culture supernatant was generated. secreted pegf was a fully biologically active protein, as demonstrated by its capacity to stimulate l <dig> mouse fibroblast cell line proliferation in vitro. for in vivo study, forty piglets were randomly allocated to control, antibiotic control, empty vector-expressing l. lactis  and pegf-secreting l. lactis . after  <dig> d of rearing, final body weight and average daily gain in ll-pegf were greater  than those in control, but no significant differences between ll-pegf, ll-ev and antibiotic control. overall period average daily feed intake was higher in ll-pegf, ll-ev and antibiotic control than in control . no significant difference was observed on adfi/adg. ll-pegf increased villous height in the duodenum, jejunum and ileum than in control and ll-ev . sucrase in the  <dig> intestinal segments, aminopeptidase a in the duodenum and jejunum, aminopeptidase n and dipeptidase iv in the duodenum in ll-pegf were higher than those in control . furthermore, escherichia coli and enterococcus counts decreased in the ileum and lactobacillus increased in the ileum and cecum digesta in ll-pegf compare with the control . lactobacillus increased in the cecum in ll-ev compared with control and antibiotic control .


CONCLUSIONS
we have generated a recombinant lactococcus lactis which produced and secreted fully biologically active porcine egf. oral administration of pegf-secreting l. lactis had beneficial effects on intestinal health and performance of early-weaned piglets.

porcine epidermal growth factorlactococcus lactisearly-weaned pigletsintestinal developmentproduction performance

