BACKGROUND
the bacillus genus of firmicutes bacteria is ubiquitous in nature and includes one of the best characterized model organisms, b. subtilis, as well as medically significant human pathogens, the most notorious being b. anthracis and b. cereus. as the most abundant living entities on the planet, bacteriophages are known to heavily influence the ecology and evolution of their hosts, including providing virulence factors. thus, the identification and analysis of bacillus phages is critical to understanding the evolution of bacillus species, including pathogenic strains.


RESULTS
whole genome nucleotide and proteome comparison of the  <dig> extant bacillus phages revealed  <dig> distinct clusters,  <dig> subclusters and  <dig> singleton phages. host analysis of these clusters supports host boundaries at the subcluster level and suggests phages as vectors for genetic transfer within the bacillus cereus group, with b. anthracis as a distant member of the group. analysis of the proteins conserved among these phages reveals enormous diversity and the uncharacterized nature of these phages, with a total of  <dig>  protein families  of which only  <dig>  had a predicted function. in addition,  <dig>   of phams were orphams . the most populated phams were those encoding proteins involved in dna metabolism, virion structure and assembly, cell lysis, or host function. these included several genes that may contribute to the pathogenicity of bacillus strains.


CONCLUSIONS
this analysis provides a basis for understanding and characterizing bacillus phages and other related phages as well as their contributions to the evolution and pathogenicity of bacillus cereus group bacteria. the presence of sparsely populated clusters, the high ratio of singletons to clusters, and the large number of uncharacterized, conserved proteins confirms the need for more bacillus phage isolation in order to understand the full extent of their diversity as well as their impact on host evolution.

keywords
bacteriophagephageclusterbacillusissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

