BACKGROUND
the formation and development of bulblets are crucial to the lilium genus since these processes are closely related to carbohydrate metabolism, especially to starch and sucrose metabolism. however, little is known about the transcriptional regulation of both processes. to gain insight into carbohydrate-related genes involved in bulblet formation and development, we conducted comparative transcriptome profiling of lilium davidii var. unicolor bulblets at  <dig> d,  <dig> d  and  <dig> d  after scale propagation.


RESULTS
analysis of the transcriptome revealed that a total of  <dig>  unigenes with an average sequence size of 630 bp were generated. based on clusters of orthologous groups  analysis, 8% of the sequences were attributed to carbohydrate transport and metabolism. the results of kegg pathway enrichment analysis showed that starch and sucrose metabolism constituted the predominant pathway among the three library pairs. the starch content in mother scales and bulblets decreased and increased, respectively, with almost the same trend as sucrose content. gene expression analysis of the key enzymes in starch and sucrose metabolism suggested that sucrose synthase  and invertase , mainly hydrolyzing sucrose, presented higher gene expression in mother scales and bulblets at stages of bulblet appearance and enlargement, while sucrose phosphate synthase  showed higher expression in bulblets at morphogenesis. the enzymes involved in the starch synthetic direction such as adpg pyrophosphorylase , soluble starch synthase , starch branching enzyme  and granule-bound starch synthase  showed a decreasing trend in mother scales and higher gene expression in bulblets at bulblet appearance and enlargement stages while the enzyme in the cleavage direction, starch de-branching enzyme , showed higher gene expression in mother scales than in bulblets.


CONCLUSIONS
an extensive transcriptome analysis of three bulblet development stages contributes considerable novel information to our understanding of carbohydrate metabolism-related genes in lilium at the transcriptional level, and demonstrates the fundamentality of carbohydrate metabolism in bulblet emergence and development at the molecular level. this could facilitate further investigation into the molecular mechanisms underlying these processes in lily and other related species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
liliumbulblet formation and developmenttranscriptomestarch and sucrose metabolismgene expression fileissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

