BACKGROUND
protein complexes conserved across species indicate processes that are
core to cellular machinery . while numerous
computational methods have been devised to identify complexes from the protein
interaction  networks of individual species, these are severely limited by
noise and errors  in currently available datasets. our analysis
using human and yeast ppi networks revealed that these methods missed several
important complexes including those conserved between the two species
. here, we note
that much of the functionalities of yeast complexes have been conserved in human
complexes not only through sequence conservation of proteins but also of critical
functional domains. therefore, integrating information of domain
conservation might throw further light on conservation patterns between yeast and
human complexes.


RESULTS
we identify conserved complexes by constructing an interolog network 
leveraging on the functional conservation of proteins between species
through domain conservation  in addition to sequence
similarity. we employ 'state-of-the-art' methods to cluster the interolog network,
and map these clusters back to the original ppi networks to identify complexes
conserved between the species. evaluation of our in-based approach 
on human and yeast interaction data identifies several additional complexes  compared to direct complex detection from the original pins .
our analysis revealed that the in-construction removes several non-conserved
interactions many of which are false positives, thereby improving complex
prediction. in fact removing non-conserved interactions from the original pins
also resulted in higher number of conserved complexes, thereby validating our
in-based approach. these complexes included the mismatch repair complex,
mlh1-msh2-pms2-pcna, and other important ones namely, rna polymerase-ii, eif <dig> and
mcm complexes, all of which constitute core cellular processes known to be
conserved across the two species.


CONCLUSIONS
our method based on integrating domain conservation and sequence similarity to
construct interolog networks helps to identify considerably more conserved
complexes between the ppi networks from two species compared to direct complex
prediction from the ppi networks. we observe from our experiments that protein
complexes are not conserved from yeast to human in a straightforward way, that is,
it is not the case that a yeast complex is a  sub-set of a human complex
with a few additional proteins present in the human complex. instead complexes
have evolved multifold with considerable re-organization of proteins and
re-distribution of their functions across complexes. this finding can have
significant implications on attempts to extrapolate other kinds of relationships
such as synthetic lethality from yeast to human, for example in the identification
of novel cancer targets. availability:
http://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/~leonghw/cocin/.

20- <dig> september  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  twelfth international conference on
bioinformatics  taicang, china

