BACKGROUND
fine-scale or spatial genetic structure  is one of the key genetic characteristics of plant populations. several evolutionary and ecological processes and population characteristics influence the level of sgs within plant populations. higher fine-scale genetic structure may be expected in peripheral than core populations of long-lived forest trees, owing to the differences in the magnitude of operating evolutionary and ecological forces such as gene flow, genetic drift, effective population size and founder effects. we addressed this question using eastern white cedar  as a model species for declining to endangered long-lived tree species with mixed-mating system.


RESULTS
we determined the sgs in two core and two peripheral populations of eastern white cedar from its maritime canadian eastern range using six nuclear microsatellite dna markers. significant sgs ranging from  <dig> m to  <dig> m distance classes was observed in the four studied populations. an analysis of combined four populations revealed significant positive sgs up to the  <dig> m distance class. the mean positive significant sgs observed in the peripheral populations was up to six times  of that observed in the core populations . spatial autocorrelation coefficients and correlograms of single and sub-sets of populations were statistically significant. the extent of within-population sgs was significantly negatively correlated with all genetic diversity parameters. significant heterogeneity of within-population sgs was observed for 0- <dig> m and 61- <dig> m between core and peripheral populations. average sp, and gene flow distances were higher in peripheral  than in core  populations. however, the mean neighborhood size was higher in the core  than in the peripheral  populations.


CONCLUSIONS
eastern white cedar populations have significant fine-scale genetic structure at short distances. peripheral populations have several-folds higher within-population fine-scale genetic structure than core populations. anthropogenic disturbances and population fragmentation presumably have significant effects on fine-scale genetic structure in eastern white cedar. core populations have higher neighborhood size than peripheral populations, whereas gene flow distances are higher in peripheral than in core populations. the results of our study contribute to the knowledge of poorly-understood spatial genetic structure of core versus peripheral populations in plants. as well, the information is of significance for conservation of genetic resources of eastern white cedar and perhaps of other long-lived forest trees with mixed-mating system.

