BACKGROUND
subtype a is a major strain in the hiv- <dig> pandemic in eastern europe, central asia and in certain regions of east africa, notably in rural kenya. while considerable effort has been focused upon mapping and defining immunodominant ctl epitopes in hiv- <dig> subtype b and subtype c infections, few epitope mapping studies have focused upon subtype a.


RESULTS
we have used the ifn-γ elispot assay and overlapping peptide pools to show that the pattern of ctl recognition of the gag and nef proteins in subtype a infection is similar to that seen in subtypes b and c. the p <dig> and p <dig> proteins of gag and the central conserved region of nef were targeted by ctl from hiv-1-infected kenyans. several epitope/hla associations commonly seen in subtype b and c infection were also observed in subtype a infections. notably, an immunodominant hla-c restricted epitope  was observed, with 8/ <dig> hla-cw <dig> subjects responding to this epitope. screening the cohort with peptide sets representing subtypes a, c and d , revealed that peptide sets based upon an homologous subtype  only marginally improved the capacity to detect ctl responses. while the different peptide sets detected a similar number of responses , each set was capable of detecting unique responses not identified with the other peptide sets.


CONCLUSIONS
hence, screening with multiple peptide sets representing different sequences, and by extension different epitope variants, can increase the detectable breadth of the hiv-1-specific ctl response. interpreting the true extent of cross-reactivity may be hampered by the use of 15-mer peptides at a single concentration and a lack of knowledge of the sequence that primed any given ctl response. therefore, reagent choice and knowledge of the exact sequences that prime ctl responses will be important factors in experimentally defining cross-reactive ctl responses and their role in hiv- <dig> disease pathogenesis and validating vaccines aimed at generating broadly cross-reactive ctl responses.

