BACKGROUND
hybridization between incipient species is expected to become progressively limited as their genetic divergence increases and reproductive isolation proceeds. amphibian radiations and their secondary contact zones are useful models to infer the timeframes of speciation, but empirical data from natural systems remains extremely scarce. here we follow this approach in the european radiation of tree frogs . we investigated a natural hybrid zone between two lineages  of mio-pliocene divergence  for comparison with other hybrid systems from this group.


RESULTS
we found concordant geographic distributions of nuclear and mitochondrial gene pools, and replicated narrow transitions  across two independent transects, indicating an advanced state of reproductive isolation and potential local barriers to dispersal. this result parallels the situation between h. arborea and h. intermedia, which share the same amount of divergence with h. orientalis. in contrast, younger lineages show much stronger admixture at secondary contacts.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings corroborate the negative relationship between hybridizability and divergence time in european tree frogs, where  <dig> my are necessary to achieve almost complete reproductive isolation. speciation seems to progress homogeneously in this radiation, and might thus be driven by gradual genome-wide changes rather than single speciation genes. however, the timescale differs greatly from that of other well-studied amphibians. general assumptions on the time necessary for speciation based on evidence from unrelated taxa may thus be unreliable. in contrast, comparative hybrid zone analyses within single radiations such as our case study are useful to appreciate the advance of speciation in space and time.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
contact zoneintrogressiondivergencecline analysisspeciationhylaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

