BACKGROUND
the small rnas  are a regulatory class of rna mainly represented by the  <dig> and 24-nucleotide size classes. the cellular srnas are processed by rnase iii family enzyme dicer  from a self-complementary hairpin loop or other type of rna duplexes. the papaya genome has been sequenced, but its micrornas and other regulatory rnas are yet to be analyzed.


RESULTS
we analyzed the genomic features of the papaya srna population from three srna deep sequencing libraries made from leaves, flowers, and leaves infected with papaya ringspot virus . we also used the deep sequencing data to annotate the micro rna  in papaya. we identified  <dig> mirnas,  <dig> of which were conserved in other species, and  <dig> of which were novel mirnas specific to papaya. in contrast to the chargaff’s purine-pyrimidine equilibrium, cellular srna was significantly biased towards a purine rich population. of the two purine bases, higher frequency of adenine was present in 23nt or longer srnas, while 22nt or shorter srnas were over represented by guanine bases. however, this bias was not observed in the annotated mirnas in plants. the 21nt species were expressed from fewer loci but expressed at higher levels relative to the 24nt species. the highly expressed 21nt species were clustered in a few isolated locations of the genome. the prsv infected leaves showed higher accumulation of  <dig> and 22nt srna compared to uninfected leaves. we observed higher accumulation of mirna* of seven annotated mirnas in virus-infected tissue, indicating the potential function of mirna* under stressed conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
we have identified  <dig> mirnas in papaya. our study revealed the asymmetric purine-pyrimidine distribution in cellular srna population. the 21nt species of srnas have higher expression levels than 24nt srna. the mirna* of some mirnas shows higher accumulation in prsv infected tissues, suggesting that these strands are not totally functionally redundant. the findings open a new avenue for further investigation of the srna silencing pathway in plants.

mirnasirnapapaya ringspot virus small rna strand selectiontransgene silencing

