BACKGROUND
high-throughput technology allows for genome-wide measurements at different molecular levels for the same patient, e.g. single nucleotide polymorphisms  and gene expression. correspondingly, it might be beneficial to also integrate complementary information from different molecular levels when building multivariable risk prediction models for a clinical endpoint, such as treatment response or survival. unfortunately, such a high-dimensional modeling task will often be complicated by a limited overlap of molecular measurements at different levels between patients, i.e. measurements from all molecular levels are available only for a smaller proportion of patients.


RESULTS
we propose a sequential strategy for building clinical risk prediction models that integrate genome-wide measurements from two molecular levels in a complementary way. to deal with partial overlap, we develop an imputation approach that allows us to use all available data. this approach is investigated in two acute myeloid leukemia applications combining gene expression with either snp or dna methylation data. after obtaining a sparse risk prediction signature e.g. from snp data, an automatically selected set of prognostic snps, by componentwise likelihood-based boosting, imputation is performed for the corresponding linear predictor by a linking model that incorporates e.g. gene expression measurements. the imputed linear predictor is then used for adjustment when building a prognostic signature from the gene expression data. for evaluation, we consider stability, as quantified by inclusion frequencies across resampling data sets. despite an extremely small overlap in the application example with gene expression and snps, several genes are seen to be more stably identified when taking the  linear predictor from the snp data into account. in the application with gene expression and dna methylation, prediction performance with respect to survival also indicates that the proposed approach might work well.


CONCLUSIONS
we consider imputation of linear predictor values to be a feasible and sensible approach for dealing with partial overlap in complementary integrative analysis of molecular measurements at different levels. more generally, these results indicate that a complementary strategy for integrating different molecular levels can result in more stable risk prediction signatures, potentially providing a more reliable insight into the underlying biology.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
acute myeloid leukemiamultiple genome-wide data setsrisk predictionmultivariable modelboostingtime-to-event endpointposition of stefanie hieke has partially been founded by the willhelm sander foundationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

