BACKGROUND
time-lapse microscopy is an essential tool for capturing and correlating bacterial morphology and gene expression dynamics at single-cell resolution. however state-of-the-art computational methods are limited in terms of the complexity of cell movies that they can analyze and lack of automation. the proposed bacterial image analysis driven single cell analytics  computational pipeline addresses these limitations thus enabling high throughput systems microbiology.


RESULTS
basca can segment and track multiple bacterial colonies and single-cells, as they grow and divide over time  to give rise to dense communities with thousands of interacting cells in the field of view. it combines advanced image processing and machine learning methods to deliver very accurate bacterial cell segmentation and tracking  even when processing images of imperfect quality with several overcrowded colonies in the field of view. in addition, basca extracts on the fly a plethora of single-cell properties, which get organized into a database summarizing the analysis of the cell movie. we present alternative ways to analyze and visually explore the spatiotemporal evolution of single-cell properties in order to understand trends and epigenetic effects across cell generations. the robustness of basca is demonstrated across different imaging modalities and microscopy types.


CONCLUSIONS
basca can be used to analyze accurately and efficiently cell movies both at a high resolution  and at a large scale  as needed to shed light on e.g. how bacterial community effects and epigenetic information transfer play a role on important phenomena for human health, such as biofilm formation, persisters’ emergence etc. moreover, it enables studying the role of single-cell stochasticity without losing sight of community effects that may drive it.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
time-lapse microscopymachine learningbacterial image analysiscolonies segmentationcell segmentationlineage tree constructionvisualizationsingle-cell informaticssingle-cell analyticsalexander s. onassis public benefit foundation gzj030/2013-2014balomenos athanasios d. ministry of education, lifelong learning and religious affairs 380229manolakos elias s. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

