BACKGROUND
fuzzless-lintless cotton mutants are considered to be the ideal material to understand the molecular mechanisms involved in fibre cell development. although there are few reports on transcriptome and proteome analyses in cotton at fibre initiation and elongation stages, there is no comprehensive comparative transcriptome analysis of fibre-bearing and fuzzless-lintless cotton ovules covering fibre initiation to secondary cell wall  synthesis stages. in the present study, a comparative transcriptome analysis was carried out using g. hirsutum l. cv. mcu <dig> wild-type  and it’s near isogenic fuzzless-lintless  mutant at fibre initiation , elongation  and scw synthesis  stages.


RESULTS
scanning electron microscopy study revealed the delay in the initiation of fibre cells and lack of any further development after  <dig> dpa in the fl mutant. transcriptome analysis showed major down regulation of transcripts  at fibre initiation and early elongation  stages in the fl mutant. majority of the down regulated transcripts at fibre initiation stage in the fl mutant represent calcium and phytohormone mediated signal transduction pathways, biosynthesis of auxin and ethylene and stress responsive transcription factors . further, transcripts involved in carbohydrate and lipid metabolisms, mitochondrial electron transport system  and cell wall loosening and elongation were highly down-regulated at fibre elongation stage  in the fl mutant. in addition, cellulose synthases and sucrose synthase c were down-regulated at scw biosynthesis stage . interestingly, some of the transcripts  involved in phytohormone signalling and stress responsive transcription factors that were up-regulated at fibre initiation stage in the wt were found to be up-regulated at much later stage  in fl mutant.


CONCLUSIONS
comparative transcriptome analysis of wt and its near isogenic fl mutant revealed key genes and pathways involved at various stages of fibre development. our data implicated the significant role of mitochondria mediated energy metabolism during fibre elongation process. the delayed expression of genes involved in phytohormone signalling and stress responsive tfs in the fl mutant suggests the need for a coordinated expression of regulatory mechanisms in fibre cell initiation and differentiation.

