BACKGROUND
soil microorganisms are mainly responsible for the complete mineralization of aromatic compounds that usually originate from plant products or environmental pollutants. in many cases, structurally diverse aromatic compounds can be converted to a small number of structurally simpler intermediates, which are metabolized to tricarboxylic acid intermediates via the β-ketoadipate pathway. this strategy provides great metabolic flexibility and contributes to increased adaptation of bacteria to their environment. however, little is known about the evolution and regulation of the β-ketoadipate pathway in root-associated diazotrophs.


RESULTS
in this report, we performed a genome-wide analysis of the benzoate and 4-hydroxybenzoate catabolic pathways of pseudomonas stutzeri a <dig>  with a focus on the functional characterization of the β-ketoadipate pathway. the p. stutzeri a <dig> genome contains sets of catabolic genes involved in the peripheral pathways for catabolism of benzoate  and 4-hydroxybenzoate , and in the catechol  and protocatechuate  branches of the β-ketoadipate pathway. a particular feature of the catabolic gene organization in a <dig> is the absence of the catr and pcak genes encoding a lysr family regulator and 4-hydroxybenzoate permease, respectively. furthermore, the benr protein functions as a transcriptional activator of the ben operon, while transcription from the catbc promoter can be activated in response to benzoate. benzoate degradation is subject to carbon catabolite repression induced by glucose and acetate in a <dig>  the hplc analysis of intracellular metabolites indicated that low concentrations of 4-hydroxybenzoate significantly enhance the ability of a <dig> to degrade benzoate.


CONCLUSIONS
the expression of genes encoding proteins involved in the β-ketoadipate pathway is tightly modulated by both pathway-specific and catabolite repression controls in a <dig>  this strain provides an ideal model system for further study of the evolution and regulation of aromatic catabolic pathways.

