BACKGROUND
transcriptome studies have revealed that many eukaryotic genomes are pervasively transcribed producing numerous long non-coding rnas . however, only a few lncrnas have been ascribed a cellular role thus far, with most regulating the expression of adjacent genes. even less lncrnas have been annotated as essential hence implying that the majority may be functionally redundant. therefore, the function of lncrnas could be illuminated through systematic analysis of their synthetic genetic interactions .


RESULTS
here, we employ synthetic genetic array  in saccharomyces cerevisiae to identify gis between long intergenic non-coding rnas  and protein-coding genes. we first validate this approach by demonstrating that the telomerase rna tlc <dig> displays a gi network that corresponds to its well-described function in telomere length maintenance. we subsequently performed sga screens on a set of uncharacterised lincrnas and uncover their connection to diverse cellular processes. one of these lincrnas, sut <dig>  exhibits a gi profile associating it to telomere organisation and we consistently demonstrate that sut <dig> is required for telomeric overhang homeostasis through an exo1-dependent pathway. furthermore, the gi profile of sut <dig> is distinct from that of its neighbouring genes suggesting a function independent to its genomic location. accordingly, we show that ectopic expression of this lincrna suppresses telomeric overhang accumulation in sut457Δ cells assigning a trans-acting role for sut <dig> in telomere biology.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, our work proposes that systematic application of this genetic approach could determine the functional significance of individual lncrnas in yeast and other complex organisms.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
long intergenic non-coding rnasstable unannotated transcriptssynthetic genetic arraygenetic interactionstelomerehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000781european research council260797kirmizis antonis issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

