BACKGROUND
the cost of whole genome sequencing  has decreased tremendously in recent years due to advances in next-generation sequencing technologies. nevertheless, the cost of carrying out large-scale cohort studies using wgs is still daunting. past simulation studies with coverage at ~2x have shown promise for using low coverage wgs in studies focused on variant discovery, association study replications, and population genomics characterization. however, the performance of low coverage wgs in populations with a complex history and no reference panel remains to be determined.


RESULTS
south indian populations are known to have a complex population structure and are an example of a major population group that lacks adequate reference panels. to test the performance of extremely low-coverage wgs  in populations with a complex history and to provide a reference resource for south indian populations, we performed exl-wgs on  <dig> south indian individuals from eight populations to ~ <dig> x coverage. using two variant discovery pipelines, snptools and gatk, we generated a consensus call set that has ~90% sensitivity for identifying common variants . imputation further improves the sensitivity of our call set. in addition, we obtained high-coverage for the whole mitochondrial genome to infer the maternal lineage evolutionary history of the indian samples.


CONCLUSIONS
overall, we demonstrate that exl-wgs with imputation can be a valuable study design for variant discovery with a dramatically lower cost than standard wgs, even in populations with a complex history and without available reference data. in addition, the south indian exl-wgs data generated in this study will provide a valuable resource for future indian genomic studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
single nucleotide variantwhole genome sequencingsouth asianextremely low coveragepopulation structureimputationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000051national human genome research instituteu54hg003273r00hg005846gibbs richard a. xing jinchuan http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000057national institute of general medical sciencesr01gm59290jorde lynn b. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

