BACKGROUND
plants are oftentimes exposed to many types of abiotic stresses. drought is one of the main environmental stresses which limits plant growth, distribution and crop yield worldwide. amygdalus mira  yü et lu is an important wild peach, and it is considered an ideal wild peach germplasm for improving cultivated peach plants. because of the loss of genetic variation, cultivated peach plants are sensitive to biotic and abiotic stresses. wild peach germplasm can offer many useful genes for peach improvement. responses to drought by withholding water have been studied in amygdalus mira  yü et lu roots. in this study, plants were divided into well-watered  and water-stressed  groups, and the treatment group did not receive water until the recovery period .


RESULTS
several physiological parameters, including root water content and root length, were reduced by drought stress and recovered after rewatering. in addition, the relative conductivity, the levels of proline, mda and h2o <dig>  and the activities of ros scavenging enzymes  were increased, and none of these factors, except the level of proline, recovered after rewatering. in total,  <dig> differentially expressed proteins were revealed after drought. the identified proteins refer to a extensive range of biological processes, molecular functions and cellular components, including cytoskeleton dynamics , carbohydrate and nitrogen metabolism , energy metabolism , transcription and translation , transport , inducers , stress and defense , molecular chaperones , protein degradation , signal transduction , other materials metabolism  and unknown functions . proteins related to defense, stress, transcription and translation play an important role in drought response. in addition, we also examined the correlation between protein and transcript levels.


CONCLUSIONS
the interaction between enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants, the levels of proline, mda, h2o <dig> and the relative conductivity, and the expression level of proteins in drought-treated plants all contribute to drought resistance in amygdalus mira  yü et lu.


electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
amygdalus mira  yü et luwild peachdroughtphysiologicalproteomics fundamental research funds for the central universities 2572015da03meng fanjuan issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

