BACKGROUND
opsins are light sensitive receptors associated with visual processes. insects typically possess opsins that are stimulated by ultraviolet, short and long wavelength  radiation. six putative lw-sensitive opsins predicted in the yellow fever mosquito, aedes aegypti and malaria mosquito, anopheles gambiae, and eight in the southern house mosquito, culex quinquefasciatus, suggest gene expansion in the family culicidae  relative to other insects. here we report the first detailed molecular and evolutionary analyses of lw opsins in three mosquito vectors, with a goal to understanding the molecular basis of opsin-mediated visual processes that could be exploited for mosquito control.


RESULTS
time of divergence estimates suggest that the mosquito lw opsins originated from  <dig> or  <dig> duplication events between  <dig> / <dig>  to  <dig> / <dig>  million years ago  and that these likely occurred following the predicted divergence of the lineages anophelinae and culicinae 145– <dig> my. fitmodel analyses identified nine amino acid residues in the lw opsins that may be under positive selection. of these, eight amino acids occur in the n and c termini and are shared among all three species, and one residue in tmiii was unique to culicine species. alignment of 5′ non-coding regions revealed potential conserved non-coding sequences  and transcription factor binding sites  in seven pairs of lw opsin paralogs.


CONCLUSIONS
our analyses suggest opsin gene duplication and residues possibly associated with spectral tuning of lw-sensitive photoreceptors. we explore two mechanisms - positive selection and differential expression mediated by regulatory units in cns – that may have contributed to the retention of lw opsin genes in culicinae and anophelinae. we discuss the evolution of mosquito lw opsins in the context of major earth events and possible adaptation of mosquitoes to lw-dominated photo environments, and implications for mosquito control strategies based on disrupting vision-mediated behaviors.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mosquitoopsinlong-wavelengthgene duplicationpositive selectiondifferential expressionconserved non-coding sequencesvisionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100006377purdue universityinternal fundshill catherine a. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

