BACKGROUND
lettuce  is susceptible to dieback, a soilborne disease caused by two viruses from the family tombusviridae. susceptibility to dieback is widespread in romaine and leaf-type lettuce, while modern iceberg cultivars are resistant to this disease. resistance in iceberg cultivars is conferred by tvr <dig> - a single, dominant gene that provides durable resistance. this study describes fine mapping of the resistance gene, analysis of nucleotide polymorphism and linkage disequilibrium in the tvr <dig> region, and development of molecular markers for marker-assisted selection.


RESULTS
a combination of classical linkage mapping and association mapping allowed us to pinpoint the location of the tvr <dig> resistance gene on chromosomal linkage group  <dig>  nine molecular markers, based on expressed sequence tags , were closely linked to tvr <dig> in the mapping population, developed from crosses between resistant  and susceptible  cultivars. sequencing of these markers from a set of  <dig> cultivars revealed a relatively high level of nucleotide polymorphism  and extensive linkage disequilibrium  in this region. however, the extent of linkage disequilibrium was affected by population structure and the values were substantially larger when the analysis was performed only for romaine  and crisphead  accessions. the association mapping approach revealed that one of the nine markers  in the tvr <dig> region matched exactly with resistant and susceptible phenotypes when tested on a set of  <dig> l. sativa accessions from all horticultural types of lettuce. the marker-trait association was also confirmed on two accessions of lactuca serriola - a wild relative of cultivated lettuce. the combination of three single-nucleotide polymorphisms  at the cntg <dig> marker identified four haplotypes. three of the haplotypes were associated with resistance and one of them was always associated with susceptibility to the disease.


CONCLUSIONS
we have successfully applied high-resolution dna melting  analysis to distinguish all four haplotypes of the cntg <dig> marker in a single analysis. marker-assisted selection for dieback resistance with hrm is now an integral part of our breeding program that is focused on the development of improved lettuce cultivars.

