BACKGROUND
cynanchum komarovii al iljinski is a xerophytic plant species widely distributing in the severely adverse environment of the deserts in northwest china. at present, the detailed transcriptomic and genomic data for c. komarovii are still insufficient in public databases.


RESULTS
to investigate changes of drought-responsive genes and explore the mechanisms of drought tolerance in c. komarovii, approximately  <dig>  gb sequencing data were obtained using illumina sequencing technology. after de novo assembly  <dig>  unigenes were generated with an average length of 604 bp. among these unigenes,  <dig>  were annotated with gene descriptions, conserved domains, gene ontology terms, and metabolic pathways. the results showed that a great number of unigenes were significantly affected by drought stress. we identified  <dig> unigenes as reliable differentially expressed genes . during drought stress, the regulatory genes were involved in signaling transduction pathways and in controlling the expression of functional genes. moreover, c. komarovii activated many functional genes that directly protected against stress and improved tolerance to adapt drought condition. importantly, the degs were involved in biosynthesis, export, and regulation of plant cuticle, suggesting that plant cuticle may play a vital role in response to drought stress and the accumulation of cuticle may allow c. komarovii to improve the tolerance to drought stress.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first large-scale reference sequence data of c. komarovii, which enlarge the genomic resources of this species. our comprehensive transcriptome analysis will provide a valuable resource for further investigation into the molecular adaptation of desert plants under drought condition and facilitate the exploration of drought-tolerant candidate genes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cynanchum komaroviidrought-stress responseillumina sequencingtranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

