BACKGROUND
the moss physcomitrella patens as a model species provides an important reference for early-diverging lineages of plants and the release of the genome in  <dig> opened the doors to genome-wide studies. the usability of a reference genome greatly depends on the quality of the annotation and the availability of centralized community resources. therefore, in the light of accumulating evidence for missing genes, fragmentary gene structures, false annotations and a low rate of functional annotations on the original release, we decided to improve the moss genome annotation.


RESULTS
here, we report the complete moss genome re-annotation  incorporating the increased transcript availability from a multitude of developmental stages and tissue types. we demonstrate the utility of the improved p. patens genome annotation for comparative genomics and new extensions to the cosmoss.org resource as a central repository for this plant “flagship” genome. the structural annotation of  <dig>  protein-coding genes results in  <dig> additional loci including  <dig> loci with known protein domains or homologs in plantae. this is the first release to include information on transcript isoforms, suggesting alternative splicing events for at least  <dig> % of the loci. furthermore, this release now also provides information on non-protein-coding loci. functional annotations were improved regarding quality and coverage, resulting in 58% annotated loci  that comprise also  <dig> additional loci with go annotations. access and manual curation of the functional and structural genome annotation is provided via the http://www.cosmoss.org model organism database.


CONCLUSIONS
comparative analysis of gene structure evolution along the green plant lineage provides novel insights, such as a comparatively high number of loci with 5’-utr introns in the moss. comparative analysis of functional annotations reveals expansions of moss house-keeping and metabolic genes and further possibly adaptive, lineage-specific expansions and gains including at least 13% orphan genes.

bryophytephyscomitrella patensgenome annotationgene structurereference genomemodel organismutrplant evolutionnon-flowering plantorphan genes

