BACKGROUND
xenorhabdus bacteria engage in a beneficial symbiosis with steinernema nematodes, in part by providing activities that help kill and degrade insect hosts for nutrition. xenorhabdus strains  can display wide variation in host-interaction phenotypes and genetic potential indicating that strains may differ in their encoded symbiosis factors, including secreted metabolites.

methods
to discern strain-level variation among symbiosis factors, and facilitate the identification of novel compounds, we performed a comparative analysis of the genomes of  <dig> xenorhabdus bovienii bacterial strains.


RESULTS
the analyzed x. bovienii draft genomes are broadly similar in structure . genome content analysis revealed that general classes of putative host-microbe interaction functions, such as secretion systems and toxin classes, were identified in all bacterial strains. in contrast, we observed diversity of individual genes within families , indicating the specific molecules secreted by each strain can vary. additionally, phenotypic analysis indicates that regulation of activities  differs among strains.


CONCLUSIONS
the analyses presented here demonstrate that while general mechanisms by which x. bovienii bacterial strains interact with their invertebrate hosts are similar, the specific molecules mediating these interactions differ. our data support that adaptation of individual bacterial strains to distinct hosts or niches has occurred. for example, diverse metabolic profiles among bacterial symbionts may have been selected by dissimilarities in nutritional requirements of their different nematode hosts. similarly, factors involved in parasitism , likely differ based on evolution in response to naturally encountered organisms, such as insect hosts, competitors, predators or pathogens. this study provides insight into effectors of a symbiotic lifestyle, and also highlights that when mining xenorhabdus species for novel natural products, including antibiotics and insecticidal toxins, analysis of multiple bacterial strains likely will increase the potential for the discovery of novel molecules

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
symbiosiscompetitionxenorhabdussteinernemabacterianematodesinsectscomparative genomicshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healtht <dig> ai55397murfin kristen e. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationios-0920631goodrich-blair heidi http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationios-1353674goodrich-blair heidi issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

