BACKGROUND
polyploidy plays an important role in the adaptation and speciation of plants. the alteration of karyotype is a significant event during polyploidy formation. the medicago sativa complex includes both diploid  and tetraploid  subspecies. the tetraploid m. ssp. sativa was regarded as having a simple autopolyploid origin from diploid ssp. caerulea, whereas the autopolyploid origin of tetraploid ssp. falcata from diploid form ssp. falcata is still in doubt. in this study, detailed comparative cytogenetic analysis between diploid to tetraploid species, as well as genomic affinity across different species in the m. sativa complex, were conducted based on comparative mapping of  <dig> repeated dna sequences and two rdna sequences by a fluorescence in situ hybridization  technique.


RESULTS
fish patterns of the repeats in diploid subspecies caerulea were highly similar to those in tetraploid subspecies sativa. distinctly different fish patterns were first observed in diploid ssp. falcata, with only centromeric hybridizations using centromeric and multiple region repeats and a few subtelomeric hybridizations using subtelomeric repeats. tetraploid subspecies falcata was unexpectedly found to possess a highly variable karyotype, which agreed with neither diploid ssp. falcata nor ssp. sativa. reconstruction of chromosome-doubling process of diploid ssp. caerulea showed that chromosome changes have occurred during polyploidization process.


CONCLUSIONS
the comparative cytogenetic results provide reliable evidence that diploid subspecies caerulea is the direct progenitor of tetraploid subspecies sativa. and autotetraploid ssp. sativa has been suggested to undergo a partial diploidization by the progressive accumulation of chromosome structural rearrangements during evolution. however, the tetraploid subspecies falcata is far from a simple autopolyploid from diploid subspecies falcata although no obvious morphological change was observed between these two subspecies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
medicago sativam. sativa ssp. caeruleam. sativa ssp. falcatarepetitive sequencesfishchromosome evolutiondiploidizationthe joint scholars project of the dawn of west china talent training program of the chinese academy of sciencesnatural science foundation of qinghai province2015-zj-903dou quanwen issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

