BACKGROUND
group ii introns are catalytically active rna and mobile retroelements present in certain eukaryotic organelles, bacteria and archaea. these ribozymes self-splice from the pre-mrna of interrupted genes and reinsert within target dna sequences by retrohoming and retrotransposition. evolutionary hypotheses place these retromobile elements at the origin of over half the human genome. nevertheless, the evolution and dissemination of group ii introns was found to be quite difficult to infer.


RESULTS
we characterized the functional and evolutionary relationship between the model group ii intron from lactococcus lactis, ll.ltrb, and ef.pcfg, a newly discovered intron from a clinical strain of enterococcus faecalis. ef.pcfg was found to be homologous to ll.ltrb and to splice and mobilize in its native environment as well as in l. lactis. interestingly, ef.pcfg was shown to splice at the same level as ll.ltrb but to be significantly less efficient to invade the ll.ltrb recognition site. we also demonstrated that specific point mutations between the ieps of both introns correspond to functional adaptations which developed in l. lactis as a response to selective pressure on mobility efficiency independently of splicing. the sequence of all the homologous full-length variants of ll.ltrb were compared and shown to share a conserved pattern of mutation acquisition.


CONCLUSIONS
this work shows that ll.ltrb and ef.pcfg are homologous and have a common origin resulting from a recent lateral transfer event followed by further adaptation to the new target site and/or host environment. we hypothesize that ef.pcfg is the ancestor of ll.ltrb and was initially acquired by l. lactis, most probably by conjugation, via a single event of horizontal transfer. strong selective pressure on homing site invasion efficiency then led to the emergence of beneficial point mutations in the iep, enabling the successful establishment and survival of the group ii intron in its novel lactococcal environment. the current colonization state of ll.ltrb in l. lactis was probably later achieved through recurring episodes of conjugation-based horizontal transfer as well as independent intron mobility events. overall, our data provide the first evidence of functional adaptation of a group ii intron upon invading a new host, offering strong experimental support to the theory that bacterial group ii introns, in sharp contrast to their organellar counterparts, behave mostly as mobile elements.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
enterococcus faecalislactococcus lactisll.ltrbef.pcfglateral transferintron evolutionintron mobilityintron disseminationconjugationnatural sciences and engineering research council of canada 227826cousineau benoit natural sciences and engineering research council of canada , cgs-m master's fellowshipfonds de recherche en nature et technologies du quebec, master's research scholarshipgraduate excellence fellowship, mcgill universityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

