BACKGROUND
mutation in proteins are a natural byproduct of evolution but can also cause serious diseases. aminoacyl-trna synthetases  are indispensable components of all cellular protein translational machineries, and in humans they drive translation in both cytoplasm and mitochondria. mutations in aarss have been implicated in a plethora of diseases including neurological conditions, metabolic disorders and cancer.


RESULTS
we have developed an algorithmic approach for genome-wide analyses of sequence substitutions that combines evolutionary, structural and functional information. this pipeline enabled us to super-annotate human aars mutations and analyze their linkage to health disorders. our data suggest that in some but not all cases, aars mutations occur in functional and structural sectors where they can manifest their pathological effects by altering enzyme activity or causing structural instability. further, mutations appear in both solvent exposed and buried regions of aarss indicating that these alterations could lead to dysfunctional enzymes resulting in abnormal protein translation routines by affecting inter-molecular interactions or by disruption of non-bonded interactions. overall, the prevalence of mutations is much higher in mitochondrial aarss, and the two most often mutated aarss are mitochondrial glutamyl-trna synthetase and dual localized glycyl-trna synthetase. out of  <dig> mutations annotated in this work, only  <dig>  were observed in regions that could directly affect aminoacylation activity via either binding to atp/amino-acid, trna or by involvement in dimerization. mutations in structural cores or at potential biomolecular interfaces account for ~55% mutations while remaining mutations  remain structurally un-annotated.


CONCLUSIONS
this work provides a comprehensive structural framework within which most defective human aarss have been structurally analyzed. the methodology described here could be employed to annotate mutations in other protein families in a high-throughput manner.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aminoacyl-trna synthetasesmutationshuman diseasesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

