BACKGROUND
motif search is an important step in extracting meaningful patterns from biological data. the general problem of motif search is intractable and there is a pressing need to develop efficient, exact and approximation algorithms to solve this problem. in this paper, we present several novel, exact, sequential and parallel algorithms for solving the  edit-distance-based motif search  problem: given two integers l,d and n biological strings, find all strings of length l that appear in each input string with atmost d errors of types substitution, insertion and deletion.

methods
one popular technique to solve the problem is to explore for each input string the set of all possible l-mers that belong to the d-neighborhood of any substring of the input string and output those which are common for all input strings. we introduce a novel and provably efficient neighborhood exploration technique. we show that it is enough to consider the candidates in neighborhood which are at a distance exactly d. we compactly represent these candidate motifs using wildcard characters and efficiently explore them with very few repetitions. our sequential algorithm uses a trie based data structure to efficiently store and sort the candidate motifs. our parallel algorithm in a multi-core shared memory setting uses arrays for storing and a novel modification of radix-sort for sorting the candidate motifs.


RESULTS
the algorithms for ems are customarily evaluated on several challenging instances such as , , , , and so on. the best previously known algorithm, ems <dig>  is sequential and in estimated  <dig> days solves up to instance . our sequential algorithms are more than  <dig> times faster on . on other hard instances such as , , , our algorithms are much faster. our parallel algorithm has more than  <dig> % scaling performance while using  <dig> threads.


CONCLUSIONS
our algorithms have pushed up the state-of-the-art of ems solvers and we believe that the techniques introduced in this paper are also applicable to other motif search problems such as planted motif search  and simple motif search .

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
motifedit distancetrieradix sortieee international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine  <dig> washington, dc, usa 9- <dig> november  <dig> http://cci.drexel.edu/ieeebibm/bibm2015/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

