BACKGROUND
accurately predicting the binding affinities of large sets of protein-ligand complexes is a key challenge in computational biomolecular science, with applications in drug discovery, chemical biology, and structural biology. since a scoring function  is used to score, rank, and identify drug leads, the fidelity with which it predicts the affinity of a ligand candidate for a protein's binding site has a significant bearing on the accuracy of virtual screening. despite intense efforts in developing conventional sfs, which are either force-field based, knowledge-based, or empirical, their limited predictive power has been a major roadblock toward cost-effective drug discovery. therefore, in this work, we present novel sfs employing a large ensemble of neural networks  in conjunction with a diverse set of physicochemical and geometrical features characterizing protein-ligand complexes to predict binding affinity.


RESULTS
we assess the scoring accuracies of two new ensemble nn sfs based on bagging  and boosting , as well as those of conventional sfs in the context of the  <dig> pdbbind benchmark that encompasses a diverse set of high-quality protein families. we find that bgn-score and bsn-score have more than 25% better pearson's correlation coefficient  between predicted and measured binding affinities compared to that achieved by a state-of-the-art conventional sf. in addition, these ensemble nn sfs are also at least 19% more accurate  than sfs based on a single neural network that has been traditionally used in drug discovery applications. we further find that ensemble models based on nns surpass sfs based on the decision-tree ensemble technique random forests.


CONCLUSIONS
ensemble neural networks sfs, bgn-score and bsn-score, are the most accurate in predicting binding affinity of protein-ligand complexes among the considered sfs. moreover, their accuracies are even higher when they are used to predict binding affinities of protein-ligand complexes that are related to their training sets.

artificial neural networksbaggingboostingdrug discoveryensemble learningprotein-ligand binding affinityscoring functionscoring powervirtual screening21- <dig> august  <dig> the 9th iapr conference on pattern recognition in bioinformatics stockholm, sweden

