BACKGROUND

ochromonas is a genus of mixotrophic chrysophytes that is found ubiquitously in many aquatic environments. species in this genus can be important consumers of bacteria but vary in their ability to perform photosynthesis. we studied the effect of light and bacteria on growth and gene expression of a predominantly phagotrophic ochromonas species. axenic cultures of ochromonas sp. were fed with heat-killed bacteria  and grown in constant light or darkness. rna was extracted from cultures in the light or in the dark with hkb present , and in the light after hkb were depleted .


RESULTS
there were no significant differences in the growth or bacterial ingestion rates between algae grown in light or dark conditions. the availability of light led to a differential expression of only 8% of genes in the transcriptome. a number of genes associated with photosynthesis, phagotrophy, and tetrapyrrole synthesis was upregulated in the light + hkb treatment compared to dark + hkb. conversely, the comparison between the light + hkb and light + depleted hkb treatments revealed that the presence of hkb led to differential expression of 59% of genes, including the majority of genes involved in major carbon and nitrogen metabolic pathways. genes coding for unidirectional enzymes for the utilization of glucose were upregulated in the presence of hkb, implying increased glycolytic activities during phagotrophy. algae without hkb upregulated their expression of genes coding for ammonium transporters, implying uptake of inorganic nitrogen from the culture medium when prey were unavailable.


CONCLUSIONS
transcriptomic results agreed with previous observations that light had minimal effect on the population growth of ochromonas sp. however, light led to the upregulation of a number of phototrophy- and phagotrophy-related genes, while the availability of bacterial prey led to prominent changes in major carbon and nitrogen metabolic pathways. our study demonstrated the potential of transcriptomic approaches to improve our understanding of the trophic physiologies of complex mixotrophs, and revealed responses in ochromonas sp. not apparent from traditional culture studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mixotrophic protistochromonasgene expressionphagotrophyphotosynthesistranscriptomegordon and betty moore foundation gbmf3299caron david a. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

