BACKGROUND
senegalese sole  and common sole  are two economically and evolutionary important flatfish species both in fisheries and aquaculture. although some genomic resources and tools were recently described in these species, further sequencing efforts are required to establish a complete transcriptome, and to identify new molecular markers. moreover, the comparative analysis of transcriptomes will be useful to understand flatfish evolution.


RESULTS
a comprehensive characterization of the transcriptome for each species was carried out using a large set of illumina data  and  <dig> reads , providing coverages ranging from  <dig> x to  <dig> x. after a de novo assembly,  <dig>  and  <dig>  different transcripts were obtained, comprising  <dig>  and  <dig>  full-length cdnas in s. senegalensis and s. solea, respectively. a reference transcriptome with the longest unique transcripts and putative non-redundant new transcripts was established for each species. a subset of  <dig>  reference transcripts was qualified as highly reliable orthologs  between both species. a small subset of putative species-specific, lineage-specific and flatfish-specific transcripts were also identified. furthermore, transcriptome data permitted the identification of single nucleotide polymorphisms and simple-sequence repeats confirmed by fish to be used in further genetic and expression studies. moreover, evidences on the retention of crystallins crybb <dig>  crybb1-like and crybb <dig> in the two species of soles are also presented. transcriptome information was applied to the design of a microarray tool in s. senegalensis that was successfully tested and validated by qpcr. finally, transcriptomic data were hosted and structured at soleadb.


CONCLUSIONS
transcriptomes and molecular markers identified in this study represent a valuable source for future genomic studies in these economically important species. orthology analysis provided new clues regarding sole genome evolution indicating a divergent evolution of crystallins in flatfish. the design of a microarray and establishment of a reference transcriptome will be useful for large-scale gene expression studies. moreover, the integration of transcriptomic data in the soleadb will facilitate the management of genomic information in these important species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
solestranscriptomemicroarrayorthologymolecular markerssoleadbissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

