BACKGROUND
gait evaluation is difficult in pigs, especially when objective and quantitative data are needed, thus little research has been conducted in this species. there is considerable experience, however, with objective gait analysis in other species, such as horses and dogs. in this study, a pressure mat was used to establish baseline kinetic data for gait and its longitudinal development in growing, weaned piglets.

ten clinically healthy weaned piglets were trained to trot over a pressure mat. measurements were performed weekly during 10 weeks, starting at 5 weeks of age. four kinetic parameters were recorded for all four limbs: peak vertical force , load rate , vertical impulse  and peak vertical pressure . three representative runs per measuring session per pig were collected. for each of the variables, left vs. right limb asymmetry-indices  were calculated based on the average for that parameter per week. a linear mixed model was used to determine the influence of time , velocity, and limb . intra-class correlations were calculated to assess within-session replicability.


RESULTS
intra-class correlations showed good within-session replicability. body-weight normalized pvf , lr , vi  and pvp  were higher in the forelimbs than in the hind limbs. a higher velocity was associated with a higher npvf, nlr and npvp. all parameters varied between weeks. asi of lr and vi were higher in the forelimbs than in the hind limbs. velocity and time did not influence asi of any of the variables.


CONCLUSIONS
kinetic pressure mat measurements from healthy weaned piglets are highly replicable within-session. however, these variables present a significant variability between-session, which may be due to conformational changes of the young, growing piglets. velocity clearly influences npvf, nlr and npvp, and all kinetic variables have higher values in forelimbs than in hind limbs. as time and velocity do not affect asi’s, the latter are preferable tools when velocity cannot be controlled or when measurements are repeated over longer time intervals. the present study supports the use of a pressure mat as an objective way to analyze and quantify porcine gait.

kineticsgait analysispigsymmetry

