BACKGROUND
finger millet  gaertn.) is an important staple food crop widely grown in africa and south asia. among the millets, finger millet has high amount of calcium, methionine, tryptophan, fiber, and sulphur containing amino acids. in addition, it has c <dig> photosynthetic carbon assimilation mechanism, which helps to utilize water and nitrogen efficiently under hot and arid conditions without severely affecting yield. therefore, development and utilization of genomic resources for genetic improvement of this crop is immensely useful.


RESULTS
experimental results from whole genome sequencing and assembling process of ml- <dig> finger millet cultivar yielded 1196 mb covering approximately 82% of total estimated genome size. genome analysis showed the presence of  <dig>  genes and one half of the genome is repetitive in nature. the finger millet genome was found to have higher colinearity with foxtail millet and rice as compared to other poaceae species. mining of simple sequence repeats  yielded abundance of ssrs within the finger millet genome. functional annotation and mining of transcription factors revealed finger millet genome harbors large number of drought tolerance related genes. transcriptome analysis of low moisture stress and non-stress samples revealed the identification of several drought-induced candidate genes, which could be used in drought tolerance breeding.


CONCLUSIONS
this genome sequencing effort will strengthen plant breeders for allele discovery, genetic mapping, and identification of candidate genes for agronomically important traits. availability of genomic resources of finger millet will enhance the novel breeding possibilities to address potential challenges of finger millet improvement.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
next-generation sequencingwhole genome assemblyfunctional annotationrna-sequencingmicrosatellitesc <dig> pathwaywatershed development department, government of karnatakaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

