BACKGROUND
the metamorphosis of the spionid polychaete pseudopolydora vexillosa includes spontaneous settlement onto soft-bottom habitats and morphogenesis that can be completed in a very short time. a previous study on the total changes to the proteome during the various developmental stages of p. vexillosa suggested that little or no de novo protein synthesis occurs during metamorphosis. in this study, we used multicolor fluorescence detection of proteins in 2-d gels for differential analysis of proteins and phosphoproteins to reveal the dynamics of post-translational modification proteins in this species. a combination of affinity chromatography, 2d-page, and mass spectrometry was used to identify the phosphoproteins in pre-competent larvae, competent larvae, and newly metamorphosed juveniles.


RESULTS
we reproducibly detected  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> phosphoproteins in pre-competent larvae, competent larvae, and newly metamorphosed juveniles, respectively. the highest percentage of phosphorylation was observed during the competent larval stage. about  <dig> stage-specific phosphoprotein spots were detected in the competent stage, and  <dig> phosphoproteins were found to be significantly differentially expressed in the three stages. we identified  <dig> phosphoproteins,  <dig> of which were differentially expressed during metamorphosis. these phosphoproteins belonged to six categories of biological processes:  development,  cell differentiation and integrity,  transcription and translation,  metabolism,  protein-protein interaction and proteolysis, and  receptors and enzymes.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study to report changes in phosphoprotein expression patterns during the metamorphosis of the marine polychaete p. vexillosa. the higher degree of phosphorylation during the process of attaining competence to settle and metamorphose may be due to fast morphological transitions regulated by various mechanisms. our data are consistent with previous studies showing a high percentage of phosphorylation during competency in the barnacle balanus amphitrite and the bryozoan bugula neritina. the identified phosphoproteins may play an important role during metamorphosis, and further studies on the location and functions of important proteins during metamorphosis are warranted.

