BACKGROUND
reconstructing gene regulatory networks  from expression data plays an important role in understanding the fundamental cellular processes and revealing the underlying relations among genes. although many algorithms have been proposed to reconstruct grns, more rapid and efficient methods which can handle large-scale problems still need to be developed. the process of reconstructing grns can be formulated as an optimization problem, which is actually reconstructing grns from time series data, and the reconstructed grns have good ability to simulate the observed time series. this is a typical big optimization problem, since the number of variables needs to be optimized increases quadratically with the scale of grns, resulting an exponential increase in the number of candidate solutions. thus, there is a legitimate need to devise methods capable of automatically reconstructing large-scale grns.


RESULTS
in this paper, we use fuzzy cognitive maps  to model grns, in which each node of fcms represent a single gene. however, most of the current training algorithms for fcms are only able to train fcms with dozens of nodes. here, a new evolutionary algorithm is proposed to train fcms, which combines a dynamical multi-agent genetic algorithm  with the decomposition-based model, and termed as dmaga-fcmd, which is able to deal with large-scale fcms with up to  <dig> nodes. both large-scale synthetic fcms and the benchmark dream <dig> for reconstructing biological grns are used in the experiments to validate the performance of dmaga-fcmd.


CONCLUSIONS
the dmaga-fcmd is compared with the other four algorithms which are all state-of-the-art fcm training algorithms, and the results show that the dmaga-fcmd performs the best. in addition, the experimental results on fcms with  <dig> nodes and dream <dig> project demonstrate that dmaga-fcmd is capable of effectively and computationally efficiently training large-scale fcms and grns.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gene regulatory networksfuzzy cognitive mapsbig databig optimizationmulti-agent genetic algorithmdecompositionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

