BACKGROUND
inherited developmental diseases can cause severe animal welfare and economic problems in dairy cattle. the use of a small number of bulls for artificial insemination  carries a risk that recessive defects rapidly enrich in the population. in recent years, an increasing number of finnish ayrshire calves have been identified with signs of ptosis, intellectual disability, retarded growth and mortality, which constitute an inherited disorder classified as pirm syndrome.


RESULTS
we established a cohort of nine pirm-affected calves and  <dig> unaffected half-siblings and performed a genome-wide association study  to map the disease to a 700-kb region on bovine chromosome  <dig> . whole genome re-sequencing of an unaffected carrier, its affected progeny and  <dig> other unaffected animals from another breed identified a g > a substitution mutation at the last nucleotide of exon  <dig> in the ubiquitin protein ligase e3b encoding gene . ube3b transcript analysis revealed in-frame exon skipping in the affected animals resulting in an altered protein lacking  <dig> amino acids, of which  <dig> are located in the conserved hect-domain, the catalytic site of the ube3b protein. mutation screening in  <dig> ayrshire ai bulls currently used in finland indicated a high carrier frequency . we also found that pirm syndrome might be connected to the recently identified ah <dig> haplotype, which has a frequency of  <dig> % in the united states ayrshire population.


CONCLUSIONS
we describe pirm syndrome in cattle, which is associated with the mutated ube3b gene. the bovine phenotype resembles human kaufman oculocerebrofacial syndrome, which is also caused by mutations in ube3b. pirm syndrome might be connected with the recently identified ah <dig> haplotype, which is associated with reduced fertility in the us ayrshire population. this study enables the development of a genetic test to efficiently reduce the high frequency of mutant ube3b in ayrshires, significantly improving animal health and reducing economic loss.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
kaufman oculocerebrofacial syndromeincreased juvenile mortalityintellectual disabilitystructural malformationube3bbovinesplicing cite mutationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

