BACKGROUND
water stress limits plant survival and production in many parts of the world. identification of genes and alleles responding to water stress conditions is important in breeding plants better adapted to drought. currently there are no studies examining the transcriptome wide gene and allelic expression patterns under water stress conditions. we used rna sequencing  to identify the candidate genes and alleles and to explore the evolutionary signatures of selection.


RESULTS
we studied the effect of water stress on gene expression in eucalyptus camaldulensis seedlings derived from three natural populations. we used reference-guided transcriptome mapping to study gene expression. several genes showed differential expression between control and stress conditions. gene ontology  enrichment tests revealed up-regulation of  <dig> stress-related gene categories and down-regulation of  <dig> metabolic and cell wall organisation gene categories. more than  <dig>  single nucleotide polymorphisms  were detected and  <dig> of these showed differential allelic expression. allelic expression of 52% of these variants was correlated with differential gene expression. signatures of selection patterns were studied by estimating the proportion of nonsynonymous to synonymous substitution rates . the average ka/ks ratio among the  <dig>  genes was  <dig>  indicating that most of the genes are under purifying selection. among the positively selected genes  apoptosis and cell death categories were enriched. of the  <dig> positively selected genes, ninety genes showed differential expression and  <dig> snps from  <dig> positively selected genes showed differential allelic expression between treatments.


CONCLUSIONS
correlation of allelic expression of several snps with total gene expression indicates that these variants may be the cis-acting variants or in linkage disequilibrium with such variants. enrichment of apoptosis and cell death gene categories among the positively selected genes reveals the past selection pressures experienced by the populations used in this study.

