BACKGROUND
among the huge diversity of thermophilic bacteria mainly bacilli have been reported as active thermostable lipase producers. geothermal springs serve as the main source for isolation of thermostable lipase producing bacilli. thermostable lipolytic enzymes, functioning in the harsh conditions, have promising applications in processing of organic chemicals, detergent formulation, synthesis of biosurfactants, pharmaceutical processing etc.


RESULTS
in order to study the distribution of lipase-producing thermophilic bacilli and their specific lipase protein primary structures, three lipase producers from different genera were isolated from mesothermal  springs distributed on the territory of armenia and nagorno karabakh. based on phenotypic characteristics and 16s rrna gene sequencing the isolates were identified as geobacillus sp., bacillus licheniformis and anoxibacillus flavithermus strains. the lipase genes of isolates were sequenced by using initially designed primer sets. multiple alignments generated from primary structures of the lipase proteins and annotated lipase protein sequences, conserved regions analysis and amino acid composition have illustrated the similarity  of the lipases with true lipases  and gdsl esterase family . a conserved sequence block that determines the thermostability has been identified in the multiple alignments of the lipase proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
the results are spreading light on the lipase producing bacilli distribution in geothermal springs in armenia and nagorno karabakh. newly isolated bacilli strains could be prospective source for thermostable lipases and their genes.

keywords
geothermal springsthermophilic bacillilipaseesterasegdsl family lipasehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007029state committee of sciencebasic supportresearch grant 15t-1f399panosyan hovik armenian national science and education fund research grant biotech-4328shahinyan grigor norwegian cooperation program in higher education with eurasia grant cpea-2011/10081issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

