BACKGROUND
apis mellifera and apis cerana are two sibling species of apidae. apis cerana is adept at collecting sporadic nectar in mountain and forest region and exhibits stiffer hardiness and acarid resistance as a result of natural selection, whereas apis mellifera has the advantage of producing royal jelly. to identify differentially expressed genes  that affect the development of hypopharyngeal gland  and/or the secretion of royal jelly between these two honeybee species, we performed a digital gene expression  analysis of the hgs of these two species at three developmental stages .


RESULTS
twelve dge-tag libraries were constructed and sequenced using the total rna extracted from the hgs of newly emerged workers, nurses, and foragers of apis mellifera and apis cerana. finally, a total of  <dig> genes in apis mellifera and  <dig> in apis cerana were found to exhibit an expression difference among the three developmental stages. a total of  <dig> degs were identified between these two species. of these,  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> genes showed an expression difference at the newly emerged worker, nurse, and forager stages, respectively. the nurse stage exhibited the highest number of degs between these two species and most of these were found to be up-regulated in apis mellifera. these results suggest that the higher yield of royal jelly in apis mellifera may be due to the higher expression level of these degs.


CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we investigated the degs between the hgs of two sibling honeybee species . our results indicated that the gene expression difference was associated with the difference in the royal jelly yield between these two species. these results provide an important clue for clarifying the mechanisms underlying hypopharyngeal gland development and the production of royal jelly.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
apis melliferaapis ceranahypopharyngeal glanddigital gene expressiondifferentially expressed geneissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

