BACKGROUND
cranberries , renowned for their excellent health benefits, are an important berry crop. here, we performed transcriptome sequencing of one cranberry cultivar, from fruits at two different developmental stages, on the illumina hiseq  <dig> platform. our main goals were to identify putative genes for major metabolic pathways of bioactive compounds and compare the expression patterns between white fruit  and red fruit  in cranberry.


RESULTS
in this study, two cdna libraries of w and r were constructed. approximately  <dig> million raw sequencing reads were generated and assembled de novo, yielding  <dig>  high quality unigenes with an average length of 739 bp. using blastx,  <dig>  unigenes were identified as putative homologs of annotated sequences in public protein databases, including ncbi nr, nt, swiss-prot, kegg, cog and go. of these,  <dig>  unigenes mapped to  <dig> kegg pathways, with the metabolic pathways, secondary metabolites, glycerophospholipid metabolism, ether lipid metabolism, starch and sucrose metabolism, purine metabolism, and pyrimidine metabolism being well represented. among them, many candidate genes were involved in flavonoid biosynthesis, transport and regulation. furthermore, digital gene expression  analysis identified  <dig>  unigenes that were differentially expressed between the two fruit developmental stages. in addition,  <dig>  simple sequence repeats  were detected.


CONCLUSIONS
our results present comprehensive gene expression information about the cranberry fruit transcriptome that could facilitate our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of fruit development in cranberries. although it will be necessary to validate the functions carried out by these genes, these results could be used to improve the quality of breeding programs for the cranberry and related species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cranberryillumina sequencingfruit transcriptomeflavonoidissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

