BACKGROUND
cymbidium sinense belongs to the orchidaceae, which is one of the most abundant angiosperm families. c. sinense, a high-grade traditional potted flower, is most prevalent in china and some southeast asian countries. the control of flowering time is a major bottleneck in the industrialized development of c. sinense. little is known about the mechanisms responsible for floral development in this orchid. moreover, genome references for entire transcriptome sequences do not currently exist for c. sinense. thus, transcriptome and expression profiling data for this species are needed as an important resource to identify genes and to better understand the biological mechanisms of floral development in c. sinense.


RESULTS
in this study, de novo transcriptome assembly and gene expression analysis using illumina sequencing technology were performed. transcriptome analysis assembles gene-related information related to vegetative and reproductive growth of c. sinense. illumina sequencing generated  <dig> , <dig> high quality reads that were assembled into  <dig>  unigenes with an average sequence length of  <dig> base pairs, including  <dig>  clusters and  <dig>  singletons. a total of  <dig>   unique sequences were annotated,  <dig>  of which were assigned to specific metabolic pathways by the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes . gene ontology  analysis of the annotated unigenes revealed that the majority of sequenced genes were associated with metabolic and cellular processes, cell and cell parts, catalytic activity and binding. furthermore,  <dig> flowering-associated unigenes,  <dig> mads-box unigenes and  <dig> constans-like  unigenes were identified from our collection. in addition, three digital gene expression  libraries were constructed for the vegetative phase , floral differentiation phase  and reproductive phase . the specific expression of many genes in the three development phases was also identified.  <dig> genes among three sub-libraries with high differential expression were selected as candidates connected with flower development.


CONCLUSIONS
rna-seq and dge profiling data provided comprehensive gene expression information at the transcriptional level that could facilitate our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of floral development at three development phases of c. sinense. this data could be used as an important resource for investigating the genetics of the flowering pathway and various biological mechanisms in this orchid.

floral developmentflowering timedigital gene expressiontranscriptomecymbidium sinense

