BACKGROUND
the last step in the maturation process of the large subunit of -hydrogenases is a proteolytic cleavage of the c-terminal by a hydrogenase specific protease. contrary to other accessory proteins these hydrogenase proteases are believed to be specific whereby one type of hydrogenases specific protease only cleaves one type of hydrogenase. in cyanobacteria this is achieved by the gene product of either hupw or hoxw, specific for the uptake or the bidirectional hydrogenase respectively. the filamentous cyanobacteria nostoc punctiforme atcc  <dig> and nostoc sp strain pcc  <dig> may contain a single uptake hydrogenase or both an uptake and a bidirectional hydrogenase respectively.


RESULTS
in order to examine these proteases in cyanobacteria, transcriptional analyses were performed of hupw in nostoc punctiforme atcc  <dig> and hupw and hoxw in nostoc sp. strain pcc  <dig>  these studies revealed numerous transcriptional start points together with putative binding sites for ntca  and lexa . in order to investigate the diversity and specificity among hydrogeanse specific proteases we constructed a phylogenetic tree which revealed several subgroups that showed a striking resemblance to the subgroups previously described for -hydrogenases. additionally the proteases specificity was also addressed by amino acid sequence analysis and protein-protein docking experiments with 3d-models derived from bioinformatic studies. these studies revealed a so called "hoxbox"; an amino acid sequence specific for protease of hox-type which might be involved in docking with the large subunit of the hydrogenase.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings suggest that the hydrogenase specific proteases are under similar regulatory control as the hydrogenases they cleave. the result from the phylogenetic study also indicates that the hydrogenase and the protease have co-evolved since ancient time and suggests that at least one major horizontal gene transfer has occurred. this co-evolution could be the result of a close interaction between the protease and the large subunit of the -hydrogenases, a theory supported by protein-protein docking experiments performed with 3d-models. finally we present data that may explain the specificity seen among hydrogenase specific proteases, the so called "hoxbox"; an amino acid sequence specific for proteases of hox-type. this opens the door for more detailed studies of the specificity found among hydrogenase specific proteases and the structural properties behind it.

