BACKGROUND
physic nut  is a small perennial tree or large shrub, which is well-adapted to semi-arid regions and is considered to have potential as a crop for biofuel production. it is now regarded as an excellent model for studying biofuel plants. however, our knowledge about the molecular responses of this species to drought stress is currently limited.


RESULTS
in this study, genome-wide transcriptional profiles of roots and leaves of 8-week old physic nut seedlings were analyzed  <dig>   <dig> and 7 days after withholding irrigation. we observed a total of  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed genes  in roots and leaves, respectively. gene ontology analysis showed that the biological processes enriched in droughted plants relative to unstressed plants were related to biosynthesis, transport, nucleobase-containing compounds, and cellular protein modification. the genes found to be up-regulated in roots were related to abscisic acid  synthesis and aba signal transduction, and to the synthesis of raffinose. genes related to aba signal transduction, and to trehalose and raffinose synthesis, were up-regulated in leaves. endoplasmic reticulum  stress response genes were significantly up-regulated in leaves under drought stress, while a number of genes related to wax biosynthesis were also up-regulated in leaves. genes related to unsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis were down-regulated and polyunsaturated fatty acids were significantly reduced in leaves 7 days after withholding irrigation. as drought stress increased, genes related to ethylene synthesis, ethylene signal transduction and chlorophyll degradation were up-regulated, and the chlorophyll content of leaves was significantly reduced by 7 days after withholding irrigation.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides us with new insights to increase our understanding of the response mechanisms deployed by physic nut seedlings under drought stress. the genes and pathways identified in this study also provide much information of potential value for germplasm improvement and breeding for drought resistance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
physic nut drought stressgene expression profilesabscisic acidwaxes and fatty acidsendoplasmic reticulum stress responsesenescenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

