BACKGROUND
plant response mechanisms to heat and drought stresses have been considered in strategies for generating stress tolerant genotypes, but with limited success. here, we analyzed the transcriptome and improved tolerance to heat stress and drought of maize plants over-expressing the osmyb <dig> gene.


RESULTS
over-expression of osmyb <dig> in maize decreased the negative effects of high temperature and drought resulting in improved plant growth and performance under these conditions. this was evidenced by the higher plant biomass and reduced leaf damage exhibited by the transgenic lines compared to wild type when plants were subjected to individual or combined stresses and during or after recovery from stress. a global transcriptomic analysis using rna sequencing revealed that several genes induced by heat stress in wild type plants are constitutively up-regulated in osmyb <dig> transgenic maize. in addition, a significant number of genes up-regulated in osmyb <dig> transgenic maize under control or heat treatments have been associated with responses to abiotic stresses including high temperature, dehydration and oxidative stress. the latter is a common and major consequence of imposed heat and drought conditions, suggesting that this altered gene expression may be associated with the improved stress tolerance in these transgenic lines. functional annotation and enrichment analysis of the transcriptome also pinpoint the relevance of specific biological processes for stress responses.


CONCLUSIONS
our results show that expression of osmyb <dig> can improve tolerance to heat stress and drought in maize plants. enhanced expression of stress-associated genes may be involved in osmyb55-mediated stress tolerance. possible implications for the improved tolerance to heat stress and drought of osmyb <dig> transgenic maize are discussed.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
droughtheatmaizemybstresszea mayshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000038natural sciences and engineering research council of canadasyngenta biotechnology inc.issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

