BACKGROUND
genomic aberrations can be used to determine cancer diagnosis and prognosis. clinically relevant novel aberrations can be discovered using high-throughput assays such as single nucleotide polymorphism  arrays and next-generation sequencing, which typically provide aggregate signals of many cells at once. however, heterogeneity of tumor subclones dramatically complicates the task of detecting aberrations.


RESULTS
the aggregate signal of a population of subclones can be described as a linear system of equations. we employed a measure of allelic imbalance and total amount of dna to characterize each locus by the copy number status  of the strongest subclonal component. we designed simulated data to compare our measure to existing approaches and we analyzed snp-arrays from  <dig> melanoma samples and transcriptome sequencing  from one melanoma sample.

we showed that any system describing aggregate subclonal signals is underdetermined, leading to non-unique solutions for the exact copy number profile of subclones. for this reason, our illustrative measure was more robust than existing hidden markov model  based tools in inferring the aberration status, as indicated by tests on simulated data. this higher robustness contributed in identifying numerous aberrations in several loci of melanoma samples. we validated the heterogeneity and aberration status within single biopsies by fluorescent in situ hybridization of four affected and transcriptionally up-regulated genes e2f <dig>  etv <dig>  ezh <dig> and fam84b in  <dig> melanoma cell lines. heterogeneity was further demonstrated in the analysis of allelic imbalance changes along single exons from melanoma rna-seq.


CONCLUSIONS
these studies demonstrate how subclonal heterogeneity, prevalent in tumor samples, is reflected in aggregate signals measured by high-throughput techniques. our proposed approach yields high robustness in detecting copy number alterations using high-throughput technologies and has the potential to identify specific subclonal markers from next-generation sequencing data.

copy numbersnp arraysnext generation sequencingmelanoma

