BACKGROUND
huntington's disease  is an inherited neurodegenerative disorder triggered by an expanded polyglutamine tract in huntingtin that is thought to confer a new conformational property on this large protein. the propensity of small amino-terminal fragments with mutant, but not wild-type, glutamine tracts to self-aggregate is consistent with an altered conformation but such fragments occur relatively late in the disease process in human patients and mouse models expressing full-length mutant protein. this suggests that the altered conformational property may act within the full-length mutant huntingtin to initially trigger pathogenesis. indeed, genotype-phenotype studies in hd have defined genetic criteria for the disease initiating mechanism, and these are all fulfilled by phenotypes associated with expression of full-length mutant huntingtin, but not amino-terminal fragment, in mouse models. as the in vitro aggregation of amino-terminal mutant huntingtin fragment offers a ready assay to identify small compounds that interfere with the conformation of the polyglutamine tract, we have identified a number of aggregation inhibitors, and tested whether these are also capable of reversing a phenotype caused by endogenous expression of mutant huntingtin in a striatal cell line from the hdhq111/q <dig> knock-in mouse.


RESULTS
we screened the ninds custom collection of  <dig>  fda approved drugs and bioactive compounds for their ability to prevent in vitro aggregation of q58-htn 1– <dig> amino terminal fragment. ten compounds were identified that inhibited aggregation with ic <dig> <  <dig> μm, including gossypol, gambogic acid, juglone, celastrol, sanguinarine and anthralin. of these, both juglone and celastrol were effective in reversing the abnormal cellular localization of full-length mutant huntingtin observed in mutant hdhq111/q <dig> striatal cells.


CONCLUSIONS
at least some compounds identified as aggregation inhibitors also prevent a neuronal cellular phenotype caused by full-length mutant huntingtin, suggesting that in vitro fragment aggregation can act as a proxy for monitoring the disease-producing conformational property in hd. thus, identification and testing of compounds that alter in vitro aggregation is a viable approach for defining potential therapeutic compounds that may act on the deleterious conformational property of full-length mutant huntingtin.

