BACKGROUND
pediococcus damnosus lmg  <dig> is a lactic acid bacterium dominating the maturation phase of flemish acid beer productions. it proved to be capable of growing in beer, thereby resisting this environment, which is unfavorable for microbial growth. the molecular mechanisms underlying its metabolic capabilities and niche adaptations were unknown up to now. in the present study, whole-genome sequencing and comparative genome analysis were used to investigate this strain’s mechanisms to reside in the beer niche, with special focus on not only stress and hop resistances but also folate biosynthesis and exopolysaccharide  production.


RESULTS
the draft genome sequence of p. damnosus lmg  <dig> harbored  <dig> contigs, including an intact prophage region and several coding sequences involved in plasmid replication. the annotation of  <dig> coding sequences revealed the presence of many transporters and transcriptional regulators and several genes involved in oxidative stress response, hop resistance, de novo folate biosynthesis, and eps production. comparative genome analysis of p. damnosus lmg  <dig> with pediococcus claussenii atcc baa-344t  and pediococcus pentosaceus atcc  <dig>  revealed that various hop resistance genes and genes involved in de novo folate biosynthesis were unique to the strains isolated from beer. this contrasted with the genes related to osmotic stress responses, which were shared between the strains compared. furthermore, transcriptional regulators were enriched in the genomes of bacteria capable of growth in beer, suggesting that those cause rapid up- or down-regulation of gene expression.


CONCLUSIONS
genome sequence analysis of p. damnosus lmg  <dig> provided insights into the underlying mechanisms of its adaptation to the beer niche. the results presented will enable analysis of the transcriptome and proteome of p. damnosus lmg  <dig>  which will result in additional knowledge on its metabolic activities.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pediococcus damnosusillumina sequencingbeer environmentdraft genomecomparative genomicsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

