BACKGROUND
branched-chain amino acids  are synthesized by plants, fungi, bacteria, and archaea with plants being the major source of these amino acids in animal diets. acetolactate synthase  is the first enzyme in the bcaa synthesis pathway. although the functional contribution of als to bcaa biosynthesis has been extensively characterized, a comprehensive understanding of the regulation of this pathway at the molecular level is still lacking.


RESULTS
to characterize the regulatory processes governing als activity we utilized several complementary approaches. using the als catalytic protein subunit as bait we performed a yeast two-hybrid  screen which resulted in the identification of a set of interacting proteins, two of which  were found to be evolutionarily conserved orthologues of bacterial feedback-regulatory proteins and therefore implicated in the regulation of als activity. to investigate the molecular role aips might play in bcaa synthesis in arabidopsis thaliana, we examined the functional contribution of aip <dig> and aip <dig> knockout alleles to plant patterning and development and bcaa synthesis under various growth conditions. loss-of-function genetic backgrounds involving these two genes exhibited differential aberrant growth responses in valine-, isoleucine-, and sodium chloride-supplemented media. while bcaa synthesis is believed to be localized to the chloroplast, both aip <dig> and aip <dig> were found to localize to the peroxisome in addition to the chloroplast. analysis of free amino acid pools in the mutant backgrounds revealed that they differ in the absolute amount of individual bcaas accumulated and exhibit elevated levels of bcaas in leaf tissues. despite the phenotypic differences observed in aip <dig> and aip <dig> backgrounds, functional redundancy between these loci was suggested by the finding that aip1/aip <dig> double knockout mutants are severely developmentally compromised.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together the data suggests that the two regulatory proteins, in conjunction with als, have overlapping but distinct functions in bcaa synthesis, and also play a role in pathways unrelated to bcaa synthesis such as sodium-ion homeostasis, extending to broader aspects of patterning and development.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
branched-chain amino acidsacetolactate synthasealsahasvalineisoleucineleucinenserc canada171305-7crosby william l. qeii-gsstissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

