BACKGROUND
poultry remains a major source of foodborne bacterial infections. a variety of additives with presumed anti-microbial and/or growth-promoting effects are commonly added to poultry feed during commercial grow-out, yet the effects of these additives on the gastrointestinal microbial community  as the bird matures remain largely unknown. here we compared temporal changes in the cecal microbiome to the effects of formic acid, propionic acid, and medium-chain fatty acids  added to feed and/or drinking water.


RESULTS
cecal bacterial communities at day of hatch , 7d , 21d , and 42d  post-hatch were surveyed using direct  <dig> sequencing of 16s rrna gene amplicons from each bird in combination with cultivation-based recovery of a salmonella typhimurium marker strain and quantitative-pcr targeting clostridium perfringens. treatment effects on specific pathogens were generally non-significant. s. typhimurium introduced by oral gavage at day of hatch was recovered by cultivation from nearly all birds sampled across treatments at 7d and 21d, but by 42d, s. typhimurium was only recovered from ca. 25% of birds, regardless of treatment. sequencing data also revealed non-significant treatment effects on genera containing known pathogens and on the cecal microbiome as a whole. in contrast, temporal changes in the cecal microbiome were dramatic, highly significant, and consistent across treatments. at 7d, the cecal community was dominated by three genera  that accounted for more than half of sequences. by 21d post-hatch, a single genus  accounted for 23-55% of sequences, and the number of clostridium 16s rrna gene copies detected by quantitative-pcr reached a maximum.


CONCLUSIONS
over the  <dig> d experiment, the cecal bacterial community changed significantly as measured by a variety of ecological metrics and increases in the complexity of co-occurrence networks. management of poultry to improve animal health, nutrition, or food safety may need to consider the interactive effects of any treatments with the dramatic temporal shifts in the taxonomic composition of the cecal microbiome as described here.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

