BACKGROUND
in mono- and eudicotyledonous plants, a small nuclear gene family  encodes mitochondrial as well as chloroplast rna polymerases homologous to the t-odd bacteriophage enzymes. rpot genes from angiosperms are well characterized, whereas data from deeper branching plant species are limited to the moss physcomitrella and the spikemoss selaginella. to further elucidate the molecular evolution of the rpot polymerases in the plant kingdom and to get more insight into the potential importance of having more than one phage-type rna polymerase  available, we searched for the respective genes in the basal angiosperm nuphar advena.


RESULTS
by screening a set of bac library filters, three rpot genes were identified. both genomic gene sequences and full-length cdnas were determined. the narpot mrnas specify putative polypeptides of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> amino acids, respectively. all three genes comprise  <dig> exons and  <dig> introns, conserved in their positions with those known from rpot genes of other land plants. the encoded proteins show a high degree of conservation at the amino acid sequence level, including all functional crucial regions and residues known from the phage t <dig> rnap. the n-terminal transit peptides of two of the encoded polymerases, narpotm <dig> and narpotm <dig>  conferred targeting of green fluorescent protein  exclusively to mitochondria, whereas the third polymerase, narpotp, was targeted to chloroplasts. remarkably, translation of narpotp mrna has to be initiated at a cug codon to generate a functional plastid transit peptide. thus, besides agamous in arabidopsis and the nicotiana rpotp gene, n. advena rpotp provides another example for a plant mrna that is exclusively translated from a non-aug codon. in contrast to the rpot of the lycophyte selaginella and those of the moss physcomitrella, which are according to phylogenetic analyses in sister positions to all other phage-type polymerases of angiosperms, the nuphar rpots clustered with the well separated clades of mitochondrial  and plastid  polymerases.


CONCLUSIONS
nuphar advena encodes two mitochondrial and one plastid phage-type rnap. identification of a plastid-localized phage-type rnap in this basal angiosperm, orthologous to all other rpotp enzymes of flowering plants, suggests that the duplication event giving rise to a nuclear gene-encoded plastid rna polymerase, not present in lycopods, took place after the split of lycopods from all other tracheophytes. a dual-targeted mitochondrial and plastididal rna polymerase , as present in eudicots but not monocots, was not detected in nuphar suggesting that its occurrence is an evolutionary novelty of eudicotyledonous plants like arabidopsis.

