BACKGROUND
pathogens can infect their hosts through different routes. for studying the consequences for host resistance, we here used the entomopathogen bacillus thuringiensis and the red flour beetle tribolium castaneum for oral and systemic  experimental infection. in order to characterize the molecular mechanisms underpinning the two different infection routes, the transcriptomes of beetles of two different t. castaneum populations – one recently collected population  and a commonly used laboratory strain  – were analyzed using a next generation rna sequencing approach.


RESULTS
the genetically more diverse population cro <dig> showed a significantly larger number of differentially expressed genes. while both populations exhibited similar reactions to pricking, their expression patterns in response to oral infection differed remarkably. in particular, the cro <dig> population showed a strong response of cuticular proteins and developmental genes, which might indicate an adaptive developmental flexibility that was lost in the sb population presumably as a result of inbreeding. the immune response of sb was primarily based on antimicrobial peptides, while cro <dig> relied on responses mediated by phenoloxidase and reactive oxygen species, which may explain the higher resistance of this strain against oral infection.


CONCLUSIONS
our data demonstrate that immunological and physiological processes underpinning the two different routes of infection are clearly distinct, and that host populations particularly differ in responses to oral infection. furthermore, gene expression upon pricking infection entailed a strong signal of wounding, highlighting the importance of pricking controls in future infection studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
tribolium castaneumbacillus thuringiensishost-parasite interactionsoral infectionpricking infectionrna sequencingtranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

