BACKGROUND
sub-optimal performance of the animal health delivery system in rural areas is common in developing countries including tanzania. however, penetration of mobile phones and availability of good road network and public transport systems offer opportunities for improving the access of rural communities to diagnostic and advisory services from facilities and expertise located in urban areas. a questionnaire survey on possession and use of mobile phones by pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in kilosa and gairo districts was carried out between november and december  <dig>  a total number of  <dig> livestock keepers from three villages of chakwale , mvumi  and parakuyo  participated in the study. an e-based system was designed and tested to link rural communities with urban diagnostic facilities.


RESULTS
it was observed that the average number of phones possessed by individuals interviewed and household families was  <dig>  ±  <dig>   and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , respectively. it was further observed that out of  <dig> livestock keepers interviewed,  <dig>  had feature phones while  <dig>  of them possessed smartphones. mobile phone is currently used to support livestock production by communicating on animal health in parakuyo , mvumi  and chakwale . other contributions of mobile phones in livestock and crop agriculture observed in the study area include: exchange of livestock price information, crop price information, communicating on plant health/diseases, livestock extension and advisory services as well as crop farming extension and advisory services. we also designed and tested an e-based suavetdiag® system to support timely diagnosis of infectious disease conditions and prompt advice on case management in veterinary underserved areas.


CONCLUSIONS
availability of mobile phones in rural areas, in combination with supporting infrastructure and facilities in urban areas, has potential to stimulate local development and improving delivery of animal health and extension services. it is recommended that more development and refinement of the system should be conducted to ensure that this potential is tapped to revolutionalise delivery of animal health services in rural areas.

keywords
animal health deliverye-based diagnostic systemlinking rural and urban areastanzaniaepinav programmeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

