BACKGROUND
as a mild, highly contagious, respiratory disease, swine influenza always damages the innate immune systems, and increases susceptibility to secondary infections which results in considerable morbidity and mortality in pigs. nevertheless, the systematical host response of pigs to swine influenza virus infection remains largely unknown. to explore it, a time-course gene expression profiling was performed for comprehensive analysis of the global host response induced by h1n <dig> swine influenza virus in pigs.


RESULTS
at the early stage of h1n <dig> swine virus infection, pigs were suffering mild respiratory symptoms and pathological changes. a total of  <dig> porcine genes showing differential expression  after inoculation were identified to compare with the controls on day  <dig> post infection  . the de genes were involved in many vital functional classes, mainly including signal transduction, immune response, inflammatory response, cell adhesion and cell-cell signalling. noticeably, the genes associated with immune and inflammatory response showed highly overexpressed. through the pathway analysis, the significant pathways mainly concerned with cell adhesion molecules, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, toll-like receptor signaling pathway and mapk signaling pathway, suggesting that the host took different strategies to activate these pathways so as to prevent virus infections at the early stage. however, on pid  <dig>  the predominant function classes of de genes included signal transduction, metabolism, transcription, development and transport. furthermore, the most significant pathways switched to ppar signaling pathway and complement and coagulation cascades, showing that the host might start to repair excessive tissue damage by anti-inflammatory functions. these results on pid  <dig> demonstrated beneficial turnover for host to prevent excessive inflammatory damage and recover the normal state by activating these clusters of genes.


CONCLUSIONS
this study shows how the target organ responds to h1n <dig> swine influenza virus infection in pigs. the observed gene expression profile could help to screen the potential host agents for reducing the prevalence of swine influenza virus and further understand the molecular pathogenesis associated with h1n <dig> infection in pigs.

