BACKGROUND
protein secretion is a cell translocation process of major biological and technological significance. the secretion and downstream processing of proteins by recombinant cells is of great commercial interest. the yeast kluyveromyces lactis is considered a promising host for heterologous protein production. because yeasts naturally do not secrete as many proteins as filamentous fungi, they can produce secreted recombinant proteins with few contaminants in the medium. an ideal system to address the secretion of a desired protein could be exploited among the native proteins in certain physiological conditions. by applying algorithms to the completed k. lactis genome sequence, such a system could be selected. to this end, we predicted protein subcellular locations and correlated the resulting extracellular secretome with the transcription factors that modulate the cellular response to a particular environmental stimulus.


RESULTS
to explore the potential kluyveromyces lactis extracellular secretome, four computational prediction algorithms were applied to  <dig> predicted k. lactis proteins from the genome database. signalp v <dig> identified  <dig> proteins with n-terminal signal peptides. from these  <dig> proteins, the phobius algorithm predicted that  <dig> proteins have no transmembrane domains, and the big-pi predictor identified  <dig> proteins as having no glycosylphosphatidylinositol  modification sites. wolf psort predicted that the k. lactis secretome consists of  <dig> putative proteins, excluding subcellular targeting. the transcription regulators of the putative extracellular proteins were investigated by searching for dna binding sites in their putative promoters. the conditions to favor expression were obtained by searching gene ontology terms and using graph theory.


CONCLUSIONS
a public database of k. lactis secreted proteins and their transcription factors are presented. it consists of  <dig> orfs and  <dig> transcription factors. a graph created from this database shows  <dig> nodes and  <dig> edges, suggesting a vast number of relationships to be validated experimentally. most of the transcription factors are related to responses to stress such as drug, acid and heat resistance, as well as nitrogen limitation, and may be useful for inducing maximal expression of potential extracellular proteins.

