BACKGROUND
various insect species have been added to genomic databases over the years. thus, researchers can easily obtain online genomic information on invertebrates and insects. however, many incorrectly annotated genes are included in these databases, which can prevent the correct interpretation of subsequent functional analyses. to address this problem, we used a combination of dry and wet bench processes to select functional genes from public databases.


RESULTS
enolase is an important glycolytic enzyme in all organisms. we used a combination of dry and wet bench processes to identify functional enolases in the silkworm bombyx mori . first, we detected five annotated enolases from public databases using a hidden markov model  search, and then through cdna cloning, northern blotting, and rna-seq analysis, we revealed three functional enolases in b. mori: bmeno <dig>  bmeno <dig>  and bmenoc. bmeno <dig> contained a conserved key amino acid residue for metal binding and substrate binding in other species. however, bmeno <dig> and bmenoc showed a change in this key amino acid. phylogenetic analysis showed that bmeno <dig> and bmenoc were distinct from bmeno <dig> and other enolases, and were distributed only in lepidopteran clusters. bmeno <dig> was expressed in all of the tissues used in our study. in contrast, bmeno <dig> was mainly expressed in the testis with some expression in the ovary and suboesophageal ganglion. bmenoc was weakly expressed in the testis. quantitative rt-pcr showed that the mrna expression of bmeno <dig> and bmenoc correlated with testis development; thus, bmeno <dig> and bmenoc may be related to lepidopteran-specific spermiogenesis.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified and characterized three functional enolases from public databases with a combination of dry and wet bench processes in the silkworm b. mori. in addition, we determined that bmeno <dig> and bmenoc had species-specific functions. our strategy could be helpful for the detection of minor genes and functional genes in non-model organisms from public databases.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
enolasereproductiongrowth regulatorbombyx morianalysis pipelinejsps kakenhijp15h02837jp15h02837sato ryoichi tabunoki hiroko  jsps kakenhijp15h02483tabunoki hiroko nig collaborative research program2014-a <dig> and 2015-a155tabunoki hiroko  nig collaborative research program2014-a <dig> and 2015-a155fujiyama asao issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

