BACKGROUND
differential expression  analysis of rna-seq data still poses inferential challenges, such as handling of transcripts characterized by low expression levels. in this study, we use a plasmode-based approach to assess the relative performance of alternative inferential strategies on rna-seq transcripts, with special emphasis on transcripts characterized by a small number of read counts, so-called low-count transcripts, as motivated by an ecological application in prairie grasses. big bluestem  is a wide-ranging dominant prairie grass of ecological and agricultural importance to the us midwest while edaphic subspecies sand bluestem  grows exclusively on sand dunes. relative to big bluestem, sand bluestem exhibits qualitative phenotypic divergence consistent with enhanced drought tolerance, plausibly associated with transcripts of low expression levels. our dataset consists of rna-seq read counts for  <dig>  transcripts  collected from leaf tissue of individual plants of big bluestem  and sand bluestem . focused on low-count transcripts, we compare alternative ad-hoc data filtering techniques commonly used in rna-seq pipelines and assess the inferential performance of recently developed statistical methods for de analysis, namely deseq <dig> and edger robust. these methods attempt to overcome the inherently noisy behavior of low-count transcripts by either shrinkage or differential weighting of observations, respectively.


RESULTS
both de methods seemed to properly control family-wise type  <dig> error on low-count transcripts, whereas edger robust showed greater power and deseq <dig> showed greater precision and accuracy. however, specification of the degree of freedom parameter under edger robust had a non-trivial impact on inference and should be handled carefully. when properly specified, both de methods showed overall promising inferential performance on low-count transcripts, suggesting that ad-hoc data filtering steps at arbitrary expression thresholds may be unnecessary. a note of caution is in order regarding the approximate nature of de tests under both methods.


CONCLUSIONS
practical recommendations for de inference are provided when low-count rna-seq transcripts are of interest, as is the case in the comparison of subspecies of bluestem grasses. insights from this study may also be relevant to other applications focused on transcripts of low expression levels.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rna-seqlow-count transcriptsandropogon gerardiideseq2edger robustgene filteringplasmodeunited states department of agriculture - abiotic stree program2008-35001-04545johnson loretta issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

