BACKGROUND
although the toxicological impacts of the xenoestrogen bisphenol-a  have been studied extensively, but the mechanism of action is poorly understood. eventually, no standard method exists for evaluating the possible health hazards of bpa exposure. considering mice spermatozoa as a potential in vitro model, we investigated the effects of bpa exposure  on spermatozoa and the related mechanisms of action. the same doses were also employed to evaluate protein profiles of spermatozoa as a means to monitor their functional affiliation to diseases.


RESULTS
our results demonstrated that high concentrations of bpa negatively affect sperm motility, viability, mitochondrial functions, and intracellular atp levels by activating the mitogen-activated protein kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and protein kinase-a pathways. moreover, short-term exposure of spermatozoa to high concentrations of bpa induced differential expressions of  <dig> proteins. these effects appeared to be caused by protein degradation and phosphorylation in spermatozoa. proteins differentially expressed in spermatozoa from bpa treatment groups are putatively involved in the pathogenesis of several diseases, mainly cancer, carcinoma, neoplasm, and infertility.


CONCLUSIONS
based on these results, we propose that bpa adversely affects sperm function by the activation of several kinase pathways in spermatozoa. in addition, bpa-induced changes in the sperm proteome might be partly responsible for the observed effects in spermatozoa, subsequently involve in the pathogenesis of many diseases. therefore, we anticipated that current strategy might broadly consider for the health hazards assessment of other toxicological agents.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bisphenol-ahealth hazardsin-vitrospermatozoaproteomicsbioinformatics databasesdiseasessignaling pathwaysministry of food and drug safety of the republic of korea14162mfds66114162mfds66114162mfds66114162mfds66114162mfds66114162mfds661rahman md saidur kwon woo-sung yoon sung-jae park yoo-jin ryu buom-yong pang myung-geol issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

