BACKGROUND
absorption of antigens onto chitosan microparticles via electrostatic interaction is a common and relatively mild process suitable for mucosal vaccine. in order to increase the stability of antigens and prevent an immediate desorption of antigens from chitosan carriers in gastrointestinal tract, coating onto bsa loaded chitosan microparticles with sodium alginate was performed by layer-by-layer technology to meet the requirement of mucosal vaccine.


RESULTS
the prepared alginate coated bsa loaded chitosan microparticles had loading efficiency  of 60% and loading capacity  of 6% with mean diameter of about  <dig> μm. when the weight ratio of alginate/chitosan microparticles was greater than  <dig>  the stable system could be obtained. the rapid charge inversion of bsa loaded chitosan microparticles  was observed during the coating procedure which indicated the presence of alginate layer on the chitosan microparticles surfaces. according to the results obtained by scanning electron microscopy , the core-shell structure of bsa loaded chitosan microparticles was observed. meanwhile, in vitro release study indicated that the initial burst release of bsa from alginate coated chitosan microparticles was lower than that observed from uncoated chitosan microparticles . sds-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  assay showed that alginate coating onto chitosan microparticles could effectively protect the bsa from degradation or hydrolysis in acidic condition for at least  <dig> h. the structural integrity of alginate modified chitosan microparticles incubated in pbs for  <dig> h was investigated by ftir.


CONCLUSIONS
the prepared alginate coated chitosan microparticles, with mean diameter of about  <dig> μm, was suitable for oral mucosal vaccine. moreover, alginate coating onto the surface of chitosan microparticles could modulate the release behavior of bsa from alginate coated chitosan microparticles and could effectively protect model protein  from degradation in acidic medium in vitro for at least  <dig> h. in all, the prepared alginate coated chitosan microparticles might be an effective vehicle for oral administration of antigens.

