BACKGROUND
sialoadhesin -expressing monocytes/macrophages have been associated with several diseases like inflammatory and autoimmune disorders as well as viral infections, and they also appear to play a role in the initiation of an adaptive immune response. this makes sn-expressing cells not only attractive targets for cell-directed therapies, but also an appealing target for vaccination. furthermore, since sn was shown to be an endocytic receptor, the conjugation of effector molecules to an sn-specific ligand should allow intracellular delivery of these conjugates. previously, we developed functional sn-specific immunoconjugates that were generated via chemical coupling. although successful, the system requires significant optimization for each immunoconjugate to be made. to generate a more flexible and controlled system, we developed a recombinant antibody vector allowing the creation of genetic antibody fusion constructs. this paper reports on the characterization of the recombinant antibody and the evaluation of its use for sn-directed targeting.


RESULTS
the variable domains of the porcine sn-specific monoclonal antibody 41d <dig> were sequenced and cloned in frame with a mouse igg <dig> backbone. transfection of hek293t cells with the resulting plasmid led to the secretion of fully assembled igg into the culture medium. this recombinant antibody rec41d <dig> was shown to specifically bind to porcine sn with a comparable affinity as the native monoclonal antibody. in addition, rec41d <dig> also induced sn endocytosis in primary macrophages and resided for prolonged times in early/late endosomes. to allow the generation of antibody fusion constructs, a multiple cloning site was introduced at the c-terminus of the heavy chain. two fusion constructs were generated, one containing a v <dig> peptide tag and one containing an egfp molecule. both constructs were shown to be efficiently produced in hek293t cells and easily purified using standard protein g chromatography. in addition, both v <dig> and egfp were shown to be co-internalized together with rec41d <dig> into sn-expressing primary macrophages.


CONCLUSIONS
a recombinant antibody allowing targeted delivery of peptides and proteins to sn-expressing macrophages was developed. production and purification of antibody fusion constructs was possible without major optimization and with batch to batch consistency, confirming the development of a versatile antibody vector to evaluate sn-directed targeting strategies in a porcine animal model.

macrophagesialoadhesincd169siglec-1recombinant antibodytargetingcell-directed therapy

