BACKGROUND
in honeybees, differential feeding of female larvae promotes the occurrence of two different phenotypes, a queen and a worker, from identical genotypes, through incremental alterations, which affect general growth, and character state alterations that result in the presence or absence of specific structures. although previous studies revealed a link between incremental alterations and differential expression of physiometabolic genes, the molecular changes accompanying character state alterations remain unknown.


RESULTS
by using cdna microarray analyses of > <dig>  apis mellifera ests, we found  <dig> differentially expressed genes  between developing queens and workers. many genes recorded as up-regulated in prospective workers appear to be unique to a. mellifera, suggesting that the workers' developmental pathway involves the participation of novel genes. workers up-regulate more developmental genes than queens, whereas queens up-regulate a greater proportion of physiometabolic genes, including genes coding for metabolic enzymes and genes whose products are known to regulate the rate of mass-transforming processes and the general growth of the organism . many degs are likely to be involved in processes favoring the development of caste-biased structures, like brain, legs and ovaries, as well as genes that code for cytoskeleton constituents. treatment of developing worker larvae with juvenile hormone  revealed  <dig> jh responsive genes, specifically during the critical period of caste development. using gibbs sampling and expectation maximization algorithms, we discovered eight overrepresented cis-elements from four gene groups. graph theory and complex networks concepts were adopted to attain powerful graphical representations of the interrelation between cis-elements and genes and objectively quantify the degree of relationship between these entities.


CONCLUSIONS
we suggest that clusters of functionally related degs are co-regulated during caste development in honeybees. this network of interactions is activated by nutrition-driven stimuli in early larval stages. our data are consistent with the hypothesis that jh is a key component of the developmental determination of queen-like characters. finally, we propose a conceptual model of caste differentiation in a. mellifera based on gene-regulatory networks.

