BACKGROUND
serotonin represents an evolutionary ancient neurotransmitter that is ubiquitously found among animals including the lophotrochozoan phylum bryozoa, a group of colonial filter-feeders. comparatively little is known on their nervous system, and data on their serotonin-lir nervous system currently are mostly limited to the basal phylactolaemates. previous investigations indicated a common ground-pattern of the serotonin-lir nervous system in these animals, but in order to assess this on a larger scale,  <dig> gymnolaemate species from  <dig> genera were comparatively analysed herein.

methods
twenty-one species from  <dig> gymnolaemate genera were analysed by immunocytochemical stainings and confocal laser scanning microscopy.


RESULTS
in all species the serotonin-lir signal is concentrated in the cerebral ganglion from where a nerve tract emanates laterally and traverses orally to engulf the foregut. serotonin-lir perikarya are situated at the base of the tentacles that almost always correspond to the number of tentacles minus two. the oral side in almost all species shows three serotonin-lir perikarya followed by a ‘serotonergic gap’ that to our knowledge is not reflected in the morphology of the nervous system. some species show additional serotonin-lir signal in tentacle nerves, visceral innervation and pore complexes. paludicella articulata is exceptional as it shows signal in the latero-visceral nerves with serotonin-lir perikarya in the esophagus, parts of the tentacle sheath nerves as well as the frontal body wall around the parietal muscle bundles.


CONCLUSIONS
in general, the serotonin-lir nervous system in the bryozoa shows a consistent pattern among its different clades with few deviations. preliminary data on phylactolaemates suggest the presence of a ‘serotonergic gap’ similar to gymnolaemates. both show a subset of oral tentacles and the remaining tentacles in gymnolaemates which correspond to the lateral tentacles of phylactolaemates. the lophophoral concavity lacks serotonin-lir perikarya indicating that due to their larger sizes and increased tentacle number, the horse-shoe shaped arrangement could represent an apomorphy of phylactolaemates.

keywords
bryozoaserotoningymnolaematalophophoreissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

