BACKGROUND
extreme acidic environments are characterized by their high metal content and lack of nutrients . macroscopic biofilms and filaments usually grow on the water-air interface or under the stream attached to solid substrates . in the río tinto , brown filaments develop under the water stream where the gram-negative iron-oxidizing bacteria leptospirillum spp.  and acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans are abundant. these microorganisms play a critical role in bioleaching processes for industrial  and environmental applications . the aim of this study was to investigate the physiological differences between the free living  and the sessile  lifestyles of leptospirillum spp. as part of its natural extremely acidophilic community.


RESULTS
total rna extracted from environmental samples was used to determine the composition of the metabolically active members of the microbial community and then to compare the biofilm and planktonic environmental transcriptomes by hybridizing to a genomic microarray of l. ferrooxidans. genes up-regulated in the filamentous biofilm are involved in cellular functions related to biofilm formation and maintenance, such as: motility and quorum sensing , synthesis of cell wall structures , specific proteases , stress response chaperons , etc. additionally, genes involved in mixed acid fermentation  were up-regulated in the biofilm. this result, together with the presence of small organic acids like acetate and formate  in the acidic  water stream, suggests that either l. ferrooxidans or other member of the microbial community are producing acetate in the acidophilic biofilm under microaerophilic conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the acidophilic filaments are dynamic structures in which different mechanisms for biofilm formation/dispersion are operating. specific transcriptomic fingerprints can be inferred for both planktonic and sessile cells, having the former a more active tca cycle, while the mixed acid fermentation process dominate in the latter. the excretion of acetate may play a relevant ecological role as a source of electron donor for heterotrophic fe3+ reducers like some alphaproteobacteria, acidobacterium spp. and sulfobacillus spp., also present in the biofilm. additionally, acetate may have a negative effect on bioleaching by inhibiting the growth of chemolithotrophic bacteria.

