BACKGROUND
the petal senescence of ethylene insensitive species has not been investigated thoroughly while little is known about the temporal and tissue specific expression patterns of transcription factors  in this developmental process. even less is known on flower senescence of the ornamental pot plant gardenia jasminoides, a non climacteric flower with significant commercial value.


RESULTS
we initiated a de novo transcriptome study to investigate the petal senescence in four developmental stages of cut gardenia flowers considering that the visible symptoms of senescence appear within 4 days of flower opening. de novo assembly of transcriptome sequencing resulted in  <dig>  contigs with mean length of  <dig> nucleotides that generated  <dig>  unigenes. these were further clustered into  <dig>  clusters and  <dig>  singletons. the comparison of the consecutive developmental stages resulted in  <dig> common, differentially expressed unigenes. a large number of simple sequence repeats were also identified comprising a large number of dinucleotides and trinucleotides. the prevailing families of differentially expressed tfs comprise the ap2/erebp, wrky and the bhlh. there are  <dig> differentially expressed tfs when the symptoms of flower senescence become visible with the most prevailing being the wrky family with  <dig> unigenes. no other wrky tfs had been identified up to now in petal senescence of ethylene insensitive species. a large number of differentially expressed genes were identified at the initiation of visible symptoms of senescence compared to the open flower stage indicating a significant shift in the expression profiles which might be coordinated by up-regulated and/or down-regulated tfs. the expression of  <dig> genes that belong to the tf families of wrky, bhlh and the ethylene sensing pathway was validated using qrt – pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
this de novo transcriptome analysis resulted in the identification of tfs with specific temporal expression patterns such as two wrkys and one bhlh, which might play the role of senescence progression regulators. further research is required to investigate their role in gardenia flowers in order to develop tools to delay petal senescence.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gardeniatranscriptomessr markerstranscription factorspetal senescenceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

