BACKGROUND
the fungus cronartium ribicola  is an economically and ecologically important forest pathogen that causes white pine blister rust  disease on five-needle pines. to cause stem cankers and kill white pine trees the fungus elaborates a life cycle with five stages of spore development on five-needle pines and the alternate host ribes plants. to increase our understanding of molecular wp-br interactions, here we report genome-wide transcriptional profile analysis of c. ribicola using rna-seq.


RESULTS
cdna libraries were constructed from aeciospore, urediniospore, and western white pine  tissues post cri infection. over  <dig> million rna-seq 100-bp paired-end  reads from rust fungal spores were de novo assembled and a reference transcriptome was generated with  <dig>  transcripts that were expressed from  <dig>  unigenes. a total of  <dig> unique proteins were predicted as a part of the cri secretome from complete open reading frames , and 41 % of them were cronartium-specific. this study further identified a repertoire of candidate effectors and other pathogenicity determinants. differentially expressed genes  were identified to gain an understanding of molecular events important during the wpbr fungus life cycle by comparing cri transcriptomes at different infection stages. large-scale changes of in planta gene expression profiles were observed, revealing that multiple fungal biosynthetic pathways were enhanced during mycelium growth inside infected pine stem tissues. conversely, many fungal genes that were up-regulated at the urediniospore stage appeared to be signalling components and transporters. the secreted fungal protein genes that were up-regulated in pine needle tissues during early infection were primarily associated with cell wall modifications, possibly to mask the rust pathogen from plant defenses.


CONCLUSIONS
this comprehensive transcriptome profiling substantially improves our current understanding of molecular wp-br interactions. the repertoire of candidate effectors and other putative pathogenicity determinants identified here are valuable for future functional analysis of cri virulence and pathogenicity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cronartium ribicolaeffectorpathogenicityrna-seqtranscriptome profilingissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

