BACKGROUND
building models of molecular regulatory networks is challenging not just because of the intrinsic difficulty of describing complex biological processes. writing a model is a creative effort that calls for more flexibility and interactive support than offered by many of today’s biochemical model editors. our model editor msmb — multistate model builder — supports multistate models created using different modeling styles.


RESULTS
msmb provides two separate advances on existing network model editors.  a simple but powerful syntax is used to describe multistate species. this reduces the number of reactions needed to represent certain molecular systems, thereby reducing the complexity of model creation.  extensive feedback is given during all stages of the model creation process on the existing state of the model. users may activate error notifications of varying stringency on the fly, and use these messages as a guide toward a consistent, syntactically correct model. msmb default values and behavior during model manipulation  can be adapted to suit the modeler, thus supporting creativity rather than interfering with it. msmb’s internal model representation allows saving a model with errors and inconsistencies . a consistent model can be exported to sbml or copasi formats. we show the effectiveness of msmb’s multistate syntax through models of the cell cycle and mrna transcription.


CONCLUSIONS
using multistate reactions reduces the number of reactions need to encode many biochemical network models. this reduces the cognitive load for a given model, thereby making it easier for modelers to build more complex models. the many interactive editing support features provided by msmb make it easier for modelers to create syntactically valid models, thus speeding model creation. complete information and the installation package can be found at http://www.copasi.org/softwareprojects. msmb is based on java and the copasi api.

systems biologybiological networksmathematical modelingchemical reaction systemscopasisbmlsoftwaremodel editormultistate

