BACKGROUND
abiotic stresses due to environmental factors could adversely affect the growth and development of crops. among the abiotic stresses, drought and heat stress are two critical threats to crop growth and sustainable agriculture worldwide. considering global climate change, incidence of combined drought and heat stress is likely to increase. the aim of this study was to shed light on plant growth performance and leaf physiology of three tomatoes cultivars  under control, drought, heat and combined stress.


RESULTS
shoot fresh and dry weight, leaf area and relative water content of all cultivars significantly decreased under drought and combined stress as compared to control. the net photosynthesis and starch content were significantly lower under drought and combined stress than control in the three cultivars. stomata and pore length of the three cultivars significantly decreased under drought and combined stress as compared to control. the tomato ‘arvento’ was more affected by heat stress than ‘la1994’ and ‘la2093’ due to significant decreases in shoot dry weight, chlorophyll a and carotenoid content, starch content and npq  only in ‘arvento’ under heat treatment. by comparison, the two heat-tolerant tomatoes were more affected by drought stress compared to ‘arvento’ as shown by small stomatal and pore area, decreased sucrose content, Φpsii , etr  and ql  in ‘la1994’ and ‘la2093’. the three cultivars showed similar response when subjected to the combination of drought and heat stress as shown by most physiological parameters, even though only ‘la1994’ and ‘la2093’ showed decreased fv/fm , Φpsii, etr and ql under combined stress.


CONCLUSIONS
the cultivars differing in heat sensitivity did not show difference in the combined stress sensitivity, indicating that selection for tomatoes with combined stress tolerance might not be correlated with the single stress tolerance. in this study, drought stress had a predominant effect on tomato over heat stress, which explained why simultaneous application of heat and drought revealed similar physiological responses to the drought stress. these results will uncover the difference and linkage between the physiological response of tomatoes to drought, heat and combined stress and be important for the selection and breeding of tolerant tomato cultivars under single and combine stress.

keywords
tomatodrought stressheat stressphotosynthesischlorophyll fluorescencenatural science foundation of youth in jiangsu province bk20160579zhou rong natural science foundation of youth in jiangsu provincebk20140739wang yinlei http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31601745zhou rong basic scientific research project in jiangsu academy of agricultural sciencezx2003zhao tongmin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

