BACKGROUND
the high degree of heterogeneity observed in breast cancers makes it very difficult to classify the cancer patients into distinct clinical subgroups and consequently limits the ability to devise effective therapeutic strategies. several classification strategies based on er/pr/her <dig> expression or the expression profiles of a panel of genes have helped, but such methods often produce misleading results due to their dynamic nature. in contrast, somatic dna mutations are relatively stable and lead to initiation and progression of many sporadic cancers. hence in this study, we explore the use of gene mutation profiles to classify, characterize and predict the subgroups of breast cancers.


RESULTS
we analyzed the whole exome sequencing data from  <dig> ethnically similar breast cancer patients in the cancer genome atlas  project. somatic and non-synonymous single nucleotide variants identified from each patient were assigned a quantitative score  that represents the extent of negative impact on the gene function. using these scores with non-negative matrix factorization method, we clustered the patients into three subgroups. by comparing the clinical stage of patients, we identified an early-stage-enriched and a late-stage-enriched subgroup. comparison of the mutation scores of early and late-stage-enriched subgroups identified  <dig> genes that carry significantly higher mutations rates in the late stage subgroup. functional characterization of these genes revealed important functional gene families that carry a heavy mutational load in the late state rich subgroup of patients. finally, using the identified subgroups, we also developed a supervised classification model to predict the stage of the patients.


CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates that gene mutation profiles can be effectively used with unsupervised machine-learning methods to identify clinically distinguishable breast cancer subgroups. the classification model developed in this method could provide a reasonable prediction of the cancer patients’ stage solely based on their mutation profiles. this study represents the first use of only somatic mutation profile data to identify and predict breast cancer subgroups and this generic methodology can also be applied to other cancer datasets.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
unsupervised and supervised machine learninggene mutation profilestcgabreast cancer classificationbreast cancer subtypescancer stage predictionwhole exome sequencing data analysisthe international conference on intelligent biology and medicine   <dig> indianapolis, in, usa 13- <dig> november  <dig> http://watson.compbio.iupui.edu/yunliu/icibm/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

