BACKGROUND
endosymbionts that manipulate the reproduction of their hosts have been reported widely in invertebrates. one such group of endosymbionts is the male-killers. to date all male-killers reported are bacterial in nature, but comprise a diverse group. ladybirds have been described as a model system for the study of male-killing, which has been reported in multiple species from widespread geographic locations. whilst criteria of low egg hatch-rate and female-biased progenic sex ratio have been used to identify female hosts of male-killers, variation in vertical transmission efficiency and host genetic factors may result in variation in these phenotypic indicators of male-killer presence. molecular identification of bacteria and screening for bacterial presence provide us with a more accurate method than breeding data alone to link the presence of the bacteria to the male-killing phenotype. in addition, by identifying the bacteria responsible we may find evidence for horizontal transfer between endosymbiont hosts and can gain insight into the evolutionary origins of male-killing. phylogenetic placement of male-killing bacteria will allow us to address the question of whether male-killing is a potential strategy for only some, or all, maternally inherited bacteria. together, phenotypic and molecular characterisation of male-killers will allow a deeper insight into the interactions between host and endosymbiont, which ultimately may lead to an understanding of how male-killers identify and kill male-hosts.


RESULTS
a male-killer was detected in the japanese coccinellid, propylea japonica  a species not previously known to harbour male-killers. families produced by female p. japonica showed significantly female-biased sex ratios. one female produced only daughters. this male-killer trait was maternally inherited and antibiotic treatment produced a full, heritable cure. molecular analysis identified rickettsia to be associated with the trait in this species of ladybird.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that p. japonica is host to a bacterial male-killer that is vertically inherited with variable transmission efficiency. rickettsia presence correlates with the male-killing trait, but there is some variation in the phenotypic expression of the trait due to interaction with host factors. phylogenetic analysis using the 16s rrna and  <dig> kda antigen genes suggests there may have been horizontal transfer of rickettsial male-killers between different ladybird hosts.

