BACKGROUND
thermal stable α-glucosidases with transglycosylation activity could be applied to the industrial production of oligosaccharides as well as conjugation of sugars to biologically useful materials. therefore, α-glucosidases isolated from thermophiles have gained attention over the past decade. in this study, the characterization of a highly thermostable α-glucosidase and its thermostability improved mutant from newly isolated strain thermus thermophilus tc <dig> were investigated.


RESULTS
the recombinant α-glucosidase  from thermus thermophilus tc <dig> was expressed in escherichia coli bl <dig>  and purified. the purified enzyme had a molecular mass of 184 kda and consisted of 59-kda subunits; it showed hydrolytic activity for pnp-α-d-glucopyranoside , sucrose, trehalose, panose, and isomaltooligosaccharides and very low activity for maltose. the highest specific activity of  <dig>  u/mg was observed for pnpg at 90 °c and ph  <dig> ; pb2+ provided a 20 % activity increase. ttag was stable at 70 °c for more than 7 h and had a half-life of 195 min at 80 °c and 130 min at 90 °c. transglycosylation activity was also observed with sucrose and trehalose as substrates. ttag showed differences on substrate specificity, transglycosylation, multimerization, effects of metal ions and optimal ph from other reported thermus α-glucosidases. one single-substitution ttag mutant q10y with improved thermostability was also obtained from random mutagenesis library. the site-saturation mutagenesis and structural modelling analysis indicated that q10y substitution stabilized ttag structure via additional hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings indicate that ttag is a highly thermostable and more acidic α-glucosidase distinct from other reported thermus α-glucosidases. and this work also provides new insights into the catalytic and thermal tolerance mechanisms of α-glucosidases, which may guide molecular engineering of α-glucosidase and other thermostable enzymes for industrial application.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

