BACKGROUND
the snatch-farrowed porcine-colostrum-deprived  pig model, in which neonates are raised on commercially available bovine colostrum, is an alternative model for porcine infectious disease research. it is not known if sf-pcd pigs possess growth performance and immunity comparable to conventional, farm-raised pigs. the current experiment compared growth performance and immune responses of sf-pcd pigs to their farm-raised siblings following mycoplasma hyopneumoniae  vaccination. twelve sf-pcd and  <dig> farm-raised siblings were vaccinated on day  <dig>  and d <dig> of age. body weights were measured once or twice weekly and average daily gain  was calculated. peripheral blood mononuclear cells  were isolated on d <dig>  cytokine secretion from pbmc stimulated with mhyo antigen or phorbol myristate acetate plus ionomycin  was assessed using a multiplexed fluorescent microsphere immunoassay . additionally, interferon gamma  secretion from stimulated pbmc was assessed using elispot. mhyo igg titers were measured by an elisa in d <dig> sera.


RESULTS
growth performance did not differ between groups before weaning, but sf-pcd pigs had higher adg after weaning. in response to mhyo stimulation, numbers of ifnγ secreting pbmc and levels of interleukin  <dig>  and il <dig> in pbmc supernatants were significantly higher in sf-pcd pigs, as were mhyo antibody levels in sera, and levels of il1β, il <dig> and il <dig> in supernatants of pma/iono stimulated pbmc.


CONCLUSIONS
under the conditions of this experiment, sf-pcd pigs demonstrated superior growth performance and enhanced humoral and cell-mediated immunity following vaccination. whether or not this reflects greater resistance or tolerance to infection is unknown but the ability to react positively to the vaccination provides evidence that sf-pcd pigs are a suitable alternative model for swine disease research.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
snatch-farrowed porcine-colostrum-deprived pigsanimal modelmycoplasma hyopneumoniaecytokineimmunityfluorescent microsphere immunoassayissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

