BACKGROUND
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor  has shown promising results as a cytokine adjuvant for antiviral vaccines and in various models of tumor gene therapy. to explore whether the targeting of antigens to gm-csf receptors on antigen-presenting cells enhances antigen-specific cd <dig> t-cell responses, fusion proteins of gm-csf and ovalbumin  were expressed by dna and adenoviral vector vaccines. in addition, bicistronic vectors allowing independent expression of the antigen and the cytokine were tested in parallel.


RESULTS
in vitro, the gm-csf ovalbumin fusion protein  led to the better stimulation of ova-specific cd8+ t cells by antigen-presenting cells than ova and gm-csf given as two separate proteins. however, prime-boost immunizations of mice with dna and adenoviral vector vaccines encoding gm-ova suppressed cd8+ t-cell responses to ova. ova-specific igg2a antibody levels were also reduced, while the igg <dig> antibody response was enhanced. suppression of cd8+ t cell responses by gm-ova vaccines was associated with the induction of neutralizing antibodies to gm-csf. in contrast, the coexpression of gm-csf and antigens in dna prime adenoviral boost immunizations led to a striking expansion of polyfunctional ova-specific cd8+ t cells without the induction of autoantibodies.


CONCLUSIONS
the induction of autoantibodies suggests a general note of caution regarding the use of highly immunogenic viral vector vaccines encoding fusion proteins between antigens and host proteins. in contrast, the expansion of polyfunctional ova-specific cd8+ t cells after immunizations with bicistronic vectors further support a potential application of gm-csf as an adjuvant for heterologous prime-boost regimens with genetic vaccines. since dna prime adenoviral vector boost regimenes are presently considered as one of the most efficient ways to induce cd8+ t cell responses in mice, non-human primates and humans, further enhancement of this response by gm-csf is a striking observation.

