BACKGROUND
heat shock proteins  perform a fundamental role in protecting plants against abiotic stresses. although researchers have made great efforts on the functional analysis of individual family members, hsps have not been fully characterized in rice  and little is known about their interactors.


RESULTS
in this study, we combined orthology-based approach with expression association data to screen rice hsps for the expression patterns of which strongly correlated with that of heat responsive probe-sets. twenty-seven hsp candidates were identified, including  <dig> small hsps, six hsp70s, three hsp60s, three hsp90s, and three clpb/hsp100s. then, using a combination of interolog and expression profile-based methods, we inferred  <dig> interactors of hsp70s in rice, and validated the interactions by co-localization and function-based methods. subsequent analysis showed  <dig> interacting domains and  <dig> target motifs were over-represented in hsp70s interactors. twenty-four go terms of biological processes and five go terms of molecular functions were enriched in the positive interactors, whose expression levels were positively associated with hsp70s. hsp70s interaction network implied that hsp70s were involved in macromolecular translocation, carbohydrate metabolism, innate immunity, photosystem ii repair and regulation of kinase activities.


CONCLUSIONS
twenty-seven hsps in rice were identified and  <dig> interactors of hsp70s were inferred and validated, then the interacting network of hsp70s was induced and the function of hsp70s was analyzed. furthermore, two databases named rice heat shock proteins  and rice gene expression profile , and one online tool named protein-protein interaction predictor , were constructed and could be accessed at http://bioinformatics.fafu.edu.cn/.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rice heat shock proteinsgenome wideidentificationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

