BACKGROUND
spinal cord edema is a serious complication and pathophysiological change after ischemia reperfusion  injury. it has been demonstrated closely associated with bimodal disruption of blood–spinal cord barrier  in our previous work. aquaporin  <dig> plays important but contradictory roles in water homeostasis. recently, micrornas  effectively regulate numerous target mrnas during ischemia. however, whether mirs are able to protect against dimodal disruption of bscb by regulating perivascular aqp <dig> remains to be elucidated.



RESULTS
spinal water content and eb extravasation were suggested as a bimodal distribution in directly proportion to aqp <dig>  since all maximal changes were detected at  <dig> and 48 h after reperfusion. further tem and double immunofluorescence showed that former disruption of bscb at 12 h was attributed to cytotoxic edema by up-regulated aqp <dig> expressions in astrocytes, whereas the latter at 48 h was mixed with vasogenic edema with both endothelial cells and astrocytes involvement. microarray analysis revealed that at 12 h post-injury, ten mirs were upregulated  and seven mirs were downregulated  and at 48 h, ten mirs were upregulated and eleven were downregulated compared to sham-operated controls. genomic screening and luciferase assays identified that mir-320a was a potential modulator of aqp <dig> in spinal cord after ir in vitro. in vivo, compared to rats in ir and negative control group, intrathecal infusion of mir-320a mimic attenuated ir-induced lower limb motor function deficits and bscb dysfunction as decreased eb extravasation and spinal water content through down-regulating aqp <dig> expressions, whereas pretreated with mir-320a amo reversed above effects.



CONCLUSIONS
these findings indicate mir-320a directly and functionally affects spinal cord edema through negatively regulating aqp <dig> of bscb after ir.

keywords
blood–spinal cord barriermicrornasaquaporinischemia reperfusion injurydoctoral fund of the ministry of education of china20092104110009li xiao-qian natural science foundation of china81271370li xiao-qian  the science and technology program of liaoning 2012408002ma hong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

