BACKGROUND
recent advances in dna sequencing techniques resulted in more than forty sequenced plant genomes representing a diverse set of taxa of agricultural, energy, medicinal and ecological importance. however, gene family curation is often only inferred from dna sequence homology and lacks insights into evolutionary processes contributing to gene family dynamics. in a comparative genomics framework, we integrated multiple lines of evidence provided by gene synteny, sequence homology and protein-based hidden markov modelling to extract homologous super-clusters composed of multi-domain resistance -proteins of the nb-lrr type , that are involved in plant innate immunity.


RESULTS
to assess the diversity of r-proteins within and between species, we screened twelve eudicot plant genomes including six major crops and found a total of  <dig>  nb-lrr genes. our curated r-proteins set shows a 50% average for tandem duplicates and a 22% fraction of gene copies retained from ancient polyploidy events . we provide evidence for strong positive selection and show significant differences in molecular evolution rates  among tandem- , ohnolog  and singleton  r-gene duplicates. to foster the process of gene-edited plant breeding, we report species-specific presence/absence of all  <dig> nb-lrr genes present in the model plant arabidopsis and describe four distinct clusters of nb-lrr “gatekeeper” loci sharing syntenic orthologs across all analyzed genomes.


CONCLUSIONS
by curating a near-complete set of multi-domain r-protein clusters in an eudicot-wide scale, our analysis offers significant insight into evolutionary dynamics underlying diversification of the plant innate immune system. furthermore, our methods provide a blueprint for future efforts to identify and more rapidly clone functional nb-lrr genes from any plant species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
systems biologybig datacomparative genomicsmolecular evolutionplant innate immunityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

