BACKGROUND
cnidarians are the closest living relatives to bilaterians and have been instrumental to studying the evolution of bilaterian properties. the cnidarian model, nematostella vectensis, is a unique system in which embryology and regeneration are both studied, making it an ideal candidate to develop in vivo imaging techniques. live imaging is the most direct way for quantitative and qualitative assessment of biological phenomena. actin and tubulin are cytoskeletal proteins universally important for regulating many embryological processes but so far studies in nematostella primarily focused on the localization of these proteins in fixed embryos.


RESULTS
we used fluorescent probes expressed in vivo to investigate the dynamics of nematostella development. lifeact-mturquoise <dig>  a fluorescent cyan f-actin probe, can be visualized within microvilli along the cellular surface throughout embryonic development and is stable for two months after injection. co-expression of lifeact-mturquoise <dig> with end-binding protein <dig>  fused to mvenus or tdtomato-nls allows for the visualization of cell-cycle properties in real time. utilizing fluorescent probes in vivo helped to identify a concentrated ‘flash’ of lifeact-mturquoise <dig> around the nucleus, immediately prior to cytokinesis in developing embryos. moreover, lifeact-mturquoise <dig> expression in adult animals allowed the identification of various cell types as well as cellular boundaries.


CONCLUSIONS
the methods developed in this manuscript provide an alternative protocol to investigate nematostella development through in vivo cellular analysis. this study is the first to utilize the highly photo-stable florescent protein mturquoise <dig> as a marker for live imaging. finally, we present a clear methodology for the visualization of minute temporal events during cnidarian development.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
nematostella vectensislifeactmturquoise2eb1cytoskeletonmicrovillinuclear envelopemitosisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

