BACKGROUND
external stimulations of cells by hormones, cytokines or growth factors activate signal transduction pathways that subsequently induce a re-arrangement of cellular gene expression. the analysis of such changes is complicated, as they consist of multi-layered temporal responses. while classical analyses based on clustering or gene set enrichment only partly reveal this information, matrix factorization techniques are well suited for a detailed temporal analysis. in signal processing, factorization techniques incorporating data properties like spatial and temporal correlation structure have shown to be robust and computationally efficient. however, such correlation-based methods have so far not be applied in bioinformatics, because large scale biological data rarely imply a natural order that allows the definition of a delayed correlation function.


RESULTS
we therefore develop the concept of graph-decorrelation. we encode prior knowledge like transcriptional regulation, protein interactions or metabolic pathways in a weighted directed graph. by linking features along this underlying graph, we introduce a partial ordering of the features  and are thus able to define a graph-delayed correlation function. using this framework as constraint to the matrix factorization task allows us to set up the fast and robust graph-decorrelation algorithm . to analyze alterations in the gene response in il- <dig> stimulated primary mouse hepatocytes, we performed a time-course microarray experiment and applied grade. in contrast to standard techniques, the extracted time-resolved gene expression profiles showed that il- <dig> activates genes involved in cell cycle progression and cell division. genes linked to metabolic and apoptotic processes are down-regulated indicating that il- <dig> mediated priming renders hepatocytes more responsive towards cell proliferation and reduces expenditures for the energy metabolism.


CONCLUSIONS
grade provides a novel framework for the decomposition of large-scale 'omics' data. we were able to show that including prior knowledge into the separation task leads to a much more structured and detailed separation of the time-dependent responses upon il- <dig> stimulation compared to standard methods. a matlab implementation of the grade algorithm is freely available at http://cmb.helmholtz-muenchen.de/grade.

