BACKGROUND
wheat embryo and endosperm play important roles in seed germination, seedling survival, and subsequent vegetative growth. aba can positively regulate dormancy induction and negatively regulates seed germination at low concentrations, while low h2o <dig> concentrations promote seed germination of cereal plants. in this report, we performed the first integrative transcriptome analysis of wheat embryo and endosperm responses to aba and h2o <dig> stresses.


RESULTS
we used the genechip® wheat genome array to conduct a comparative transcriptome microarray analysis of the embryo and endosperm of elite chinese bread wheat cultivar zhengmai  <dig> in response to aba and h2o <dig> treatments during seed germination. transcriptome profiling showed that after h2o <dig> and aba treatments, the  <dig> differentially expressed genes in the embryo were closely related to dna synthesis, cho metabolism, hormone metabolism, and protein degradation, while  <dig> in the endosperm were involved mainly in storage reserves, transport, biotic and abiotic stresses, hormone metabolism, cell wall metabolism, signaling, and development. scatter plot analysis showed that aba treatment increased the similarity of regulated patterns between the two tissues, whereas h2o <dig> treatment decreased the global expression similarity. mapman analysis provided a global view of changes in several important metabolism pathways , as well as related functional groups  in the embryo and endosperm following exposure of seeds to aba and h2o <dig> treatments during germination. quantitative rt-pcr analysis was used to validate the expression patterns of nine differentially expressed genes.


CONCLUSIONS
wheat seed germination involves regulation of a large number of genes involved in many functional groups. aba/h2o <dig> can repress/promote seed germination by coordinately regulating related gene expression. our results provide novel insights into the transcriptional regulation mechanisms of embryo and endosperm in response to aba and h2o <dig> treatments during seed germination.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
wheatembryo and endospermseed germinationtranscriptomeabah2o2national natural science foundation of china31471485yan yueming natural science foundation of beijing city and the key developmental project of science and technology from beijing municipal commission of educationkz201410028031yan yueming china-australia cooperation project from chinese ministry of science and technology2013dfg30530yan yueming national key project for transgenic crops of china2014zx08009-003yan yueming issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

