BACKGROUND
cancer is the leading cause of death in older dogs and its prevalence is increasing. there is clearly a need to develop more effective anti-cancer drugs in dogs. sg <dig>  is a sequence selective dna minor groove cross-linking agent. based on its in vitro potency, the spectrum of in vivo and clinical activity against human tumours, and its tolerability in human patients, sg <dig> has potential as a novel therapeutic against spontaneously occurring canine malignancies.


RESULTS
in vitro cytotoxicity was assessed using srb and mtt assays, and in vivo activity was assessed using canine tumour xenografts. dna interstrand cross-linking  was determined using a modification of the single cell gel electrophoresis  assay. effects on cell cycle distribution were assessed by flow cytometry and measurement of γ-h2ax by immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry.

sg <dig> had a multi-log differential cytotoxic profile against a panel of  <dig> canine tumour cell lines representing a range of common tumour types in dogs. in the cmec- <dig> melanoma cell line, dna icls increased linearly with dose following a 1 h treatment. peak icl was achieved within 1 h and no removal was observed over 48 h. a relationship between dna icl formation and cytotoxicity was observed across cell lines. the formation of γ-h2ax foci was slow, becoming evident after 4 h and reaching a peak at 24 h.

sg <dig> exhibited significant anti-tumour activity against two canine melanoma tumour models in vivo. anti-tumour activity was observed at  <dig>  and  <dig>  mg/kg given i.v. either once, or weekly x  <dig>  dose-dependent dna icl was observed in tumours  at 2 h and persisted at 24 h. icl increased following the second and third doses in a repeated dose schedule. at 24 h, dose dependent γ-h2ax foci were more numerous than at 2 h, and greater in tumours than in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. sg2000-induced h2ax phosphorylation measured by immunohistochemistry showed good correspondence, but less sensitivity, than measurement of foci.


CONCLUSIONS
sg <dig> displayed potent activity in vitro against canine cancer cell lines as a result of the formation and persistence of dna icls. sg <dig> also had significant in vivo antitumour activity against canine melanoma xenografts, and the comet and γ-h2ax foci methods were relevant pharmacodynamic assays. the clinical testing of sg <dig> against spontaneous canine cancer is warranted.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
canine cancersg <dig> dna interstrand cross-linkinganticancer drugpyrrolobenzodiazepine dimercancer chemotherapyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

