BACKGROUND
in horses undergoing celiotomy for acute gastrointestinal pain, identification of variables correlating with lesion severity and location, and survival provide veterinarians and owners with information that aids in making informed decisions regarding appropriate treatment. muscle enzyme activity is often increased in horses undergoing celiotomy for acute gastrointestinal pain and it is not known if muscle enzyme activity increase is specific to lesion type or impacts prognosis for survival. the objective of this study was to evaluate the relationship of pre-operative increase in muscle enzyme activities with intestinal lesion characteristics, specifically lesion location  and whether it was strangulating versus nonstrangulating, and case survival in horses undergoing celiotomy for acute gastrointestinal pain.

methods
records of  <dig> horses undergoing exploratory laparotomy for colic were reviewed retrospectively. evaluation of preoperative plasma aspartate aminotransferase , creatine kinase , sorbitol dehydrogenase , and gamma-glutamyltransferase  activities, fibrinogen and glucose concentrations, and hematocrit  and their association with gastrointestinal lesion characteristics and survival was performed.


RESULTS
pre-operative increase in plasma ck and ast activity, and hct and decrease in plasma bilirubin concentration were significantly associated with presence of lesions resulting in intestinal ischemia. increase in plasma ck activity and hct were significantly associated with a decreased probability of survival to hospital discharge. plasma ggt and sdh activity, and glucose and fibrinogen concentration were not significantly associated with survival or severity of disease in multivariate analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
plasma muscle enyzme activity may be useful as a prognostic indicator in equine colic cases. given that increases in plasma ck and ast activity were significantly associated with nonsurvival and the presence of intestinal ischemia, preoperative increase in these enzyme activities could assist in identification of disease severity and prognosis of horses undergoing celiotomy for acute gastrointestinal pain. further study is indicated to elucidate the etiology of increased muscle enzyme activity in horses with surgical colic disease observed in this preliminary study.

7- <dig> july  <dig> eleventh international equine colic research symposium dublin, ireland

