BACKGROUND
the chicken gut microbiota is an important and complicated ecosystem for the host. they play an important role in converting food into nutrient and energy. the coding capacity of microbiome vastly surpasses that of the host’s genome, encoding biochemical pathways that the host has not developed. an optimal gut microbiota can increase agricultural productivity. this study aims to explore the composition and function of cecal microbiota in dagu chicken under two feeding modes, free-range  and cage  raising.


RESULTS
cecal samples were collected from  <dig> chickens across  <dig> groups . we performed high-throughput sequencing of the 16s rrna genes v <dig> hypervariable regions to characterize the cecal microbiota of dagu chicken and compare the difference of cecal microbiota between free-range and cage raising chickens. it was found that  <dig> special operational taxonomic units  in od groups and  <dig> special otus in id groups.  <dig> phyla were shared by the  <dig> samples. bacteroidetes was the most abundant phylum with the largest proportion, followed by firmicutes and proteobacteria. the od groups showed a higher proportion of bacteroidetes  in cecum, but a lower firmicutes/bacteroidetes ratio in both 12-w old  and 18-w old groups  compared with the id groups. cecal microbiota in the od groups have higher abundance of functions involved in amino acids and glycan metabolic pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
the composition and function of cecal microbiota in dagu chicken under two feeding modes, free-range and cage raising are different. the cage raising mode showed a lower proportion of bacteroidetes in cecum, but a higher firmicutes/bacteroidetes ratio compared with free-range mode. cecal microbiota in free-range mode have higher abundance of functions involved in amino acids and glycan metabolic pathway.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
high-throughput sequencing technologyfeeding modescecal microbiotacomposition and functionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31172242tian yumin science and technology innovation team project of liaoning medical university30420130104su yuhong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

