BACKGROUND
mixed dispersal syndromes have historically been regarded as a bet-hedging mechanism that enhances survivorship in unpredictable environments, ensuring that some propagules stay in the maternal environment while others can potentially colonize new sites. however, this entails paying the costs of both dispersal and non-dispersal. propagules that disperse are likely to encounter unfavorable conditions, while non-dispersing propagules might form inbred populations of close relatives. here, we investigate the conditions under which mixed dispersal syndromes emerge and are evolutionarily stable, taking into account the risks of both environmental unpredictability and inbreeding.


RESULTS
using mathematical and computational modeling, we show that high dispersal propensity is favored whenever environmental unpredictability is low and inbreeding depression high, whereas mixed dispersal syndromes are adaptive under high environmental unpredictability, more particularly if inbreeding depression is small. although pure dispersal is frequently adaptive, mixed dispersal represents the optimal strategy under many different parameterizations of our models, indicating that this strategy is likely to be favored in a wide variety of contexts. furthermore, monomorphic populations go inevitably extinct when environmental and genetic costs are high, whilst mixed strategies can maintain viable populations even under very extreme conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
our models support the hypothesis that the interplay between inbreeding depression and environmental unpredictability shapes dispersal syndromes, often resulting in mixed strategies. moreover, mixed dispersal seems to facilitate persistence whenever conditions are critical or nearly critical for survival.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bet-hedgingmixed matingmixed dispersalselfingamphicarpyheterocarpyenvironmental noiseindividual based modelsuniversità degli studi di padovaprat2014-cpda148037hidalgo jorge spanish minecofis2013-43201-pÁ.muñoz miguel european commissionmc-iif-2011- <dig> ‘tee-off’casas rafael rubio de junta de andalucia/ec–fp7talentia programcasas rafael rubio de issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

