BACKGROUND
graphs provide a natural framework for visualizing and analyzing networks of many types, including biological networks. network clustering is a valuable approach for summarizing the structure in large networks, for predicting unobserved interactions, and for predicting functional annotations. many current clustering algorithms suffer from a common set of limitations: poor resolution of top-level clusters; over-splitting of bottom-level clusters; requirements to pre-define the number of clusters prior to analysis; and an inability to jointly cluster over multiple interaction types.


RESULTS
a new algorithm, hierarchical agglomerative clustering , is developed for fast clustering of heterogeneous interaction networks. this algorithm uses maximum likelihood to drive the inference of a hierarchical stochastic block model for network structure. bayesian model selection provides a principled method for collapsing the fine-structure within the smallest groups, and for identifying the top-level groups within a network. model scores are additive over independent interaction types, providing a direct route for simultaneous analysis of multiple interaction types. in addition to inferring network structure, this algorithm generates link predictions that with cross-validation provide a quantitative assessment of performance for real-world examples.


CONCLUSIONS
when applied to genome-scale data sets representing several organisms and interaction types, hac provides the overall best performance in link prediction when compared with other clustering methods and with model-free graph diffusion kernels. investigation of performance on genome-scale yeast protein interactions reveals roughly  <dig> top-level clusters, with a long-tailed distribution of cluster sizes. these are in turn partitioned into  <dig> fine-level clusters containing  <dig> proteins on average, again with a long-tailed size distribution. top-level clusters correspond to broad biological processes, whereas fine-level clusters correspond to discrete complexes. surprisingly, link prediction based on joint clustering of physical and genetic interactions performs worse than predictions based on individual data sets, suggesting a lack of synergy in current high-throughput data.

11– <dig> january  <dig> the ninth asia pacific bioinformatics conference  inchon, korea

