BACKGROUND
surveillance and field investigations of campylobacter infections require molecular tools with genetic markers appropriate for tracing purposes, i.e. based on the principle that some campylobacter lineages acquire a host signature under adaptive selection pressure. we developed a sequence-based method targeting the quinolone resistance determining region within the subunit a of dna gyrase . host specificity was evaluated by characterizing two collections of campylobacter jejuni  and campylobacter coli  originating from surface waters, domestic mammals and poultry.


RESULTS
based on nucleotide identity, a total of  <dig> gyra alleles were observed. thirty nine alleles assigned to c. coli encoding two peptides fell into three clades: two associated with surface waters and one associated with domestic mammals and poultry. the variability in gc content generated by synonymous mutations suggested that surface waters isolates originated from two distinct ecological niches. a total of  <dig> alleles were recorded from c. jejuni strains and encoded  <dig> peptides including one lying in a distinct lineage associated with wildlife. seven of the  <dig> alleles encoding peptide # <dig> displayed the synonymous mutation g408a not identified in poultry isolates. by contrast, the substitution ser22gly observed in  <dig> different peptide groups was significantly associated with domestic birds . the change in amino acid sequences thr86ile conferring resistance to quinolones was significantly associated with poultry  in both c. jejuni and c. coli with  <dig> % and  <dig> % of quinolone-resistant strains, respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
the gyra typing method presented here is an informative tool as sequences appear to be predictive of particular ecological niches. combined with multi-locus sequence typing, it could increase the resolution of source attribution, and combined with pora/flaa typing it could be suitable for detecting temporal clusters of human cases. all gyra alleles identified were deposited in the freely accessible online database http://pubmlst.org/campylobacter.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
campylobacter jejunicampylobacter coligyrasetypingmlstgyrasurveillancesurface waterissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

