BACKGROUND
microrna  is a class of functional non-coding small rna with 19- <dig> nucleotides in length while amur grape  is an important wild fruit crop with the strongest cold resistance among the vitis species, is used as an excellent breeding parent for grapevine, and has elicited growing interest in wine production. to date, there is a relatively large number of grapevine mirnas  from cultivated grapevine varieties such as vitis vinifera l. and hybrids of v. vinifera and v. labrusca, but there is no report on mirnas from vitis amurensis rupr, a wild grapevine species.


RESULTS
a small rna library from amur grape was constructed and solexa technology used to perform deep sequencing of the library followed by subsequent bioinformatics analysis to identify new mirnas. in total,  <dig> conserved mirnas belonging to  <dig> mirna families were identified, and  <dig> known but non-conserved mirnas were also found. significantly,  <dig> new potential amur grape-specific mirnas were discovered. the sequences of these new potential va-mirnas were further validated through mir-race, and accumulation of  <dig> new va-mirnas in seven tissues of grapevines confirmed by real time rt-pcr  analysis. the expression levels of va-mirnas in flowers and berries were found to be basically consistent in identity to those from deep sequenced srnas libraries of combined corresponding tissues. we also describe the conservation and variation of va-mirnas using mir-snps and mir-lds during plant evolution based on comparison of orthologous sequences, and further reveal that the number and sites of mir-snp in diverse mirna families exhibit distinct divergence. finally,  <dig> target genes for the new mirnas were predicted and they include a number of amur grape stress tolerance genes and many genes regulating anthocyanin synthesis and sugar metabolism.


CONCLUSIONS
deep sequencing of short rnas from amur grape flowers and berries identified  <dig> new potential mirnas and  <dig> known but non-conserved mirnas, indicating that specific mirnas exist in amur grape. these results show that a number of regulatory mirnas exist in amur grape and play an important role in amur grape growth, development, and response to abiotic or biotic stress.

amur grapemicrornasequences evolutionsolexa sequencingmir-raceqrt-pcr

