BACKGROUND
bananas and plantains  are grown in more than a hundred tropical and subtropical countries and provide staple food for hundreds of millions of people. they are seed-sterile crops propagated clonally and this makes them vulnerable to a rapid spread of devastating diseases and at the same time hampers breeding improved cultivars. although the socio-economic importance of bananas and plantains cannot be overestimated, they remain outside the focus of major research programs. this slows down the study of nuclear genome and the development of molecular tools to facilitate banana improvement.


RESULTS
in this work, we report on the first thorough characterization of the repeat component of the banana  genome. analysis of almost  <dig> mb of sequence data  permitted partial sequence reconstruction and characterization of repetitive dna, making up about 30% of the genome. the results showed that the banana repeats are predominantly made of various types of ty1/copia and ty3/gypsy retroelements representing  <dig> and 7% of the genome respectively. on the other hand, dna transposons were found to be rare. in addition to new families of transposable elements, two new satellite repeats were discovered and found useful as cytogenetic markers. to help in banana sequence annotation, a specific musa repeat database was created, and its utility was demonstrated by analyzing the repeat composition of  <dig> genomic bac clones.


CONCLUSIONS
a low-depth  <dig> sequencing of banana nuclear genome provided the largest amount of dna sequence data available until now for musa and permitted reconstruction of most of the major types of dna repeats. the information obtained in this study improves the knowledge of the long-range organization of banana chromosomes, and provides sequence resources needed for repeat masking and annotation during the musa genome sequencing project. it also provides sequence data for isolation of dna markers to be used in genetic diversity studies and in marker-assisted selection.

