BACKGROUND
many highly beneficial traits  have been transferred into crops through crosses with their wild relatives. the  <dig> recognized species of tomato  are closely related to each other and wild species genes have been extensively used for improvement of the crop, solanum lycopersicum l. in addition, the lack of geographical barriers has permitted natural hybridization between s. lycopersicum and its closest wild relative solanum pimpinellifolium in ecuador, peru and northern chile. in order to better understand patterns of s. lycopersicum diversity, we sequenced  <dig> markers ranging in length from  <dig> to 1200 bp  in genotypes of s. lycopersicum and wild tomato species s. pimpinellifolium, solanum arcanum, solanum peruvianum, solanum pennellii and solanum habrochaites. between six and twelve genotypes were comparatively analyzed per marker. several of the markers had previously been hypothesized as carrying wild species alleles within s. lycopersicum, i.e., cryptic introgressions.


RESULTS
each marker was mapped with high confidence  to a single genomic location using blastn against tomato whole genome shotgun chromosomes  database. neighbor-joining trees showed high mean bootstrap support  for distinguishing red-fruited from green-fruited taxa for  <dig> of the markers. hybridization and parsimony splits networks, genomic map positions of markers relative to documented introgressions, and historical origins of accessions were used to interpret evolutionary patterns at nine markers with putatively introgressed alleles.


CONCLUSIONS
of the  <dig> genetic markers surveyed in this study, four were involved in linkage drag on chromosome  <dig> during introgression breeding, while alleles at five markers apparently originated from natural hybridization with s. pimpinellifolium and were associated with primitive genotypes of s. lycopersicum. the positive identification of introgressed genes within crop species such as s. lycopersicum will help inform conservation and utilization of crop germplasm diversity, for example, facilitating the purging of undesirable linkage drag or the exploitation of novel, favorable alleles.

cryptic introgressionlinkage dragbreedingdna sequencesolanum species

