BACKGROUND
pdz domains are one of the most promiscuous protein recognition modules that bind with short linear peptides and play an important role in cellular signaling. recently, few high-throughput techniques  have been applied to determine in-vitro binding specificity of pdz domains. currently, many computational methods are available to predict pdz-peptide interactions but they often provide domain specific models and/or have a limited domain coverage.


RESULTS
here, we composed the largest set of pdz domains derived from human, mouse, fly and worm proteomes and defined binding models for pdz domain families to improve the domain coverage and prediction specificity. for that purpose, we first identified a novel set of  <dig> pdz families, comprising of  <dig> pdz domains from aforementioned organisms, based on efficient clustering according to their sequence identity. for  <dig> pdz families, covering  <dig> pdz domains with available interaction data, we built specialized models using a support vector machine approach. the advantage of family-wise models is that they can also be used to determine the binding specificity of a newly characterized pdz domain with sufficient sequence identity to the known families. since most current experimental approaches provide only positive data, we have to cope with the class imbalance problem. thus, to enrich the negative class, we introduced a powerful semi-supervised technique to generate high confidence non-interaction data. we report competitive predictive performance with respect to state-of-the-art approaches.


CONCLUSIONS
our approach has several contributions. first, we show that domain coverage can be increased by applying accurate clustering technique. second, we developed an approach based on a semi-supervised strategy to get high confidence negative data. third, we allowed high order correlations between the amino acid positions in the binding peptides. fourth, our method is general enough and will easily be applicable to other peptide recognition modules such as sh <dig> domains and finally, we performed a genome-wide prediction for  <dig> human and  <dig> mouse pdz domains and uncovered novel interactions with biological relevance. we make all the predictive models and genome-wide predictions freely available to the scientific community.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pdz domain-peptide interactionsprotein recognition modulesprotein domain clusteringsemi-supervised learningsupport vector machinesissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2014

