BACKGROUND
propriospinal neurons, with axonal projections intrinsic to the spinal cord, have shown a greater regenerative response than supraspinal neurons after axotomy due to spinal cord injury . our previous work focused on the response of axotomized short thoracic propriospinal  neurons following a low thoracic sci  in the rat. the present investigation analyzes the intrinsic response of cervical propriospinal neurons having long descending axons which project into the lumbosacral enlargement, long descending propriospinal tract  axons. these neurons also were axotomized by t <dig> spinal injury in the same animals used in our previous study.


RESULTS
utilizing laser microdissection , qrt-pcr, and immunohistochemistry, we studied ldpt neurons  between 3-days, and 1-month following a low thoracic  spinal cord injury. we examined the response of  <dig> genes related to growth factors, cell surface receptors, apoptosis, axonal regeneration, and neuroprotection/cell survival. we found a strong and significant down-regulation of ~25% of the genes analyzed early after injury  with a sustained down-regulation in most instances. in the few genes that were up-regulated  post-axotomy, the expression for all but one was down-regulated by 2-weeks post-injury. we also compared the uninjured tps control neurons to the uninjured ldpt neurons used in this experiment for phenotypic differences between these two subpopulations of propriospinal neurons. we found significant differences in expression in  <dig> of the  <dig> genes examined between these two subpopulations of propriospinal neurons with ldpt neurons exhibiting a significantly higher base line expression for all but  <dig> of these genes compared to tps neurons.


CONCLUSIONS
taken collectively these data indicate a broad overall down-regulation in the genes examined, including genes for neurotrophic/growth factor receptors as well as for several growth factors. there was a lack of a significant regenerative response, with the exception of an up-regulation of atf <dig> and early up-regulation of hspb <dig> , both involved in cell stress/neuroprotection as well as axonal regeneration. there was no indication of a cell death response over the first month post-injury. in addition, there appear to be significant phenotypic differences between uninjured tps and ldpt neurons, which may partly account for the differences observed in their post-axotomy responses. the findings in this current study stand in stark contrast to the findings from our previous work on tps neurons. this suggests that different approaches will be needed to enhance the capacity for each population of propriospinal neuron to survive and undergo successful axonal regeneration after sci.

