BACKGROUND
cereulide is a cyclic dodecadepsipeptide ionophore, produced via non-ribosomal peptide synthetases , which in rare cases can lead to human death. early studies had shown that emetic toxin formation belongs to a homogeneous group of bacillus cereus sensu stricto and the genetic determinants of cereulide  are located on a 270-kb plasmid related to the bacillus anthracis virulence plasmid pxo <dig> 


RESULTS
the whole genome sequences from seven emetic isolates, including two b. cereus sensu stricto and five bacillus weihenstephanensis strains, were compared, and their inside and adjacent dna sequences of the cereulide biosynthesis gene clusters were analyzed. the sequence diversity was observed, which classified the seven emetic isolates into three clades. different genomic locations of the cereulide biosynthesis gene clusters, plasmid-borne and chromosome-borne, were also found. potential mobile genetic elements  were identified in the flanking sequences of the ces gene cluster in all three types. the most striking observation was the identification of a putative composite transposon, tnces, consisting of two copies of isces element  in opposite orientations flanking the ces gene cluster in emetic b. weihenstephanensis. the mobility of this element was tested by replacing the ces gene cluster by a kmr gene marker and performing mating-out transposition assays in escherichia coli. the results showed that tnces::km transposes efficiently  and produces 8-bp direct repeat  at the insertion sites.


CONCLUSIONS
cereulide biosynthesis gene clusters display sequence diversity, different genomic locations and association with mges, in which the transposition capacity of a resistant derivative of the composite transposon tnces in e. coli was demonstrated. further study is needed to look for appropriate genetic tools to analysis the transposition of tnces in bacillus spp. and the dynamics of other mges flanking the ces gene clusters.

cereulidebacillus cereusbacillus weihenstephanensistransposonplasmid

