BACKGROUND
spermatozoa are stored in the oviductal functional sperm reservoir in animals with internal fertilization, including zoologically distant classes such as pigs or poultry. they are held fertile in the reservoir for times ranging from a couple of days , to several weeks , before they are gradually released to fertilize the newly ovulated eggs. it is currently unknown whether females from these species share conserved mechanisms to tolerate such a lengthy presence of immunologically-foreign spermatozoa. therefore, global gene expression was assessed using cdna microarrays on tissue collected from the avian utero-vaginal junction , and the porcine utero-tubal junction  to determine expression changes after mating  or in vivo cloacal/cervical infusion of sperm-free seminal fluid /seminal plasma .


RESULTS
in chickens, mating changed the expression of  <dig> genes and sf-infusion changed the expression of  <dig> genes, as compared to controls, with  <dig> genes being common to both treatments. in pigs, mating or sp-infusion changed the expressions of  <dig>  and  <dig>  genes, respectively, as compared to controls, while  <dig> genes were common to both treatments. the differentially expressed genes were significantly enriched for go categories related to immune system functions . the top  <dig> differentially expressed genes of each treatment in each animal class were analysed for gene ontology. in both pig and chicken, an excess of genes affecting local immune defence were activated, though frequently these were down-regulated. similar genes were found in both the chicken and pig, either involved in ph-regulation  or immune-modulation .


CONCLUSIONS
despite being phylogenetically distant, chicken and pig appear to share some gene functions for the preservation of viable spermatozoa in the female reservoirs.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
oviductsperm reservoirmicroarraybioinformaticschickenpigsvenska forskningsrådet formas 221-2011-512forss378091issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

