BACKGROUND
chitin, the second most abundant biopolymer on earth after cellulose, is found in probably all fungi, many animals , several protists and a few algae, playing an essential role in the development of many of them. this polysaccharide is produced by type  <dig> glycosyltransferases, called chitin synthases . there are several contradictory classifications of chs isoenzymes and, as regards their evolutionary history, their origin and diversity is still a matter of debate.


RESULTS
a genome-wide analysis resulted in the detection of more than eight hundred putative chitin synthases in proteomes associated with about  <dig> genomes. phylogenetic analyses were performed with special care to avoid any pitfalls associated with the peculiarities of these sequences . this allowed us to revise and unify the fungal chs classification and to study the evolutionary history of the chs multigenic family. this update has the advantage of being user-friendly due to the development of a dedicated website , and it includes any correspondences with previously published classifications and mutants. concerning the evolutionary history of chs, this family has mainly evolved via duplications and losses. however, it is likely that several horizontal gene transfers  also occurred in eukaryotic microorganisms and, even more surprisingly, in bacteria.


CONCLUSIONS
this comprehensive multi-species analysis contributes to the classification of fungal chs, in particular by optimizing its robustness, consensuality and accessibility. it also highlights the importance of hgt in the evolutionary history of chs and describes bacterial chs genes for the first time. many of the bacteria that have acquired a chitin synthase are plant pathogens . whether they are able to produce a chitin exopolysaccharide or secrete chitooligosaccharides requires further investigation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chitin synthasebacteriaevolutionclassificationhorizontal gene transferfungiissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

