BACKGROUND
after a volcano erupts, a lake may form in the cooled crater and become an isolated aquatic ecosystem. this makes fishes in crater lakes informative for understanding sympatric evolution and ecological diversification in barren environments. from a geological and limnological perspective, such research offers insight about the process of crater lake ecosystem establishment and speciation. in the present study we use genetic and coalescence approaches to infer the colonization history of midas cichlid fishes  that inhabit a very young crater lake in nicaragua-the ca.  <dig> year-old lake apoyeque. this lake holds two sympatric, endemic morphs of midas cichlid: one with large, hypertrophied lips  and another with thin lips. here we test the associated ecological, morphological and genetic diversification of these two morphs and their potential to represent incipient speciation.


RESULTS
gene coalescence analyses  suggest that crater lake apoyeque was colonized in a single event from the large neighbouring great lake managua only about  <dig> years ago. this founding in historic times is also reflected in the extremely low nuclear and mitochondrial genetic diversity in apoyeque. we found that sympatric adult thin- and thick-lipped fishes occupy distinct ecological trophic niches. diet, body shape, head width, pharyngeal jaw size and shape and stable isotope values all differ significantly between the two lip-morphs. the eco-morphological features pharyngeal jaw shape, body shape, stomach contents and stable isotopes  all show a bimodal distribution of traits, which is compatible with the expectations of an initial stage of ecological speciation under disruptive selection. genetic differentiation between the thin- and thick-lipped population is weak at mtdna sequence  and absent at nuclear microsatellite loci .


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides empirical evidence of eco-morphological differentiation occurring very quickly after the colonization of a new and vacant habitat. exceptionally low levels of neutral genetic diversity and inference from coalescence indicates that the midas cichlid population in apoyeque is much younger  than the crater itself . this suggests either that the crater remained empty for many hundreds of years after its formation or that remnant volcanic activity prevented the establishment of a stable fish population during the early life of the crater lake. based on our findings of eco-morphological variation in the apoyeque midas cichlids, and known patterns of adaptation in midas cichlids in general, we suggest that this population may be in a very early stage of speciation , promoted by disruptive selection and ecological diversification.

