BACKGROUND
dna rearrangement events have been widely studied in comparative genomic for many years. the importance of these events resides not only in the study about relatedness among different species, but also to determine the mechanisms behind evolution. although there are many methods to identify genome-rearrangements , the refinement of their borders has become a huge challenge. until now no accepted method exists to achieve accurate fine-tuning: i.e. the notion of breakpoint  is still an open issue, and despite repeated regions are vital to understand evolution they are not taken into account in most of the gr detection and refinement methods.

methods and 
RESULTS
we propose a method to refine the borders of gr including repeated regions. instead of removing these repetitions to facilitate computation, we take advantage of them using a consensus alignment sequence of the repeated region in between two blocks. using the concept of identity vectors for synteny blocks  and repetitions, a finite state machine is designed to detect transition points in the difference between such vectors. the method does not force the bp to be a region or a point but depends on the alignment transitions within the sbs and repetitions.


CONCLUSIONS
the accurate definition of the borders of sb and repeated genomic regions and consequently the detection of bp might help to understand the evolutionary model of species. in this manuscript we present a new proposal for such a refinement. features of the sbs borders and bps are different and fit with what is expected. sbs with more diversity in annotations and bps short and richer in dna replication and stress response, which are strongly linked with rearrangements.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
synteny blockcomputational synteny blockbreakpointrefinement6th solbio international conference  <dig>  soibio 2016riviera maya, mexico 22- <dig> april  <dig> http://www.soibio.org/en/icmexico2016issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

