BACKGROUND
species showing complex life cycles provide excellent opportunities to study the genetic associations between life cycle stages, as selective pressures may differ before and after metamorphosis. the european eel presents a complex life cycle with two metamorphoses, a first metamorphosis from larvae into glass eels  and a second metamorphosis into silver eels . we tested the hypothesis that different genes and gene pathways will be under selection at different life stages when comparing the genetic associations between glass eels and silver eels.


RESULTS
we used two sets of markers to test for selection: first, we genotyped individuals using a panel of  <dig> coding-gene single nucleotide polymorphisms  developed in american eel; second, we investigated selection at the genome level using a total of  <dig>  rad-sequencing generated snps widely distributed across the genome. using the rad approach, outlier tests identified a total of  <dig>  potentially selected snps. functional annotation analysis identified signal transduction pathways as the most over-represented group of genes, including mapk/erk signalling, calcium signalling and gnrh  signalling. many of the over-represented pathways were related to growth, while others could result from the different conditions that eels inhabit during their life cycle.


CONCLUSIONS
the observation of different genes and gene pathways under selection when comparing glass eels vs. silver eels supports the adaptive decoupling hypothesis for the benefits of metamorphosis. partitioning the life cycle into discrete morphological phases may be overall beneficial since it allows the different life stages to respond independently to their unique selection pressures. this might translate into a more effective use of food and niche resources and/or performance of phase-specific tasks .

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
adaptative decoupling hypothesiscomplex life cyclesmetamorphosisrad sequencingselectionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

