BACKGROUND
variation in environment, management practices, nutrition or selection objectives has led to a variety of different choices being made in the use of genetic material between countries. differences in genome-level homozygosity between countries may give rise to regions that result in inbreeding depression to differ. the objective of this study was to characterize regions that have an impact on a runs of homozygosity  metric and estimate their association with the additive genetic effect of milk , fat  and protein yield  and calving interval  using australia  and united states  jersey cows.

methods
genotyped cows with phenotypes on my, fy and py  and ci  were used in a two-stage analysis. a roh statistic , which counts the frequency of a snp being in a roh of at least  <dig> mb was calculated across the genome. in the first stage, residuals were obtained from a model that accounted for the portion explained by the estimated breeding value. in the second stage, these residuals were regressed on roh4mb using a single marker regression model and a gradient boosted machine  algorithm. the relationship between the additive and roh4mb of a region was characterized based on the variance of  <dig> kb estimated genomic breeding values derived from a bayesian lasso analysis. phenotypes to determine roh4mb and additive effects were residuals from the two-stage approach and yield deviations, respectively.


RESULTS
associations between yield traits and roh4mb were found for regions on bta <dig>  bta <dig> and bta <dig> for the us population and bta <dig>  bta <dig>  bta <dig> for the au population. only one association  was found for ci and roh4mb for the us population. multiple potential epistatic interactions were characterized based on the gbm analysis. lastly, the covariance sign between roh4mb and additive snp effect of a region was heterogeneous across the genome.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified multiple genomic regions associated with roh4mb in us and au jersey females. the covariance of regions impacting roh4mb and the additive genetic effect were positive and negative, which provides evidence that the homozygosity effect is location dependent.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

