BACKGROUND
cultivated peanut or groundnut  is an important oilseed crop with an allotetraploid genome . both the low level of genetic variation within the cultivated gene pool and its polyploid nature limit the utilization of molecular markers to explore genome structure and facilitate genetic improvement. nevertheless, a wealth of genetic diversity exists in diploid arachis species , which represent a valuable gene pool for cultivated peanut improvement. interspecific populations have been used widely for genetic mapping in diploid species of arachis. however, an intraspecific mapping strategy was essential to detect chromosomal rearrangements among species that could be obscured by mapping in interspecific populations. to develop intraspecific reference linkage maps and gain insights into karyotypic evolution within the genus, we comparatively mapped the a- and b-genome diploid species using intraspecific f <dig> populations. exploring genome organization among diploid peanut species by comparative mapping will enhance our understanding of the cultivated tetraploid peanut genome. moreover, new sources of molecular markers that are highly transferable between species and developed from expressed genes will be required to construct saturated genetic maps for peanut.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  est-ssr  markers were developed by mining a tetraploid peanut est assembly including  <dig>  unigenes  derived from  <dig>  long-read  and  <dig>  short-read  sequences. a set of  <dig> ssr markers were also developed by mining  <dig>  genomic survey sequences of arachis. an ssr-based intraspecific linkage map was constructed using an f <dig> population derived from a cross between k  <dig>  and gkbspsc  <dig>  in the b-genome species a. batizocoi. a high degree of macrosynteny was observed when comparing the homoeologous linkage groups between a  and b  genomes. comparison of the a- and b-genome genetic linkage maps also showed a total of five inversions and one major reciprocal translocation between two pairs of chromosomes under our current mapping resolution.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings will contribute to understanding tetraploid peanut genome origin and evolution and eventually promote its genetic improvement. the newly developed est-ssr markers will enrich current molecular marker resources in peanut.

peanut ssrgenetic linkage mapintraspecific crossest

