BACKGROUND
endocytosis is regarded as a mechanism of attenuating the epidermal growth factor receptor  signaling and of receptor degradation. there is increasing evidence becoming available showing that breast cancer progression is associated with a defect in egfr endocytosis. in order to find related ribonucleic acid  regulators in this process, high-throughput imaging with fluorescent markers is used to visualize the complex egfr endocytosis process. subsequently a dedicated automatic image and data analysis system is developed and applied to extract the phenotype measurement and distinguish different developmental episodes from a huge amount of images acquired through high-throughput imaging. for the image analysis, a phenotype measurement quantifies the important image information into distinct features or measurements. therefore, the manner in which prominent measurements are chosen to represent the dynamics of the egfr process becomes a crucial step for the identification of the phenotype. in the subsequent data analysis, classification is used to categorize each observation by making use of all prominent measurements obtained from image analysis. therefore, a better construction for a classification strategy will support to raise the performance level in our image and data analysis system.


RESULTS
in this paper, we illustrate an integrated analysis method for egfr signalling through image analysis of microscopy images. sophisticated wavelet-based texture measurements are used to obtain a good description of the characteristic stages in the egfr signalling. a hierarchical classification strategy is designed to improve the recognition of phenotypic episodes of egfr during endocytosis. different strategies for normalization, feature selection and classification are evaluated.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of performance assessment clearly demonstrate that our hierarchical classification scheme combined with a selected set of features provides a notable improvement in the temporal analysis of egfr endocytosis. moreover, it is shown that the addition of the wavelet-based texture features contributes to this improvement. our workflow can be applied to drug discovery to analyze defected egfr endocytosis processes.

keywords
phenotype measurementimage analysiswavelet-based texture measurementhierarchical classificationegfr endocytosishigh throughputthe dutch cancer societyul 2006-3538graauw marjo de the dutch cancer societyul 2007-3860graauw marjo de eu fp7-metafightno 201862graauw marjo de eufp <dig> systems microscopy noe258068graauw marjo de ti pharma projectt3-107graauw marjo de the dutch organization for scientific researchnwo 911-02-022graauw marjo de horizon breakthroughnwo 93518003graauw marjo de centre for biomedical geneticshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004543china scholarship council issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

