BACKGROUND
the snake venom gland is a specialized organ, which synthesizes and secretes the complex and abundant toxin proteins. though gene expression in the snake venom gland has been extensively studied, the focus has been on the components of the venom. as far as the molecular mechanism of toxin secretion and metabolism is concerned, we still knew a little. therefore, a fundamental question being arisen is what genes are expressed in the snake venom glands besides many toxin components?


RESULTS
to examine extensively the transcripts expressed in the venom gland of deinagkistrodon acutus and unveil the potential of its products on cellular structure and functional aspects, we generated  <dig> expressed sequence tags  from a non-normalized cdna library. all ests were clustered into  <dig> clusters, of which  <dig> % of total ests belong to recognized toxin-coding sequences;  <dig> % are similar to cellular transcripts; and  <dig> % have no significant similarity to any known sequences. by analyzing cellular functional transcripts, we found high expression of some venom related genes and gland-specific genes, such as calglandulin ef-hand protein gene and protein disulfide isomerase gene. the transcripts of creatine kinase and nadh dehydrogenase were also identified at high level. moreover, abundant cellular structural proteins similar to mammalian muscle tissues were also identified. the phylogenetic analysis of two snake venom toxin families of group iii metalloproteinase and serine protease in suborder colubroidea showed an early single recruitment event in the viperids evolutionary process.


CONCLUSIONS
gene cataloguing and profiling of the venom gland of deinagkistrodon acutus is an essential requisite to provide molecular reagents for functional genomic studies needed for elucidating mechanisms of action of toxins and surveying physiological events taking place in the very specialized secretory tissue. so this study provides a first global view of the genetic programs for the venom gland of deinagkistrodon acutus described so far and an insight into molecular mechanism of toxin secreting.

all sequences data reported in this paper have been submitted into the public database .

