BACKGROUND
potassium  is an important nutrient ion in plant cells and plays crucial roles in many plant physiological and developmental processes. in the natural environment, k+ deficiency is a common abiotic stress that inhibits plant growth and reduces crop productivity. several microarray studies have been conducted on genome-wide gene expression profiles of rice during its responses to various stresses. however, little is known about the transcriptional changes in rice genes under low-k+ conditions.


RESULTS
we analyzed the transcriptomic profiles of rice roots in response to low-k+ stress. the roots of rice seedlings with or without low-k+ treatment were harvested after  <dig> h, and  <dig> and  <dig> d, and used for microarray analysis. the microarray data showed that many genes  were up-regulated or down-regulated more than  <dig> -fold during low-k+ treatment. go analysis indicated that the genes showing transcriptional changes were mainly in the following categories: metabolic process, membrane, cation binding, kinase activity, transport, and so on. we conducted a comparative analysis of transcriptomic changes between arabidopsis and rice under low-k+ stress. generally, the genes showing changes in transcription in rice and arabidopsis in response to low-k+ stress displayed similar go distribution patterns. however, there were more genes related to stress responses and development in arabidopsis than in rice. many auxin-related genes responded to k+ deficiency in rice, whereas jasmonic acid-related enzymes may play more important roles in k+ nutrient signaling in arabidopsis.


CONCLUSIONS
according to the microarray data, fewer rice genes showed transcriptional changes in response to k+ deficiency than to phosphorus  or nitrogen  deficiency. thus, transcriptional regulation is probably more important in responses to low-p and -n stress than to low-k+ stress. however, many genes in some categories  were markedly up-regulated, suggesting that they play important roles during k+ deficiency. comparative analysis of transcriptomic changes between arabidopsis and rice showed that monocots and dicots share many similar mechanisms in response to k+ deficiency, despite some differences. further research is required to clarify the differences in transcriptional regulation between monocots and dicots.

ricek+ deficiencymicroarraytranscriptome

