BACKGROUND
in recent years, the use and importance of predicted protein residue-residue contacts has grown considerably with demonstrated applications such as drug design, protein tertiary structure prediction and model quality assessment. nevertheless, reported accuracies in the range of 25-35% stubbornly remain the norm for sequence based, long range contact predictions on hard targets. this is in spite of a prolonged effort on behalf of the community to improve the performance of residue-residue contact prediction. a thorough study of the quality of current residue-residue contact predictions and the evaluation metrics used as well as an analysis of current methods is needed to stimulate further advancement in contact prediction and its application. such a study will better explain the quality and nature of residue-residue contact predictions generated by current methods and as a result lead to better use of this contact information.


RESULTS
we evaluated several sequence based residue-residue contact predictors that participated in the tenth critical assessment of protein structure prediction  experiment. the evaluation was performed using standard assessment techniques such as those used by the official casp assessors as well as two novel evaluation metrics . an in-depth analysis revealed that while most residue-residue contact predictions generated are not accurate at the residue level, there is quite a strong contact signal present when allowing for less than residue level precision. our residue-residue contact predictor, dncon, performed particularly well achieving an accuracy of 66% for the top l/ <dig> long range contacts when evaluated in a neighbourhood of size  <dig>  the coverage of residue-residue contact areas was also greater with dncon when compared to other methods. we also provide an analysis of dncon with respect to its underlying architecture and features used for classification.


CONCLUSIONS
our novel evaluation metrics demonstrate that current residue-residue contact predictions do contain a strong contact signal and are of better quality than standard evaluation metrics indicate. our method, dncon, is a robust, state-of-the-art residue-residue sequence based contact predictor and excelled under a number of evaluation schemes. it is available as a web service at http://iris.rnet.missouri.edu/dncon/.

protein residue-residue contactcontact predictiondeep learningdeep networks5- <dig> april  <dig> tenth annual mcbios conference. discovery in a sea of data columbia, mo, usa

