BACKGROUND
panax notoginseng  f.h. chen is one of the most highly valued medicinal plants in the world. the major bioactive molecules are triterpene saponins, which are also known as ginsenosides. however, its large genome size has hindered the assembly of a draft genome by whole genome sequencing. hence, genomic and transcriptomic details about p. notoginseng, especially its biosynthetic pathways and gene expression in different parts of the plant, have remained largely unknown until now.


RESULTS
in this study, rna sequencing of three different p. notoginseng tissues was performed using next generation dna sequencing. after assembling the high quality sequencing reads into  <dig>  unigenes, biochemical pathways were predicted and  <dig>  unigenes were assigned to  <dig> kegg pathways. among them,  <dig> unigenes were identified to be involved in triterpene saponin biosynthesis. in addition,  <dig> and  <dig> unigenes were predicted to encode cytochrome p450s and glycosyltransferases, respectively, based on the annotation results, some of which encode enzymes responsible for the conversion of the triterpene saponin backbone into different ginsenosides. in particular, one unigene predominately expressed in the root was annotated as cyp716a53v <dig>  which probably participates in the formation of protopanaxatriol from protopanaxadiol in p. notoginseng. the differential expression of this gene was further confirmed by real-time pcr.


CONCLUSIONS
we have established a global transcriptome dataset for p. notoginseng and provided additional genetic information for further genome-wide research and analyses. candidate genes involved in ginsenoside biosynthesis, including putative cytochrome p450s and glycosyltransferases were obtained. the transcriptomes in different plant tissues also provide invaluable resources for future study of the differences in physiological processes and secondary metabolites in different parts of p. notoginseng.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
panax notoginsengtranscriptomeginsenosidesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

