BACKGROUND
analysis of the escherichia coli collection of reference strains  for the presence of the gene locus clya, which encodes the pore-forming protein clya , revealed that a non-functional clya locus is common among certain extraintestinal pathogenic e. coli . in fact, all  <dig> ecor group b <dig> strains and several additionally examined extraintestinal pathogenic  and neonatal meningitis ) e. coli strains contained various Δclya alleles.


RESULTS
there are at least four different variants of Δclya, suggesting that such deletions in clya have arisen at more than one occasion. on the basis of this occurrence of the truncated clya genes, we considered that there may be a patho-adaptive selection for deletions in clya in extraintestinal pathogenic e. coli. in e. coli k- <dig> the clya gene has been viewed as “cryptic” since it is tightly silenced by the nucleoid structuring protein h-ns. we constructed a restored clya+ locus in derivatives of the upec strain  <dig> for further investigation of this hypothesis and, in particular, how the gene would be expressed. our results show that the level of clya+ expression is highly increased in the upec derivatives in comparison with the non-pathogenic e. coli k- <dig>  transcription of the clya+ gene was induced to even higher levels when the sfax regulatory protein was overproduced. the derivative with a restored clya+ locus displayed a somewhat slower growth than the parental upec strain  <dig> when a sub-inhibitory concentration of the antimicrobial peptide polymyxin b was added to the growth medium.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our findings show that the clya+ locus is expressed at an elevated level in the upec strain and we conclude that this is at least in part due to the effect of the sfax/papx transcriptional regulators.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
clya cytolysinpathoadaptive mutationsclya gene expressionextraintestinal escherichia colisfax regulatory proteinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

