BACKGROUND
micrornas  have been involved in regulation of diverse spectrum of plant development processes in many species. in cotton, few mirnas have been well characterised in floral organ development. floral organ, which should be finely tuned, is a crucial factor affecting the yield of cotton. therefore, it is well worth revealing the function of mirnas in regulation of floral organ development. here, we report the role of mirna156/ <dig> in regulation of floral organ size in cotton.


RESULTS
over-expression of the ghmirna <dig> precursor in cotton  resulted in smaller floral organs, fewer ovules and decreased seed production due to suppression of cell proliferation and cell elongation. five squamosa promoter-binding protein-like  genes were identified as targets of ghmirna <dig> using a rna ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cdna end approach, and the expression level of mir157-targeted ghspls decreased in the mir <dig> over-expression lines, indicating the presence of the mir157/spl axis in cotton. two mads-box genes, orthologs of atagl <dig> and sitdr <dig>  which are associated with floral organ development and reproductive production, were repressed in the mir <dig> over-expression lines. in addition, auxin-inducible genes were also down-regulated, and auxin signal visualized by a dr5::gus reporter was attenuated in the mir <dig> over-expression lines.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the mir157/spl axis controls floral organ growth and ovule production by regulating mads-box genes and auxin signal transduction. the work further elucidates the mechanism of floral organ development and provides helpful molecular basis for improvement of cotton yield.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
floral organ sizegossypium hirsutummads-box transcription factormir157spl geneovule productionthe fundamental research funds for the central universitiesno. 2013yb06zhang xianlong the program of introducing talents of discipline to universities in chinan <dig>  b14032zhang xianlong issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

