BACKGROUND
the anaerobic gram-positive bacterium propionibacterium acnes is a human skin commensal that resides preferentially within sebaceous follicles; however, it also exhibits many traits of an opportunistic pathogen, playing roles in a variety of inflammatory diseases such as acne vulgaris. to date, the underlying disease-causing mechanisms remain ill-defined and knowledge of p. acnes virulence factors remains scarce. here, we identified proteins secreted during anaerobic cultivation of a range of skin and clinical p. acnes isolates, spanning the four known phylogenetic groups.


RESULTS
culture supernatant proteins of p. acnes were separated by two-dimensional electrophoresis  and all coomassie-stained spots were subsequently identified by maldi mass spectrometry . a set of  <dig> proteins was secreted in the mid-exponential growth phase by the majority of strains tested. functional annotation revealed that many of these common proteins possess degrading activities, including glycoside hydrolases with similarities to endoglycoceramidase, β-n-acetylglucosaminidase and muramidase; esterases such as lysophospholipase and triacylglycerol lipase; and several proteases. other secreted factors included christie-atkins-munch-petersen  factors, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase , and several hypothetical proteins, a few of which are unique to p. acnes. strain-specific differences were apparent, mostly in the secretion of putative adhesins, whose genes exhibit variable phase variation-like sequence signatures.


CONCLUSIONS
our proteomic investigations have revealed that the p. acnes secretome harbors several proteins likely to play a role in host-tissue degradation and inflammation. despite a large overlap between the secretomes of all four p. acnes phylotypes, distinct differences between predicted host-tissue interacting proteins were identified, providing potential insight into the differential virulence properties of p. acnes isolates. thus, our data presents a rich resource for guiding much-needed investigations on p. acnes virulence factors and host interacting properties.

