BACKGROUND
it has been apparent in the last few years that small non coding rnas  play a very significant role in biological regulation. among these micrornas , 22- <dig> nucleotide small regulatory rnas, have been a major object of study as these have been found to be involved in some basic biological processes. so far about  <dig> mirnas have been identified in humans alone. however, it is expected that there may be many more mirnas encoded in the human genome. in this report, a "context-sensitive" hidden markov model  to represent mirna structures has been proposed and tested extensively. we also demonstrate how this model can be used in conjunction with filters as an ab initio method for mirna identification.


RESULTS
the probabilities of the cshmm model were estimated using known human mirna sequences. a classifier for mirnas based on the likelihood score of this "trained" cshmm was evaluated by:  cross-validation estimates using known human sequences,  predictions on a dataset of known mirnas, and  prediction on a dataset of non coding rnas. the cshmm is compared with two recently developed methods, mipred and cid-mirna. the results suggest that the cshmm performs better than these methods. in addition, the cshmm was used in a pipeline that includes filters that check for the presence of est matches and the presence of drosha cutting sites. this pipeline was used to scan and identify potential mirnas from the human chromosome  <dig>  it was also used to identify novel mirnas from small rna sequences of human normal leukocytes obtained by the deep sequencing  methodology. a total of  <dig> and  <dig> novel mirnas were predicted from chromosome  <dig> and from the small rna sequences respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
the results suggest that the cshmm is likely to be a useful tool for mirna discovery either for analysis of individual sequences or for genome scan. our pipeline, consisting of a cshmm and filters to reduce false positives shows promise as an approach for ab initio identification of novel mirnas.

18- <dig> january  <dig> the eighth asia pacific bioinformatics conference  bangalore, india

