BACKGROUND
thermosensitive genic male sterile  lines and photoperiod-sensitive genic male sterile  lines have been successfully used in hybridization to improve rice yields. however, the molecular mechanisms underlying male sterility transitions in most pgms/tgms rice lines are unclear. in the recently developed tgms-co <dig> line, the male sterility is based on co-suppression of a udp-glucose pyrophosphorylase gene , but further study is needed to fully elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved.


RESULTS
microarray-based transcriptome profiling of tgms-co <dig> and wild-type hejiang  <dig>  plants grown at high and low temperatures revealed that  <dig> probe sets representing  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in the two lines, under the two conditions, or both. environmental factors strongly affected global gene expression. some genes important for pollen development were strongly repressed in tgms-co <dig> at high temperature. more significantly, series-cluster analysis of differentially expressed genes  between tgms-co <dig> plants grown under the two conditions showed that low temperature induced the expression of a gene cluster. this cluster was found to be essential for sterility transition. it includes many meiosis stage-related genes that are probably important for thermosensitive male sterility in tgms-co <dig>  inter alia: arg/ser-rich domain -containing zinc finger proteins, polypyrimidine tract-binding proteins , dead/deah box rna helicases, zos , at least one polyadenylate-binding protein and some other rna recognition motif  domain-containing proteins involved in post-transcriptional processes, eukaryotic initiation factor 5b , ribosomal proteins , aminoacyl-trna synthetases , eukaryotic elongation factor tu  and a peptide chain release factor protein involved in translation. the differential expression of  <dig> degs that are important for pollen development, low temperature responses or tgms was validated by quantitative rt-pcr .


CONCLUSIONS
temperature strongly affects global gene expression and may be the common regulator of fertility in pgms/tgms rice lines. the identified expression changes reflect perturbations in the transcriptomic regulation of pollen development networks in tgms-co <dig>  findings from this and previous studies indicate that sets of genes involved in post-transcriptional and translation processes are involved in thermosensitive male sterility transitions in tgms-co <dig> 

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptome profilingtgmsmale sterility transitionmeiosis stageissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

