BACKGROUND
currently, most biomedical models exist in isolation. it is often difficult to reuse or integrate models or their components, in part because they are not modular. modular components allow the modeler to think more deeply about the role of the model and to more completely address a modeling project’s requirements. in particular, modularity facilitates component reuse and model integration for models with different use cases, including the ability to exchange modules during or between simulations. the heterogeneous nature of biology and vast range of wet-lab experimental platforms call for modular models designed to satisfy a variety of use cases. we argue that software analogs of biological mechanisms are reasonable candidates for modularization. biomimetic software mechanisms comprised of physiomimetic mechanism modules offer benefits that are unique or especially important to multi-scale, biomedical modeling and simulation.


RESULTS
we present a general, scientific method of modularizing mechanisms into reusable software components that we call physiomimetic mechanism modules . pmms utilize parametric containers that partition and expose state information into physiologically meaningful groupings. to demonstrate, we modularize four pharmacodynamic response mechanisms adapted from an in silico liver . we verified the modularization process by showing that drug clearance results from in silico experiments are identical before and after modularization. the modularized isl achieves validation targets drawn from propranolol outflow profile data. in addition, an in silico hepatocyte culture  is created. the ishc uses the same pmms and required no refactoring. the ishc achieves validation targets drawn from propranolol intrinsic clearance data exhibiting considerable between-lab variability. the data used as validation targets for pmms originate from both in vitro to in vivo experiments exhibiting large fold differences in time scale.


CONCLUSIONS
this report demonstrates the feasibility of pmms and their usefulness across multiple model use cases. the pharmacodynamic response module developed here is robust to changes in model context and flexible in its ability to achieve validation targets in the face of considerable experimental uncertainty. adopting the modularization methods presented here is expected to facilitate model reuse and integration, thereby accelerating the pace of biomedical research.

modularitymodel reusemodeling & simulationmechanismagent-based model

