BACKGROUND
r genes are a key component of genetic interactions between plants and biotrophic bacteria and are known to regulate resistance against bacterial invasion. the most common r proteins contain a nucleotide-binding site and a leucine-rich repeat  domain. some nbs-lrr genes in the soybean genome have also been reported to function in disease resistance. in this study, the number of nbs-lrr genes was found to correlate with the number of disease resistance quantitative trait loci  that flank these genes in each chromosome. nbs-lrr genes co-localized with disease resistance qtl. the study also addressed the functional redundancy of disease resistance on recently duplicated regions that harbor nbs-lrr genes and nbs-lrr gene expression in the bacterial leaf pustule -induced soybean transcriptome.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig> genes were determined to be putative nbs-lrr genes in the soybean genome. the number of nbs-lrr genes on each chromosome was highly correlated with the number of disease resistance qtl in the 2-mb flanking regions of nbs-lrr genes. in addition, the recently duplicated regions contained duplicated nbs-lrr genes and duplicated disease resistance qtl, and possessed either an uneven or even number of nbs-lrr genes on each side. the significant difference in nbs-lrr gene expression between a resistant near-isogenic line  and a susceptible nil after inoculation of xanthomonas axonopodis pv. glycines supports the conjecture that nbs-lrr genes have disease resistance functions in the soybean genome.


CONCLUSIONS
the number of nbs-lrr genes and disease resistance qtl in the 2-mb flanking regions of each chromosome was significantly correlated, and several recently duplicated regions that contain nbs-lrr genes harbored disease resistance qtl for both sides. in addition, nbs-lrr gene expression was significantly different between the blp-resistant nil and the blp-susceptible nil in response to bacterial infection. from these observations, nbs-lrr genes are suggested to contribute to disease resistance in soybean. moreover, we propose models for how nbs-lrr genes were duplicated, and apply ks values for each nbs-lrr gene cluster.

genome duplicationnbs-lrrsoybeantranscriptome analysis

