BACKGROUND
complement is a large protein network in plasma that is crucial for human immune defenses and a major cause of aberrant inflammatory reactions. the c <dig> convertase is a multi-molecular protease complex that catalyses the cleavage of native c <dig> into its biologically important products. so far, it has been difficult to study the exact molecular arrangement of c <dig> convertases, because their non-catalytic subunits  are covalently linked to biological surfaces through a reactive thioester. through development of a highly purified model system for c <dig> convertases, we here aim to provide insights into the surface-specific nature of these important protease complexes.


RESULTS
alternative pathway  c <dig> convertases were generated on small streptavidin beads that were coated with purified c3b molecules. site-specific biotinylation of c3b via the thioester allowed binding of c3b in the natural orientation on the surface. in the presence of factor b and factor d, these c3b beads could effectively convert c <dig>  conversion rates of surface-bound c3b were more than 100-fold higher than fluid-phase c3b, confirming the requirement of a surface. we determine that high surface densities of c3b, and its attachment via the thioester, are essential for c <dig> convertase formation. combining our results with molecular modeling explains how high c3b densities may facilitate intermolecular interactions that only occur on target surfaces. finally, we define two interfaces on c <dig> important for its recognition by surface-bound c <dig> convertases.


CONCLUSIONS
we establish a highly purified model that mimics the natural arrangement of c <dig> convertases on a surface. the developed model and molecular insights are essential to understand the molecular basis of deregulated complement activity in human disease and will facilitate future design of therapeutic interventions against these critical enzymes in inflammation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
innate immunityinflammatory diseasescomplementconvertase enzymesmulti-molecular proteasesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

