BACKGROUND
the sheep is an important model organism for many types of medically relevant research, but molecular genetic experiments in the sheep have been limited by the lack of knowledge about ovine gene sequences.


RESULTS
prior to our study, mrna sequences for only  <dig>  partial or complete ovine genes were publicly available. therefore, we developed a composite de novo transcriptome assembly method for next-generation sequence data to combine known ovine mrna and est sequences, mrna sequences from mouse and cow, and sequences assembled de novo from short read rna-seq data into a composite reference transcriptome, and identified transcripts from over  <dig> thousand previously undescribed ovine genes. gene expression analysis based on these data revealed substantially different expression profiles in standard versus delayed bone healing in an ovine tibial osteotomy model. hundreds of transcripts were differentially expressed between standard and delayed healing and between the time points of the standard and delayed healing groups. we used the sheep sequences to design quantitative rt-pcr assays with which we validated the differential expression of  <dig> genes that had been identified by rna-seq analysis. a number of clusters of characteristic expression profiles could be identified, some of which showed striking differences between the standard and delayed healing groups. gene ontology  analysis showed that the differentially expressed genes were enriched in terms including extracellular matrix, cartilage development, contractile fiber, and chemokine activity.


CONCLUSIONS
our results provide a first atlas of gene expression profiles and differentially expressed genes in standard and delayed bone healing in a large-animal model and provide a number of clues as to the shifts in gene expression that underlie delayed bone healing. in the course of our study, we identified transcripts of  <dig>  ovine genes, including  <dig>  genes for which no sequence information was previously available. this information will provide a basis for future molecular research involving the sheep as a model organism.

