BACKGROUND
sorghum  is ranked as the fifth most important grain crop and serves as a major food staple and fodder resource for much of the world, especially in arid and semi-arid regions. the recent surge in sorghum research is driven by its tolerance to drought/heat stresses and its strong potential as a bioenergy feedstock. completion of the sorghum genome sequence has opened new avenues for sorghum functional genomics. however, the availability of genetic resources, specifically mutant lines, is limited. chemical mutagenesis of sorghum germplasm, followed by screening for mutants altered in important agronomic traits, represents a rapid and effective means of addressing this limitation. induced mutations in novel genes of interest can be efficiently assessed using the technique known as targeting induced local lesion in genomes .


RESULTS
a sorghum mutant population consisting of  <dig>  lines was generated from the inbred line btx <dig> by treatment with the chemical agent ethyl methanesulfonate . numerous phenotypes with altered morphological and agronomic traits were observed from m <dig> and m <dig> lines in the field. a subset of  <dig> mutant lines was analyzed by tilling using four target genes. a total of five mutations were identified resulting in a calculated mutation density of 1/ <dig> kb. two of the mutations identified by tilling and verified by sequencing were detected in the gene encoding caffeic acid o-methyltransferase  in two independent mutant lines. the two mutant lines segregated for the expected brown midrib  phenotype, a trait associated with altered lignin content and increased digestibility.


CONCLUSIONS
tilling as a reverse genetic approach has been successfully applied to sorghum. the diversity of the mutant phenotypes observed in the field, and the density of induced mutations calculated from tilling indicate that this mutant population represents a useful resource for members of the sorghum research community. moreover, tilling has been demonstrated to be applicable for sorghum functional genomics by evaluating a small subset of the ems-induced mutant lines.

