BACKGROUND
it has been established that mammalian egg zona pellucida  glycoproteins are responsible for species-restricted binding of sperm to unfertilized eggs, inducing the sperm acrosome reaction, and preventing polyspermy. in mammals, zp apparently represents a barrier to heterospecific fertilization and thus probably contributes to reproductive isolation between species. the evolutionary relationships between some members of the tribe bovini are complex and highly debatable, particularly, those involving bos and bison species for which interspecific hybridization is extensively documented. because reproductive isolation is known to be a major precursor of species divergence, testing evolutionary patterns of zp glycoproteins may shed some light into the speciation process of these species. to this end, we have examined intraspecific and interspecific genetic variation of two zp genes  for seven representative species  from the bovini tribe, including five species from bos and bison, and two species each from genera bubalus and syncerus.


RESULTS
a pattern of low levels of intraspecific polymorphism and interspecific divergence was detected for the two sequenced fragments each for zp <dig> and zp <dig>  at intraspecific level, none of neutrality tests detected deviations from neutral equilibrium expectations for the two genes. several haplotypes in both genes were shared by multiple species from bos and bison.


CONCLUSIONS
here we argue that neither ancestral polymorphism nor introgressive hybridization alone can fully account for haplotype sharing among species from bos and bison, and that both scenarios have contributed to such a pattern of haplotype sharing observed here. additionally, codon-based tests revealed strong evidence for purifying selection in the zp <dig> coding haplotype sequences and weak evidence for purifying selection in the zp <dig> coding haplotype sequences. contrary to a general genetic pattern that genes or genomic regions contributing to reproductive isolation between species often evolve rapidly and show little or no gene flow between species, these results demonstrate that, particularly, those sequenced exons of the zp <dig> and the zp <dig> did not show any contribution to reproductive isolation between the bovine species studied here.

