BACKGROUND
throughout a long period of adaptation and selection, sheep have thrived in a diverse range of ecological environments. mongolian sheep is the common ancestor of the chinese short fat-tailed sheep. migration to different ecoregions leads to changes in selection pressures and results in microevolution. mongolian sheep and its subspecies differ in a number of important traits, especially reproductive traits. genome-wide intraspecific variation is required to dissect the genetic basis of these traits.


RESULTS
this research resequenced  <dig> short fat-tailed sheep breeds with a  <dig> -fold coverage of the sheep genome. we report more than  <dig> million single nucleotide polymorphisms and  <dig>  million indels and identify  <dig> genomic regions with reduced pooled heterozygosity or increased genetic distance to each other breed that represent likely targets for selection during the migration. these regions harbor genes related to developmental processes, cellular processes, multicellular organismal processes, biological regulation, metabolic processes, reproduction, localization, growth and various components of the stress responses. furthermore, we examined the haplotype diversity of  <dig> genomic regions involved in reproduction and found significant differences in tshr and prl gene regions among  <dig> sheep breeds.


CONCLUSIONS
our results provide useful genomic information for identifying genes or causal mutations associated with important economic traits in sheep and for understanding the genetic basis of adaptation to different ecological environments.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
sheepmicroevolutionwhole-genome resequencingselection signalreproductionshandong provincial modern agriculture industry technology system sheep industry innovation teamno. sats2012263wang jianmin the innovation research of agriculture and biology resourcesno. 2011186125wang jianmin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

