BACKGROUND
pedunculate oak, quercus robur is an abundant forest tree species that hosts a large and diverse community of beneficial ectomycorrhizal fungi , whereby ectomycorrhiza  formation is stimulated by mycorrhiza helper bacteria such as streptomyces sp. ach  <dig>  oaks typically grow rhythmically, with alternating root flushes  and shoot flushes . we explored the poorly understood mechanisms by which oaks integrate signals induced by their beneficial microbes and endogenous rhythmic growth at the level of gene expression. to this end, we compared transcript profiles of oak microcuttings at rf and sf during interactions with ach  <dig> alone and in combination with the basidiomycetous emf piloderma croceum.


RESULTS
the local root and distal leaf responses to the microorganisms differed substantially. more genes involved in the recognition of bacteria and fungi, defence and cell wall remodelling related transcription factors  were differentially expressed in the roots than in the leaves of oaks. in addition, interaction with ach  <dig> and p. croceum affected the expression of a higher number of genes during sf than during rf, including ach  <dig> elicited defence response, which was attenuated by co-inoculation with p. croceum in the roots during sf. genes encoding leucine-rich receptor-like kinases  and proteins , lrr containing defence response regulators, tfs from bzip, erf and wrky families, xyloglucan cell wall transglycolases/hydrolases and exordium proteins were differentially expressed in both roots and leaves of plants treated with ach  <dig>  only few genes, including specific rlks and tfs, were induced in both ach  <dig> and co-inoculation treatments.


CONCLUSIONS
treatment with ach  <dig> induces and maintains the expression levels of signalling genes encoding candidate receptor protein kinases and tfs and leads to differential expression of cell wall modification related genes in pedunculate oak microcuttings. local gene expression response to ach  <dig> alone and in combination with p. croceum are more pronounced when roots are in resting stages, possibly due to the fact that non growing roots re-direct their activity towards plant defence rather than growth.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
plant growth promoting rhizobacteria defencedisease resistancemycorrhizaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

