BACKGROUND
marginal zone  b cells play important roles in the early phases of humoral immune responses. in addition to possessing an inherent capacity to rapidly differentiate into antibody secreting cells, mz b cells also help to regulate the fate of both t-independent and t-dependent blood-borne antigens in the spleen. for t-dependent antigens, mz b cells bind igm-antigen complexes in a complement-dependent manner. once mz b cells bind igm-containing immune complexes , they transport them into b cell follicles for deposition onto follicular dendritic cells , an important component of secreted igm's ability to enhance adaptive immune responses. to further define the requirement for mz b cells in igm-ic deposition, mice deficient in the nf-κb protein p <dig>  which have been reported to lack mz b cells, were analyzed for their ability to trap igm-ic onto fdcs.


RESULTS
mice  deficient in p <dig>  had small numbers of mz b cells, as determined by cell surface phenotype and localization in the splenic mz. these cells bound high levels of igm-ic both in vivo and in vitro. subsequent to the binding of igm-ic by the mz b cells in p50-/- mice, small amounts of igm-ic were found localized on fdcs, suggesting that the mz b cells retained their ability to transport these complexes into splenic follicles. strikingly, mz b cells accumulated with age in p50-/- mice. by  <dig> months of age, p50-/- mice contained normal numbers of these cells as defined by cd21/cd <dig> profile and high level expression of cd1d, cd <dig>  and igm, and by their positioning around the marginal sinus. however, fdcs from these older p50-/- mice exhibited a reduced capacity to trap igm-ic and retain complement components.


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate that while the p <dig> component of the nf-κb transcription complex plays an important role in the early development of mz b cells, mz b cells can develop and accumulate in mice lacking this protein. these results highlight the interface between genetic deficiencies and age, and suggest that different transcription factors may play distinct roles in the development and maintenance of cell populations at different ages.

