BACKGROUND
the systemic form of porcine circovirus associated disease , also known as postweaning multisystemic wasting syndrome  was initially detected in the early 1990s. starting in  <dig>  the canadian swine industry experienced considerable losses due to pcvad, concurrent with a shift in genotype of porcine circovirus type  <dig> . objectives of the current study were to explore spatial characteristics of self-reported pcvad distribution in ontario between  <dig> and  <dig>  and to investigate the existence and nature of local spread.


RESULTS
the study included  <dig> swine herds from a large disease-monitoring project that included porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome  virus-positive herds identified by the diagnostic laboratory, and prrs virus-negative herds directly from the target population. herds were included if they had growing pigs present on-site and available geographical coordinates for the sampling site. furthermore, herds were defined as pcvad-positive if a producer reported an outbreak of circovirus associated disease, or as pcvad-negative if no outbreak was noted. spatial trend was investigated using generalized additive models and time to pcvad outbreak in a herd using cox's proportional hazard model; spatial and spatio-temporal clustering was explored using k-functions; and location of most likely spatial and spatio-temporal clusters was investigated using scan statistics. over the study period, the risk of reporting a pcvad-positive herd tended to be higher in the eastern part of the province after adjustment for herd prrs status . this was partly confirmed for spread . local spread also appeared to exist, as suggested by the tentative  existence of spatio-temporal clustering of pcvad and detection of a spatio-temporal cluster .


CONCLUSIONS
in ontario, pcvad has shown a general trend, spreading from east-to-west. we interpret the existence of spatio-temporal clustering as evidence of spatio-temporal aggregation of pcvad-positive cases above expectations and, together with the existence of spatio-temporal and spatial clusters, as suggestive of apparent local spread of pcvad. clustering was detected at small spatial and temporal scales. other patterns of spread could not be detected; however, survival rates in discrete ontario zones, as well as a lack of a clear spatial pattern in the most likely spatio-temporal clusters, suggest other between-herd transmission mechanisms.

