BACKGROUND
distance-based phylogeny inference methods first estimate evolutionary distances between every pair of taxa, then build a tree from the so-obtained distance matrix. these methods are fast and fairly accurate. however, they hardly deal with incomplete distance matrices. such matrices are frequent with recent multi-gene studies, when two species do not share any gene in analyzed data. the few existing algorithms to infer trees with satisfying accuracy from incomplete distance matrices have time complexity in o or more, where n is the number of taxa, which precludes large scale studies. agglomerative distance algorithms  are much faster, with time complexity in o which allows huge datasets and heavy bootstrap analyses to be dealt with. these algorithms proceed in three steps:  search for the taxon pair to be agglomerated,  estimate the lengths of the two so-created branches,  reduce the distance matrix and return to  until the tree is fully resolved. but available agglomerative algorithms cannot deal with incomplete matrices.


RESULTS
we propose an adaptation to incomplete matrices of three agglomerative algorithms, namely nj, bionj  <cit>  and mvr  <cit> . our adaptation generalizes to incomplete matrices the taxon pair selection criterion of nj , and combines this generalized criterion with that of addtree  <cit> . steps  and  are also modified, but o time complexity is kept. the performance of these new algorithms is studied with large scale simulations, which mimic multi-gene phylogenomic datasets. our new algorithms – named nj*, bionj* and mvr* – infer phylogenetic trees that are as least as accurate as those inferred by other available methods, but with much faster running times. mvr* presents the best overall performance. this algorithm accounts for the variance of the pairwise evolutionary distance estimates, and is well suited for multi-gene studies where some distances are accurately estimated using numerous genes, whereas others are poorly estimated  due to the low number  of sequenced genes being shared by both species.


CONCLUSIONS
our distance-based agglomerative algorithms nj*, bionj* and mvr* are fast and accurate, and should be quite useful for large scale phylogenomic studies. when combined with the sdm method  <cit>  to estimate a distance matrix from multiple genes, they offer a relevant alternative to usual supertree techniques  <cit> . binaries and all simulated data are downloadable from  <cit> .

