BACKGROUND
prostate epithelial cells accumulate a high level of aspartate that is utilized as a substrate for their unique function of production and secretion of enormously high levels of citrate. in most mammalian cells aspartate is synthesized; and, therefore is a non-essential amino acid. in contrast, in citrate-producing prostate cells, aspartate is an essential amino acid that must be derived from circulation. the prostate intracellular/extracellular conditions present a 40: <dig> concentration gradient. therefore, these cells must possess a plasma membrane-associated aspartate uptake transport process to achieve their functional activity. in earlier kinetic studies we identified the existence of a unique na+-dependent high-affinity l-aspartate transport process in rat prostate secretory epithelial cells. the present report is concerned with the identification of this putative l-aspartate transporter in rat and human prostate cells.


RESULTS
the studies show for the first time that eaac <dig> is expressed in normal rat prostate epithelial cells, in normal and hyperplastic human prostate glands, and in human malignant prostate cell lines. eaac <dig> expression and high-affinity l-aspartate transport are correspondingly down-regulated by eaac <dig> sirna knock down. exposure of prostate cells to physiological levels of prolactin or testosterone results in an up-regulation of eaac <dig> expression and a corresponding increase in the high-affinity transport of l-aspartate into the cells.


CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that eaac <dig> functions as the high-affinity l-aspartate transporter that is responsible for the uptake and accumulation of aspartate in prostate cells. in other cells , eaac <dig> has been reported to function as a glutamate transporter rather than as an aspartate transporter. the regulation of eaac <dig> expression and l-aspartate transport by testosterone and prolactin is consistent with their regulation of citrate production in prostate cells. the identification of eaac <dig> as the high-affinity l-aspartate transporter now permits studies to elucidate the mechanism of hormonal regulation of eaac <dig> gene expression, and to investigate the mechanism by which the cellular environment effects the functioning of eaac <dig> as an aspartate transporter or as a glutamate transporter.

