BACKGROUND
flavonoids are secondary metabolites that play significant roles in plant cells. in particular, polymethoxy flavonoids , including nobiletin, have been reported to exhibit various health-supporting properties such as anticancer, anti-inflammatory, and anti-pathogenic properties. however, it is difficult to utilize pmfs for medicinal and dietary use because plant cells contain small amounts of these compounds. biosynthesis of pmfs in plant cells is carried out by the methylation of hydroxyl groups of flavonoids by o-methyltransferases , and many kinds of fomts with different levels of substrate specificity and regioselectivity are cooperatively involved in this biosynthesis.


RESULTS
in this study, we isolated five genes encoding fomt  from citrus depressa, which is known to accumulate nobiletin in the peels of its fruits. the genes encoded mg2+-independent o-methyltransferases and showed high amino acid sequence similarity  with higher plant flavonoid o-methyltransferases. one of these genes is cdfomt <dig>  which was successfully expressed as a soluble homodimer enzyme in escherichia coli. the molecular mass of the recombinant cdfomt <dig> subunit was  <dig>  kda including a 6× histidine tag. the enzyme exhibited o-methyltransferase activity for quercetin, naringenin, -epicatechin, and equol using s-adenosyl-l-methionine  as a methyl donor, and its optimal ph and temperature were ph  <dig>  and 45 °c, respectively. the recombinant cdfomt <dig> demonstrated methylation activity for the 3-, 5-, 6-, and 7-hydroxyl groups of flavones, and  <dig> ′, <dig> -tetra-o-methylated quercetin was synthesized from quercetin as a final product of the whole cell reaction system. thus, cdfomt <dig> is a o-methyltransferase possessing a broad range of substrate specificity and regioselectivity for flavonoids.


CONCLUSIONS
five fomt genes were isolated from c. depressa, and their nucleotide sequences were determined. cdfomt <dig> was successfully expressed in e. coli cells, and the enzymatic properties of the recombinant protein were characterized. recombinant cdfomt <dig> indicated o-methyltransferase activity for many flavonoids and a broad regioselectivity for quercetin as a substrate. whole-cell biocatalysis using cdfomt <dig> expressed in e. coli cells was performed using quercetin as a substrate, and  <dig> ′, <dig> -tetramethylated quercetin was obtained as the final product.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
o-methyltransferaseflavonoids-adenosyl-l-methionine dependentcitrus depressanobiletinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

