BACKGROUND
mycosphaerella fijiensis, causative agent of the black sigatoka disease of banana, is considered the most economically damaging banana disease. despite its importance, the genetics of pathogenicity are poorly understood. previous studies have characterized polyketide pathways with possible roles in pathogenicity. to identify additional candidate pathogenicity genes, we compared the transcriptome of this fungus during the necrotrophic phase of infection with that during saprophytic growth in medium.


RESULTS
transcriptome analysis was conducted, and the functions of differentially expressed genes were predicted by identifying conserved domains, gene ontology  annotation and go enrichment analysis, carbohydrate-active enzymes  annotation, and identification of genes encoding effector-like proteins. the analysis showed that genes commonly involved in secondary metabolism have higher expression in infected leaf tissue, including genes encoding cytochrome p450s, short-chain dehydrogenases, and oxidoreductases in the 2-oxoglutarate and fe-dependent oxygenase superfamily. other pathogenicity-related genes with higher expression in infected leaf tissue include genes encoding salicylate hydroxylase-like proteins, hydrophobic surface binding proteins, cfem domain-containing proteins, and genes encoding secreted cysteine-rich proteins characteristic of effectors. more genes encoding amino acid transporters, oligopeptide transporters, peptidases, proteases, proteinases, sugar transporters, and proteins containing domain of unknown function   <dig> had higher expression in infected leaf tissue, while more genes encoding inhibitors of peptidases and proteinases had higher expression in medium. sixteen gene clusters with higher expression in leaf tissue were identified including clusters for the synthesis of a non-ribosomal peptide. a cluster encoding a novel fusicoccane was also identified. two putative dispensable scaffolds were identified with a large proportion of genes with higher expression in infected leaf tissue, suggesting that they may play a role in pathogenicity. for two other scaffolds, no transcripts were detected in either condition, and pcr assays support the hypothesis that at least one of these scaffolds corresponds to a dispensable chromosome that is not required for survival or pathogenicity.


CONCLUSIONS
our study revealed major changes in the transcriptome of mycosphaerella fijiensis, when associating with its host compared to during saprophytic growth in medium. this analysis identified putative pathogenicity genes and also provides support for the existence of dispensable chromosomes in this fungus.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mycosphaerella fijiensisblack sigatokatranscriptomeeffectorssecondary metabolismnon-ribosomal peptide synthasefusicoccanedomain of unknown function 3328salicylate hydroxylasedispensable chromosomedole food companyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000001national science foundationgraduate research fellowshipnoar roslyn d. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthtraining grantissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

