BACKGROUND
the unicellular cyanobacterium synechocystis sp. pcc  <dig> is a model microbe for studying biochemistry, genetics and molecular biology of photobiological processes. importance of this bacterium in basic and applied research calls for a systematic, genome-wide description of its transcriptional regulatory capacity. characteristic transcriptional responses to changes in the growth environment are expected to provide a scaffold for describing the synechocystis transcriptional regulatory network as well as efficient means for functional annotation of genes in the genome.


RESULTS
we designed, validated and used synechocystis genome-wide oligonucleotide  microarray  to study transcriptional activity of the cyanobacterial genome in response to sulfur  starvation. the microarray data were verified by quantitative rt-pcr. we made five main observations: 1) transcriptional changes upon sulfate starvation were relatively moderate, but significant and consistent with growth kinetics; 2) s acquisition genes encoding for a high-affinity sulfate transporter were significantly induced, while decreased transcription of genes for phycobilisome, photosystems i and ii, cytochrome b6/f, and atp synthase indicated reduced light-harvesting and photosynthetic activity; 3) s starvation elicited transcriptional responses associated with general growth arrest and stress; 4) a large number of genes regulated by s availability encode hypothetical proteins or proteins of unknown function; 5) hydrogenase structural and maturation accessory genes were not identified as differentially expressed, even though increased hydrogen evolution was observed.


CONCLUSIONS
the expression profiles recorded by using this oligonucleotide-based microarray platform revealed that during transition from the condition of plentiful s to s starvation, synechocystis undergoes coordinated transcriptional changes, including changes in gene expression whose products are involved in sensing nutrient limitations and tuning bacterial metabolism. the transcriptional profile of the nutrient starvation was dominated by a decrease in abundances of many transcripts. however, these changes were unlikely due to the across-the-board, non-specific shut down of transcription in a condition of growth arrest. down-regulation of transcripts encoding proteins whose function depends on a cellular s status indicated that the observed repression has a specific regulatory component. the repression of certain s-related genes was paralleled by activation of genes involved in internal and external s scavenging.

