BACKGROUND
adhesiveness to intestinal epithelium, beneficial immunomodulating effects and the production of pathogen-inhibitory compounds are generally considered as beneficial characteristics of probiotic organisms. we showed the potential health-promoting properties and the mechanisms of probiotic action of seven swine intestinal lactobacillus amylovorus isolates plus the type strain  by investigating their adherence to porcine intestinal epithelial cells  and mucus as well as the capacities of the strains to i) inhibit the adherence of escherichia coli to ipec- <dig> cells, ii) to produce soluble inhibitors against intestinal pathogens and iii) to induce immune signaling in dendritic cells . moreover, the role of the l. amylovorus surface  –layers - symmetric, porous arrays of identical protein subunits present as the outermost layer of the cell envelope - in adherence to ipec- <dig> cells was assessed using a novel approach which utilized purified cell wall fragments of the strains as carriers for the recombinantly produced s-layer proteins.


RESULTS
three of the l. amylovorus strains studied adhered to ipec- <dig> cells, while four strains inhibited the adherence of e. coli, indicating additional mechanisms other than competition for binding sites being involved in the inhibition. none of the strains bound to porcine mucus. the culture supernatants of all of the strains exerted inhibitory effects on the growth of e. coli, salmonella, listeria and yersinia, and a variable, strain-dependent induction was observed of both pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in human dcs. l. amylovorus dsm  <dig> was shown to carry two s-layer-like proteins on its surface in addition to the major s-layer protein slpa. in contrast to expectations, none of the major s-layer proteins of the ipec- <dig> -adhering strains mediated bacterial adherence.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated adhesive and significant pathogen inhibitory efficacies among the swine intestinal l. amylovorus strains studied, pointing to their potential use as probiotic feed supplements, but no independent role could be demonstrated for the major s-layer proteins in adherence to epithelial cells. the results indicate that many intestinal bacteria may coexist with and confer benefits to the host by mechanisms not attributable to adhesion to epithelial cells or mucus.

s-layerlactobacillusadhesionipec-1dendritic cell

