BACKGROUND
psorophora mosquitoes are exclusively found in the americas and have been associated with transmission of encephalitis and west nile fever viruses, among other arboviruses. mosquito salivary glands represent the final route of differentiation and transmission of many parasites. they also secrete molecules with powerful pharmacologic actions that modulate host hemostasis, inflammation, and immune response. here, we employed next generation sequencing and proteome approaches to investigate for the first time the salivary composition of a mosquito member of the psorophora genus. we additionally discuss the evolutionary position of this mosquito genus into the culicidae family by comparing the identity of its secreted salivary compounds to other mosquito salivary proteins identified so far.


RESULTS
illumina sequencing resulted in  <dig> , <dig> sequence reads, which were assembled into  <dig>  contigs. all families were classified according to their in silico-predicted function/ activity. annotation of these sequences allowed classification of their products into  <dig> salivary protein families, twenty  of which were confirmed by our subsequent proteome analysis. two protein families were deorphanized from aedes and one from ochlerotatus, while four protein families were described as novel to psorophora genus because they had no match with any other known mosquito salivary sequence. several protein families described as exclusive to culicines were present in psorophora mosquitoes, while we did not identify any member of the protein families already known as unique to anophelines. also, the psorophora salivary proteins had better identity to homologs in aedes , followed by ochlerotatus , culex , and anopheles , respectively.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first sialome  catalog of salivary proteins from a psorophora mosquito, which may be useful for better understanding the lifecycle of this mosquito and the role of its salivary secretion in arboviral transmission.

