BACKGROUND
the new world screwworm, cochliomyia hominivorax, is a devastating pest of livestock endemic to subtropical and tropical regions of the western hemisphere. the larvae of this species feed on the tissue of living animals, including man, and can cause death if untreated. over 60 years ago, the sterile insect technique  was developed with the aim of eradicating this pest, initially from florida but subsequently from all of north and central america. from the outset it was appreciated that sit would be more efficient if only sterile males were released in the field, but this was not possible until now.


RESULTS
here, we report on the development and evaluation of the first sexing strains of c. hominivorax that produce only males when raised on diet without tetracycline. transgenic lines have been developed that possess a tetracycline repressible female-lethal genetic system. ten of these lines show high female lethality at the late larval/pupal stages and three of them present dominant female lethality. most of the lines were comparable to the wild type parental strain in several fitness parameters that are relevant to mass rearing in a production facility. further, three lines performed well in male mating success and male competition assays, suggesting they would be sexually competitive in the field. consequently, one transgenic line has been selected by the new world screwworm program for evaluation under mass rearing conditions.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the promising characteristics of the selected sexing strains may contribute to reduce production costs for the existing eradication program and provide more efficient population suppression, which should make a genetic control program more economical in regions were c. hominivorax remains endemic.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
new world screwwormsterile insect techniquettatransformermale-onlygenetic controlhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100005825national institute of food and agriculture2011-33522-30730scott maxwell j. panama-united states commission for the eradication and prevention of screwworm  01-15scott maxwell j. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007917agricultural research service59-6205-3-001scott maxwell j. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

