BACKGROUND
escherichia coli strains lacking the phosphoenolpyruvate: carbohydrate phosphotransferase system , which is the major bacterial component involved in glucose transport and its phosphorylation, accumulate high amounts of phosphoenolpyruvate that can be diverted to the synthesis of commercially relevant products. however, these strains grow slowly in glucose as sole carbon source due to its inefficient transport and metabolism. strain pb <dig>  with 400% increased growth rate, was isolated after a 120 hours adaptive laboratory evolution process for the selection of faster growing derivatives in glucose. analysis of the genetic changes that occurred in the pb <dig> strain that lacks pts will allow a better understanding of the basis of its growth adaptation and, therefore, in the design of improved metabolic engineering strategies for enhancing carbon diversion into the aromatic pathways.


RESULTS
whole genome analyses using two different sequencing methodologies: the roche nimblegen inc. comparative genome sequencing technique, and high throughput sequencing with illumina inc. gaiix, allowed the identification of the genetic changes that occurred in the pb <dig> strain. both methods detected  <dig> non-synonymous and  <dig> synonymous point mutations. several non-synonymous mutations mapped in regulatory genes  and in other putative regulatory loci . in addition, a chromosomal deletion of  <dig>  bp was detected that removed  <dig> genes, among them, the rpph, muth and galr genes. characterization of some of these mutated and deleted genes with their functions and possible functions, are presented.


CONCLUSIONS
the deletion of the contiguous rpph, muth and galr genes that occurred simultaneously, is apparently the main reason for the faster growth of the evolved pb <dig> strain. in support of this interpretation is the fact that inactivation of the rpph gene in the parental pb <dig> strain substantially increased its growth rate, very likely by increasing glycolytic mrna genes stability. furthermore, galr inactivation allowed glucose transport by galp into the cell. the deletion of muth in an already stressed strain that lacks pts is apparently responsible for the very high mutation rate observed.

pts systemresequencinglaboratory evolutionmutationdeletionadaptationrpphglycolysis

