BACKGROUND
next generation dna sequencing  and genome mining of actinomycetes and other microorganisms is currently one of the most promising strategies for the discovery of novel bioactive natural products, potentially revealing novel chemistry and enzymology involved in their biosynthesis. this approach also allows rapid insights into the biosynthetic potential of microorganisms isolated from unexploited habitats and ecosystems, which in many cases may prove difficult to culture and manipulate in the laboratory. streptomyces leeuwenhoekii  was isolated from the hyper-arid high-altitude atacama desert in chile and shown to produce novel polyketide antibiotics.


RESULTS
here we present the de novo sequencing of the s. leeuwenhoekii linear chromosome  and two extrachromosomal replicons, the circular psle <dig>  and the linear psle <dig> , all in single contigs, obtained by combining pacific biosciences smrt  and illumina miseq technologies. we identified the biosynthetic gene clusters for chaxamycin, chaxalactin, hygromycin a and desferrioxamine e, metabolites all previously shown to be produced by this strain  and an additional  <dig> putative gene clusters for specialised metabolites. as well as gene clusters for polyketides and non-ribosomal peptides, we also identified three gene clusters encoding novel lasso-peptides.


CONCLUSIONS
the s. leeuwenhoekii genome contains  <dig> gene clusters apparently encoding the biosynthesis of specialised metabolites, most of them completely novel and uncharacterised. this project has served to evaluate the current state of ngs for efficient and effective genome mining of high gc actinomycetes. the pacbio technology now permits the assembly of actinomycete replicons into single contigs with >99 % accuracy. the assembled illumina sequence permitted not only the correction of omissions found in gc homopolymers in the pacbio assembly  but it also allowed us to obtain the sequences of the termini of the chromosome and of a linear plasmid that were not assembled by pacbio. we propose an experimental pipeline that uses the illumina assembled contigs, in addition to just the reads, to complement the current limitations of the pacbio sequencing technology and assembly software.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
second/third next generation sequencingillumina miseqpacific biosciences pacbio smrtchaxamycinchaxalactinlasso peptidegenome miningissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

