BACKGROUND
mitochondrial genomes  of multicellular animals  with bilateral symmetry  are compact and usually carry  <dig> protein-coding genes for subunits of three respiratory complexes and atp synthase. however, occasionally reported exceptions to this typical mtdna organization prompted speculation that, as in protists and plants, some bilaterian mitogenomes may continue to lose their canonical genes, or may even acquire new genes. to shed more light on this phenomenon, a pcr-based screen was conducted to assess fast-evolving mtdnas of apocritan hymenoptera  for genomic rearrangements that might be associated with the modification of mitochondrial gene content.


RESULTS
sequencing of segmental inversions, identified in the screen, revealed that the cytochrome oxidase subunit ii gene  of campsomeris   was split into two genes coding for coxiia and coxiib. the coxii-derived complementary polypeptides apparently form a heterodimer, have reduced hydrophobicity compared with the majority of mitogenome-encoded cox subunits, and one of them, coxiib, features increased content of cys residues. analogous cox <dig> fragmentation is known only in two clades of protists , where it has been associated with piecewise relocation of this gene into the nucleus. in campsomeris mtdna, cox2a and cox2b loci are separated by a 3-kb large cluster of several antiparallel overlapping orfs, one of which, qnu, seems to encode a nuclease that may have played a role in cox <dig> fission.


CONCLUSIONS
although discontinuous mitochondrial protein genes encoding fragmented, complementary polypeptides are known in protists and some plants, split cox <dig> of campsomeris is the first case of such a gene arrangement found in animals. the reported data also indicate that bilaterian animal mitogenomes may be carrying lineage-specific genes more often than previously thought, and suggest a homing endonuclease-based mechanism for insertional mitochondrial gene fission.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genome evolutionmitochondrial gene fissionhorizontal gene transferhoming nucleasecampsomerishymenopteraissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

