BACKGROUND
the metabolism of bacterial peptidoglycan is a dynamic process, synthases and cleavage enzymes are functionally coordinated. lytic transglycosylase enzymes  are part of multienzyme complexes which regulate bacterial division and elongation. lts are also involved in peptidoglycan turnover and in macromolecular transport systems. despite their central importance, no lts have been identified in the human pathogen streptococcus pneumoniae. we report the identification of the first putative lt enzyme in s. pneumoniae and discuss its role in pneumococcal peptidoglycan metabolism.


RESULTS
homology searches of the pneumococcal genome allowed the identification of a new domain putatively involved in peptidoglycan cleavage . this sequence has been found exclusively in gram-positive bacteria and gene clusters containing pecace are conserved among streptococcal species. the pecace domain is, in some instances, found in association with other domains known to catalyze peptidoglycan hydrolysis.


CONCLUSIONS
a new domain, pecace, putatively involved in peptidoglycan hydrolysis has been identified in s. pneumoniae. the probable enzymatic activity deduced from the detailed analysis of the amino acid sequence suggests that the pecace domain may proceed through a lt-type or goose lyzosyme-type cleavage mechanism. the pecace function may differ largely from the other hydrolases already identified in the pneumococcus: lyta, lytb, lytc, cbpd and pcsb. the multimodular architecture of proteins containing the pecace domain is another example of the many activities harbored by peptidoglycan hydrolases, which is probably required for the regulation of peptidoglycan metabolism. the release of new bacterial genomes sequences will probably add new members to the five groups identified so far in this work, and new groups could also emerge. conversely, the functional characterization of the unknown domains mentioned in this work can now become easier, since bacterial peptidoglycan is proposed to be the substrate.

