BACKGROUND
differences between cattle production systems can influence the nutritional and sensory characteristics of beef, in particular its fatty acid  composition. as beef products derived from pasture-based systems can demand a higher premium from consumers, there is a need to understand the biological characteristics of pasture produced meat and subsequently to develop methods of authentication for these products. here, we describe an approach to authentication that focuses on differences in the transcriptomic profile of muscle from animals finished in different systems of production of practical relevance to the irish beef industry. the objectives of this study were to identify a panel of differentially expressed  genes/networks in the muscle of cattle raised outdoors on pasture compared to animals raised indoors on a concentrate based diet and to subsequently identify an optimum panel which can classify the meat based on a production system.


RESULTS
a comparison of the muscle transcriptome of outdoor/pasture-fed and indoor/concentrate-fed cattle resulted in the identification of  <dig> de genes. functional analysis of these genes identified two significant networks , both of which are involved in fa metabolism. the expression of selected up-regulated genes in the outdoor/pasture-fed animals correlated positively with the total n- <dig> fa content of the muscle. the pathway and network analysis of the de genes indicate that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor  and fyn/ampk could be implicit in the regulation of these alterations to the lipid profile. in terms of authentication, the expression profile of three de genes  could almost completely separate the samples based on production system  in this context.


CONCLUSIONS
the majority of de genes between muscle of the outdoor/pasture-fed and concentrate-fed cattle were related to lipid metabolism and in particular β-oxidation. in this experiment the combined expression profiles of alad, eif4ebp <dig> and npnt were optimal in classifying the muscle transcriptome based on production system. given the overall lack of comparable studies and variable concordance with those that do exist, the use of transcriptomic data in authenticating production systems requires more exploration across a range of contexts and breeds.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
beef authenticationβ-oxidationepigeneticsfatty acidconcentratespastureppartranscriptomehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001584department of agriculture, food and the marineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

