BACKGROUND
symbioses throughout the animal kingdom are known to extend physiological and ecological capabilities to hosts. insect-microbe associations are extremely common and are often related to novel niche exploitation, fitness advantages, and even speciation events. these phenomena include expansions in host diet, detoxification of insecticides and toxins, and increased defense against pathogens. however, dissecting the contributions of individual groups of symbionts at the molecular level is often underexplored due to methodological and analytical limitations. termites are one of the best studied systems for physiological collaborations between host and symbiota; however, most work in lower termites  focuses on the eukaryotic members of this symbiotic consortium. here we present a metatranscriptomic analysis which provides novel insights into bacterial contributions to the holobiont of the eastern subterranean termite, reticulitermes flavipes, in the presence and absence of a fungal pathogen.


RESULTS
using a customized ribodepletion strategy, a metatranscriptome assembly was obtained representing the host termite as well as bacterial and protist symbiota. sequence data provide new insights into biosynthesis, catabolism, and transport of major organic molecules and ions by the gut consortium, and corroborate previous findings suggesting that bacteria play direct roles in nitrogen fixation, amino acid biosynthesis, and lignocellulose digestion. with regard to fungal pathogen challenge, a total of  <dig> differentially expressed candidate host and symbiont contigs were identified  including an upregulated bacterial amidohydrolase.


CONCLUSIONS
this study presents the most complete bacterial metatranscriptome from a lower termite and provides a framework on which to build a more complete model of termite-symbiont interactions including, but not limited to, digestion and pathogen defense.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
termitemetatranscriptomesymbiosismicrobial ecologyribo-depletionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100006974indiana academy of sciences2014-13peterson brittany f. entomological society of america monsanto graduate research grant,2014peterson brittany f. o. wayne rollins / orkin endowmentn/ascharf michael e. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

