BACKGROUND
we investigated parent-of-origin and allele-specific expression effects on obesity and hepatic gene expression in reciprocal crosses between the berlin fat mouse inbred line  and c57bl/6ncrl .


RESULTS
we found that f1-males with a bfmi mother developed  <dig>  times more fat mass on a high fat diet at  <dig> weeks than f1-males of a bfmi father. the phenotype was detectable from six weeks on and was preserved after cross-fostering. rna-seq data of liver provided evidence for higher biosynthesis and elongation of fatty acids  in obese male offspring of a bfmi mother versus lean offspring of a bfmi father. furthermore, fatty acid degradation  and the peroxisome pathway were impaired . the circadian rhythm was affected as well . among the highest up-regulated protein coding genes in obese males were acot <dig> , cyp4a <dig>  and cyp4a <dig> , which hydroxylize fatty acids and which are known to be increased in liver steatosis. obese males showed lower expression of the genetically imprinted and paternally expressed  <dig>  gene  and higher expression of the androgen receptor  gene . allelic imbalance was found for expression of atp-binding cassette transporter gene abca8b. several of the differentially expressed genes contain estrogen response elements.


CONCLUSIONS
parent-of-origin effects during gametogenesis and/or fetal development in an obese mother epigenetically modify the transcription of genes that lead to enhanced fatty acid synthesis and impair β-oxidation in the liver of male, but not female f <dig> offspring. down-regulation of peg <dig> could contribute to trigger this metabolic setting. at puberty, higher amounts of the androgen receptor and altered access to estrogen response elements in affected genes are likely responsible for male specific expression of genes that were epigenetically triggered. a suggestive lack of estrogen binding motifs was found for highly down-regulated genes in adult hepatocytes of obese f <dig> males .

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
allele-specific gene expressionallelic imbalancehigh fat dietimprintingpeg3circadian rhythmsex differencessex hormonesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

