BACKGROUND
spiders  are essential predators in every terrestrial ecosystem largely because they have evolved potent arsenals of silk and venom. spider silks are high performance materials made almost entirely of proteins, and thus represent an ideal system for investigating genome level evolution of novel protein functions. however, genomic level resources remain limited for spiders.


RESULTS
we de novo assembled a transcriptome for the western black widow  from deeply sequenced cdnas of three tissue types. our multi-tissue assembly contained ~ <dig>  unique transcripts, of which >  <dig>  were annotated by homology. comparing transcript abundance among the different tissues, we identified  <dig> silk gland-specific transcripts, including the few known silk fiber components . silk gland specific transcripts are enriched compared to the entire transcriptome in several functions, including protein degradation, inhibition of protein degradation, and oxidation-reduction. phylogenetic analyses of  <dig> gene families containing silk gland specific transcripts demonstrated novel gene expansions within silk glands, and multiple co-options of silk specific expression from paralogs expressed in other tissues.


CONCLUSIONS
we propose a transcriptional program for the silk glands that involves regulating gland specific synthesis of silk fiber and glue components followed by protecting and processing these components into functional fibers and glues. our black widow silk gland gene repertoire provides extensive expansion of resources for biomimetic applications of silk in industry and medicine. furthermore, our multi-tissue transcriptome facilitates evolutionary analysis of arachnid genomes and adaptive protein systems.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
de novo assemblyspidroingene familymolecular evolutionlatrodectus hesperusissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

