BACKGROUND
consumer-resource interactions constitute one of the most common types of interspecific antagonistic interaction. in natural communities, complex species interactions are likely to affect the outcomes of reciprocal co-evolution between consumers and their resource species. individuals face multiple enemies simultaneously, and consequently they need to adapt to several different types of enemy pressures. in this study, we assessed how protist predation affects the susceptibility of bacterial populations to infection by viral parasites, and whether there is an associated cost of defence on the competitive ability of the bacteria. as a study system we used serratia marcescens and its lytic bacteriophage, along with two bacteriovorous protists with distinct feeding modes: tetrahymena thermophila  and acanthamoeba castellanii . the results were further confirmed with another study system with pseudomonas and tetrahymena thermophila.


RESULTS
we found that selection by protist predators lowered the susceptibility to infections by lytic phages in serratia and pseudomonas. in serratia, concurrent selection by phages and protists led to lowered susceptibility to phage infections and this effect was independent from whether the bacteria shared a co-evolutionary history with the phage population or not. bacteria that had evolved with phages were overall more susceptible to phage infection  but they were less vulnerable to the phages they had co-evolved with than ancestral phages. selection by bacterial enemies was costly in general and was seen as a lowered fitness in absence of phages, measured as a biomass yield.


CONCLUSIONS
our results show the significance of multiple species interactions on pairwise consumer-resource interaction, and suggest potential overlap in defending against predatory and parasitic enemies in microbial consumer-resource communities. ultimately, our results could have larger scale effects on eco-evolutionary community dynamics.

keywords
antagonistic co-evolutionbacteriophageshost-parasite interactionmultiple species interactionphage resistancephage-host interactionpseudomonas fluorescens sbw25protistsserratia marcescenstrade-offissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

