BACKGROUND
deriving valid variant calling results from raw next-generation sequencing data is a particularly challenging task, especially with respect to clinical diagnostics and personalized medicine. however, when using classic variant calling software, the user usually obtains nothing more than a list of variants that pass the corresponding caller’s internal filters. any expected mutations , that have not been called by the software, need to be investigated manually.


RESULTS
bbcanalyzer  provides a novel visual approach to facilitate this step of time-consuming, manual inspection of common mutation sites. bbcanalyzer is able to visualize base counts at predefined positions or regions in any sequence alignment data that are available as bam files. thereby, the tool provides a straightforward solution for evaluating any list of expected mutations like hotspot mutations, or even whole regions of interest. in addition to an ordinary textual report, bbcanalyzer reports highly customizable plots. information on the counted number of bases, the reference bases, known mutations or polymorphisms, called mutations and base qualities is summarized in a single plot. by uniting this information in a graphical way, the user may easily decide on a variant being present or not – completely independent of any internal filters or frequency thresholds.


CONCLUSIONS
bbcanalyzer provides a unique, novel approach to facilitate variant calling where classical tools frequently fail to call. the r package is freely available at http://bioconductor.org. the local web application is available at additional file  <dig>  a documentation of the r package  as well as the web application  with detailed descriptions, examples of all input- and output elements, exemplary code as well as exemplary data are included. a video demonstrates the exemplary usage of the local web application .


additional file 3: supplement_ <dig>  video demonstrating the exemplary usage of the web application “bbcanalyzer”. 




electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
variant callingnext-generation sequencingvisualizationpersonalized medicinehotspot mutationsera-net transcanbmbf 01kt1401h2020634789issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

