BACKGROUND
the species neorhizobium galegae comprises two symbiovars that induce nodules on galega plants. strains of both symbiovars, orientalis and officinalis, induce nodules on the same plant species, but fix nitrogen only in their own host species. the mechanism behind this strict host specificity is not yet known. in this study, genome sequences of representatives of the two symbiovars were produced, providing new material for studying properties of n. galegae, with a special interest in genomic differences that may play a role in host specificity.


RESULTS
the genome sequences confirmed that the two representative strains are much alike at a whole-genome level. analysis of orthologous genes showed that n. galegae has a higher number of orthologs shared with rhizobium than with agrobacterium. the symbiosis plasmid of strain hambi  <dig> was shown to transfer by conjugation under optimal conditions. in addition, both sequenced strains have an acetyltransferase gene which was shown to modify the nod factor on the residue adjacent to the non-reducing-terminal residue. the working hypothesis that this gene is of major importance in directing host specificity of n. galegae could not, however, be confirmed.


CONCLUSIONS
strains of n. galegae have many genes differentiating them from strains of agrobacterium, rhizobium and sinorhizobium. however, the mechanism behind their ecological difference is not evident. although the final determinant for the strict host specificity of n. galegae remains to be identified, the gene responsible for the species-specific acetylation of the nod factors was identified in this study. we propose the name noet for this gene to reflect its role in symbiosis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
neorhizobium galegaegenomenod factornoetorthologsmass spectrometryconjugative plasmidissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

