BACKGROUND
we recently reported the identification of bacillus sp. nrrl b- <dig> that induces heart autoimmunity by generating cardiac-reactive t cells through molecular mimicry. this marine bacterium was originally isolated from the gulf of mexico, but no associations with human diseases were reported. therefore, to characterize its biological and medical significance, we sought to determine and analyze the complete genome sequence of bacillus sp. nrrl b- <dig> 


RESULTS
based on the phylogenetic analysis of 16s ribosomal rna  genes, sequence analysis of the 16s-23s rdna intergenic transcribed spacers, phenotypic microarray, and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry, we propose that this organism belongs to the species bacillus infantis, previously shown to be associated with sepsis in a newborn child. analysis of the complete genome of bacillus sp. nrrl b- <dig> revealed several virulence factors including adhesins, invasins, colonization factors, siderophores and transporters. likewise, the bacterial genome encodes a wide range of methyl transferases, transporters, enzymatic and biochemical pathways, and insertion sequence elements that are distinct from other closely related bacilli.


CONCLUSIONS
the complete genome sequence of bacillus sp. nrrl b- <dig> provided in this study may facilitate genetic manipulations to assess gene functions associated with bacterial survival and virulence. additionally, this bacterium may serve as a useful tool to establish a disease model that permits systematic analysis of autoimmune events in various susceptible rodent strains.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bacillus sp. nrrl b-14911genomeheartthe international conference on intelligent biology and medicine   <dig> indianapolis, in, usa 13- <dig> november  <dig> http://watson.compbio.iupui.edu/yunliu/icibm/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

