BACKGROUND
burkholderia pseudomallei, the causative agent of melioidosis, is a gram-negative bacterium widely distributed in soil and water in endemic areas. this soil saprophyte can survive harsh environmental conditions, even in soils where herbicides  are abundant. sigma factor e  is a key regulator of extra-cytoplasmic stress response in gram-negative bacteria. in this study, we identified the b. pseudomallei σe regulon and characterized the indirect role that σe plays in the regulation of spermidine, contributing to the successful survival of b. pseudomallei in stressful environments.


RESULTS
changes in the global transcriptional profiles of b. pseudomallei wild type and σe mutant under physiological and oxidative stress  conditions were determined. we identified  <dig> up-regulated genes under oxidative stress condition. comparison of the transcriptional profiles of b. pseudomallei wild type and σe mutant under control or oxidative stress conditions identified  <dig> oxidative-responsive genes regulated by σe, including genes involved in cell membrane repair, maintenance of protein folding and oxidative stress response and potential virulence factors such as a type vi secretion system . importantly, we identified that the speg gene, encoding spermidine-acetyltransferase, is a novel member of the b. pseudomallei σe regulon. the expression of speg was regulated by σe, implying that σe plays an indirect role in the regulation of physiological level of spermidine to protect the bacteria during oxidative stress.


CONCLUSIONS
this study identified b. pseudomallei genes directly regulated by σe in response to oxidative stress and revealed the indirect role of σe in the regulation of the polyamine spermidine  for bacterial cell protection during oxidative stress. this study provides new insights into the regulatory mechanisms by which σe contributes to the survival of b. pseudomallei under stressful conditions.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
b. pseudomalleitranscription profilesigma espegoxidative stressissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

