BACKGROUND
penicillium griseofulvum is associated in stored apples with blue mould, the most important postharvest disease of pome fruit. this pathogen can simultaneously produce both detrimental and beneficial secondary metabolites . in order to gain insight into sm synthesis in p. griseofulvum in vitro and during disease development on apple, we sequenced the genome of p. griseofulvum strain pg <dig> and analysed important sm clusters.


RESULTS
pg <dig> genome sequence  shows that p. griseofulvum branched off after the divergence of p. oxalicum but before the divergence of p. chrysogenum. genome-wide analysis of p. griseofulvum revealed putative gene clusters for patulin, griseofulvin and roquefortine c biosynthesis. furthermore, we quantified the sm production in vitro and on apples during the course of infection. the expression kinetics of key genes of sm produced in infected apple were examined. we found additional sm clusters, including those potentially responsible for the synthesis of penicillin, yanuthone d, cyclopiazonic acid and we predicted a cluster putatively responsible for the synthesis of chanoclavine i.


CONCLUSIONS
these findings provide relevant information to understand the molecular basis of sm biosynthesis in p. griseofulvum, to allow further research directed to the overexpression or blocking the synthesis of specific sm.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
penicillium griseofulvumgenome sequencingsecondary metabolitespostharvest diseaseblue moldpatulinroquefortine cgriseofulvinlife financial instrument of the european unionlife <dig> env/hr/000580spadaro davide spanish ministry of economy and competitivenessbio2012-37161gabaldón toni the qatar national research fund nprp5-298-3-086gabaldón toni the european research council erc-2012-stg-310325gabaldón toni the spanish ministry of economy and innovation agl2011-30519-c03-01gonzález-candelas luis the generalitat valenciana, spain prometeoii/2014/027gonzález-candelas luis issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

