BACKGROUND
osteochondrosis ) is a juvenile osteo-articular disorder affecting several mammalian species. in horses, oc is considered as a multifactorial disease and has been described as a focal disruption of endochondral ossification leading to the development of osteoarticular lesions. nevertheless, oc physiopathology is poorly understood. affected horses may present joint swelling, stiffness and lameness. thus, oc is a major concern for the equine industry. our study was designed as an integrative approach using omics technologies for the identification of constitutive defects in epiphyseal cartilage and/or subchondral bone associated with the development of primary lesions to further understand oc pathology. this study compared samples from non-affected joints  from oc-affected foals  with samples from oc-free foals  considered as control samples. consequently, results are not confounded by changes associated with the evolution of the lesion, but focus on altered constitutive molecular mechanisms. comparative proteomics and micro computed tomography analyses were performed on predisposed and oc-free bone and cartilage samples. metabolomics was also performed on synovial fluid from oc-free, oc-affected and predisposed joints.


RESULTS
two lesion subtypes were identified: ocd  and oc . modulated proteins were identified using omics technologies  in cartilage and bone from affected foals compare to oc-free foals. these were associated with cellular processes including cell cycle, energy production, cell signaling and adhesion as well as tissue-specific processes such as chondrocyte maturation, extracellular matrix and mineral metabolism. of these, five had already been identified in synovial fluid of oc-affected foals: actg <dig> , albumin, haptoglobin, fbg  and c4bpa .


CONCLUSIONS
this study suggests that ocd lesions may result from a cartilage defect whereas oc lesions may be triggered by both bone and cartilage defects, suggesting that different molecular mechanisms responsible for the equine osteochondrosis lesion subtypes and predisposition could be due to a defect in both bone and cartilage. this study will contribute to refining the definition of oc lesions and may improve diagnosis and development of therapies for horses and other species, including humans.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
equine osteochondrosiscartilagesubchondral boneproteomicsmetabolomicsμctissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

