BACKGROUND
while the taxonomy and genomics of environmental strains from the p. fluorescens species-complex has been reported, little is known about p. fluorescens strains from clinical samples. in this report, we provide the first genomic analysis of p. fluorescens strains in which human vs. environmental isolates are compared.


RESULTS
seven p. fluorescens strains were isolated from respiratory samples from cystic fibrosis  patients. the clinical strains could grow at a higher temperature  than has been reported for environmental strains. draft genomes were generated for all of the clinical strains, and multi-locus sequence analysis placed them within subclade iii of the p. fluorescens species-complex. all strains encoded type- ii, −iii, −iv, and -vi secretion systems, as well as the widespread colonization island . this is the first description of a wci in p. fluorescens strains. all strains also encoded a complete i2/pfit locus and showed evidence of horizontal gene transfer. the clinical strains were found to differ from the environmental strains in the number of genes involved in metal resistance, which may be a possible adaptation to chronic antibiotic exposure in the cf lung.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the largest comparative genomics analysis of p. fluorescens subclade iii strains to date and includes the first clinical isolates. at a global level, the clinical p. fluorescens subclade iii strains were largely indistinguishable from environmental p. fluorescens subclade iii strains, supporting the idea that identifying strains as ‘environmental’ vs ‘clinical’ is not a phenotypic trait. rather, strains within p. fluorescens subclade iii will colonize and persist in any niche that provides the requirements necessary for growth.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pseudomonas fluorescensgenomicshumanlungmetalefflux pumpscystic fibrosishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000050national heart, lung, and blood instituteroi-hl114447http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000060national institute of allergy and infectious diseasesu19-ai090871t32-ai007528university of michigan host microbiome initiativep30dk034933-30nesbitt program for cf research university of michiganissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

