BACKGROUND
successful animal communication depends on a receiver’s ability to detect a sender’s signal. exemplars of adaptive sender-receiver coupling include acoustic communication, often important in the context of seasonal reproduction. during the reproductive summer season, both male and female midshipman fish  exhibit similar increases in the steroid-dependent frequency sensitivity of the saccule, the main auditory division of the inner ear. this form of auditory plasticity enhances detection of the higher frequency components of the multi-harmonic, long-duration advertisement calls produced repetitively by males during summer nights of peak vocal and spawning activity. the molecular basis of this seasonal auditory plasticity has not been fully resolved. here, we utilize an unbiased transcriptomic rna sequencing approach to identify differentially expressed transcripts within the saccule’s hair cell epithelium of reproductive summer and non-reproductive winter fish.


RESULTS
we assembled  <dig>  unique transcripts from our saccular epithelial sequence reads. of these,  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % were upregulated in the reproductive and non-reproductive saccular epithelium, respectively. gene ontology  term enrichment analyses of the differentially expressed transcripts showed that the reproductive saccular epithelium was transcriptionally, translationally, and metabolically more active than the non-reproductive epithelium. furthermore, the expression of a specific suite of candidate genes, including ion channels and components of steroid-signaling pathways, was upregulated in the reproductive compared to the non-reproductive saccular epithelium. we found reported auditory functions for  <dig> candidate genes upregulated in the reproductive midshipman saccular epithelium,  <dig> of which are enriched in mouse hair cells, validating their hair cell-specific functions across vertebrates.


CONCLUSIONS
we identified a suite of differentially expressed genes belonging to neurotransmission and steroid-signaling pathways, consistent with previous work showing the importance of these characters in regulating hair cell auditory sensitivity in midshipman fish and, more broadly, vertebrates. the results were also consistent with auditory hair cells being generally more physiologically active when animals are in a reproductive state, a time of enhanced sensory-motor coupling between the auditory periphery and the upper harmonics of vocalizations. together with several new candidate genes, our results identify discrete patterns of gene expression linked to frequency- and steroid-dependent plasticity of hair cell auditory sensitivity.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
hearinghair cellssacculetranscriptomefrequency sensitivityion channelssteroid hormonesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

