BACKGROUND
gastrointestinal nematodes  are one of the main constraints to ruminant production worldwide. anthelmintic resistance  has been reported in goats throughout europe, yet little is known about the ar status in italy. the aims of the study were: i) determine the frequency of ar in gins in goat flocks in northern italy, italy, ii) survey goat farmers on the current practices of parasite control, iii) update the species composition of the gastrointestinal helminthofauna. thirty three flocks were enrolled and  <dig> individual fecal samples were collected. based on the egg per gram ,  <dig> flocks were selected to evaluate the presence of ar in gins with the fecal egg count reduction test . a questionnaire surveyed  <dig> dairy goat farmers to acquire information about farm management and drenching practices against gins. further, the gastrointestinal tracts of  <dig> goats were analyzed.


RESULTS
the fecrs indicated that five of the  <dig> flocks had problems of ar, which was identified in all two of the anthelmintic classes tested. resistance and suspected resistance was found in 40% of the flocks selected for ar testing that were treated with benzimidazoles while 20% of the flocks treated with eprinomectin had resistant gins. teladorsagia/trichostrongylus l <dig> were isolated from the post-treatment coprocultures of all flocks with resistance but not from the flock with suspected oxfendazole resistance. treatments against helminths were performed once annually in  <dig> % of the flocks, but  <dig> % of farmers declared not regularly treating their goats every year. annual treatments usually occurred in autumn or winter at dose rate for sheep. te. circumcincta, h. contortus, tr. colubriformis, skrjabinema caprae and oesophagostomum venulosum were the most abundant and prevalent species of the gastrointestinal tract.


CONCLUSIONS
strategies to prevent the development of ar should be widely adopted in northern italy. further, farmers and practitioners should be educated about the importance of using the correct dose rates in goats. in addition, the presence of highly pathogenic gins coupled with high worm burden in all sector of gastrointestinal tract and the prevalence values further suggest that improved diagnosis and active surveillance of gins infection is needed.

parasitesgastrointestinal nematodesanthelmintic resistancegoatitaly

