BACKGROUND
many marine meiofaunal species are reported to have wide distributions, which creates a paradox considering their hypothesized low dispersal abilities. correlated with this paradox is an especially high taxonomic deficit for meiofauna, partly related to a lower taxonomic effort and partly to a high number of putative cryptic species. molecular-based species delineation and barcoding approaches have been advocated for meiofaunal biodiversity assessments to speed up description processes and uncover cryptic lineages. however, these approaches show sensitivity to sampling coverage  and the success rate has never been explored on mesopsammic mollusca.


RESULTS
we collected the meiofaunal sea-slug pontohedyle  from  <dig> localities worldwide. with a traditional morphological approach, all specimens fall into two morphospecies. however, with a multi-marker genetic approach, we reveal multiple lineages that are reciprocally monophyletic on single and concatenated gene trees in phylogenetic analyses. these lineages are largely concordant with geographical and oceanographic parameters, leading to our primary species hypothesis . in parallel, we apply four independent methods of molecular based species delineation: general mixed yule coalescent model , statistical parsimony, bayesian species delineation  and automatic barcode gap discovery . the secondary species hypothesis  is gained by relying only on uncontradicted results of the different approaches , resulting in the discovery of a radiation of   <dig> mainly cryptic species,  <dig> of them new to science, some sympatric and some allopatric with respect to ocean boundaries. however, the meiofaunal paradox still persists in some pontohedyle species identified here with wide coastal and trans-archipelago distributions.


CONCLUSIONS
our study confirms extensive, morphologically cryptic diversity among meiofauna and accentuates the taxonomic deficit that characterizes meiofauna research. we observe for pontohedyle slugs a high degree of morphological simplicity and uniformity, which we expect might be a general rule for meiofauna. to tackle cryptic diversity in little explored and hard-to-sample invertebrate taxa, at present, a combined approach seems most promising, such as multi-marker-barcoding  combined with a minimum consensus approach across independent methods of molecular species delineation to define candidate species.

