BACKGROUND
the putative methyltransferase laea is a global regulator that affects the expression of multiple secondary metabolite gene clusters in several fungi. in trichoderma reesei, its ortholog lae <dig> appears to predominantly regulate genes involved in increasing competitive fitness in its environment, including expression of cellulases and polysaccharide hydrolases. a drawback in all studies related to laea/lae <dig> function so far, however, is that the respective loss-of-function and overexpressing mutants display different growth rates. thus some of the properties attributed to laea/lae <dig> could be simply due to changes of the growth rate.


RESULTS
we cultivated t. reesei, a Δlae <dig> mutant and a lae1-overexpressing strain in chemostats on glucose at two different growth rates  which resemble growth rates at repressing and derepressing conditions, respectively. under these conditions, the effect of modulating lae <dig> expression was mainly visible in the Δlae <dig> mutant, whereas the overexpressing strain showed little differences to the parent strain. the effect on the expression of some gene categories identified earlier  was confirmed, but in addition gcn5-n-acetyltransferases, amino acid permeases and flavin monooxygenases were identified as so far unknown major targets of lae <dig> action. lae <dig> was also shown to interfere with the regulation of expression of several genes by the growth rate. about a tenth of the genes differentially expressed in the Δlae <dig> mutant under either growth condition were found to be clustered in the genome, but no specific gene group was associated with this phenomenon.


CONCLUSIONS
our data show that – using t. reesei lae <dig> as a model - the investigation of transcriptome in regulatory mutants at constant growth rates leads to new insights into the physiological roles of the respective regulator.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
trichoderma reeseimicroarraychemostatlae1growth ratetranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

