BACKGROUND
host-range restricted poxviruses make promising vaccine vectors due to their safety profile and immunogenicity. an understanding of the host innate immune responses produced by different poxvirus vectors would aid in the assessment, selection and rational design of improved vaccines for human and veterinary applications. novel avipoxviruses are being assessed to determine if they are different from other poxvirus vectors. analysis of the transcriptome induced in a mouse model would aid in determining if there were significant differences between different poxvirus vectors which may reflect different adjuvant potential as well as establish if they should be further evaluated as vaccine vectors.


RESULTS
we compared host transcript abundance in the spleens of balb/c mice twenty four hours after intravenous infection  with six host-restricted poxvirus species from three genera, namely lumpy skin disease virus , canarypox virus , fowlpox virus , modified vaccinia ankara  and two novel south african avipoxviruses, feral pigeonpox virus  and penguinpox virus . these six viruses produced qualitatively and quantitatively distinct host responses with lsdv, followed by mva, inducing the greatest interferon  response. fep <dig> and pepv caused very little change to host transcript abundance compared to the other  <dig> viruses tested. cnpv and fwpv induced the up regulation of two immunoglobulin genes ) with cnpv inducing a third, ighm . hiv-1–specific igg <dig> antibodies have been correlated with decreased risk of hiv- <dig> infection in the rv <dig> trial, which included a cnpv-based vector  p <dig>  2014). up regulation of igg <dig> by cnpv and fwpv but not the other poxviruses tested in vivo, implies that these two avipoxvirus-vector backbones may be involved in stimulation of the clinically important igg <dig> antibody subclass. differential transcript abundance associated with the different poxviruses is further discussed with particular emphasis on responses related to immune responses.


CONCLUSIONS
six, genetically diverse host-restricted poxviruses produce different responses in a mouse model early after infection. these differences may affect the immune response induced to vaccine antigen in vectors based on these viruses. the two novel avipoxviruses were clearly distinguishable from the other viruses.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
poxvirusvaccinemicro-arraylsdvmvaavipoxvirusesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

