BACKGROUND
the marine cyanobacterium prochlorococcus is very abundant in warm, nutrient-poor oceanic areas. the upper mixed layer of oceans is populated by high light-adapted prochlorococcus ecotypes, which despite their tiny genome  seem to have developed efficient strategies to cope with stressful levels of photosynthetically active and ultraviolet  radiation. at a molecular level, little is known yet about how such minimalist microorganisms manage to sustain high growth rates and avoid potentially detrimental, uv-induced mutations to their dna. to address this question, we studied the cell cycle dynamics of p. marinus pcc <dig> cells grown under high fluxes of visible light in the presence or absence of uv radiation. near natural light-dark cycles of both light sources were obtained using a custom-designed illumination system . expression patterns of key dna synthesis and repair, cell division, and clock genes were analyzed in order to decipher molecular mechanisms of adaptation to uv radiation.


RESULTS
the cell cycle of p. marinus pcc <dig> was strongly synchronized by the day-night cycle. the most conspicuous response of cells to uv radiation was a delay in chromosome replication, with a peak of dna synthesis shifted about  <dig> h into the dark period. this delay was seemingly linked to a strong downregulation of genes governing dna replication  and cell division , whereas most genes involved in dna repair  were already activated under high visible light and their expression levels were only slightly affected by additional uv exposure.


CONCLUSIONS
prochlorococcus cells modified the timing of the s phase in response to uv exposure, therefore reducing the risk that mutations would occur during this particularly sensitive stage of the cell cycle. we identified several possible explanations for the observed timeshift. among these, the sharp decrease in transcript levels of the dnaa gene, encoding the dna replication initiator protein, is sufficient by itself to explain this response, since dna synthesis starts only when the cellular concentration of dnaa reaches a critical threshold. however, the observed response likely results from a more complex combination of uv-altered biological processes.

