BACKGROUND
mycobacterium smegmatis is fast growing non-pathogenic mycobacteria. this organism has been widely used as a model organism to study the biology of other virulent and extremely slow growing species like mycobacterium tuberculosis. based on the homology of the n-terminal dna binding domain, the recently sequenced genome of m. smegmatis has been shown to possess several putative gntr regulators. a striking characteristic feature of this family of regulators is that they possess a conserved n-terminal dna binding domain and a diverse c-terminal domain involved in the effector binding and/or oligomerization. since the physiological role of these regulators is critically dependent upon effector binding and operator sites, we have analysed and classified these regulators into their specific subfamilies and identified their potential binding sites.


RESULTS
the sequence analysis of m. smegmatis putative gntrs has revealed that fadr, hutc, mocr and the ytra-like regulators are encoded by  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes respectively. further out of  <dig> fadr-like regulators,  <dig> were classified into the fadr group and  <dig> into the vanr group. all these proteins showed similar secondary structural elements specific to their respective subfamilies except msmeg_ <dig>  which showed additional secondary structural elements. using the reciprocal blast searches, we further identified the orthologs of these regulators in bacillus subtilis and other mycobacteria. since the expression of many regulators is auto-regulatory, we have identified potential operator sites for a number of these gntr regulators by analyzing the upstream sequences.


CONCLUSIONS
this study helps in extending the annotation of m. smegmatis gntr proteins. it identifies the gntr regulators of m. smegmatis that could serve as a model for studying orthologous regulators from virulent as well as other saprophytic mycobacteria. this study also sheds some light on the nucleotide preferences in the target-motifs of gntrs thus providing important leads for initiating the experimental characterization of these proteins, construction of the gene regulatory network for these regulators and an understanding of the influence of these proteins on the physiology of the mycobacteria.

