BACKGROUND
vaccines have profoundly impacted global health although concerns persist about their potential role in autoimmune or other adverse reactions. to address these concerns, vaccine components like immunogens and adjuvants require critical evaluation not only in healthy subjects but also in those genetically averse to vaccine constituents. evaluation in autoimmune-prone animal models of adjuvants is therefore important in vaccine development. the objective here was to assess the effectiveness of experimental adjuvants: two phytol-derived immunostimulants phis- <dig>  and phis- <dig> , and a new commercial adjuvant from porcine small intestinal submucosa , relative to a standard adjuvant alum. phytol derivatives are hydrophobic, oil-in water diterpenoids, while alum is hydrophilic, and sis is essentially a biodegradable and collagenous protein cocktail derived from extracellular matrices.


RESULTS
we studied phthalate -specific and cross-reactive anti-dna antibody responses, and parameters associated with the onset of autoimmune disorders. we determined antibody isotype and cytokine/chemokine milieu induced by the above experimental adjuvants relative to alum. our results indicated that the phytol-derived adjuvant phis- <dig> exceeded alum in enhancing anti-phthalate antibody without much cross reactivity with ds-dna. relatively, sis and phis- <dig> proved less robust, but they were also less inflammatory. interestingly, these adjuvants facilitated isotype switching of anti-hapten, but not of anti-dna response. the current study reaffirms our earlier reports on adjuvanticity of phytol compounds and sis-h in non autoimmune-prone balb/c and c57bl/ <dig> mice. these adjuvants are as effective as alum also in autoimmune-prone nzb/wf <dig> mice, and they have little deleterious effects.


CONCLUSIONS
although all adjuvants tested impacted cytokine/chemokine milieu in favor of th1/th <dig> balance, the phytol compounds fared better in reducing the onset of autoimmune syndromes. however, sis is least inflammatory among the adjuvants evaluated.

