BACKGROUND
one of the challenges in the analysis of microarray data is to integrate and compare the selected  gene lists from multiple experiments for common or unique underlying biological themes. a common way to approach this problem is to extract common genes from these gene lists and then subject these genes to enrichment analysis to reveal the underlying biology. however, the capacity of this approach is largely restricted by the limited number of common genes shared by datasets from multiple experiments, which could be caused by the complexity of the biological system itself.


RESULTS
we now introduce a new pathway pattern extraction pipeline , which extends the existing wps application by providing a new pathway-level comparative analysis scheme. to facilitate comparing and correlating results from different studies and sources, ppep contains new interfaces that allow evaluation of the pathway-level enrichment patterns across multiple gene lists. as an exploratory tool, this analysis pipeline may help reveal the underlying biological themes at both the pathway and gene levels. the analysis scheme provided by ppep begins with multiple gene lists, which may be derived from different studies in terms of the biological contexts, applied technologies, or methodologies. these lists are then subjected to pathway-level comparative analysis for extraction of pathway-level patterns. this analysis pipeline helps to explore the commonality or uniqueness of these lists at the level of pathways or biological processes from different but relevant biological systems using a combination of statistical enrichment measurements, pathway-level pattern extraction, and graphical display of the relationships of genes and their associated pathways as gene-term association networks  within the wps platform. as a proof of concept, we have used the new method to analyze many datasets from our collaborators as well as some public microarray datasets.


CONCLUSIONS
this tool provides a new pathway-level analysis scheme for integrative and comparative analysis of data derived from different but relevant systems. the tool is freely available as a pathway pattern extraction pipeline implemented in our existing software package wps, which can be obtained at

