BACKGROUND
fibropapillomatosis  is a neoplastic disease characterized by cutaneous tumours that has been documented to infect all sea turtle species. chelonid fibropapilloma-associated herpesvirus  is believed to be the aetiological agent of fp, based principally on consistent pcr-based detection of herpesvirus dna sequences from fp tumours. we used a recently described pcr-based assay that targets  <dig> conserved cfphv genes, to survey  <dig> green turtles . this included both fp tumour exhibiting and clinically healthy individuals. an additional  <dig> globally distributed clinically healthy individual sea turtles; representing four other species were also screened.


RESULTS
cfphv dna sequences were obtained from 37/ <dig>  fp exhibiting green turtles, and 45/ <dig>  clinically healthy animals spanning all five species. although the frequency of infected individuals per turtle population varied considerably, most global populations contained at least one cfphv positive individual, with the exception of various turtle species from the arabian gulf, northern indian ocean and puerto rico.

haplotype analysis of the different gene markers clustered the cfphv dna sequences for two of the markers  in turtles from turks and caicos separate to all others, regardless of host species or geographic origin.


CONCLUSIONS
presence of cfphv dna within globally distributed samples for all five species of sea turtle was confirmed. while 100% of the fp exhibiting green turtles yielded cfphv sequences, surprisingly, so did 15% of the clinically healthy turtles. we hypothesize that turtle populations with zero  cfphv frequency may be attributed to possible environmental differences, diet and/or genetic resistance in these individuals. our results provide first data on the prevalence of cfphv among seemingly healthy turtles; a factor that may not be directly correlated to the disease incidence, but may suggest of a long-term co-evolutionary latent infection interaction between cfphv and its turtle-host across species. finally, computational analysis of amino acid variants within the turks and caicos samples suggest potential functional importance in a substitution for marker ul <dig> that encodes the major capsid protein gene, which potentially could explain differences in pathogenicity. nevertheless, such a theory remains to be validated by further research.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
co-evolutionsea turtlesherpesvirusfibropapillomatosistumourslatencycfphvissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

