BACKGROUND
initial characterization of the flax genome showed that ty1-copia retrotransposons are abundant, with several members being recently inserted, and in close association with genes. recent insertions indicate a potential for ongoing transpositional activity that can create genomic diversity among accessions, cultivars or varieties. the polymorphisms generated constitute a good source of molecular markers that may be associated with phenotype if the insertions alter gene activity. flax, where accessions are bred mainly for seed nutritional properties or for fibers, constitutes a good model for studying the relationship of transpositional activity with diversification and breeding. in this study, we estimated copy number and used a type of transposon display known as sequence-specific amplification polymorphisms , to characterize six families of ty1-copia elements across  <dig> flax accessions. polymorphic insertion sites were sequenced to find insertions that could potentially alter gene expression, and a preliminary test was performed with selected genes bearing transposable element  insertions.


RESULTS
quantification of six families of ty1-copia elements indicated different abundances among te families and between flax accessions, which suggested diverse transpositional histories. ssaps showed a high level of polymorphism in most of the evaluated retrotransposon families, with a trend towards higher levels of polymorphism in low-copy number families. ty1-copia insertion polymorphisms among cultivars allowed a general distinction between oil and fiber types, and between spring and winter types, demonstrating their utility in diversity studies. characterization of polymorphic insertions revealed an overwhelming association with genes, with insertions disrupting exons, introns or within 1 kb of coding regions. a preliminary test on the potential transcriptional disruption by tes of four selected genes evaluated in three different tissues, showed one case of significant impact of the insertion on gene expression.


CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that specific ty1-copia families have been active since breeding commenced in flax. the retrotransposon-derived polymorphism can be used to separate flax types, and the close association of many insertions with genes defines a good source of potential mutations that could be associated with phenotypic changes, resulting in diversification processes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ty1-copiatransposable elementsflaxcultivarssequence-specific amplification polymorphism http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008762genome canadatufgendeyholos michael k. natural sciences and engineering research council of canada natural sciences and engineering research council of canada nserc alexander graham bell canada graduate scholarship michael smith foreign study supplement galindo-gonzález leonardo deyholos michael k. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000146alberta innovates - technology futures top-up awardgalindo-gonzález leonardo labex saclay plant sciences-spsanr-10-labx-0040-spsgrandbastien marie-angèle issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

