BACKGROUND
sxt is an integrating conjugative element  originally isolated from vibrio cholerae, the bacterial pathogen that causes cholera. it houses multiple antibiotic and heavy metal resistance genes on its ca.  <dig> kb circular double stranded dna  genome, and functions as an effective vehicle for the horizontal transfer of resistance genes within susceptible bacterial populations. here, we characterize the activities of an alkaline exonuclease  and single strand annealing protein  encoded on the sxt genetic element, which share significant sequence homology with exo and bet from bacteriophage lambda, respectively.


RESULTS
sxt-exo has the ability to degrade both linear dsdna and single stranded dna  molecules, but has no detectable endonuclease or nicking activities. adopting a stable trimeric arrangement in solution, the exonuclease activities of sxt-exo are optimal at ph  <dig>  and essentially require mn2+ or mg2+ ions. similar to lambda-exo, sxt-exo hydrolyzes dsdna with 5'- to 3'-polarity in a highly processive manner, and digests dna substrates with 5'-phosphorylated termini significantly more effectively than those lacking 5'-phosphate groups. notably, the dsdna exonuclease activities of both sxt-exo and lambda-exo are stimulated by the addition of lambda-bet, sxt-bet or a single strand dna binding protein encoded on the sxt genetic element . when co-expressed in e. coli cells, sxt-bet and sxt-exo mediate homologous recombination between a pcr-generated dsdna fragment and the chromosome, analogous to recet and lambda-bet/exo.


CONCLUSIONS
the activities of the sxt-exo protein are consistent with it having the ability to resect the ends of linearized dsdna molecules, forming partially ssdna substrates for the partnering sxt-bet single strand annealing protein. as such, sxt-exo and sxt-bet may function together to repair or process sxt genetic elements within infected v. cholerae cells, through facilitating homologous dna recombination events. the results presented here significantly extend our general understanding of the properties and activities of alkaline exonuclease and single strand annealing proteins of viral/bacteriophage origin, and will assist the rational development of bacterial recombineering systems.

