BACKGROUND
the small intestine is a specialized compartment were close interactions take place between host, microbes, food antigens and dietary fatty acids. dietary fats get absorbed by epithelial cells and processed into a range of lipoprotein particles after which they are basolaterally secreted and collected in the lymphatics. in contrast to the colon, the small intestine is covered only by a thin mucus coat that allows for intimate interactions between host-cells and microbes. lipoproteins have long been recognized as protective factors in infectious diseases via the neutralization of bacterial toxins like lipopolysaccharides. much less attention has been given to the potential role of lipoproteins as factors contributing to the maintenance of small intestinal immune homeostasis via modulating bacteria-induced immune responses.


RESULTS
lipoproteins vldl, ldl and hdl were found to neutralize tlr responses towards specific tlr-ligands or a selection of gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. attenuation of tlr <dig> activity was acute and only slightly improved by longer pre-incubation times of ligands and lipoproteins with no differences between bacterial-lipopeptides or bacteria. in contrast, attenuation of tlr <dig> responses was only observed after extensive preincubation of lipoproteins and lps. preincubation of bacteria and lipoproteins led only to a modest attenuation of tlr <dig> activity. moreover, compared to tlr <dig>  tlr <dig> activity could only be attenuated by lipoproteins over a small ligand dose range.


CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate the ability of lipoproteins vldl, ldl and hdl to inhibit tlr responses towards bacterial-ligands and bacteria. presence of lipoproteins was found to modulate the mamp-induced cytokine release by primary human monocytes measured as changes in the release of il- <dig>  tnfα, gm-csf and ifnγ. using tlr <dig> and tlr4-reporter cells, lipoproteins were found to inhibit tlr responses with differences in affinity and kinetics. these data establish a role for lipoproteins as immunoregulatory molecules, attenuating tlr-responses and thereby positively contributing to mucosal homeostasis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

