BACKGROUND
plant-parasitic nematodes  are major crop pests. on olive , they significantly contribute to economic losses in the top-ten olive producing countries in the world especially in nurseries and under cropping intensification. the diversity and the structure of ppn communities respond to environmental and anthropogenic forces. the olive tree is a good host plant model to understand the impact of such forces on ppn diversity since it grows according to different modalities . a wide soil survey was conducted in several olive-growing regions in morocco. the taxonomical and the functional diversity as well as the structures of ppn communities were described and then compared between non-cultivated  and cultivated  olives.


RESULTS
a high diversity of ppn with the detection of  <dig> species and  <dig> genera was revealed. some taxa were recorded for the first time on olive trees worldwide and new species were also identified. anthropogenic factors  strongly impacted the ppn diversity and the functional composition of communities because the species richness, the local diversity and the evenness of communities significantly decreased and the abundance of nematodes significantly increased in high-density conditions. furthermore, these conditions exhibited many more obligate and colonizer ppn and less persister ppn compared to non-cultivated conditions. taxonomical structures of communities were also impacted: genera such as xiphinema spp. and heterodera spp. were dominant in wild olive, whereas harmful taxa such as meloidogyne spp. were especially enhanced in high-density orchards.


CONCLUSIONS
olive anthropogenic practices reduce the ppn diversity in communities and lead to changes of the community structures with the development of some damaging nematodes. the study underlined the ppn diversity as a relevant indicator to assess community pathogenicity. that could be taken into account in order to design control strategies based on community rearrangements and interactions between species instead of reducing the most pathogenic species.

keywords
anthropisationcommunitiesfunctional diversitymoroccooliveplant-parasitic nematodestaxonomical structurestishreen universityarimnetkbbe219262mateille thierry issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

