BACKGROUND
self-incompatibility  is a widespread and important mating system that promotes outcrossing in plants. erigeron breviscapus, a medicinal herb used widely in traditional chinese medicine, is a self-incompatible species of asteraceae. however, the genetic characteristics of si responses in e. breviscapus remain largely unknown. to understand the possible mechanisms of e. breviscapus in response to si, we performed a comparative transcriptomic analysis with capitulum of e. breviscapus after self- and cross-pollination, which may provide valuable information for analyzing the candidate si-associated genes of e. breviscapus.

methods
using a high-throughput next-generation sequencing  approach, the transcriptionexpression profiling of the different genes of e. breviscapus were obtained, some results were verified by quantitative real time pcr .


RESULTS
 after assembly,  <dig>  gene models were obtained , among which  <dig>  unigenes  were annotated by comparisons with four public databases :  <dig>  unigenes  showed high homology with sequences in the nr database. differentially expressed genes were identified among the three cdna libraries , and approximately  <dig> genes might be associated with si responses. several these genes were upregulated in self-pollinated capitulum but downregulated in cross-pollinated capitulum, such as srlk  and its downstream signal factor, mlpk. qrt-pcr confirmed that the expression patterns of ebsrlk <dig> and ebsrlk <dig> genes were not closely related to si of e. breviscapus.


CONCLUSIONS
this work represents the first large-scale analysis of gene expression in the self-pollinated and cross-pollinated flowers of e. breviscapus. a larger number of notable genes potentially involved in si responses showed differential expression, including genes playing crucial roles in cell-cell communication, signal transduction and the pollination process. we thus hypothesized that those genes showing differential expression and encoding critical regulators of si responses, such as mlpk, arc <dig>  cam, exo70a <dig>  map, sf <dig> and nod, might affect si responses in e. breviscapus. taken together, our study provides a pool of si-related genes in e. breviscapus and offers a valuable resource for elucidating the mechanisms of si in asteraceae.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
erigeron breviscapustranscriptomeself-incompatibilitydigital gene expressionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

