BACKGROUND
positive and negative feedback loops are ubiquitous motifs in biochemical signaling pathways. the mitogen-activated protein kinase  pathway module is part of many distinct signaling networks and comprises several of these motifs, whose functioning depends on the cell line at hand and on the particular context.

the maintainance of specificity of the response of the mapk module to distinct stimuli has become a key paradigm especially in pc- <dig> cells, where the same module leads to different cell fates, depending on the stimulating growth factor.

this cell fate is regulated by differences in the erk  activation profile, which shows a transient response upon stimulation with egf, while the response is sustained in case of ngf. this behavior was explained by different effective network topologies. it is widely believed that this sustained response requires a bistable system.


RESULTS
in this study we present a sampling-based bayesian model analysis on a dataset, in which pc- <dig> cells have been stimulated with different growth factors. this is combined with novel analysis methods to investigate the role of feedback interconnections to shape erk response. results strongly suggest that, besides bistability, an additional effect called quasi-bistability can contribute to explain the observed responses of the system to different stimuli. quasi-bistability is the ability of a monostable system to maintain two distinct states over a long time period upon a transient signal, which is also related to positive feedback, but cannot be detected by standard steady state analysis methods.


CONCLUSIONS
although applied on a specific example, our framework is generic enough to be also relevant for other regulatory network modeling studies that comprise positive feedback to explain cellular decision making processes. overall, this study advices to focus not only on steady states, but also to take transient behavior into account in the analysis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
quasi-bistabilitymapk signaling pathwaycellular decision makingdeutsche forschungsgemeinschaftexc 310/2bundesministerium für bildung und forschungfkz0316186aissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

