BACKGROUND
endophytic bacteria benefit host plant directly or indirectly, e.g. by biocontrol of the pathogens. up to now, their interactions with the host and with other microorganisms are poorly understood. consequently, a crucial step for improving the knowledge of those relationships is to determine if pathogens or plant growing season influence endophytic bacterial diversity and dynamic.


RESULTS
four healthy, four phytoplasma diseased and four recovered  grapevine plants were sampled monthly from june to october  <dig> in a vineyard in north-western italy. metagenomic dna was extracted from sterilized leaves and the endophytic bacterial community dynamic and diversity were analyzed by taxon specific real-time pcr, length-heterogeneity pcr and genus-specific pcr. these analyses revealed that both sampling date and phytoplasma infection influenced the endophytic bacterial composition. interestingly, in june, when the plants are symptomless and the pathogen is undetectable  the endophytic bacterial community associated with diseased grapevines was different from those in the other sampling dates, when the phytoplasmas are detectable inside samples;  the microbial community associated with recovered plants differs from that living inside healthy and diseased plants. interestingly, lh-pcr database identified bacteria previously reported as biocontrol agents in the examined grapevines. of these, burkholderia, methylobacterium and pantoea dynamic was influenced by the phytoplasma infection process and seasonality.


CONCLUSIONS
results indicated that endophytic bacterial community composition in grapevine is correlated to both phytoplasma infection and sampling date. for the first time, data underlined that, in diseased plants, the pathogen infection process can decrease the impact of seasonality on community dynamic. moreover, based on experimental evidences, it was reasonable to hypothesize that after recovery the restructured microbial community could maintain the main structure between seasons.

flavescence doréerecoverytaxon-specific real-time pcrlh-pcrmicrobial ecology

