BACKGROUND
the accessibility of high-throughput genotyping technologies has contributed greatly to the development of genomic resources in non-model organisms. high-density genotyping arrays have only recently been developed for some economically important species such as conifers. the potential for using genomic technologies in association mapping and breeding depends largely on the genome wide patterns of diversity and linkage disequilibrium in current breeding populations. this study aims to deepen our knowledge regarding these issues in maritime pine, the first species used for reforestation in south western europe.


RESULTS
using a new map merging algorithm, we first established a  <dig>  cm composite linkage map  by bringing together three already available genetic maps. using rigorous statistical testing based on kernel density estimation and resampling we identified cold and hot spots of recombination. in parallel,  <dig> unrelated trees of a mass-selected population were genotyped using a 12k-snp array. a total of  <dig>  informative snps allowed to describe historical recombination, genetic diversity and genetic structure of this recently domesticated breeding pool that forms the basis of much of the current and future breeding of this species. we observe very low levels of population genetic structure and find no evidence that artificial selection has caused a reduction in genetic diversity. by combining these two pieces of information, we provided the map position of  <dig>  snps corresponding to  <dig>  different loci. this made it possible to analyze the spatial pattern of genetic diversity  and long distance linkage disequilibrium  along the chromosomes. we found no particular pattern in the empirical variogram of h
e
 across the  <dig> linkage groups and, as expected for an outcrossing species with large effective population size, we observed an almost complete lack of long distance ld.


CONCLUSIONS
these results are a stepping stone for the development of strategies for studies in population genomics, association mapping and genomic prediction in this economical and ecologically important forest tree species.

pinus pinastergenetic diversitylinkage disequilibriumrecombinationlinkage mapdomesticationbreeding programforest treegenomicsgenomic selection

