BACKGROUND
in the genus streptomyces, one of the most remarkable control mechanisms of physiological processes is carbon catabolite repression . this mechanism regulates the expression of genes involved in the uptake and utilization of alternative carbon sources. ccr also affects the synthesis of secondary metabolites and morphological differentiation. even when the outcome effect of ccr in different bacteria is the same, their essential mechanisms can be quite different. in several streptomycetes glucose kinase  represents the main glucose phosphorylating enzyme and has been regarded as a regulatory protein in ccr. to evaluate the paradigmatic model proposed for ccr in streptomyces, a high-density microarray approach was applied to streptomyces coelicolor m <dig>  under repressed and non-repressed conditions. the transcriptomic study was extended to assess the scglk role in this model by comparing the transcriptomic profile of s. coelicolor m <dig> with that of a ∆glk mutant derived from the wild-type strain, complemented with a heterologous glk gene from zymomonas mobilis , insensitive to ccr but able to grow in glucose .


RESULTS
microarray experiments revealed that glucose influenced the expression of  <dig> genes. interestingly, even when the scglk protein does not have dna binding domains and the glycolytic flux was restored by a heterologous glucokinase, the scglk replacement modified the expression of  <dig> genes. from these,  <dig> were also affected by glucose while  <dig> appeared to be under the control of scglk. this work identified the expression of s. coelicolor genes involved in primary metabolism that were influenced by glucose and/or scglk. aside from describing the metabolic pathways influenced by glucose and/or scglk, several unexplored transcriptional regulators involved in the ccr mechanism were disclosed.


CONCLUSIONS
the transcriptome of a classical model of ccr was studied in s. coelicolor to differentiate between the effects due to glucose or scglk in this regulatory mechanism. glucose elicited important metabolic and transcriptional changes in this microorganism. while its entry and flow through glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathway were stimulated, the gluconeogenesis was inhibited. glucose also triggered the ccr by repressing transporter systems and the transcription of enzymes required for secondary carbon sources utilization. our results confirm and update the agar model of the ccr in streptomyces and its dependence on the scglk per se. surprisingly, the expected regulatory function of scglk was not found to be as global as thought before , although may be accompanied or coordinated by other transcriptional regulators. aside from describing the metabolic pathways influenced by glucose and/or scglk, several unexplored transcriptional regulators involved in the ccr mechanism were disclosed. these findings offer new opportunities to study and understand the ccr in s. coelicolor by increasing the number of known glucose and scglk -regulated pathways and a new set of putative regulatory proteins possibly involved or controlling the ccr.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptometranscriptional factorscarbon catabolite regulationglucose kinasestreptomyces coelicolordgapa, papiit, unamin201413sánchez sergio conacytcb-219686sánchez sergio issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

