BACKGROUND

corynebacterium glutamicum is a non-pathogenic bacterium widely used in industrial amino acid production and metabolic engineering research. although the genome sequences of some c. glutamicum strains are available, comprehensive comparative genome analyses of these species have not been done. six wild type c. glutamicum strains were sequenced using next-generation sequencing technology in our study. together with  <dig> previously reported strains, we present a comprehensive comparative analysis of c. glutamicum genomes.


RESULTS
by average nucleotide identity  analysis, we show that  <dig> strains, which were previously classified either in the genus brevibacterium, or as some other species within the genus corynebacterium, should be reclassified as members of the species c. glutamicum. c. glutamicum has an open pan-genome with  <dig> core genes. an additional nad+/nadp+ specific glutamate dehydrogenase  gene  was identified in the glutamate synthesis pathway of some c. glutamicum strains. for analyzing variations related to amino acid production, we have developed an efficient pipeline that includes three major steps: multi locus sequence typing , phylogenomic analysis based on single nucleotide polymorphisms , and a thorough comparison of all genomic variation amongst ancestral or closely related wild type strains. this combined approach can provide new perspectives on the industrial use of c. glutamicum.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first comprehensive comparative analysis of c. glutamicum genomes at the pan-genomic level. whole genome comparison provides definitive evidence for classifying the members of this species. identifying an aditional gdh gene in some c. glutamicum strains may accelerate further research on glutamate synthesis. our proposed pipeline can provide a clear perspective, including the presumed ancestor, the strain breeding trajectory, and the genomic variations necessary to increase amino acid production in c. glutamicum.


electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
corynebacterium glutamicumpan-genomecomparative genomicsproduction of amino acidsthe 27th international conference on genome informatics shanghai, china 3- <dig> october  <dig> http://admis.fudan.edu.cn/giw2016/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

