BACKGROUND
the present in vitro study investigated whether the utilization of fructooligosaccharides  may influence canine fecal microbial population in presence of diets differing in their protein content and digestibility. fresh fecal samples were collected from five adult dogs, pooled, and incubated for 24 h with the undigested residue of three diets:  <dig>  low protein high digestibility diet  229 g/kg);  <dig>  high protein high digestibility diet ;  <dig>  high protein low digestibility diet  that had been previously subjected to enzymatic digestion. in the in vitro fermentation study, there were six treatments: 1) lp hd; 2) hp hd 3) hp ld; 4) lp hd + fos; 5) hp hd + fos; 6) hp ld + fos. fructooligosaccharides were added at the final concentration of  <dig>  g/l. samples of fermentation fluid were collected at  <dig> and 24 h of incubation.


RESULTS
values of ph were reduced by fos at  <dig> and 24 h ; conversely, low protein digestibility and high dietary protein level resulted in higher ph at both sampling times . at 24 h, fos lowered ammonia  and resulted  in higher concentrations of total volatile fatty acids  , acetic acid , propionic acid  and n-butyric acid . conversely, at 24 h, low protein digestibility resulted  in lower concentrations of acetic acid , propionic acid  and total vfa . putrescine concentrations were increased at  <dig> and 24 h of fermentation by low protein digestibility  and fos . after 24 h of fermentation, high dietary protein level resulted in lower counts of lactobacilli and enterococci  whereas low protein digestibility tended to increase counts of c. perfringens .


CONCLUSIONS
results from the present study showed that diets rich in protein may exert negative influences on the canine intestinal ecosystem, slightly increasing the presence of ammonia and reducing counts of lactobacilli and enterococci. moreover, the presence of poorly digestible protein resulted in lower concentrations of vfa. conversely, administration of fos may improve metabolism of canine intestinal microbiota, reducing ammonia concentrations and enhancing vfa production.

keywords
dogdietary proteinfructooligosaccharidesintestinal microbiotaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

