BACKGROUND
in continuation of our previously interest in the saccharification of agriculture wastes by bacillus megatherium in solid state fermentation , we wish to report an investigation and comparative evaluation among trichoderma sp. for the saccharification of four alkali-pretreated agricultural residues and production of hydrolytic enzymes, carboxymethyl cellulase , filter paperase , pectinase  and xylanase  in ssf. the optimization of the physiological conditions of production of hydrolytic enzymes and saccharification content from trichoderma virens using alkali-pretreated wheat bran was the last goal.

methods
the physico-chemical parameters of ssf include incubation time, incubation temperature, moisture content of the substrate, incubation ph, supplementation with carbon and nitrogen sources were optimized.


RESULTS
saccharification of different solid state fermentation sources wheat bran, date's seeds, grass and palm leaves, were tested for the production of fermentable sugar by trichoderma sp. the maximum production of hydrolytic enzymes cmcase, fpase, pgase and xylase and saccharification content were obtained on wheat bran. time course, moisture content, optimum temperature, optimum ph, supplementation with carbon and nitrogen sources were optimized to achieve the maximum production of the hydrolytic enzymes, protein and total carbohydrate of t. virens using alkali pre-treated wheat bran. the maximum production of cmcase, fpase, pgase, xylase, protein and carbohydrate content was recorded at 72 h of incubation, 50- <dig> % moisture, temperature 25- <dig> °c and ph  <dig>  the influence of supplementary carbon and nitrogen sources was studied. while lactose and sucrose enhanced the activity of pgase from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and  <dig>  u/g, starch inhibited all other enzymes. this was confirmed by maximum saccharification content. among the nitrogen sources, yeast extract and urea enhanced the saccharification content and cmcase, pgase and xylase.


CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study indicated that alkali pre-treated wheat bran was a better substrate for saccharification and production of hydrolytic enzymes cmcase, fpase, pgase and xylase by t. virens compared to other alkali-pretreated agricultural residues tested.

keywords
trichoderma spsaccharificationhydrolytic enzymesagriculture wastesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

