BACKGROUND
flavonoids such as anthocyanins, flavonols and proanthocyanidins, play a central role in fruit colour, flavour and health attributes. in peach and nectarine  these compounds vary during fruit growth and ripening. flavonoids are produced by a well studied pathway which is transcriptionally regulated by members of the myb and bhlh transcription factor families. we have isolated nectarine flavonoid regulating genes and examined their expression patterns, which suggests a critical role in the regulation of flavonoid biosynthesis.


RESULTS
in nectarine, expression of the genes encoding enzymes of the flavonoid pathway correlated with the concentration of proanthocyanidins, which strongly increases at mid-development. in contrast, the only gene which showed a similar pattern to anthocyanin concentration was udp-glucose-flavonoid-3-o-glucosyltransferase , which was high at the beginning and end of fruit growth, remaining low during the other developmental stages. expression of flavonol synthase  correlated with flavonol levels, both temporally and in a tissue specific manner. the pattern of ufgt gene expression may be explained by the involvement of different transcription factors, which up-regulate flavonoid biosynthesis , or repress  the transcription of the biosynthetic genes. the expression of a potential proanthocyanidin-regulating transcription factor, mybpa <dig>  corresponded with proanthocyanidin levels. functional assays of these transcription factors were used to test the specificity for flavonoid regulation.


CONCLUSIONS
myb <dig> positively regulates the promoters of ufgt and dihydroflavonol 4-reductase  but not leucoanthocyanidin reductase . in contrast, mybpa <dig> trans-activates the promoters of dfr and lar, but not ufgt. this suggests exclusive roles of anthocyanin regulation by myb <dig> and proanthocyanidin regulation by mybpa <dig>  further, these transcription factors appeared to be responsive to both developmental and environmental stimuli.

anthocyanintranscriptional regulationmybpeachnectarineprunus persicalight

