BACKGROUND
canine inflammatory bowel disease  is a chronic enteropathy of unknown etiology, although microbiome dysbiosis, genetic susceptibility, and dietary and/or environmental factors are hypothesized to be involved in its pathogenesis. since some of the current therapies are associated with severe side effects, novel therapeutic modalities are needed. a new oral supplement for long-term management of canine ibd containing chondroitin sulfate  and prebiotics  was developed to target intestinal inflammation and oxidative stress, and restore normobiosis, without exhibiting any side effects. this double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled trial in dogs with ibd aims to evaluate the effects of 180 days administration of this supplement together with a hydrolyzed diet on clinical signs, intestinal histology, gut microbiota, and serum biomarkers of inflammation and oxidative stress.


RESULTS
twenty-seven client-owned biopsy-confirmed ibd dogs were included in the study, switched to the same hydrolyzed diet and classified into one of two groups: supplement and placebo. initially, there were no significant differences between groups  for any of the studied parameters. final data analysis  showed a significant decrease in canine ibd activity index  score in both groups after treatment . after treatment, a significant decrease  in histologic score was seen only in the supplement group. when groups were compared, the supplement group showed significantly higher serum cholesterol  and paraoxonase- <dig>  levels after 60 days of treatment , and the placebo group showed significantly reduced serum total antioxidant capacity  levels after 120 days . no significant differences were found between groups at any time point for cibdai, wsava histologic score and fecal microbiota evaluated by pcr-restriction fragment length polymorphism . no side effects were reported in any group.


CONCLUSIONS
the combined administration of the supplement with hydrolyzed diet over 180 days was safe and induced improvements in selected serum biomarkers, possibly suggesting a reduction in disease activity. this study was likely underpowered, therefore larger studies are warranted in order to demonstrate a supplemental effect to dietary treatment of this supplement on intestinal histology and cibdai.

keywords
chronic enteropathydogglycosaminoglycanresistant starchβ-glucansoxidative stresscibdaibioiberica saissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

