BACKGROUND
the basidiomycete moniliophthora roreri is the causal agent of frosty pod rot  disease of cacao , the source of chocolate, and fpr is one of the most destructive diseases of this important perennial crop in the americas. this hemibiotroph infects only cacao pods and has an extended biotrophic phase lasting up to sixty days, culminating in plant necrosis and sporulation of the fungus without the formation of a basidiocarp.


RESULTS
we sequenced and assembled  <dig>  mb into  <dig>  contigs that represent the m. roreri genome. of the  <dig>  predicted open reading frames ,  <dig>  were validated by rna-seq. using read count data from rna sequencing of cacao pods at  <dig> and  <dig> days post infection, differential gene expression was estimated for the biotrophic and necrotrophic phases of this plant-pathogen interaction. the sequencing data were used to develop a genome based secretome for the infected pods. of the  <dig>  genes encoding putative secreted proteins,  <dig>  were expressed in the biotrophic and necrotrophic phases. analysis of the data revealed secretome gene expression that correlated with infection and intercellular growth in the biotrophic phase and invasive growth and plant cellular death in the necrotrophic phase.


CONCLUSIONS
genome sequencing and rna-seq was used to determine and validate the moniliophthora roreri genome and secretome. high sequence identity between moniliophthora roreri genes and moniliophthora perniciosa genes supports the taxonomic relationship with moniliophthora perniciosa and the relatedness of this fungus to other basidiomycetes. analysis of rna-seq data from infected plant tissues revealed differentially expressed genes in the biotrophic and necrotrophic phases. the secreted protein genes that were upregulated in the biotrophic phase are primarily associated with breakdown of the intercellular matrix and modification of the fungal mycelia, possibly to mask the fungus from plant defenses. based on the transcriptome data, the upregulated secreted proteins in the necrotrophic phase are hypothesized to be actively attacking the plant cell walls and plant cellular components resulting in necrosis. these genes are being used to develop a new understanding of how this disease interaction progresses and to identify potential targets to reduce the impact of this devastating disease.

