BACKGROUND
infectious salmon anaemia  is a viral disease of marine-farmed atlantic salmon  caused by isa virus , which belongs to the genus isavirus, family orthomyxoviridae. the virus is considered to be carried by marine wild fish and for over  <dig> years has caused major disease outbreaks in marine-farmed atlantic salmon in the northern hemisphere. in the southern hemisphere, isav was first detected in chile in  <dig> in marine-farmed coho salmon . in contrast to the classical presentation of isa in atlantic salmon, the presence of isav in chile until now has only been associated with a clinical condition called icterus syndrome in coho salmon and virus isolation has not always been possible. during the winter of  <dig>  unexplained mortalities were registered in market-size atlantic salmon in a grow-out site located in chiloé in region x of chile. we report here the diagnostic findings of the first significant clinical outbreak of isa in marine-farmed atlantic salmon in chile and the first characterization of the isav isolated from the affected fish.


RESULTS
in mid-june  <dig>  an atlantic salmon marine farm site located in central chiloé island in region x of chile registered a sudden increase in mortality following recovery from an outbreak of pisciricketsiosis, which rose to a cumulative mortality of  <dig> % by harvest time. based on the clinical signs and lesions in the affected fish, and laboratory tests performed on the fish tissues, a confirmatory diagnosis of isa was made; the first time isa in its classical presentation and for the first time affecting farmed atlantic salmon in chile. rapid sequencing of the virus-specific rt-pcr products amplified from the fish tissues identified the virus to belong to the european genotype  of the highly polymorphic region  group hpr 7b, but with an 11-amino acid insert in the fusion glycoprotein, and ability to cause cytopathic effects  in chse- <dig> cell line, characteristics which make it distinct from common european genotype isav isolates from europe and north america.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the present work constitutes the first report of a case of isa in farmed atlantic salmon in chile. the clinical signs and lesions are consistent with the classical descriptions of the disease in marine-farmed atlantic salmon in the northern hemisphere. the outbreak was caused by isav of european genotype  of hpr 7b but distinct from common european genotype isav isolates.

