BACKGROUND
burkholderia cenocepacia is a soil-dwelling gram-negative betaproteobacterium with an important role as opportunistic pathogen in humans. infections with b. cenocepacia are very difficult to treat due to their high intrinsic resistance to most antibiotics. biofilm formation further adds to their antibiotic resistance. b. cenocepacia harbours a large, multi-replicon genome with a high gc-content, the reference genome of strain j <dig> includes  <dig> annotated genes. this study aims to annotate transcription start sites and identify novel transcripts on a whole genome scale.

methods
rna extracted from b. cenocepacia j <dig> biofilms was analysed by differential rna-sequencing and the resulting dataset compared to data derived from conventional, global rna-sequencing. transcription start sites were annotated and further analysed according to their position relative to annotated genes.


RESULTS
four thousand ten transcription start sites were mapped over the whole b. cenocepacia genome and the primary transcription start site of  <dig> genes expressed in b. cenocepacia biofilms were defined. for  <dig> genes a start codon alternative to the annotated one was proposed. substantial antisense transcription for  <dig> genes and two novel protein coding sequences were identified. the distribution of internal transcription start sites can be used to identify genomic islands in b. cenocepacia. a potassium pump strongly induced only under biofilm conditions was found and  <dig> non-coding small rnas highly expressed in biofilms were discovered.


CONCLUSIONS
mapping transcription start sites across the b. cenocepacia genome added relevant information to the j <dig> annotation. genes and novel regulatory rnas putatively involved in b. cenocepacia biofilm formation were identified. these findings will help in understanding regulation of b. cenocepacia biofilm formation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
burkholderia cenocepaciabiofilmsdrna-seqtranscription start sitesmall rnasantisense rnagenomic islandsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

