BACKGROUND
non-coding rnas  play crucial roles in many biological processes, such as post-transcription of gene regulation. ncrnas mainly function through interaction with rna binding proteins . to understand the function of a ncrna, a fundamental step is to identify which protein is involved into its interaction. therefore it is promising to computationally predict rbps, where the major challenge is that the interaction pattern or motif is difficult to be found.


RESULTS
in this study, we propose a computational method ipminer  to predict ncrna-protein interactions from sequences, which makes use of deep learning and further improves its performance using stacked ensembling. one of the ipminer’s typical merits is that it is able to mine the hidden sequential interaction patterns from sequence composition features of protein and rna sequences using stacked autoencoder, and then the learned hidden features are fed into random forest models. finally, stacked ensembling is used to integrate different predictors to further improve the prediction performance. the experimental results indicate that ipminer achieves superior performance on the tested lncrna-protein interaction dataset with an accuracy of  <dig> , sensitivity of  <dig> , specificity of  <dig> , precision of  <dig>  and matthews correlation coefficient of  <dig> , respectively. we further comprehensively investigate ipminer on other rna-protein interaction datasets, which yields better performance than the state-of-the-art methods, and the performance has an increase of over  <dig> % on some tested benchmarked datasets. in addition, we further apply ipminer for large-scale prediction of ncrna-protein network, that achieves promising prediction performance.


CONCLUSIONS
by integrating deep neural network and stacked ensembling, from simple sequence composition features, ipminer can automatically learn high-level abstraction features, which had strong discriminant ability for rna-protein detection. ipminer achieved high performance on our constructed lncrna-protein benchmark dataset and other rna-protein datasets. ipminer tool is available at http://www.csbio.sjtu.edu.cn/bioinf/ipminer.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
ncrnancrna-proteindeep learningstacked ensembingnational natural science foundation of china 61462018fan yong-xian science and technology commission of shanghai municipalityno. 16jc1404300shen hong-bin issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

