BACKGROUND
skeletal muscle stem cells enable the formation, growth, maintenance, and regeneration of skeletal muscle throughout life. the regeneration process is compromised in several pathological conditions, and muscle progenitors derived from pluripotent stem cells have been suggested as a potential therapeutic source for tissue replacement. dna methylation is an important epigenetic mechanism in the setting and maintenance of cellular identity, but its role in stem cell determination towards the myogenic lineage is unknown. here we addressed the dna methylation dynamics of the major genes orchestrating the myogenic determination and differentiation programs in embryonic stem  cells, their pax7-induced myogenic derivatives, and muscle stem cells in proliferating and differentiating conditions.


RESULTS
our data showed a common muscle-specific dna demethylation signature required to acquire and maintain the muscle-cell identity. this specific-dna demethylation is pax7-mediated, and it is a prime event in muscle stem cells gene activation. notably, downregulation of the demethylation-related enzyme apobec <dig> in es-derived myogenic precursors reduced myogenin-associated dna demethylation and dramatically impaired the expression of differentiation markers and, ultimately, muscle differentiation.


CONCLUSIONS
our results underscore dna demethylation as a key mechanism driving myogenesis and identify specific pax7-mediated dna demethylation signatures to acquire and maintain the muscle-cell identity. additionally, we provide a panel of epigenetic markers for the efficient and safe generation of es- and induced pluripotent stem cell -derived myogenic progenitors for therapeutic applications.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dna methylationcellular identitymyogenesispax7-induced escsapobec2epimarkershttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100007136secretaría de estado de investigación, desarrollo e innovaciónsaf2012-37427saf2011- <dig>  saf2015-64521peinado miguel a. suelves mònica http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000025national institute of mental healthr <dig> ar055299perlingeiro rita minnesota regenerative medicinemrm  <dig> pdsch 003magli alessandro fpi fellow issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

