BACKGROUND
galactofuranose -containing glycoconjugates are present in numerous microbes, including filamentous fungi where they are important for morphology, virulence and maintaining cell wall integrity. the incorporation of galf-residues into galactomannan, galactomannoproteins and glycolipids is carried out by golgi-localized galf transferases. the nucleotide sugar donor used by these transferases  is produced in the cytoplasm and has to be transported to the lumen of the golgi by a dedicated nucleotide sugar transporter.

methods
based on homology with recently identified udp-galf-transporters in a. fumigatus and a. nidulans, two putative udp-galf-transporters in a. niger were found. their function and localization was determined by gene deletions and gfp-tagging studies, respectively.


RESULTS
the two putative udp-galf-transporters in a. niger are homologous to each other and are predicted to contain eleven transmembrane domains  or ten transmembrane domains  due to a reduced length of the c-terminal part of the ugtb protein. the presence of two putative udp-galf-transporters in the genome was not unique for a. niger. from the twenty aspergillus species analysed, nine species contained two additional putative udp-galf-transporters. three of the nine species were outside the aspergillus section nigri, indication an early duplication of udp-galf-transporters and subsequent loss of the ugtb copy in several aspergilli. deletion analysis of the single and double mutants in a. niger indicated that the two putative udp-galf-transporters  have a redundant function in udp-galf-transport as only the double mutant displayed a galf-negative phenotype. the galf-negative phenotype of the double mutant could be complemented by expressing either cfp-ugta or cfp-ugtb fusion proteins from their endogenous promoters, indicating that both cfp-tagged proteins are functional. both ugt proteins co-localize with each other as well as with the gdp-mannose nucleotide transporter, as was demonstrated by fluorescence microscopy, thereby confirming their predicted localization in the golgi.


CONCLUSIONS
a. niger contains two genes encoding udp-galf-transporters. deletion and localization studies indicate that ugta and ugtb have redundant functions in the biosynthesis of galf-containing glycoconjugates.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cell wallgalactomannangalactofuranosesugar nucleotide transportersgolgiissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

