BACKGROUND
rna interference  can potently reduce target gene expression in mammalian cells and is in wide use for loss-of-function studies. several recent reports have demonstrated that short double-stranded rnas , used to mediate rnai, can also induce an interferon-based response resulting in changes in the expression of many interferon-responsive genes. off-target gene silencing has also been described, bringing into question the validity of certain rnai-based approaches for studying gene function. we have targeted the plasminogen activator inhibitor- <dig>  mrna using lentiviral vectors for delivery of u <dig> promoter-driven pai-2-targeted short hairpin rna  expression. pai- <dig> is reported to have anti-apoptotic activity, thus reduction of endogenous expression may be expected to make cells more sensitive to programmed cell death.


RESULTS
as expected, we encountered a cytotoxic phenotype when targeting the pai- <dig> mrna with vector-derived shrna. however, this predicted phenotype was a potent non-specific effect of shrna expression, as functional overexpression of the target protein failed to rescue the phenotype. by decreasing the shrna length or modifying its sequence we maintained pai- <dig> silencing and reduced, but did not eliminate, cytotoxicity. shrna of  <dig> complementary nucleotides  or more increased expression of the oligoadenylate synthase- <dig>  interferon-responsive gene.  <dig> mer shrna had no effect on oas <dig> expression but long-term selective pressure on cell growth was observed. by lowering lentiviral vector titre we were able to reduce both expression of shrna and induction of oas <dig>  without a major impact on the efficacy of gene silencing.


CONCLUSIONS
our data demonstrate a rapid cytotoxic effect of shrnas expressed in human tumor cell lines. there appears to be a cut-off of  <dig> complementary nucleotides below which there is no interferon response while target gene silencing is maintained. cytotoxicity or oas <dig> induction could be reduced by changing shrna sequence or vector titre, but stable gene silencing could not be maintained in extended cell culture despite persistent marker gene expression from the rnai-inducing transgene cassette. these results underscore the necessity of careful controls for immediate and long-term rnai use in mammalian cell systems.

