BACKGROUND
valeriana fauriei is commonly used in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases in many countries. several constituents with various pharmacological properties are present in the roots of valeriana species. although many researches on v. fauriei have been done since a long time, further studies in the discipline make a limit due to inadequate genomic information. hence, illumina hiseq  <dig> system was conducted to obtain the transcriptome data from shoot and root of v. fauriei.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  unigenes were noticed from  <dig> , <dig> raw reads after preprocessing and assembly. of these,  <dig>  unigens were annotated with uniprot blast hits and mapped to cog, go and kegg pathway. also,  <dig>  and  <dig>  transcripts were expressed in root and shoot of v. fauriei, respectively. among the secondary metabolite biosynthesis, terpenoid backbone and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were large groups, where transcripts was involved. to characterize the molecular basis of terpenoid, carotenoid, and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, the levels of transcription were determined by qrt-pcr. also, secondary metabolites content were measured using gc/ms and hplc analysis for that gene expression correlated with its accumulation respectively between shoot and root of v. fauriei.


CONCLUSIONS
we have identified the transcriptome using illumina hiseq system in shoot and root of v. fauriei. also, we have demonstrated gene expressions associated with secondary metabolism such as terpenoid, carotenoid, and phenylpropanoid.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
valeriana faurieiillumina hiseq systemdigital gene expressionterpenoidcarotenoidphenylpropanoidrural development administration, republic of koreapj011582022015kim young ock http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100005880national institute of biological resources nibr201503101kim soonok deanship of scientific research at king saud university rg-1435-071arasu mariadhas valan issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

