BACKGROUND
gene regulatory processes are largely resulting from binding of transcription factors to specific genomic targets. leucine-responsive regulatory protein  is a prevalent transcription factor family in prokaryotes, however, little information is available on biological functions of these proteins in archaea. here, we study genome-wide binding of the lrp-like transcription factor ss-lrpb from sulfolobus solfataricus.


RESULTS
chromatin immunoprecipitation in combination with dna microarray analysis  has revealed that ss-lrpb interacts with  <dig> additional loci besides the four previously identified local targets. only a subset of the newly identified binding targets, concentrated in a highly variable is-dense genomic region, is also bound in vitro by pure ss-lrpb. there is no clear relationship between the in vitro measured dna-binding specificity of ss-lrpb and the in vivo association suggesting a limited permissivity of the crenarchaeal chromatin for transcription factor binding. of  <dig> identified binding regions,  <dig> are co-bound by lysm, another lrp-like transcription factor in s. solfataricus. comparative gene expression analysis in an ss-lrpb mutant strain shows no significant ss-lrpb-mediated regulation for most targeted genes, with exception of the crispr b cluster, which is activated by ss-lrpb through binding to a specific motif in the leader region.


CONCLUSIONS
the genome-wide binding profile presented here implies that ss-lrpb is associated at additional genomic binding sites besides the local gene targets, but acts as a specific transcription regulator in the tested growth conditions. moreover, we have provided evidence that two lrp-like transcription factors in s. solfataricus, ss-lrpb and lysm, interact in vivo.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
archaeasulfolobusleucine-responsive regulatory proteincrisprchip-chipissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013

