BACKGROUND
release of domesticated strains of fish into nature may pose a threat to wild populations with respect to their evolved genetic structure and fitness. understanding alterations that have occurred in both physiology and genetics as a consequence of domestication can assist in evaluating the risks posed by introgression of domesticated genomes into wild genetic backgrounds, however the molecular causes of these consequences are currently poorly defined. the present study has examined levels of mrna in fast-growing pure domesticated , slow-growing age-matched pure wild , slow-growing size-matched pure wild , and first generation hybrid cross  rainbow trout  to investigate the influence of genotype  and developmental stage  on genetic responses  and specific physiological pathways.


RESULTS
highly significant differences in mrna levels were found between domesticated and wild-type rainbow trout genotypes , with many mrnas in the wild-domesticated hybrid progeny showing intermediate levels. differences were also found between age-matched and size-matched wild-type trout groups , with unique mrna differences for each of the wild-type groups when compared to domesticated trout , illustrating an influence of fish developmental stage affecting findings when used as comparator groups to other genotypes. analysis of differentially expressed mrnas  among the genotypes indicates that  <dig> % are regulated consistent with an additive genetic model, whereas  <dig> % and  <dig> % show a recessive or dominant mode of regulation, respectively. these molecular data are largely consistent with phenotypic data  assessed in domesticated and wild trout strains.


CONCLUSIONS
the present molecular data are concordant with domestication having clearly altered rainbow trout genomes and consequent phenotype from that of native wild populations. although mainly additive responses were noted in hybrid progeny, the prevalence of dominant and non-additive responses reveals that introgression of domesticated and wild genotypes alters the type of genetic control of mrna levels from that of wild-type, which may lead to disruption of gene regulation systems important for developing phenotypes for optimal fitness in nature. a clear influence of both fish age and size  on mrna levels was also noted in this study, which highlights the importance of examining multiple control samples to provide a comprehensive understanding of changes observed between strains possessing differences in growth rate.

genomicsdomesticationgrowthrainbow troutage-matchedsize-matched

