BACKGROUND
the neotropics are exceptionally diverse, containing roughly one third of all extant bird species on earth. this remarkable species richness is thought to be a consequence of processes associated with both andean orogenesis throughout the tertiary, and climatic fluctuations during the quaternary. phylogeographic studies allow insights into how such events might have influenced evolutionary trajectories of species and ultimately contribute to a better understanding of speciation. studies on continentally distributed species are of particular interest because different populations of such taxa may show genetic signatures of events that impacted the continent-wide biota. here we evaluate the genealogical history of one of the world’s most broadly-distributed and polytypic passerines, the rufous-collared sparrow .


RESULTS
we obtained control region dna sequences from  <dig> zonotrichia capensis individuals sampled across the species’ range . six additional molecular markers, both nuclear and mitochondrial, were sequenced for a subset of individuals with divergent control region haplotypes. median-joining network analysis, and bayesian and maximum parsimony phylogenetic analyses all recovered three lineages: one spanning middle america, the dominican republic, and north-western south america; one encompassing the dominican republic, roraima  and la paz  south to tierra del fuego, argentina; and a third, including eastern argentina and brazil. phylogenetic analyses suggest that the middle american/north-western south american clade is sister to the remaining two. bayesian and maximum likelihood coalescent simulations used to study lineage demographic history, diversification times, migration rates and population expansion together suggested that diversification of the three lineages occurred rapidly during the pleistocene, with negligible gene flow, leaving genetic signatures of population expansions.


CONCLUSIONS
the pleistocene history of the rufous-collared sparrow involved extensive range expansion from a probable central american origin. its remarkable morphological and behavioral diversity probably represents recent responses to local conditions overlying deeper patterns of lineage diversity, which are themselves produced by isolation and the history of colonization of south america.

colonizationdemographic expansionintraspecific divergencedna sequencespleistocenerufous-collared sparrow

