BACKGROUND
regulated proteolysis by the proteasome is one of the fundamental mechanisms used in eukaryotic cells to control cellular behavior. efficient tools to regulate protein stability offer synthetic influence on molecular level on a selected biological process. optogenetic control of protein stability has been achieved with the photo-sensitive degron  module. this engineered tool consists of the photoreceptor domain light oxygen voltage  <dig>  from arabidopsis thaliana phototropin <dig> fused to a sequence that induces direct proteasomal degradation, which was derived from the carboxy-terminal degron of murine ornithine decarboxylase. the abundance of target proteins tagged with the psd module can be regulated by blue light if the degradation tag is exposed to the cytoplasm or the nucleus.


RESULTS
we used the model organism saccharomyces cerevisiae to generate psd module variants with increased and decreased stabilities in darkness or when exposed to blue light using site-specific and random mutagenesis. the variants were characterized as fusions to fluorescent reporter proteins and showed half-lives between  <dig> and 75 minutes in cells exposed to blue light and  <dig> to 187 minutes in darkness. in blue light, ten variants showed accelerated degradation and four variants increased stability compared to the original psd module. measuring the dark/light ratio of selected constructs in yeast cells showed that two variants were obtained with ratios twice as high as in the wild type psd module. in silico modeling of photoreceptor variant characteristics suggested that for most cases alterations in behavior were induced by changes in the light-response of the lov <dig> domain.


CONCLUSIONS
in total, the mutational analysis resulted in psd module variants, which provide tuning of protein stability over a broad range by blue light. two variants showed characteristics that are profoundly improved compared to the original construct. the modular usage of the lov <dig> domain in optogenetic tools allows the usage of the mutants in the context of other applications in synthetic and systems biology as well.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
optogeneticslov <dig> domaindegronproteolysislightproteasomesynthetic biologyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

