BACKGROUND
one of the most important members of the genus brassica, cabbage, requires a relatively high level of calcium for normal growth . localized ca2+ deficiency in cabbage leaves causes tip-burn, bringing about serious economic losses . although it has been known that the occurrence of tip-burn is related to ca2+ deficiency, there is limited information on the underlying mechanisms of tip-burn or the relationship between ca2+ and tip-burn incidence. to obtain more information on the genetic control of tip-burn symptoms, we focused on the identification of genes differentially expressed in response to increasing intracellular ca2+ and k+ concentrations in b. oleracea lines derived from tip-burn susceptible, tip-burn resistant cabbages , and kale .


RESULTS
we compared the levels of major macronutrient cations, including ca2+ and k+, in three leaf segments, the leaf apex , middle of leaf , and leaf base , of tip-burn susceptible, tip-burn resistant cabbages, and kale. ca2+ and k+ concentrations were highest in kale, followed by tip-burn resistant and then tip-burn susceptible cabbages. these cations generally accumulated to a greater extent in the lb than in the la. transcriptome analysis identified  <dig>  loci as putative non-redundant genes in the three leaf segments of the three b. oleracea lines and showed significant changes in expression of  <dig>  loci based on ca2+ and k+ levels. among these,  <dig> loci were identified as tip-burn related phenotype-specific genes. tip-burn resistant cabbage and kale-specific genes were largely related to stress and transport activity based on go annotation. tip-burn resistant cabbage and kale plants showed phenotypes clearly indicative of heat-shock, freezing, and drought stress tolerance compared to tip-burn susceptible cabbages, demonstrating a correlation between intracellular ca2+ and k+ concentrations and tolerance of abiotic stress with differential gene expression. we selected  <dig> genes that were up- or down-regulated in response to increasing ca2+ and k+ concentrations in the three leaf segments of the three plant lines. gene ontology enrichment analysis indicated that these genes participated in regulatory metabolic processes or stress responses.


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the genes involved in regulatory metabolic processes or stress responses were differentially expressed in response to increasing ca2+ and k+ concentrations in the b. oleracea leaf. our transcriptome data and the genes identified may serve as a starting point for understanding the mechanisms underlying essential macronutrient deficiencies in plants, as well as the features of tip-burn in cabbage and other brassica species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
calcium ionpotassium iontranscriptomebrassica oleraceacabbage genomics assisted breeding supporting center  research programsgolden seed projectkribb research initiative programissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

