BACKGROUND
pregnancy testing in cattle is commonly invasive requiring manual rectal palpation of the reproductive tract that presents risks to the operator and pregnancy. alternative non-invasive tests have been developed but have not gained popularity due to poor specificity, sensitivity and the inconvenience of sample handling. our aim is to present the pilot study and proof of concept of a new non invasive technique to sense the presence and age  of the foetus by recording the electrical and audio signals produced by the foetus heartbeat using an array of specialized sensors embedded in a stand alone handheld prototype device. the device was applied to the right flank  of more than  <dig> cattle from  <dig> different farms, including pregnant and not pregnant, a diversity of breeds, and both dairy and beef herds. pregnancy status response is given “on the spot” from an optimized machine learning algorithm running on the device within seconds after data collection.


RESULTS
using combined electrical and audio foetal signals we detected pregnancy with a sensitivity of  <dig> % and a specificity of  <dig> % for all recorded data. those values increase to 91% and 81% respectively by removing files with excessive noise .

foetus ageing was achieved by comparing the detected foetus heart-rate with published tables. however, given the challenging farm environment of a restless cow, correct foetus ageing was achieved for only 21% of the correctly diagnosed pregnant cows.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion we have found that combining ecg and pcg measurements on the right flank of cattle provides a reliable and rapid method of pregnancy testing. the device has potential to be applied by unskilled operators. this will generate more efficient and productive management of farms. there is potential for the device to be applied to large endangered quadrupeds in captive breeding programs where early, safe and reliable pregnancy diagnosis can be imperative but currently difficult to achieve.

