BACKGROUND
complex biological systems are often modeled as networks of interacting units. networks of biochemical interactions among proteins, epidemiological contacts among hosts, and trophic interactions in ecosystems, to name a few, have provided useful insights into the dynamical processes that shape and traverse these systems. the degrees of nodes  and the extent of clustering  are two of many well-studied network properties that can fundamentally shape a system. disentangling the interdependent effects of the various network properties, however, can be difficult. simple network models can help us quantify the structure of empirical networked systems and understand the impact of various topological properties on dynamics.


RESULTS
here we develop and implement a new markov chain simulation algorithm to generate simple, connected random graphs that have a specified degree sequence and level of clustering, but are random in all other respects. the implementation of the algorithm  provides the generation of random graphs optimized according to a local or global, and relative or absolute measure of clustering. we compare our algorithm to other similar methods and show that ours more successfully produces desired network characteristics.

finding appropriate null models is crucial in bioinformatics research, and is often difficult, particularly for biological networks. as we demonstrate, the networks generated by clustrnet can serve as random controls when investigating the impacts of complex network features beyond the byproduct of degree and clustering in empirical networks.


CONCLUSIONS
clustrnet generates ensembles of graphs of specified edge structure and clustering. these graphs allow for systematic study of the impacts of connectivity and redundancies on network function and dynamics. this process is a key step in unraveling the functional consequences of the structural properties of empirical biological systems and uncovering the mechanisms that drive these systems.

