BACKGROUND
aspartic proteases  are a large family of proteolytic enzymes found in almost all organisms. in plants, they are involved in many biological processes, such as senescence, stress responses, programmed cell death, and reproduction. prior to the present study, no grape ap gene had been reported, and their research on woody species was very limited.


RESULTS
in this study, a total of  <dig> ap genes  were identified in the grape genome, among which  <dig> contained the complete asp domain. synteny analysis within grape indicated that segmental and tandem duplication events contributed to the expansion of the grape ap family. additional analysis between grape and arabidopsis demonstrated that several grape ap genes were found in the corresponding syntenic blocks of arabidopsis, suggesting that these genes arose before the divergence of grape and arabidopsis. phylogenetic relationships of the  <dig> vvaps with the complete asp domain and their arabidopsis orthologs, as well as their gene and protein features were analyzed and their cellular localization was predicted. moreover, expression profiles of vvap genes in six different tissues were determined, and their transcript abundance under various stresses and hormone treatments were measured. twenty-seven vvap genes were expressed in at least one of the six tissues examined; nineteen vvaps responded to at least one abiotic stress,  <dig> vvaps responded to powdery mildew infection, and most of the vvaps responded to sa and aba treatments. furthermore, integrated synteny and phylogenetic analysis identified orthologous ap genes between grape and arabidopsis, providing a unique starting point for investigating the function of grape ap genes.


CONCLUSIONS
the genome-wide identification, evolutionary and expression analyses of grape ap genes provide a framework for future analysis of ap genes in defining their roles during stress response. integrated synteny and phylogenetic analyses provide novel insight into the functions of less well-studied genes using information from their better understood orthologs.

synteny analysisphylogenetic analysisgene expressionorthologous genesgrape

