BACKGROUND
the order hymenoptera  contains about eight percent of all described species, but no analytical studies have addressed the origins of this richness at family-level or above. to investigate which major subtaxa experienced significant shifts in diversification, we assembled a family-level phylogeny of the hymenoptera using supertree methods. we used sister-group species-richness comparisons to infer the phylogenetic position of shifts in diversification.


RESULTS
the supertrees most supported by the underlying input trees are produced using matrix representation with compatibility  . whilst relationships at the tips of the tree tend to be well supported, those along the backbone of the tree  are generally not. ten significant shifts in diversification  are found common to both mrc supertrees. the apocrita  experienced a positive shift at their origin accounting for approximately  <dig>  species. within apocrita other positive shifts include the vespoidea , anthophila + sphecidae , bethylidae + chrysididae , dryinidae , and proctotrupidae . four relatively species-poor families  have undergone negative shifts. there are some two-way shifts in diversification where sister taxa have undergone shifts in opposite directions.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that numerous phylogenetically distinctive radiations contribute to the richness of large clades. they also suggest that evolutionary events restricting the subsequent richness of large clades are common. problematic phylogenetic issues in the hymenoptera are identified, relating especially to superfamily validity , and deeper apocritan relationships. our results should stimulate new functional studies on the causes of the diversification shifts we have identified. possible drivers highlighted for specific adaptive radiations include key anatomical innovations, the exploitation of rich host groups, and associations with angiosperms. low richness may have evolved as a result of geographical isolation, specialised ecological niches, and habitat loss or competition.

