BACKGROUND
microarray technologies are rapidly becoming available for new species including teleost fishes. we constructed a rainbow trout cdna microarray targeted at the identification of genes which are differentially expressed in response to environmental stressors. this platform included clones from normalized and subtracted libraries and genes selected through functional annotation. present study focused on time-course comparisons of stress responses in the brain and kidney and the identification of a set of genes which are diagnostic for stress response.


RESULTS
fish were stressed with handling and samples were collected  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days after the first exposure. gene expression profiles were analysed in terms of gene ontology categories. stress affected different functional groups of genes in the tissues studied. mitochondria, extracellular matrix and endopeptidases  were the major targets in kidney. stress response in brain was characterized with dramatic temporal alterations. metal ion binding proteins, glycolytic enzymes and motor proteins were induced transiently, whereas expression of genes involved in stress and immune response, cell proliferation and growth, signal transduction and apoptosis, protein biosynthesis and folding changed in a reciprocal fashion. despite dramatic difference between tissues and time-points, we were able to identify a group of  <dig> genes that showed strong correlation of expression profiles  in  <dig> microarray experiments being regulated by stress. we evaluated performance of the clone sets used for preparation of microarray. overall, the number of differentially expressed genes was markedly higher in est than in genes selected through gene ontology annotations, however 63% of stress-responsive genes were from this group.


CONCLUSIONS
 <dig>  stress responses in fish brain and kidney are different in function and time-course.  <dig>  identification of stress-regulated genes provides the possibility for measuring stress responses in various conditions and further search for the functionally related genes.

