BACKGROUND
reliable transcription factor binding site  prediction methods are essential for computer annotation of large amount of genome sequence data. however, current methods to predict tfbss are hampered by the high false-positive rates that occur when only sequence conservation at the core binding-sites is considered.


RESULTS
to improve this situation, we have quantified the performance of several position weight matrix  algorithms, using exhaustive approaches to find their optimal length and position. we applied these approaches to bio-medically important tfbss involved in the regulation of cell growth and proliferation as well as in inflammatory, immune, and antiviral responses , obesity and lipid metabolism , regulation of the steroidogenic  and cell cycle  genes expression. we have also gained extra specificity using a method, entitled sitega, which takes into account structural interactions within tfbs core and flanking regions, using a genetic algorithm  with a discriminant function of locally positioned dinucleotide  frequencies.

to ensure a higher confidence in our approach, we applied resampling-jackknife and bootstrap tests for the comparison, it appears that, optimized pwm and sitega have shown similar recognition performances. then we applied sitega and optimized pwms  to sequences in the eukaryotic promoter database . the resulting sitega recognition models can now be used to search sequences for bss using the web tool, sitega.

analysis of dependencies between close and distant lpds revealed by sitega models has shown that the most significant correlations are between close lpds, and are generally located in the core  region. a greater number of less significant correlations are mainly between distant lpds, which spanned both core and flanking regions. when sitega and optimized pwm models were applied together, this substantially reduced false positives at least at higher stringencies.


CONCLUSIONS
based on this analysis, sitega adds substantial specificity even to optimized pwms and may be considered for large-scale genome analysis. it adds to the range of techniques available for tfbs prediction, and epd analysis has led to a list of genes which appear to be regulated by the above tfs.

