BACKGROUND
pseudomonas syringae infects diverse plant species and is widely used in the study of effector function and the molecular basis of disease. although the relationship between bacterial metabolism, nutrient acquisition and virulence has attracted increasing attention in bacterial pathology, there is limited knowledge regarding these studies in pseudomonas syringae. the aim of this study was to investigate the function of the cara gene and the small rna p <dig>  and characterize the regulation of these transcripts.


RESULTS
disruption of the cara gene  which encodes the predicted small chain of carbamoylphosphate synthetase, resulted in arginine and pyrimidine auxotrophy in pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato dc <dig>  complementation with the wild type cara gene was able to restore growth to wild-type levels in minimal medium. deletion of the small rna p <dig>  which resides immediately upstream of cara, did not result in arginine or pyrimidine auxotrophy. the expression of cara was influenced by the concentrations of both arginine and uracil in the medium. when tested for pathogenicity, Δcara showed reduced fitness in tomato as well as arabidopsis when compared to the wild-type strain. in contrast, mutation of the region encoding p <dig> had minimal effect in planta. Δcara also exhibited reduced motility and increased biofilm formation, whereas disruption of p <dig> had no impact on motility or biofilm formation.


CONCLUSIONS
our data show that cara plays an important role in providing arginine and uracil for growth of the bacteria and also influences other factors that are potentially important for growth and survival during infection. although we find that the small rna p <dig> and cara are co-transcribed, p <dig> does not play a role in the phenotypes that cara is required for, such as motility, cell attachment, and virulence. additionally, our data suggests that pyrimidines may be limited in the apoplastic space of the plant host tomato.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
pseudomonas syringae pv tomatocarabp32virulenceswarmingbiofilm formationhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007917agricultural research serviceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

