BACKGROUND
membrane proteins are underrepresented in structural databases, which has led to a lack of computational tools and the corresponding inappropriate use of tools designed for soluble proteins. for membrane proteins, lipid accessibility is an essential property. although programs are available for sequence-based prediction of lipid accessibility and structure-based identification of solvent-accessible surface area, the latter does not distinguish between water accessible and lipid accessible residues in membrane proteins.


RESULTS
here we present mp_lipid_acc, the first method to identify lipid accessible residues from the protein structure, implemented in the rosettamp framework and available as a webserver. our method uses protein structures transformed in membrane coordinates, for instance from pdbtm or opm databases, and a defined membrane thickness to classify lipid accessibility of residues. mp_lipid_acc is applicable to both α-helical and β-barrel membrane proteins of diverse architectures with or without water-filled pores and uses a concave hull algorithm for surface-residue classification. we further provide a manually curated benchmark dataset that can be used for further method development.


CONCLUSIONS
we present a novel tool to classify lipid accessibility from the protein structure, which is applicable to proteins of diverse architectures and achieves prediction accuracies of 90% on a manually curated database. mp_lipid_acc is part of the rosetta software suite, available at www.rosettacommons.org. the webserver is available at http://rosie.graylab.jhu.edu/mp_lipid_acc/submit and the benchmark dataset is available at http://tinyurl.com/mp-lipid-acc-dataset.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
membrane proteinsstructure predictionlipid accessibilityaccessible surface arearosetta softwaresimons foundation http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000057national institute of general medical sciencesnih r01-gm073151lyskov sergey issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

