BACKGROUND
the interactions of fig wasps and their host figs provide a model for investigating co-evolution. fig wasps have specialized morphological characters and lifestyles thought to be adaptations to living in the fig's syconium. although these aspects of natural history are well documented, the genetic mechanism underlying these changes remain unknown. fig wasp olfaction is the key to host-specificity. the or83b gene class, an unusual member of olfactory receptor family, plays a critical role in enabling the function of conventional olfactory receptors. four or83b orthologous genes from one pollinator   and three non-pollinator fig wasps   associated with one species of fig  can be used to better understand the molecular mechanism underlying the fig wasp's adaptation to its host. we made a comparison of spatial tissue-specific expression patterns and substitution rates of one orthologous gene in these fig wasps and sought evidence for selection pressures.


RESULTS
a newly identified or83b orthologous gene was named or <dig>  expressions of or <dig> were restricted to the heads of all wingless male fig wasps, which usually live in the dark cavity of a fig throughout their life cycle. however, expressions were widely detected in the antennae, legs and abdomens of all female fig wasps that fly from one fig to another for oviposition, and secondarily pollination. weak expression was also observed in the thorax of pfws. compared with npfws, the or <dig> gene in c. solmsi had an elevated rate of substitutions and lower codon usage. analyses using tajima's d, fu and li's d* and f* tests indicated a non-neutral pattern of nucleotide variation in all fig wasps. unlike in npfws, this non-neutral pattern was also observed for synonymous sites of or <dig> within pfws.


CONCLUSIONS
the sex- and species-specific expression patterns of or <dig> genes detected beyond the known primary olfactory tissues indicates the location of cryptic olfactory inputs. the specialized ecological niche of these wasps explains the unique habits and adaptive evolution of or <dig> genes. the or <dig> gene in c. solmsi is evolving very rapidly. negative deviation from the neutral model of evolution reflects possible selection pressures acting on or <dig> sequences of fig wasp, particularly on pfws who are more host-specific to figs.

