BACKGROUND
if mutation within the coding region of the genome is largely not adaptive, the ratio of nonsynonymous  to synonymous substitutions  per site  should be approximately equal among closely related species. furthermore, dn/ds in divergence between species should be equivalent to dn/ds in polymorphisms. this hypothesis is of particular interest in closely related members of the bovini tribe, because domestication has promoted rapid phenotypic divergence through strong artificial selection of some species while others remain undomesticated. we examined a number of genes that may be involved in milk production in domestic cattle and a number of their wild relatives for evidence that domestication had affected molecular evolution. elevated rates of dn/ds were further queried to determine if they were the result of positive selection, low effective population size  or reduced selective constraint.


RESULTS
we have found that the domestication process has contributed to higher dn/ds ratios in cattle, especially in the lineages leading to the domestic cow  and mithan  and within some breeds of domestic cow. however, the high rates of dn/ds polymorphism within b. taurus when compared to species divergence suggest that positive selection has not elevated evolutionary rates in these genes. likewise, the low rate of dn/ds in bison, which has undergone a recent population bottleneck, indicates a reduction in population size alone is not responsible for these observations.


CONCLUSIONS
the effect of selection depends on effective population size and the selection coefficient . typically under domestication both selection pressure for traits important in fitness in the wild and ne are reduced. therefore, reduced selective constraint could be responsible for the observed elevated evolutionary ratios in domesticated species, especially in b. taurus and b. frontalis, which have the highest dn/ds in the bovini. this may have important implications for tests of selection such as the mcdonald-kreitman test. surprisingly we have also detected a significant difference in the supposed neutral substitution rate between synonymous and noncoding sites in the bovine genome, with a 30% higher rate of substitution at synonymous sites. this is due, at least in part, to an excess of the highly mutable cpg dinucleotides at synonymous sites, which will have implications for time of divergence estimates from molecular data.

