BACKGROUND
tea is a popular natural non-alcoholic beverage consumed worldwide due to its bioactive ingredients, particularly catechins . catechins not only contribute to tea quality but also serve important functions in the anti-stress regulation of secondary metabolic pathways. however, the percentages of various catechins are different among tea plant  cultivars. this study aimed to elucidate the biosynthetic mechanism of catechins. transcriptomes from leaf tissues of four tea plant cultivars, ‘yunnanshilixiang’, ‘chawansanhao’, ‘ruchengmaoyecha’, and ‘anjibaicha’, were sequenced using the high-throughput sequencing platform illumina hiseq™  <dig>  de novo assemble were also performed. catechins contents were measured through reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography , and the biosynthetic pathway was also surveyed.


RESULTS
we constructed a unified unigene database. a total of  <dig>  pairs of putative orthologs from the four tea plant cultivars, ‘yunnanshilixiang’, ‘chawansanhao’, ‘ruchengmaoyecha’, and ‘anjibaicha’ were generated. approximately  <dig>  unigenes  were aligned to the sequences of seven public databases with a cut-off e-value of 1e- <dig>  a total of  <dig> differentially expressed genes were found through rpkm values, and  <dig> unigenes were assigned to the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway using the integrated function annotation. the -egc and -ec contents were significantly lower and the -gc and -c contents were abnormally higher in ‘ruchengmaoyecha’ than in ‘yunnanshilixiang’, ‘chawansanhao’, and ‘anjibaicha’. the proportion of catechins was confirmed by selecting critical genes  for qrt-pcr analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provided a global survey of transcriptomes from four tea plant cultivars and serves as an available resource of genetic diversity. the analyses of transcriptome profiles and physiological indicators not only identified the putative genes involved in the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway but also provided some novel insights for the mechanisms of catechins biosynthesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
camellia sinensistranscriptomehigh-throughput sequencingcatechinsrp-hplcgenetic diversityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

