BACKGROUND
human mesenchymal stromal/stem cells  are adult multipotent cells that behave in a highly plastic manner, inhabiting the stroma of several tissues. the potential utility of mscs is nowadays strongly investigated in the field of regenerative medicine and cell therapy, although many questions about their molecular identity remain uncertain.


RESULTS
msc primary cultures from human bone marrow  and placenta  were derived and verified by their immunophenotype standard pattern and trilineage differentiation potential. then, a broad characterization of the transcriptome of these mscs was performed using rna deep sequencing . quantitative analysis of these data rendered an extensive expression footprint that includes  <dig>  protein-coding genes. flow cytometry assays of canonical msc cd-markers were congruent with their expression levels detected by the rna-seq. expression of other recently proposed msc markers  was tested in the placenta samples, finding only cd <dig> and nestin. functional analysis revealed enrichment in stem cell related genes and mesenchymal regulatory transcription factors . analysis of tf binding sites  identified  <dig> meta-regulators, including factors klf <dig> and myc among them. epigenetically, hypomethylated promoter patterns supported the active expression of the msc tfs found. an interaction network of these tfs was built to show up their links and relations. assessment of dissimilarities between cell origins  disclosed two hundred differentially expressed genes enrolled in microenvironment processes related to the cellular niche, as regulation of bone formation and blood vessel morphogenesis for the case of bm-mscs. by contrast genes overexpressed in pl-mscs showed functional enrichment on mitosis, negative regulation of cell-death and embryonic morphogenesis that supported the higher growth rates observed in the cultures of these fetal cells and their closer links with development processes.


CONCLUSIONS
the results present a transcriptomic portrait of the human mscs isolated from bone marrow and placenta. the data are released as a cell-specific resource, providing a comprehensive expression footprint of the mscs useful to better understand their cellular and molecular biology and for further investigations on the isolation and biomedical use of these multipotent cells.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
stromal cellsmesenchymal stem cellsplacentabone marrowhuman gene expressionrna-seqtranscription factorsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

