BACKGROUND
in order to get global molecular understanding of one of the most important crop diseases worldwide, we investigated compatible and incompatible interactions between phytophthora infestans and potato . we used the two most field-resistant potato clones under swedish growing conditions, which have the greatest known local diversity of p. infestans populations, and a reference compatible cultivar.


RESULTS
quantitative label-free proteomics of  <dig> apoplastic secretome samples  in combination with genome-wide transcript analysis by  <dig> microarrays  were used to capture changes in protein abundance and gene expression at  <dig>   <dig> and 72 hours after inoculation with p. infestans. to aid mass spectrometry analysis we generated cultivar-specific rna-seq data , which increased peptide identifications by 17%. components induced only during incompatible interactions, which are candidates for hypersensitive response initiation, include a kunitz-like protease inhibitor, transcription factors and an rcr3-like protein. more secreted proteins had lower abundance in the compatible interaction compared to the incompatible interactions. based on this observation and because the well-characterized effector-target c <dig> protease follows this pattern, we suggest  <dig> putative effector targets.


CONCLUSIONS
in summary, over  <dig> transcripts and  <dig> secreted proteins changed in abundance in at least one time point, illustrating the dynamics of plant responses to a hemibiotroph. half of the differentially abundant proteins showed a corresponding change at the transcript level. many putative hypersensitive and effector-target proteins were single representatives of large gene families.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
potatodesireesarpo mirasw93-1015secretomeapoplastresistancehypersensitive responsephytophthora infestansissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

