BACKGROUND
nocturnally active gymnotiform weakly electric fish generate electric signals for communication and navigation, which can be energetically taxing. these fish mainly inhabit the amazon basin, where some species prefer well-oxygenated waters and others live in oxygen-poor, stagnant habitats. the latter species show morphological, physiological, and behavioral adaptations for hypoxia-tolerance. however, there have been no studies of hypoxia tolerance on the molecular level. globins are classic respiratory proteins. they function principally in oxygen-binding and -delivery in various tissues and organs. here, we investigate the molecular evolution of alpha and beta hemoglobins, myoglobin, and neuroglobin in  <dig> gymnotiforms compared with other teleost fish.


RESULTS
the present study identified positively selected sites  on hemoglobin  and myoglobin  genes using different maximum likelihood  methods; some pss fall in structurally important protein regions. this evidence for the positive selection of globin genes suggests that the adaptive evolution of these genes has helped to enhance the capacity for oxygen storage and transport. interestingly, a substitution of a cys at a key site in the obligate air-breathing electric eel  is predicted to enhance oxygen storage of mb and contribute to no delivery during hypoxia. a parallel cys substitution was also noted in an air-breathing african electric fish . moreover, the expected pattern under normoxic conditions of high expression of myoglobin in heart and neuroglobin in the brain in two hypoxia-tolerant species suggests that the main effect of selection on these globin genes is on their sequence rather than their basal expression patterns.


CONCLUSIONS
results indicate a clear signature of positive selection in the globin genes of most hypoxia-tolerant gymnotiform fishes, which are obligate or facultative air breathers. these findings highlight the critical role of globin genes in hypoxia tolerance evolution of gymnotiform electric fishes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gymnotiformeshypoxia toleranceadaptive evolutionglobinpositive selectionnsfios 1557857zakon harold http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004543china scholarship councilpriority academic program development of jiangsu education institutionhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008964nanjing normal universityhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100008562university of texas at austinissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

