BACKGROUND
the lancelet amphioxus  is a close relative of vertebrates and thus may enhance our understanding of vertebrate gene and genome evolution. in this context, the globins are one of the best studied models for gene family evolution. previous biochemical studies have demonstrated the presence of an intracellular globin in notochord tissue and myotome of amphioxus, but the corresponding gene has not yet been identified. genomic resources of branchiostoma floridae now facilitate the identification, experimental confirmation and molecular evolutionary analysis of its globin gene repertoire.


RESULTS
we show that b. floridae harbors at least fifteen paralogous globin genes, all of which reveal evidence of gene expression. the protein sequences of twelve globins display the conserved characteristics of a functional globin fold. in phylogenetic analyses, the amphioxus globin bflgb <dig> forms a common clade with vertebrate neuroglobins, indicating the presence of this nerve globin in cephalochordates. orthology is corroborated by conserved syntenic linkage of bflgb <dig> and flanking genes. the kinetics of ligand binding of recombinantly expressed bflgb <dig> reveals that this globin is hexacoordinated with a high oxygen association rate, thus strongly resembling vertebrate neuroglobin. in addition, possible amphioxus orthologs of the vertebrate globin x lineage and of the myoglobin/cytoglobin/hemoglobin lineage can be identified, including one gene as a candidate for being expressed in notochord tissue. genomic analyses identify conserved synteny between amphioxus globin-containing regions and the vertebrate β-globin locus, possibly arguing against a late transpositional origin of the β-globin cluster in vertebrates. some amphioxus globin gene structures exhibit minisatellite-like tandem duplications of intron-exon boundaries , which may serve to explain the creation of novel intron positions within the globin genes.


CONCLUSIONS
the identification of putative orthologs of vertebrate globin variants in the b. floridae genome underlines the importance of cephalochordates for elucidating vertebrate genome evolution. the present study facilitates detailed functional studies of the amphioxus globins in order to trace conserved properties and specific adaptations of respiratory proteins at the base of chordate evolution.

