BACKGROUND
dopamine is integral to cognition, learning and memory, and dysfunctions of the frontal cortical dopamine system have been implicated in several developmental neuropsychiatric disorders. the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  is critical for working memory which does not fully mature until the third decade of life. few studies have reported on the normal development of the dopamine system in human dlpfc during postnatal life. we assessed pre- and postsynaptic components of the dopamine system including tyrosine hydroxylase, the dopamine receptors , catechol-o-methyltransferase, and monoamine oxidase  in the developing human dlpfc .


RESULTS
gene expression was first analysed by microarray and then by quantitative real-time pcr. protein expression was analysed by western blot. protein levels for tyrosine hydroxylase peaked during the first year of life  then gradually declined to adulthood. similarly, mrna levels of dopamine receptors d2s  and d2l  isoforms, monoamine oxidase a  and catechol-o-methyltransferase  were significantly higher in neonates and infants as was catechol-o-methyltransferase protein . in contrast, dopamine d <dig> receptor mrna correlated positively with age  and dopamine d <dig> receptor protein expression increased throughout development  with adults having the highest d <dig> protein levels . monoamine oxidase b mrna and protein  levels also increased significantly throughout development. interestingly, dopamine d <dig> receptor mrna levels negatively correlated with age  in an expression profile opposite to that of the dopamine d <dig> receptor.


CONCLUSIONS
we find distinct developmental changes in key components of the dopamine system in dlpfc over postnatal life. those genes that are highly expressed during the first year of postnatal life may influence and orchestrate the early development of cortical neural circuitry while genes portraying a pattern of increasing expression with age may indicate a role in dlpfc maturation and attainment of adult levels of cognitive function.

dlpfcpostmortemadhdschizophreniadopamine receptortyrosine hydroxylasecomtmaoamaobdrd

