BACKGROUND
universally accepted landmark stages are necessary to highlight key events in plant reproductive development and to facilitate comparisons among species. domestication and selection of tomato resulted in many varieties that differ in fruit shape and size. this diversity is useful to unravel underlying molecular and developmental mechanisms that control organ morphology and patterning. the tomato fruit shape gene sun controls fruit elongation. the most dramatic effect of sun on fruit shape occurs after pollination and fertilization although a detailed investigation into the timing of the fruit shape change as well as gene expression profiles during critical developmental stages has not been conducted.


RESULTS
we provide a description of floral and fruit development in a red-fruited closely related wild relative of tomato, solanum pimpinellifolium accession la <dig>  we use established and propose new floral and fruit landmarks to present a framework for tomato developmental studies. in addition, gene expression profiles of three key stages in floral and fruit development are presented, namely floral buds  <dig> days before anthesis , anthesis-stage flowers , and  <dig> days post anthesis fruit . to demonstrate the utility of the landmarks, we characterize the tomato shape gene sun in fruit development. sun controls fruit shape predominantly after fertilization and its effect reaches a maximum at  <dig> days post-anthesis coinciding with fruit landmark  <dig> representing the globular embryo stage of seed development. the expression profiles of the nils that differ at sun show that only  <dig> genes were differentially expressed and most of them at a less than 2-fold difference.


CONCLUSIONS
the landmarks for flower and fruit development in tomato were outlined and integrated with the effect of sun on fruit shape. although we did not identify many genes differentially expressed in the nils that differ at the sun locus, higher or lower transcript levels for many genes involved in phytohormone biosynthesis or signaling as well as organ identity and patterning of tomato fruit were found between developmental time points.

