BACKGROUND
articular cartilage, because of its avascular nature, has little capacity for spontaneous healing, and tissue engineering approaches, employing different biomaterials and cells, are under development. among the investigated biomaterials are the chitosan-based hydrogels. although thoroughly studied in other mammalian species, studies are scarce in equines. so, the aim of the present study was to investigate the biocompatibility of chitosan-gp in horse joints submitted to high mechanical loads.


RESULTS
an osteochondral defect was created by arthroscopy in the medial surface of lateral trochlea of talus of left or right leg, randomly selected, from six healthy geldings. the defect was filled up with chitosan-gp. the contralateral joint received an identical defect with no implant. the chondral fragment removed to produce the defect was collected, processed and used as the “initial” sample  for histology, immunohistochemistry, and metabolic labelling of pgs. after 180 days, the repair tissues were collected, and also analyzed. at the end of the experiment , the total number of cells per field in repair tissues was equal to control, and macrophages and polymorphonuclear cells were not detected, suggesting that no significant inflammation was present. these cells were able to synthesize type ii collagen and proteoglycans . nevertheless, the cell population in these tissues, both in presence of chitosan-gp and in untreated controls, were heterogeneous, with a lower proportion of type ii collagen-positives cells and some with a fibroblastic aspect. moreover, the pgs synthesized in repair tissues formed in presence or absence of chitosan-gp were similar to those of normal cartilage. however, the chitosan-gp treated tissue had an disorganized appearance, and blood vessels were present.


CONCLUSIONS
implanted chitosan-gp did not evoke an important inflammatory reaction, and permitted cell growth. these cells were able to synthesize type ii collagen and pgs similar to those synthesized in normal cartilage and in healing tissue without implant, indicating its chondrocyte nature.

chitosan-gpcartilageproteoglycantype ii collagenequine jointbiocompatibilityscaffold

