BACKGROUND
recently we proposed efficient method to exclude undesirable primers at any stage of amplification reaction, here termed nope . according to this method, added oligonucleotide overlapping with the 3′-end of unwanted amplification primer  simultaneously provides a template for its elongation. this elongation disrupts specificity of unwanted primer, preventing its further participation in pcr. the suggested approach allows to rationally manage the course of pcr reactions in order to facilitate analysis of complex dna mixtures as well as to perform multistage pcr bypassing intermediate purification steps.


RESULTS
here we apply nope method to dna library preparation for the high-throughput sequencing  with the pcr-based introduction of unique molecular identifiers . we show that nope oligo efficiently neutralizes umi-containing oligonucleotides after introduction of umi into sample dna molecules, thus allowing to proceed with further amplification steps without purification and associated loss of starting material. at the same time, nope oligo does not affect the efficiency of target pcr amplification.


CONCLUSIONS
we describe a simple, robust and cheap modification of umi-labeled hts libraries preparation procedure, that allows to bypass purification step and thus to preserve starting material which may be limited, e.g. circulating tumor dna, circulating fetal dna, or small amounts of isolated cells of interest. furthermore, demonstrated simplicity and robustness of nope method should make it popular in various pcr protocols.

keywords
high-throughput sequencingunique molecular identifierstargeted resequencingpcrhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100006769russian science foundation14-35-00105lukyanov sergey http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100010661horizon  <dig> framework programme633592chudakov dmitriy m. http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002261russian foundation for basic research15-34-21052chudakov dmitriy m. ministry of education, youth and sports of the czech republiclq1601chudakov dmitriy m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

