BACKGROUND
advances in human genomics have allowed unprecedented productivity in terms of algorithms, software, and literature available for translating raw next-generation sequence data into high-quality information. the challenges of variant identification in organisms with lower quality reference genomes are less well documented. we explored the consequences of commonly recommended preparatory steps and the effects of single and multi sample variant identification methods using four publicly available software applications  on whole genome sequence data of  <dig> key ancestors of swiss dairy cattle populations. accuracy of calling next-generation sequence variants was assessed by comparison to the same loci from medium and high-density single nucleotide variant  arrays.


RESULTS
the total number of snvs identified varied by software and method, with single  sample results ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>   million variants. computing time varied considerably between software. preparatory realignment of insertions and deletions and subsequent base quality score recalibration had only minor effects on the number and quality of snvs identified by different software, but increased computing time considerably. average concordance for single  sample results with high-density chip data was  <dig> %  and average genotype concordance in correctly identified snvs was  <dig> %  across software. the average quality of snvs identified, measured as the ratio of transitions to transversions, was higher using single sample methods than multi sample methods. a consensus approach using results of different software generally provided the highest variant quality in terms of transition/transversion ratio.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings serve as a reference for variant identification pipeline development in non-human organisms and help assess the implication of preparatory steps in next-generation sequencing pipelines for organisms with incomplete reference genomes . benchmarking this information should prove particularly useful in processing next-generation sequencing data for use in genome-wide association studies and genomic selection.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
next-generation sequencing analysissingle nucleotide variant identificationpipelineissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

