BACKGROUND
zearalenone is a mycotoxin produced by several species of fusarium genus, most notably fusarium graminearum and fusarium culmorum. this resorcylic acid lactone is one of the most important toxins causing serious animal and human diseases. for over two decades it has been known that the mycoparasitic fungus clonostachys rosea  can detoxify zearalenone, however no such attributes have been described within the trichoderma genus.


RESULTS
we screened for the presence of zearalenone lactonohydrolase homologs in isolates of clonostachys and trichoderma genera. we report first finding of expressed zearalenone lactonohydrolase in trichoderma aggressivum. for three isolates , we were able to reconstruct full coding sequence and verify the biotransformation ability potential. additionally, we assessed progression of the detoxification process .

in silico, search for origins of zearalenone lactonohydrolase activity in model fungal and bacterial genomes has shown that zearalenone lactonohydrolase homologs form a monophyletic fungal clade among the a/b hydrolase superfamily representatives. we corroborated the finding of functional enzyme homologs by investigating the functional sites  conserved in both multiple sequence alignment and in homology-based structural models.


CONCLUSIONS
our research shows the first finding of a functional zearalenone lactonohydrolase in mycoparasitic trichoderma aggressivum . the supporting evidence for presence and activity of functional enzyme homologs is based on the chemical analyses, gene expression patterns, homology models showing conservation of key structural features and marked reduction of zearalenone content in cultured samples . our findings also show divergent strategies of zearalenone biotransformation ability  present in several members of hypocreales order . the potential for lactonhydrolase activity directed towards zearalenone and/or similar compounds is likely ancient, with homologs present in several divergent filamentous fungi among both sordariomycetes  and leotiomycetes .

zearalenone lactonohydrolasezearalenoneclonostachys sptrichoderma spfusarium spmycotoxinsepoxide hydrolasehomology modelling

