BACKGROUND
biological research increasingly relies on network models to study complex phenomena. signal transduction pathways are molecular circuits that model how cells receive, process, and respond to information from the environment providing snapshots of the overall cell dynamics. most of the attempts to reconstruct signal transduction pathways are limited to single regulator networks including only genes/proteins. however, networks involving a single type of regulator and neglecting transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations mediated by transcription factors and micrornas, respectively, may not fully reveal the complex regulatory mechanisms of a cell. we observed a lack of computational instruments supporting explorative analysis on this type of three-component signal transduction pathways.


RESULTS
we have developed cytransfinder, a new cytoscape plugin able to infer three-component signal transduction pathways based on user defined regulatory patterns and including mirnas, tfs and genes. since cytransfinder has been designed to support exploratory analysis, it does not rely on expression data. to show the potential of the plugin we have applied it in a study of two mirnas that are particularly relevant in human melanoma progression, mir-146a and mir- <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
cytransfinder supports the reconstruction of small signal transduction pathways among groups of genes. results obtained from its use in a real case study have been analyzed and validated through both literature data and preliminary wet-lab experiments, showing the potential of this tool when performing exploratory analysis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
micrornasignal transduction pathwaysdata fusioncytoscapenetwork analysispathway analysisnetwork modulescompagnia di san paolo, torino  <dig> , airc <dig>   <dig> taverna daniela fondazione cassa di risparmio torino crt, torino  <dig> dttaverna daniela italian ministry of education, university and research prin  <dig>  minddi carlo stefano issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

