BACKGROUND
toxoplasmosis is a major public health concern in many countries of the world. a cross-sectional and follow up experimental study designs were used for seroepidemiological and bioassay studies, respectively from november  <dig> to april  <dig>  the objectives were to estimate the seroprevalence of t. gondii infection, to assess risk factors and to isolate the parasite from camels in the fentale district, ethiopia. a direct agglutination test  and indirect enzyme linked immunosorbent assay  kits were used to test camel sera. hearts and tongues  from  <dig> seropositive camels were bioassayed in mice. associations between seroprevalence and potential risk factors  were analyzed using logistic regression.


RESULTS
an overall t. gondii prevalence of  <dig> %  by dat and  <dig> %  by indirect elisa test were detected. herd level seroprevalence of  <dig> %   by dat was recorded and it was significantly higher in areas where wild felids are present . multivariable logistic regression showed that the likelihood of acquiring t. gondii infection was significantly higher in camels in the ilala pastoral association    than camels in the galcha pa , in camels of ≥ 8 years old  than camels of ≤ 4 years old  and in areas where domestic cats are present . all camel owners were uneducated, handle aborted fetus with bare hands, and drink raw camel milk. dat and elisa tests had moderate agreement . viable t. gondii were isolated from  <dig> %  of dat positive camels. one dat positive but elisa negative camel sample gave a cyst positive result.


CONCLUSIONS
t. gondii infection of camels in the study district is widespread. age, presence of domestic cats and study pa are independent predictors of t. gondii seropositivity. isolation of viable parasites from edible tissues of camels and the very poor knowledge of pastoralists about toxoplasmosis suggest the need for prevention of toxoplasmosis through bio-security measures, education and further investigation to unravel the impact of camel toxoplasmosis deserves consideration.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
t. gondiicameldatelisaseroepidemiologybioassayethiopiaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

