BACKGROUND
farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase  belongs to the short-chain prenyltransferase family, and it performs a conserved and essential role in the terpenoid biosynthesis pathway. however, its classification, evolutionary history, and the forces driving the evolution of fps genes in plants remain poorly understood.


RESULTS
phylogeny and positive selection analysis was used to identify the evolutionary forces that led to the functional divergence of fps in plants, and recombinant detection was undertaken using the genetic algorithm for recombination detection  method. the dataset included  <dig> fps variation pattern sequences . this study revealed that the fps gene was under positive selection in plants. no recombinant within the fps gene was found. therefore, it was inferred that the positive selection of fps had not been influenced by a recombinant episode. the positively selected sites were mainly located in the catalytic center and functional areas, which indicated that the 98s and 234d were important positively selected sites for plant fps in the terpenoid biosynthesis pathway. they were located in the fps conserved domain of the catalytic site. we inferred that the diversification of fps genes was associated with functional divergence and could be driven by positive selection.


CONCLUSIONS
it was clear that protein sequence evolution via positive selection was able to drive adaptive diversification in plant fps proteins. this study provides information on the classification and positive selection of plant fps genes, and the results could be useful for further research on the regulation of triterpenoid biosynthesis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
biological evolutionfarnesyl pyrophosphate synthasepositive selectionterpenoid biosynthesisthe national natural science foundation of china31260069wu yaosheng issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

