BACKGROUND
north american agalinis raf. species represent a taxonomically challenging group and there have been extensive historical revisions at the species, section, and subsection levels of classification. the genus contains many rare species, including the federally listed endangered species agalinis acuta. in addition to evaluating the degree to which historical classifications at the section and subsection levels are supported by molecular data sampled from  <dig> individuals representing  <dig> agalinis species, we assessed the monophyly of  <dig> species by sampling multiple individuals representing different populations of those species. twenty-one of these species are of conservation concern in at least some part of their range.


RESULTS
phylogenetic relationships estimated using maximum likelihood analyses of seven chloroplast dna loci  and the nuclear ribosomal dna its  locus ; indicated no support for the historically recognized sections except for section erectae. our results suggest that north american members of the genus comprise six major lineages, however we were not able to resolve branching order among many of these lineages. monophyly of  <dig> of the  <dig> sampled species was supported based on significant branch lengths of and high bootstrap support for subtending branches. however, there was no statistical support for the monophyly of a. acuta with respect to agalinis tenella and agalinis decemloba. although most species were supported, deeper relationships among many species remain ambiguous.


CONCLUSIONS
the north american agalinis species sampled form a well supported, monophyletic group within the family orobanchaceae relative to the outgroups sampled. most hypotheses regarding section- and subsection-level relationships based on morphology were not supported and taxonomic revisions are warranted. lack of support for monophyly of agalinis acuta leaves the important question regarding its taxonomic status unanswered. lack of resolution is potentially due to incomplete lineage sorting of ancestral polymorphisms among recently diverged species; however the gene regions examined did distinguish among almost all other species in the genus. due to the important policy implications of this finding we are further evaluating the evolutionary distinctiveness of a. acuta using morphological data and loci with higher mutation rates.

