BACKGROUND
nematodes represent the most abundant benthic metazoa in one of the largest habitats on earth, the deep sea. characterizing major patterns of biodiversity within this dominant group is a critical step towards understanding evolutionary patterns across this vast ecosystem. the present study has aimed to place deep-sea nematode species into a phylogenetic framework, investigate relationships between shallow water and deep-sea taxa, and elucidate phylogeographic patterns amongst the deep-sea fauna.


RESULTS
molecular data  confirms a high diversity amongst deep-sea enoplids. there is no evidence for endemic deep-sea lineages in maximum likelihood or bayesian phylogenies, and enoplids do not cluster according to depth or geographic location. tree topologies suggest frequent interchanges between deep-sea and shallow water habitats, as well as a mixture of early radiations and more recently derived lineages amongst deep-sea taxa. this study also provides convincing evidence of cosmopolitan marine species, recovering a subset of oncholaimid nematodes with identical gene sequences  at trans-atlantic sample sites.


CONCLUSIONS
the complex clade structures recovered within the enoplida support a high global species richness for marine nematodes, with phylogeographic patterns suggesting the existence of closely related, globally distributed species complexes in the deep sea. true cosmopolitan species may additionally exist within this group, potentially driven by specific life history traits of enoplids. although this investigation aimed to intensively sample nematodes from the order enoplida, specimens were only identified down to genus  and our sampling regime focused on an infinitesimal small fraction of the deep-sea floor. future nematode studies should incorporate an extended sample set covering a wide depth range , utilize additional genetic loci  that are informative at the species level, and apply high-throughput sequencing methods to fully assay community diversity. finally, further molecular studies are needed to determine whether phylogeographic patterns observed in enoplids are common across other ubiquitous marine groups .

