BACKGROUND
quantitative molecular biology remains a challenge for researchers due to inconsistent approaches for control of errors in the final results. due to several factors that can influence the final result, quantitative analysis and interpretation of qpcr data are still not trivial. together with the development of high-throughput qpcr platforms, there is a need for a tool allowing for robust, reliable and fast nucleic acid quantification.


RESULTS
we have developed “quantgenius” , an open-access web application for a reliable qpcr-based quantification of nucleic acids. the quantgenius workflow interactively guides the user through data import, quality control  and calculation steps. the input is machine- and chemistry–independent. quantification is performed using the standard curve approach, with normalization to one or several reference genes. the special feature of the application is the implementation of user-guided qc-based decision support system, based on qpcr standards, that takes into account pipetting errors, assay amplification efficiencies, limits of detection and quantification of the assays as well as the control of pcr inhibition in individual samples. the intermediate calculations and final results are exportable in a data matrix suitable for further statistical analysis or visualization. we additionally compare the most important features of quantgenius with similar advanced software tools and illustrate the importance of proper qc system in the analysis of qpcr data in two use cases.


CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, quantgenius is the only qpcr data analysis tool that integrates qc-based decision support and will help scientists to obtain reliable results which are the basis for biologically meaningful data interpretation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
quantitative molecular biologyquantitative pcrnucleic acid quantificationweb applicationdecision support systemjavna agencija za raziskovalno dejavnost rs p4―0165http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100004329javna agencija za raziskovalno dejavnost rsn4―002gruden kristina issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

