BACKGROUND
flavobacterium psychrophilum is the etiologic agent of bacterial coldwater disease in salmonids. earlier research showed that a rifampicin-passaged strain of f. psychrophilum  caused no disease in rainbow trout  while inducing a protective immune response against challenge with the virulent csf 259– <dig> strain. we hypothesized that rifampicin passage leads to an accumulation of genomic mutations that, by chance, reduce virulence. to assess the pattern of phenotypic and genotypic changes associated with passage, we examined proteomic, lps and single-nucleotide polymorphism  differences for two f. psychrophilum strains  that were passaged with and without rifampicin selection.


RESULTS
rifampicin resistance was conveyed by expected mutations in rpob, although affecting different dna bases depending on the strain. one rifampicin-passaged csf 259– <dig> strain  was attenuated  in challenged fish, but only accumulated eight nonsynonymous snps compared to the parent strain. a csf 259– <dig> strain passaged without rifampicin  accumulated five nonsynonymous snps and was partially attenuated  compared to the parent strain . in contrast, there were no significant change in fish mortalities among thc 02– <dig> wild-type and passaged strains, despite numerous snps accumulated during passage with  and without rifampicin . while only three missense snps were associated with attenuation, a ser492phe rpob mutation in the cr strain may contribute to further attenuation. all strains except cr retained a gliding motility phenotype. few proteomic differences were observed by 2d sds-page and there were no apparent changes in lps between strains. comparative methylome analysis of two strains  identified no shared methylation motifs for these two strains.


CONCLUSIONS
multiple genomic changes arose during passage experiments with rifampicin selection pressure. consistent with our hypothesis, unique strain-specific mutations were detected for the fully attenuated , partially attenuated  and another fully attenuated strain .

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
rifampicinattenuationflavobacterium psychrophilumsnpmethylomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

