BACKGROUND
pre-harvest sprouting  of wheat grain leads to a reduction in grain yield and quality. the availability of markers for marker-assisted selection  of phs resistance will serve to enhance breeding selection and advancement of lines for cultivar development. the aim of this study was to identify candidate regions and develop molecular markers for phs resistance in wheat. this was achieved via high density mapping of single nucleotide polymorphism  markers from an illumina 90 k infinium custom beadchip in a doubled haploid  population derived from a rl4452/‘ac domain’ cross and subsequent detection of quantitative trait loci  for phs related traits . snp marker sequences flanking qtl were used to locate colinear regions in brachypodium and rice, and identify genic markers associated with phs resistance that can be utilized for mas in wheat.


RESULTS
a linkage map spanning  <dig>  cm was constructed with a total of  <dig>  snp, simple sequence repeat , diversity arrays technology  and expressed sequence tag  markers. qtl analyses using multiple interval mapping  identified four qtl for phs resistance traits on chromosomes 3b, 4a, 7b and 7d. sequences of snps flanking these qtl were subject to a blastn search on the international wheat genome sequencing consortium  database . best survey sequence hits were subject to a blastn search on gramene  against both brachypodium and rice databases, and candidate genes and regions for phs resistance were identified. a total of  <dig> snp flanking sequences on chromosomes 3b, 4a, 7b and 7d were converted to kasp markers and validated with matching genotype calls of infinium snp data.


CONCLUSIONS
our study identified candidate genes involved in abscissic acid  and gibberellin  metabolism, and flowering time in four genomic regions of brachypodium and rice respectively, in addition to  <dig> kasp markers for phs resistance in wheat. these markers can be deployed in future genetic studies of phs resistance and might also be useful in the evaluation of phs in germplasm and breeding material.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
wheatpre-harvest sproutingquantitative trait locicandidate genesissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

