BACKGROUND
the ncbi dbest currently contains more than eight million human expressed sequenced tags . this wide collection represents an important source of information for gene expression studies, provided it can be inspected according to biologically relevant criteria. est data can be browsed using different dedicated web resources, which allow to investigate library specific gene expression levels and to make comparisons among libraries, highlighting significant differences in gene expression. nonetheless, no tool is available to examine distributions of quantitative est collections in gene ontology  categories, nor to retrieve information concerning library-dependent est involvement in metabolic pathways. in this work we present the human est ontology explorer  , a web facility for comparison of expression levels among libraries from several healthy and diseased tissues.


RESULTS
the heoe provides library-dependent statistics on the distribution of sequences in the go direct acyclic graph  that can be browsed at each go hierarchical level. the tool is based on large-scale blast annotation of est sequences. due to the huge number of input sequences, this blast analysis was performed with the aid of grid computing technology, which is particularly suitable to address data parallel task. relying on the achieved annotation, library-specific distributions of ests in the go graph were inferred. a pathway-based search interface was also implemented, for a quick evaluation of the representation of libraries in metabolic pathways. est processing steps were integrated in a semi-automatic procedure that relies on perl scripts and stores results in a mysql database. a php-based web interface offers the possibility to simultaneously visualize, retrieve and compare data from the different libraries. statistically significant differences in go categories among user selected libraries can also be computed.


CONCLUSIONS
the heoe provides an alternative and complementary way to inspect est expression levels with respect to approaches currently offered by other resources. furthermore, blast computation on the whole human est dataset was a suitable test of grid scalability in the context of large-scale bioinformatics analysis. the heoe currently comprises sequence analysis from  <dig> non-normalized libraries, representing a comprehensive overview on healthy and unhealthy tissues. as the analysis procedure can be easily applied to other libraries, the number of represented tissues is intended to increase.

19– <dig> may  <dig> bioinformatics methods for biomedical complex systems applications  varenna, italy

