BACKGROUND
human epidermal growth factor receptor  <dig>  has an important role in cancer aggressiveness and poor prognosis. her <dig> has been used as a drug target for cancers. in particular, to effectively treat her2-positive cancer, small molecule inhibitors were developed to target her <dig> kinase. knowing that curcumin has been used as food to inhibit cancer activity, this study evaluated the efficacy of natural curcumins and curcumin analogs as her <dig> inhibitors using in vitro and in silico studies. the curcumin analogs considered in this study composed of  <dig> groups classified by their core structure, β-diketone, monoketone, pyrazole, and isoxazole.


RESULTS
in the present study, both computational and experimental studies were performed. the specificity of curcumin analogs selected from the docked results was examined against human breast cancer cell lines. the screened curcumin compounds were then subjected to molecular dynamics simulation study. by modifying curcumin analogs, we found that protein-ligand affinity increases. the benzene ring with a hydroxyl group could enhance affinity by forming hydrophobic interactions and the hydrogen bond with the hydrophobic pocket. hydroxyl, carbonyl or methoxy group also formed hydrogen bonds with residues in the adenine pocket and sugar pocket of her2-tk. these modifications could suggest the new drug design for potentially effective her2-tk inhibitors. two outstanding compounds, bisdemethylcurcumin  and  <dig> -bis- <dig> -dimethoxystyryl)isoxazole ,were well oriented in the binding pocket almost in the simulation time,  <dig> ns. this evidence confirmed the results of cell-based assays and the docking studies. they possessed more distinguished interactions than known her2-tk inhibitors, considering them as a promising drug in the near future.


CONCLUSIONS
the series of curcumin compounds were screened using a computational molecular docking and followed by human breast cancer cell lines assay. both as-ktc <dig> and as-ktc <dig> could inhibit breast cancer cell lines though inhibiting of her2-tk. the intermolecular interactions were confirmed by molecular dynamics simulation studies. this information would explore more understanding of curcuminoid structures and her2-tk.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
her2tyrosine kinasecurcuminoid analogsdockingmolecular dynamics simulationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

