BACKGROUND
the responses of adult parasympathetic ganglion neurons to injury and the neurotrophic mechanisms underlying their axonal regeneration are poorly understood. this is especially relevant to penis-projecting parasympathetic neurons, which are vulnerable to injury during pelvic surgery such as prostatectomy. we investigated the changes in pelvic ganglia of adult male rats in the first week after unilateral cavernous  nerve axotomy . in some experiments fluorogold was injected into the penis seven days prior to injury to allow later identification of penis-projecting neurons. neurturin and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor  are neurotrophic factors for penile parasympathetic neurons, so we also examined expression of relevant receptors, gfrα <dig> and gfrα <dig>  in injured pelvic ganglion neurons.


RESULTS
axotomy caused prolific growth of axon collaterals  in pelvic ganglia ipsilateral to the injury. these collaterals were most prevalent in the region near the exit of the penile nerve. this region contained the majority of fluorogold-labelled neurons. many sprouting fibres formed close associations with sympathetic and parasympathetic pelvic neurons, including many fluorogold neurons. however immunoreactivity for synaptic proteins could not be demonstrated in these collaterals. preganglionic terminals showed a marked loss of synaptic proteins, suggesting a retrograde effect of the injury beyond the injured neurons. gfrα <dig> immunofluorescence intensity was decreased in the cytoplasm of parasympathetic neurons, but gfrα <dig> immunofluorescence was unaffected in these neurons.


CONCLUSIONS
these studies show that there are profound changes within the pelvic ganglion after penile nerve injury. sprouting of injured postganglionic axons occurs concurrently with structural or chemical changes in preganglionic terminals. new growth of postganglionic axon collaterals within the ganglion raises the possibility of the formation of aberrant synaptic connections between injured and un-injured ganglion neurons. together these changes demonstrate a broader effect on the pelvic autonomic circuitry than simply loss of neuroeffector connections. these structural changes are accompanied by potential changes in neurotrophic factor signalling due to altered expression of receptors for members of the gdnf family. together our results advance understanding of the responses of pelvic autonomic nerve circuits to injury and may assist in designing strategies for promoting regeneration.

