BACKGROUND
veterinary medicines have been widely used for the prevention and treatment of diseases, growth promotion, and to promote feeding efficacy in livestock. as the veterinary medicine industry has steadily grown, it is crucial to set up a baseline for the quality of medicine as well as the insufficiency or excessiveness of the active ingredients in drug products to ensure the compliance, safety and efficacy of these medicines. thus, the 10 years data of post-marketing quality control study was summarized to determine the rate and extent of non-compliance of these medicines and to establish baseline data for future quality control measures of veterinary medicine.


RESULTS
in this study,  <dig> drugs for veterinary use were collected per year from each city and province in korea and analysed for the quantity of active ingredients according to the “national post-market surveillance  system” over the past decade. the npms assessment was performed using liquid and gas chromatography, titration, uv/vis spectrophotometry, and bioassays. a total of  <dig> cases were deemed noncompliant, with the average noncompliance rate for all medicine types being  <dig> %. the average noncompliance rates for antibiotics, biologics and other chemical drugs except antibiotics  were  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> %, respectively. the first leading cause for noncompliant products was insufficient quantity of major ingredients , and the second leading cause was the existence of excess amount of active ingredients . tylosin, spiramycin, ampicillin, tetracyclines and penicillins were most frequently found to be noncompliant among antibiotics. among the ocd, the noncompliance was found commonly in vitamin a.


CONCLUSIONS
the overall trend presented gradually decreasing violation rates, suggesting that the quality of veterinary medicines has improved. consistent application of the npms assessment and the establishment of the korea veterinary good manufacturing practice  will help to maintain the good quality of medicine.

keywords
veterinary medicinequality controlpost-market surveillance assayanimal and plant quarantine agency101-6200-6240-301-210lee kwang-jick issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

