BACKGROUND
the origin of vertebrate retroviruses  is yet to be thoroughly investigated, but due to their similarity and identical gag-pol  genome structure, it is accepted that they evolve from ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements the retrotransposons and retroviruses of plants, fungi and animals. these  <dig> groups of ltr retroelements code for  <dig> proteins rarely studied due to the high variability – gag polyprotein, protease and gpy/f module. in relation to  <dig> previously proposed retroviridae classes i, ii and ii, investigation of the above proteins conclusively uncovers important insights regarding the ancient history of ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements.


RESULTS
we performed a comprehensive study of  <dig> non-redundant ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements. phylogenetic reconstruction inferred based on the concatenated analysis of the gag and pol polyproteins shows a robust phylogenetic signal regarding the clustering of otus. evaluation of gag and pol polyproteins separately yields discordant information. while pol signal supports the traditional perspective , gag polyprotein describes an alternative scenario where each retroviridae class can be distantly related with one or more ty3/gypsy lineages. we investigated more in depth this evidence through comparative analyses performed based on the gag polyprotein, the protease and the gpy/f module. our results indicate that contrary to the traditional monophyletic view of the origin of vertebrate retroviruses, the retroviridae class i is a molecular fossil, preserving features that were probably predominant among ty3/gypsy ancestors predating the split of plants, fungi and animals. in contrast, classes ii and iii maintain other phenotypes that emerged more recently during ty3/gypsy evolution.


CONCLUSIONS
the  <dig> retroviridae classes i, ii and iii exhibit phenotypic differences that delineate a network never before reported between ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements. this new scenario reveals how the diversity of vertebrate retroviruses is polyphyletically recurrent into the ty3/gypsy evolution, i.e. older than previously thought. the simplest hypothesis to explain this finding is that classes i, ii and iii trace back to at least  <dig> ty3/gypsy ancestors that emerged at different evolutionary times prior to protostomes-deuterostomes divergence. we have called this "the three kings hypothesis" concerning the origin of vertebrate retroviruses.

