BACKGROUND
the genus pyrus belongs to the tribe pyreae  of the family rosaceae, and includes one of the most important commercial fruit crops, pear. the phylogeny of pyrus has not been definitively reconstructed. in our previous efforts, the internal transcribed spacer region  revealed a poorly resolved phylogeny due to non-concerted evolution of nrdna arrays. therefore, introns of low copy nuclear genes  are explored here for improved resolution. however, paralogs and lineage sorting are still two challenges for applying lcngs in phylogenetic studies, and at least two independent nuclear loci should be compared. in this work the second intron of leafy and the alcohol dehydrogenase gene  were selected to investigate their molecular evolution and phylogenetic utility.


RESULTS
dna sequence analyses revealed a complex ortholog and paralog structure of adh genes in pyrus and malus, the pears and apples. comparisons between sequences from rt-pcr and genomic pcr indicate that some adh homologs are putatively nonfunctional. a partial region of adh <dig> was sequenced for  <dig> pyrus species and three subparalogs representing adh1- <dig> were identified. these led to poorly resolved phylogenies due to low sequence divergence and the inclusion of putative recombinants. for the second intron of leafy, multiple inparalogs were discovered for both lfy1int <dig> and lfy2int <dig>  lfy1int <dig> is inadequate for phylogenetic analysis due to lineage sorting of two inparalogs. lfy2int2-n, however, showed a relatively high sequence divergence and led to the best-resolved phylogeny. this study documents the coexistence of outparalogs and inparalogs, and lineage sorting of these paralogs and orthologous copies. it reveals putative recombinants that can lead to incorrect phylogenetic inferences, and presents an improved phylogenetic resolution of pyrus using lfy2int2-n.


CONCLUSIONS
our study represents the first phylogenetic analyses based on lcngs in pyrus. ancient and recent duplications lead to a complex structure of adh outparalogs and inparalogs in pyrus and malus, resulting in neofunctionalization, nonfunctionalization and possible subfunctionalization. among all investigated orthologs, lfy2int2-n is the best nuclear marker for phylogenetic reconstruction of pyrus due to suitable sequence divergence and the absence of lineage sorting.

