BACKGROUND
chromatin immunoprecipitation  followed by next-generation sequencing  has been widely used to identify genomic loci of transcription factor  binding and histone modifications. chip-seq data analysis involves multiple steps from read mapping and peak calling to data integration and interpretation. it remains challenging and time-consuming to process large amounts of chip-seq data derived from different antibodies or experimental designs using the same approach. to address this challenge, there is a need for a comprehensive analysis pipeline with flexible settings to accelerate the utilization of this powerful technology in epigenetics research.


RESULTS
we have developed a highly integrative pipeline, termed hichip for systematic analysis of chip-seq data. hichip incorporates several open source software packages selected based on internal assessments and published comparisons. it also includes a set of tools developed in-house. this workflow enables the analysis of both paired-end and single-end chip-seq reads, with or without replicates for the characterization and annotation of both punctate and diffuse binding sites. the main functionality of hichip includes:  read quality checking;  read mapping and filtering;  peak calling and peak consistency analysis; and  result visualization. in addition, this pipeline contains modules for generating binding profiles over selected genomic features, de novo motif finding from transcription factor  binding sites and functional annotation of peak associated genes.


CONCLUSIONS
hichip is a comprehensive analysis pipeline that can be configured to analyze chip-seq data derived from varying antibodies and experiment designs. using public chip-seq data we demonstrate that hichip is a fast and reliable pipeline for processing large amounts of chip-seq data.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
chip-seqnext-generation sequencingpeak callingduplicate filteringirreproducible discovery rateissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

