BACKGROUND
soma localization is an important step in computational neuroscience to map neuronal circuits. however, locating somas from large-scale and complicated datasets is challenging. the challenges primarily originate from the dense distribution of somas, the diversity of soma sizes and the inhomogeneity of image contrast.


RESULTS
we proposed a novel localization method based on density-peak clustering. in this method, we introduced two quantities  to describe the soma imaging signal, and developed an automatic algorithm to identify the soma positions from the feature space . compared with other methods focused on high local density, our method allowed the soma center to be characterized by high local density and large minimum distance. the simulation results indicated that our method had a strong ability to locate the densely positioned somas and strong robustness of the key parameter for the localization. from the analysis of the experimental datasets, we demonstrated that our method was effective at locating somas from large-scale and complicated datasets, and was superior to current state-of-the-art methods for the localization of densely positioned somas.


CONCLUSIONS
our method effectively located somas from large-scale and complicated datasets. furthermore, we demonstrated the strong robustness of the key parameter for the localization and its effectiveness at a low signal-to-noise ratio  level. thus, the method provides an effective tool for the neuroscience community to quantify the spatial distribution of neurons and the morphologies of somas.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
touching soma localizationdensity-peak clusteringoptical microscopic imagehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china 9123230661205196quan tingwei zeng shaoqun http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003819natural science foundation of hubei province2014cfb564quan tingwei issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

