BACKGROUND
fruit quality depends on a series of biochemical events that modify appearance, flavour and texture throughout fruit development and ripening. cell wall polysaccharide remodelling largely contributes to the elaboration of fleshy fruit texture. although several genes and enzymes involved in cell wall polysaccharide biosynthesis and modifications are known, their coordinated activity in these processes is yet to be discovered.


RESULTS
combined transcriptomic and biochemical analyses allowed the identification of putative enzymes and related annotated members of gene families involved in cell wall polysaccharide composition and structural changes during apple fruit growth and ripening. the early development genes were mainly related to cell wall biosynthesis and degradation with a particular target on hemicelluloses. fine structural evolutions of galactoglucomannan were strongly correlated with mannan synthase, glucanase  and β-galactosidase gene expression. in contrast, fewer genes related to pectin metabolism and cell expansion  were observed in ripening fruit combined with expected changes in cell wall polysaccharide composition.


CONCLUSIONS
hemicelluloses undergo major structural changes particularly during early fruit development. the high number of early expressed β-galactosidase genes questions their function on galactosylated structures during fruit development and storage. their activity and cell wall substrate remains to be identified. moreover, new insights into the potential role of peroxidases and transporters, along with cell wall metabolism open the way to further studies on concomitant mechanisms involved in cell wall assembly/disassembly during fruit development and storage.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
applefruit developmentcell wall polysaccharideshemicellulosestranscriptomic analysisintegrative analysisissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

