BACKGROUND
grid technology is the computing model which allows users to share a wide pletora of distributed computational resources regardless of their geographical location. up to now, the high security policy requested in order to access distributed computing resources has been a rather big limiting factor when trying to broaden the usage of grids into a wide community of users. grid security is indeed based on the public key infrastructure  of x. <dig> certificates and the procedure to get and manage those certificates is unfortunately not straightforward. a first step to make grids more appealing for new users has recently been achieved with the adoption of robot certificates.

methods
robot certificates have recently been introduced to perform automated tasks on grids on behalf of users. they are extremely useful for instance to automate grid service monitoring, data processing production, distributed data collection systems. basically these certificates can be used to identify a person responsible for an unattended service or process acting as client and/or server. robot certificates can be installed on a smart card and used behind a portal by everyone interested in running the related applications in a grid environment using a user-friendly graphic interface. in this work, the genius grid portal, powered by enginframe, has been extended in order to support the new authentication based on the adoption of these robot certificates.


RESULTS
the work carried out and reported in this manuscript is particularly relevant for all users who are not familiar with personal digital certificates and the technical aspects of the grid security infrastructure . the valuable benefits introduced by robot certificates in e-science can so be extended to users belonging to several scientific domains, providing an asset in raising grid awareness to a wide number of potential users.


CONCLUSIONS
the adoption of grid portals extended with robot certificates, can really contribute to creating transparent access to computational resources of grid infrastructures, enhancing the spread of this new paradigm in researchers' working life to address new global scientific challenges. the evaluated solution can of course be extended to other portals, applications and scientific communities.

18– <dig> september  <dig> european molecular biology network  conference 2008: 20th anniversary celebration martina franca, italy

