BACKGROUND
gene co-expression, in the form of a correlation coefficient, has been valuable in the analysis, classification and prediction of protein-protein interactions. however, it is susceptible to bias from a few samples having a large effect on the correlation coefficient. gene co-expression stability is a means of quantifying this bias, with high stability indicating robust, unbiased co-expression correlation coefficients. we assess the utility of gene co-expression stability as an additional measure to support the co-expression correlation in the analysis of protein-protein interaction networks.


RESULTS
we studied the patterns of co-expression correlation and stability in interacting proteins with respect to their interaction promiscuity, levels of intrinsic disorder, and essentiality or disease-relatedness. co-expression stability, along with co-expression correlation, acts as a better classifier of hub proteins in interaction networks, than co-expression correlation alone, enabling the identification of a class of hubs that are functionally distinct from the widely accepted transient  and obligate  hubs. proteins with high levels of intrinsic disorder have low co-expression correlation and high stability with their interaction partners suggesting their involvement in transient interactions, except for a small group that have high co-expression correlation and are typically subunits of stable complexes. similar behavior was seen for disease-related and essential genes. interacting proteins that are both disordered have higher co-expression stability than ordered protein pairs. using co-expression correlation and stability, we found that transient interactions are more likely to occur between an ordered and a disordered protein while obligate interactions primarily occur between proteins that are either both ordered, or disordered.


CONCLUSIONS
we observe that co-expression stability shows distinct patterns in structurally and functionally different groups of proteins and interactions. we conclude that it is a useful and important measure to be used in concert with gene co-expression correlation for further insights into the characteristics of proteins in the context of their interaction network.

 <dig> november- <dig> december  <dig> asia pacific bioinformatics network  tenth international conference on bioinformatics – first iscb asia joint conference  <dig>  kuala lumpur, malaysia

