BACKGROUND
glycolysis and subsequent fermentation is the main energy source for many anaerobic organisms. the glycolytic pathway consists of ten enzymatic steps which appear to be universal amongst eukaryotes. however, it has been shown that the origins of these enzymes in specific eukaryote lineages can differ, and sometimes involve lateral gene transfer events. we have conducted an expressed sequence tag  survey of the anaerobic flagellate trimastix pyriformis to investigate the nature of the evolutionary origins of the glycolytic enzymes in this relatively unstudied organism.


RESULTS
we have found genes in the trimastix est data that encode enzymes potentially catalyzing nine of the ten steps of the glycolytic conversion of glucose to pyruvate. furthermore, we have found two different enzymes that in principle could catalyze the conversion of phosphoenol pyruvate  to pyruvate  as part of the last step in glycolysis. our phylogenetic analyses of all of these enzymes revealed at least four cases where the relationship of the trimastix genes to homologs from other species is at odds with accepted organismal relationships. although lateral gene transfer events likely account for these anomalies, with the data at hand we were not able to establish with confidence the bacterial donor lineage that gave rise to the respective trimastix enzymes.


CONCLUSIONS
a number of the glycolytic enzymes of trimastix have been transferred laterally from bacteria instead of being inherited from the last common eukaryotic ancestor. thus, despite widespread conservation of the glycolytic biochemical pathway across eukaryote diversity, in a number of protist lineages the enzymatic components of the pathway have been replaced by lateral gene transfer from disparate evolutionary sources. it remains unclear if these replacements result from selectively advantageous properties of the introduced enzymes or if they are neutral outcomes of a gene transfer 'ratchet' from food or endosymbiotic organisms or a combination of both processes.

