BACKGROUND
locomotor disorders and infections by escherichia coli represent major concerns to the poultry industry worldwide. avian pathogenic e. coli  is associated with extraintestinal infections leading to respiratory or systemic disease known as colibacillosis. the most common lesions seen in cases of colibacillosis are perihepatitis, airsacculitis, pericarditis, peritonitis/salpingitis and arthritis. these diseases are responsible for significant economic losses in the poultry industry worldwide. e. coli has been recently isolated from vertebral osteomyelitis cases in brazil and there are no data on molecular and phenotypic characteristics of e. coli strains isolated from lesions in the locomotor system of broilers. this raised the question whether specific e. coli strains could be responsible for bone lesions in broilers. the aim of this study was to assess these characteristics of e. coli strains isolated from broilers presenting vertebral osteomyelitis and arthritis in brazil.


RESULTS
fifteen e. coli strains from bone lesions were submitted to apec diagnosis and setting of ecor phylogenic group, o serogroup, flagella type, virulence genes content, genetic patterns by pulsed field gel electrophoresis  and multilocus sequence typing . in addition, bacterial isolates were further characterized through a lethality test, serum resistance test and antibiotic resistance profile. e. coli strains harbored different genetic pattern as assessed by pfge, regardless of flock origin and lesion site. the strains belonged to seven sequence types  previously described  or newly described in this study . ecor group d  was the most frequently detected. the strains belonged to diverse serogroups , some of worldwide importance. the antibiotic resistance profile confirmed strains’ diversity and revealed a high proportion of multidrug-resistant strains , mainly to quinolones and beta-lactams, including third generation cephalosporin. the percentage of resistance to tetracycline was moderate  but always associated with multidrug resistance.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrated that vertebral osteomyelitis and arthritis in broilers can be associated with highly diverse e. coli based on molecular and phenotypic characteristics. there was no specific virulence patterns of the e. coli strains associated with vertebral osteomyelitis or arthritis. also, e. coli strains were frequently multidrug resistant and belonged to sts commonly shared by apec and human expec strains.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
broilersbacterial infectionsapecvirulence genespathologymultidrug-resistant e. coliconselho nacional de desenvolvimento científico e tecnológico  project 14/2010ecco roselene http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002322coordenação de aperfeiçoamento de pessoal de nível superiorinraissue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

