BACKGROUND
human α-galactosidase a  and α-n-acetylgalactosaminidase  are presumed to share a common ancestor. deficiencies of these enzymes cause two well-characterized human lysosomal storage disorders  – fabry  and schindler  diseases. caenorhabditis elegans was previously shown to be a relevant model organism for several late endosomal/lysosomal membrane proteins associated with lsds. the aim of this study was to identify and characterize c. elegans orthologs to both human lysosomal luminal proteins α-gal and α-naga.


RESULTS
blastp searches for orthologs of human α-gal and α-naga revealed a single c. elegans gene  with homology to both human genes  – gana- <dig>  we cloned and sequenced the complete gana- <dig> cdna and elucidated the gene organization.

phylogenetic analyses and homology modeling of gana- <dig> based on the 3d structure of chicken α-naga, rice α-gal and human α-gal suggest a close evolutionary relationship of gana- <dig> to both human α-gal and α-naga.

both α-gal and α-naga enzymatic activities were detected in c. elegans mixed culture homogenates. however, α-gal activity on an artificial substrate was completely inhibited by the α-naga inhibitor, n-acetyl-d-galactosamine.

a gana-1::gfp fusion protein expressed from a transgene, containing the complete gana- <dig> coding region and  <dig> kb of its hypothetical promoter, was not detectable under the standard laboratory conditions. the gfp signal was observed solely in a vesicular compartment of coelomocytes of the animals treated with concanamycin a  or nh4cl, agents that increase the ph of the cellular acidic compartment.

immunofluorescence detection of the fusion protein using polyclonal anti-gfp antibody showed a broader and coarsely granular cytoplasmic expression pattern in body wall muscle cells, intestinal cells, and a vesicular compartment of coelomocytes.

inhibition of gana- <dig> by rna interference resulted in a decrease of both α-gal and α-naga activities measured in mixed stage culture homogenates but did not cause any obvious phenotype.


CONCLUSIONS
gana- <dig> is a single c. elegans ortholog of both human α-gal and α-naga proteins. phylogenetic, homology modeling, biochemical and gfp expression analyses support the hypothesis that gana- <dig> has dual enzymatic activity and is localized in an acidic cellular compartment.

