BACKGROUND
species generally have a fixed number of chromosomes in the cell nuclei while between-species differences are common and often pronounced. these differences could have evolved through multiple speciation events, each involving the fixation of a single chromosomal rearrangement. alternatively, marked changes in the karyotype may be the consequence of within-species accumulation of multiple chromosomal fissions/fusions, resulting in highly polymorphic systems with the subsequent extinction of intermediate karyomorphs. although this mechanism of chromosome number evolution is possible in theory, it has not been well documented.


RESULTS
we present the discovery of exceptional intraspecific variability in the karyotype of the widespread eurasian butterfly leptidea sinapis. we show that within this species the diploid chromosome number gradually decreases from 2n =  <dig> in spain to 2n =  <dig> in eastern kazakhstan, resulting in a  <dig> km-wide cline that originated recently . remarkably, intrapopulational chromosome number polymorphism exists, the chromosome number range overlaps between some populations separated by hundreds of kilometers, and chromosomal heterozygotes are abundant. we demonstrate that this karyotypic variability is intraspecific because in l. sinapis a broad geographical distribution is coupled with a homogenous morphological and genetic structure.


CONCLUSIONS
the discovered system represents the first clearly documented case of explosive chromosome number evolution through intraspecific and intrapopulation accumulation of multiple chromosomal changes. leptidea sinapis may be used as a model system for studying speciation by means of chromosomally-based suppressed recombination mechanisms, as well as clinal speciation, a process that is theoretically possible but difficult to document. the discovered cline seems to represent a narrow time-window of the very first steps of species formation linked to multiple chromosomal changes that have occurred explosively. this case offers a rare opportunity to study this process before drift, dispersal, selection, extinction and speciation erase the traces of microevolutionary events and just leave the final picture of a pronounced interspecific chromosomal difference.

