BACKGROUND
the micropropagation is a powerful tool to scale up plants of economical and agronomical importance, enhancing crop productivity. however, a small but growing body of evidence suggests that epigenetic mechanisms, such as dna methylation and histone modifications, can be affected under the in vitro conditions characteristic of micropropagation. here, we tested whether the adaptation to different in vitro systems  modified epigenetically different clones of agave fourcroydes and a. angustifolia. furthermore, we assessed whether these epigenetic changes affect the regulatory expression of knotted1-like homeobox  transcription factors.


RESULTS
to gain a better understanding of epigenetic changes during in vitro and ex vitro conditions in agave fourcroydes and a. angustifolia, we analyzed global dna methylation, as well as different histone modification marks, in two different systems: semisolid in magenta boxes  and temporary immersion in modular bioreactors . no significant difference was found in dna methylation in a. fourcroydes grown in either m or b. however, when a. fourcroydes was compared with a. angustifolia, there was a two-fold difference in dna methylation between the species, independent of the in vitro system used. furthermore, we detected an absence or a low amount of the repressive mark h3k9me <dig> in ex vitro conditions in plants that were cultured earlier either in m or b. moreover, the expression of atqknox <dig> and atqknox <dig>  on a. fourcroydes and a. angustifolia clones, is affected during in vitro conditions. therefore, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation  to know whether these genes were epigenetically regulated. in the case of atqknox <dig>  the h3k4me <dig> and h3k9me <dig> were affected during in vitro conditions in comparison with atqknox <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
agave clones plants with higher dna methylation during in vitro conditions were better adapted to ex vitro conditions. in addition, a. fourcroydes and a. angustifolia clones displayed differential expression of the knox <dig> gene during in vitro conditions, which is epigenetically regulated by the h3k4me <dig> and h3k9me <dig> marks. the finding of an epigenetic regulation in key developmental genes will make it important in future studies to identify factors that help to find climate-resistant micropropagated plants.

epigeneticsin vitrohistone methylationagaveknox genes

