BACKGROUND
controlling sex ratios is essential for the aquaculture industry, especially in those species with sex dimorphism for relevant productive traits, hence the importance of knowing how the sexual phenotype is established in fish. turbot, a very important fish for the aquaculture industry in europe, shows one of the largest sexual growth dimorphisms amongst marine cultured species, being all-female stocks a desirable goal for the industry. although important knowledge has been achieved on the genetic basis of sex determination  in this species, the master sd gene remains unknown and precise information on gene expression at the critical stage of sex differentiation is lacking. in the present work, we examined the expression profiles of  <dig> relevant genes related to sex differentiation, from  <dig> up to 135 days post fertilization , when gonads are differentiating. we also considered the influence of three temperature regimes on sex differentiation.


RESULTS
the first sex-related differences in molecular markers could be observed at 90 days post fertilization  and so we have called that time the onset of sex differentiation. three genes were the first to show differential expression between males and females and also allowed us to sex turbot accurately at the onset of sex differentiation : cyp19a1a, amh and vasa. the expression of genes related to primordial germ cells  started to increase between 75– <dig> dpf and vasa and tdrd <dig> later presented higher expression in females . two genes placed on the sd region of turbot  did not show any expression pattern suggestive of a sex determining function. we also detected changes in the expression levels of several genes  depending on culture temperature.


CONCLUSIONS
our results enabled us to identify the first sex-associated genetic cues  at the initial stages of gonad development in turbot  and to accurately sex turbot at this age, establishing the correspondence between gene expression profiles and histological sex. furthermore, we profiled several genes involved in sex differentiation and found specific temperature effects on their expression.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fishgonaddevelopmentqpcrgenessex ratioaromatasemalefemaletemperaturespanish ministerio de ciencia e innovaciónsánchez laura spanish governement consolider ingenio aquagenomicscsd2007-00002martínez paulino issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

