BACKGROUND
symbiotic interactions between microbes and animals are common in nature. symbiotic organisms are particularly common in insects and, in some cases, they may protect their hosts from pathogenic infections. wolbachia and spiroplasma endosymbionts naturally inhabit various insects including drosophila melanogaster fruit flies. therefore, this symbiotic association is considered an excellent model to investigate whether endosymbiotic bacteria participate in host immune processes against certain pathogens. here we have investigated whether the presence of wolbachia alone or together with spiroplasma endosymbionts in d. melanogaster adult flies affects the immune response against the virulent insect pathogen photorhabdus luminescens and against non-pathogenic escherichia coli bacteria.


RESULTS
we found that d. melanogaster flies carrying no endosymbionts, those carrying both wolbachia and spiroplasma, and those containing wolbachia only had similar survival rates after infection with p. luminescens or escherichia coli bacteria. however, flies carrying both endosymbionts or wolbachia only contained higher numbers of e. coli cells at early time-points post infection than flies without endosymbiotic bacteria. interestingly, flies containing wolbachia only had lower titers of this endosymbiont upon infection with the pathogen p. luminescens than uninfected flies of the same strain. we further found that the presence of wolbachia and spiroplasma in d. melanogaster up-regulated certain immune-related genes upon infection with p. luminescens or e. coli bacteria, but it failed to alter the phagocytic ability of the flies toward e. coli inactive bioparticles.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that the presence of wolbachia and spiroplasma in d. melanogaster can modulate immune signaling against infection by certain insect pathogenic and non-pathogenic bacteria. results from such studies are important for understanding the molecular basis of the interactions between endosymbiotic bacteria of insects and exogenous microbes.

keywords
drosophila melanogasterendosymbiontswolbachiaspiroplasmainsect pathogenphotorhabdus luminescensinfectioninnate immunityhost-microbe interactionshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000060national institute of allergy and infectious diseases 1r01ai110675-01a1eleftherianos ioannis issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

