BACKGROUND
atlantic halibut  is a high-value, niche market species for cold-water marine aquaculture. production of monosex female stocks is desirable in commercial production since females grow faster and mature later than males. understanding the sex determination mechanism and developing sex-associated markers will shorten the time for the development of monosex female production, thus decreasing the costs of farming.


RESULTS
halibut juveniles were masculinised with  <dig> α-methyldihydrotestosterone  and grown to maturity. progeny groups from four treated males were reared and sexed. two of these groups  consisted of only females, while the other two  contained balanced sex ratios . dna from parents and offspring from the two mixed-sex families were used as a template for restriction-site associated dna  sequencing. the  <dig> million raw reads produced  <dig>  unique rad-tags. a linkage map was constructed based on  <dig> single nucleotide polymorphism  markers and  <dig> microsatellites consisting of  <dig> linkage groups, which corresponds to the number of chromosome pairs in this species. a major sex determining locus was mapped to linkage group  <dig> in both families. assays for  <dig> snps with significant association with phenotypic sex were tested in both population data and in  <dig> additional families. using a variety of machine-learning algorithms 97% correct classification could be obtained with the 3% of errors being phenotypic males predicted to be females.


CONCLUSIONS
altogether our findings support the hypothesis that the atlantic halibut has an xx/xy sex determination system. assays are described for sex-associated dna markers developed from the rad sequencing analysis to fast track progeny testing and implement monosex female halibut production for an immediate improvement in productivity. these should also help to speed up the inclusion of neomales derived from many families to maintain a larger effective population size and ensure long-term improvement through selective breeding.

hippoglossus hippoglossussex determinationmonosexqtl mappingrad-seqaquaculture

