BACKGROUND
it has been found that micrornas  can function as a regulatory factor across species. for example, food-derived plant mirnas may pass through the gastrointestinal  tract, enter into the plasma and serum of mammals, and interact with endogenous rnas to regulate their expression. although this new type of regulatory mechanism is not well understood, it provides a fresh look at the relationship between food consumption and physiology. to investigate this new type of mechanism, we conducted a systematic computational study to analyze the potential functions of these dietary mirnas in the human body.


RESULTS
in this paper, we predicted human and plant target genes using rnahybrid and set some criteria to further filter them. then we built the cross-species regulatory network according to the filtered targets, extracted central nodes by pagerank algorithm and built core modules. we summarized the functions of these modules to three major categories: ion transport, metabolic process and stress response, and especially some target genes are highly related to ion transport, polysaccharides and the lipid metabolic process. through functional analysis, we found that human and plants have similar functions such as ion transport and stress response, so our study also indicates the existence of a close link between exogenous plant mirna targets and digestive/urinary organs.


CONCLUSIONS
according to our analysis results, we suggest that the ingestion of these plant mirnas may have a functional impact on consuming organisms in a cross-kingdom way, and the dietary habit may affect the physiological condition at a genetic level. our findings may be useful for discovering cross-species regulatory mechanism in further study.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
mirnacross-species regulationcore modulefunctional analysishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007847natural science foundation of jilin province20150101056jc20140101194jczhang hao liu yuanning http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002858china postdoctoral science foundation2015m570273zhang hao http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china61471181liu yuanning issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

