BACKGROUND
tone languages such as thai and mandarin chinese use differences in fundamental frequency  to distinguish lexical meaning. previous behavioral studies have shown that native speakers of a non-tone language have difficulty discriminating among tone contrasts and are sensitive to different f <dig> dimensions than speakers of a tone language. the aim of the present erp study was to investigate the effect of language background and training on the non-attentive processing of lexical tones. eeg was recorded from  <dig> adult native speakers of mandarin chinese,  <dig> native speakers of american english, and  <dig> thai speakers while they were watching a movie and were presented with multiple tokens of low-falling, mid-level and high-rising thai lexical tones. high-rising or low-falling tokens were presented as deviants among mid-level standard tokens, and vice versa. eeg data and data from a behavioral discrimination task were collected before and after a two-day perceptual categorization training task.


RESULTS
behavioral discrimination improved after training in both the chinese and the english groups. low-falling tone deviants versus standards elicited a mismatch negativity  in all language groups. before, but not after training, the english speakers showed a larger mmn compared to the chinese, even though english speakers performed worst in the behavioral tasks. the mmn was followed by a late negativity, which became smaller with improved discrimination. the high-rising deviants versus standards elicited a late negativity, which was left-lateralized only in the english and chinese groups.


CONCLUSIONS
results showed that native speakers of english, chinese and thai recruited largely similar mechanisms when non-attentively processing thai lexical tones. however, native thai speakers differed from the chinese and english speakers with respect to the processing of late f <dig> contour differences . in addition, native speakers of a non-tone language  were initially more sensitive to f <dig> onset differences , which was suppressed as a result of training. this result converges with results from previous behavioral studies and supports the view that attentive as well as non-attentive processing of f <dig> contrasts is affected by language background, but is malleable even in adult learners.

