BACKGROUND
starch is the principle constituent of potato tubers and is of considerable importance for food and non-food applications. its metabolism has been subject of extensive research over the past decades. despite its importance, a description of the complete inventory of genes involved in starch metabolism and their genome organization in potato plants is still missing. moreover, mechanisms regulating the expression of starch genes in leaves and tubers remain elusive with regard to differences between transitory and storage starch metabolism, respectively. this study aimed at identifying and mapping the complete set of potato starch genes, and to study their expression pattern in leaves and tubers using different sets of transcriptome data. moreover, we wanted to uncover transcription factors co-regulated with starch accumulation in tubers in order to get insight into the regulation of starch metabolism.


RESULTS
we identified  <dig> genomic loci encoding enzymes involved in starch metabolism. novel isoforms of many enzymes were found. their analysis will help to elucidate mechanisms of starch biosynthesis and degradation. expression analysis of starch genes led to the identification of tissue-specific isoenzymes suggesting differences in the transcriptional regulation of starch metabolism between potato leaf and tuber tissues. selection of genes predominantly expressed in developing potato tubers and exhibiting an expression pattern indicative for a role in starch biosynthesis enabled the identification of possible transcriptional regulators of tuber starch biosynthesis by co-expression analysis.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the annotation of the complete set of starch metabolic genes in potato plants and their genomic localizations. novel, so far undescribed, enzyme isoforms were revealed. comparative transcriptome analysis enabled the identification of tuber- and leaf-specific isoforms of starch genes. this finding suggests distinct regulatory mechanisms in transitory and storage starch metabolism. putative regulatory proteins of starch biosynthesis in potato tubers have been identified by co-expression and their expression was verified by quantitative rt-pcr.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
starch metabolismgene expressionmicroarray analysissolanum tuberosumgene annotationco-expression analysishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaftso1002/3-1sonnewald sophia http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100005908bundesministerium für ernährung und landwirtschaft22032711sonnewald uwe issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

