BACKGROUND
the mechanism of action of antimicrobial peptides  was initially correlated with peptide membrane permeation properties. however, recent evidences indicate that action of a number of amp is more complex and involves specific interactions at cell envelopes or with intracellular targets. in this study, a genomic approach was undertaken on the model yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae to characterize the antifungal effect of two unrelated amp.


RESULTS
two differentiated peptides were used: the synthetic cell-penetrating paf <dig> and the natural cytolytic melittin. transcriptomic analyses demonstrated distinctive gene expression changes for each peptide. quantitative rt-pcr confirmed differential expression of selected genes. gene ontology  annotation of differential gene lists showed that the unique significant terms shared by treatment with both peptides were related to the cell wall . assays with mutants lacking cw-related genes including those of mapk signaling pathways revealed genes having influence on sensitivity to peptides. fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry demonstrated paf <dig> interaction with cells and internalization that correlated with cell killing in sensitive cw-defective mutants such as Δecm <dig> or Δssd <dig>  go annotation also showed differential responses between peptides, which included ribosomal biogenesis, arg genes from the metabolism of amino groups , or the reaction to unfolded protein stress. susceptibility of deletion mutants confirmed the involvement of these processes. specifically, mutants lacking arg genes from the metabolism of arginine pathway were markedly more resistant to paf <dig> and had a functional cw. in the deletant in the arginosuccinate synthetase  gene, paf <dig> interaction occurred normally, thus uncoupling peptide interaction from cell killing. the previously described involvement of the glycosphingolipid gene ipt <dig> was extended to the peptides studied here.


CONCLUSIONS
reinforcement of cw is a general response common after exposure to distinct amp, and likely contributes to shield cells from peptide interaction. however, a weakened cw is not necessarily indicative of a higher sensitivity to amp. additional processes modulate susceptibility to specific peptides, exemplified in the involvement of the metabolism of amino groups in the case of paf <dig>  the relevance of the response to unfolded protein stress or the sphingolipid biosynthesis, previously reported for other unrelated amp, was also independently confirmed.

