BACKGROUND
single nucleotide polymorphisms  are the most common type of genetic variation. identification of large numbers of snps is helpful for genetic diversity analysis, map-based cloning, genome-wide association analyses and marker-assisted breeding. recently, identifying genome-wide snps in allopolyploid brassica napus  by resequencing many accessions has become feasible, due to the availability of reference genomes of brassica rapa  and brassica oleracea , which are the progenitor species of b. napus . although many snps in b. napus have been released, the objective in the present study was to produce a larger, more informative set of snps for large-scale and efficient genotypic screening. hence, short-read genome sequencing was conducted on ten elite b. napus accessions for snp discovery. a subset of these snps was randomly selected for sequence validation and for genotyping efficiency testing using the illumina goldengate assay.


RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  bi-allelic snps were discovered throughout the b. napus genome. a total of  <dig>  putative amino acid variants were located in  <dig>  protein-coding genes, which were predicted to have enriched binding and catalytic activity as a result. using the goldengate genotyping platform,  <dig> of  <dig> snps sampled could effectively distinguish genotypes of  <dig> lines from two mapping populations, with an average call rate of 92%.


CONCLUSIONS
despite the polyploid nature of b. napus, nearly  <dig>  simple snps were identified by whole genome resequencing. these snps were predicted to be effective in high-throughput genotyping assays . hence, the development of a much larger genotyping array of informative snps is feasible. snps identified in this study to cause non-synonymous amino acid substitutions can also be utilized to directly identify causal genes in association studies.

keywords
brassica napusallopolyploidresequencinggenotypinggoldengatenon-synonymous snpissue-copyright-statement© biomed central ltd 2013

