BACKGROUND
bovine tuberculosis  caused by mycobacterium bovis continues to cause substantial losses to global agriculture and has significant repercussions for human health. the advent of high throughput genomics has facilitated large scale gene expression analyses that present a novel opportunity for revealing the molecular mechanisms underlying mycobacterial infection. using this approach, we have previously shown that innate immune genes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells  from btb-infected animals are repressed in vivo in the absence of exogenous antigen stimulation. in the present study, we hypothesized that the pbmc from btb-infected cattle would display a distinct gene expression program resulting from exposure to m. bovis. a functional genomics approach was used to examine the immune response of btb-infected  and healthy control  cattle to stimulation with bovine tuberculin  in vitro. pbmc were harvested before, and at  <dig> h and  <dig> h post in vitro stimulation with bovine tuberculin. gene expression changes were catalogued within each group using a reference hybridization design and a targeted immunospecific cdna microarray platform  with  <dig>  spot features representing  <dig>  genes.


RESULTS
 <dig> gene spot features were significantly differentially expressed in btb-infected animals at  <dig> h post-stimulation contrasting with only  <dig> gene spot features in the non-infected control animals . at  <dig> h post-stimulation,  <dig> and  <dig> gene spot features were differentially expressed in both groups respectively. the results provided evidence of a proinflammatory gene expression profile in pbmc from btb-infected animals in response to antigen stimulation. furthermore, a common panel of eighteen genes, including transcription factors were significantly expressed in opposite directions in both groups. real-time quantitative reverse transcription pcr  demonstrated that many innate immune genes, including components of the tlr pathway and cytokines were differentially expressed in btb-infected  versus control animals  after stimulation with bovine tuberculin.


CONCLUSIONS
the pbmc from btb-infected animals exhibit different transcriptional profiles compared with pbmc from healthy control animals in response to m. bovis antigen stimulation, providing evidence of a novel gene expression program due to m. bovis exposure.

