BACKGROUND
polymorphisms in the gene for phosphatidylinositol binding clathrin assembly protein , an endocytic-related protein, are associated with a small, increased risk of developing alzheimer’s disease , strongly suggesting that changes in endocytosis are involved in the aetiology of the disease. we have investigated the involvement of picalm in the processing of amyloid precursor protein  to understand how picalm could be linked to the development of ad. we used sirna to deplete levels of picalm, its isoforms and clathrin heavy chain in the human brain-derived h <dig> neuroglioma cell line that expresses endogenous levels of app. we then used western blotting, elisa and immunohistochemistry to detect intra- and extracellular protein levels of endocytic-related proteins, app and app metabolites including β-amyloid . levels of functional endocytosis were quantified using alexa 488-conjugated transferrin and flow cytometry as a marker of clathrin-mediated endocytosis .


RESULTS
following depletion of all the isoforms of picalm by sirna in h <dig> cells, levels of intracellular app, intracellular β-c-terminal fragment  and secreted sappβ  were significantly reduced but aβ <dig> was not affected. functional endocytosis was significantly reduced after both picalm and clathrin depletion, highlighting the importance of picalm in this process. however, depletion of clathrin did not affect app but did reduce β-ctf levels. picalm depletion altered the intracellular distribution of clathrin while clathrin reduction affected the subcellular pattern of picalm labelling. both picalm and clathrin depletion reduced the expression of bace <dig> mrna and picalm sirna reduced protein levels. individual depletion of picalm isoforms  <dig> and  <dig> did not affect app levels while clathrin depletion had a differential effect on the isoforms, increasing isoform  <dig> while decreasing isoform  <dig> expression.


CONCLUSIONS
the depletion of picalm in brain-derived cells has significant effects on the processing of app, probably by reducing cme. in particular, it affects the production of β-ctf which is increasingly considered to be an important mediator in ad independent of aβ. thus a decrease in picalm expression in the brain could be beneficial to slow or prevent the development of ad.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
alzheimer’s diseaseamyloid precursor proteinβ-c-terminal fragmentβ-secretaseclathrin-mediated endocytosispicalmhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100000265medical research councilmr/l010305/1issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

