BACKGROUND
a gene regulatory network  represents interactions of genes inside a cell or tissue, in which vertexes and edges stand for genes and their regulatory interactions respectively. reconstruction of gene regulatory networks, in particular, genome-scale networks, is essential for comparative exploration of different species and mechanistic investigation of biological processes. currently, most of network inference methods are computationally intensive, which are usually effective for small-scale tasks , but are difficult to construct grns at genome-scale.


RESULTS
here, we present a software package for gene regulatory network reconstruction at a genomic level, in which gene interaction is measured by the conditional mutual information measurement using a parallel computing framework . the package is a greatly improved implementation of our previous pca-cmi algorithm. in cmip, we provide not only an automatic threshold determination method but also an effective parallel computing framework for network inference. performance tests on benchmark datasets show that the accuracy of cmip is comparable to most current network inference methods. moreover, running tests on synthetic datasets demonstrate that cmip can handle large datasets especially genome-wide datasets within an acceptable time period. in addition, successful application on a real genomic dataset confirms its practical applicability of the package.


CONCLUSIONS
this new software package provides a powerful tool for genomic network reconstruction to biological community. the software can be accessed at http://www.picb.ac.cn/cmip/.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
gene regulatory networkgenome-wideparallel computingsoftwarethe 27th international conference on genome informatics shanghai, china 3- <dig> october  <dig> http://admis.fudan.edu.cn/giw2016/issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

