BACKGROUND
the microarray data analysis realm is ever growing through the development of various tools, open source and commercial. however there is absence of predefined rational algorithmic analysis workflows or batch standardized processing to incorporate all steps, from raw data import up to the derivation of significantly differentially expressed gene lists. this absence obfuscates the analytical procedure and obstructs the massive comparative processing of genomic microarray datasets. moreover, the solutions provided, heavily depend on the programming skills of the user, whereas in the case of gui embedded solutions, they do not provide direct support of various raw image analysis formats or a versatile and simultaneously flexible combination of signal processing methods.


RESULTS
we describe here gene armada , a matlab implemented platform with a graphical user interface. this suite integrates all steps of microarray data analysis including automated data import, noise correction and filtering, normalization, statistical selection of differentially expressed genes, clustering, classification and annotation. in its current version, gene armada fully supports  <dig> coloured cdna and affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays, plus custom arrays for which experimental details are given in tabular form . it also supports the analysis of already processed results through its versatile import editor. besides being fully automated, gene armada incorporates numerous functionalities of the statistics and bioinformatics toolboxes of matlab. in addition, it provides numerous visualization and exploration tools plus customizable export data formats for seamless integration by other analysis tools or matlab, for further processing. gene armada requires matlab  <dig>   or higher and is also distributed as a stand-alone application with matlab component runtime.


CONCLUSIONS
gene armada provides a highly adaptable, integrative, yet flexible tool which can be used for automated quality control, analysis, annotation and visualization of microarray data, constituting a starting point for further data interpretation and integration with numerous other tools.

