BACKGROUND
gene bodies are the most evolutionarily conserved targets of dna methylation in eukaryotes. however, the regulatory functions of gene body dna methylation remain largely unknown. dna methylation in insects appears to be primarily confined to exons. two recent studies in apis mellifera  and nasonia vitripennis  analyzed transcription and dna methylation data for one gene in each species to demonstrate that exon-specific dna methylation may be associated with alternative splicing events. in this study we investigated the relationship between dna methylation, alternative splicing, and cross-species gene conservation on a genome-wide scale using genome-wide transcription and dna methylation data.


RESULTS
we generated rna deep sequencing data  to measure genome-wide mrna expression at the exon- and gene-level. we produced a de novo transcriptome from this rna-seq data and computationally predicted splice variants for the honeybee genome. we found that exons that are included in transcription are higher methylated than exons that are skipped during transcription. we detected enrichment for alternative splicing among methylated genes compared to unmethylated genes using fisher’s exact test. we performed a statistical analysis to reveal that the presence of dna methylation or alternative splicing are both factors associated with a longer gene length and a greater number of exons in genes. in concordance with this observation, a conservation analysis using blast revealed that each of these factors is also associated with higher cross-species gene conservation.


CONCLUSIONS
this study constitutes the first genome-wide analysis exhibiting a positive relationship between exon-level dna methylation and mrna expression in the honeybee. our finding that methylated genes are enriched for alternative splicing suggests that, in invertebrates, exon-level dna methylation may play a role in the construction of splice variants by positively influencing exon inclusion during transcription. the results from our cross-species homology analysis suggest that dna methylation and alternative splicing are genetic mechanisms whose utilization could contribute to a longer gene length and a slower rate of gene evolution.

