BACKGROUND
legumes are important to humans by providing food, feed and raw materials for industrial utilizations. some legumes, such as alfalfa, are potential bioenergy crops due to their high biomass productivity. global transcriptional profiling has been successfully used to identify genes and regulatory pathways in secondary cell wall thickening in arabidopsis, but such transcriptome data is lacking in legumes.


RESULTS
a systematic microarray assay and high through-put real time pcr analysis of secondary cell wall development were performed along stem maturation in medicago truncatula. more than  <dig>  genes were differentially expressed during stem maturation, and were categorized into  <dig> expression clusters. among these,  <dig> transcription factor genes were correlated with lignin/cellulose biosynthesis, therefore representing putative regulators of secondary wall development. the b-zip, nac, wrky, c2h <dig> zinc finger , homeobox, and hsf gene families were over-represented. gene co-expression network analysis was employed to identify transcription factors that may regulate the biosynthesis of lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose. as a complementary approach to microarray, real-time pcr analysis was used to characterize the expression of  <dig>  transcription factors in the stem samples, and  <dig> of these were upregulated more than 5-fold during stem maturation. reverse genetics characterization of a cellulose synthase gene in cluster  <dig> confirmed its function in xylem development.


CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a useful transcriptome and expression resource for understanding cell wall development, which is pivotal to enhance biomass production in legumes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomeexpressionsecondary cell walldevelopmentmedicago truncatulahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000199u.s. department of agricultureid0e3pbg6788wang huanzhong uconn research excellence program awardid0ecxbg6789wang huanzhong oklahoma department of energy bioenergy centerid0ee5bg6790dixon richard the samuel roberts noble foundationid0eo6bg6791dixon richard issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

