BACKGROUND
the demosponge amphimedon queenslandica is amongst the few early-branching metazoans with an assembled and annotated draft genome, making it an important species in the study of the origin and early evolution of animals. current gene models in this species are largely based on in silico predictions and low coverage expressed sequence tag  evidence.


RESULTS
amphimedon queenslandica protein-coding gene models are improved using deep rna-seq data from four developmental stages and cel-seq data from  <dig> developmental samples. over 86% of previously predicted genes are retained in the new gene models, although 24% have additional exons; there is also a marked increase in the total number of annotated 3’ and 5’ untranslated regions . importantly, these new developmental transcriptome data reveal numerous previously unannotated protein-coding genes in the amphimedon genome, increasing the total gene number by 25%, from  <dig>  to  <dig> . in general, amphimedon genes have introns that are markedly smaller than those in other animals and most of the alternatively spliced genes in amphimedon undergo intron-retention; exon-skipping is the least common mode of alternative splicing. finally, in addition to canonical polyadenylation signal sequences, amphimedon genes are enriched in a number of unique at-rich motifs in their 3’ utrs.


CONCLUSIONS
the inclusion of developmental transcriptome data has substantially improved the structure and composition of protein-coding gene models in amphimedon queenslandica, providing a more accurate and comprehensive set of genes for functional and comparative studies. these improvements reveal the amphimedon genome is comprised of a remarkably high number of tightly packed genes. these genes have small introns and there is pervasive intron retention amongst alternatively spliced transcripts. these aspects of the sponge genome are more similar unicellular opisthokont genomes than to other animal genomes.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptometranscription terminationalternative splicingmetazoan evolutionissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

