BACKGROUND
annona squamosa l., a popular fruit tree, is the most widely cultivated species of the genus annona. the lack of transcriptomic and genomic information limits the scope of genome investigations in this important shrub. it bears aggregate fruits with numerous seeds. a few rare accessions with very few seeds have been reported for annona. a massive pyrosequencing  of transcriptome from early stages of fruit development  was performed to produce expression datasets in two genotypes, sitaphal and nmk- <dig>  that show a contrast in the number of seeds set in fruits. the data reported here is the first source of genome-wide differential transcriptome sequence in two genotypes of a. squamosa, and identifies several candidate genes related to seed development.


RESULTS
approximately  <dig>  million high-quality clean reads were obtained in the cdna library from the developing fruits of both the genotypes, with an average length of about 568 bp. quality-reads were assembled de novo into  <dig> to  <dig> contigs in the developing fruit samples at different stages of development. the contig sequence data of all the four stages of each genotype were combined into larger units resulting into  <dig>  and  <dig>  unigenes, with a mean size of more than  <dig> kb. assembled unigenes were functionally annotated by querying against the protein sequences of five different public databases , with an e-value cut-off of 10− <dig>  a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  unigenes did not match any known protein in the nr database. these sequences could be genes specific to annona sp. or belong to untranslated regions. several of the unigenes representing pathways related to primary and secondary metabolism, and seed and fruit development expressed at a higher level in sitaphal, the densely seeded cultivar in comparison to the poorly seeded nmk- <dig>  a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  simple sequence repeat  motifs were identified respectively in the two genotypes. these could be potential candidates for transcript based microsatellite analysis in a. squamosa.


CONCLUSIONS
the present work provides early-stage fruit specific transcriptome sequence resource for a. squamosa. this repository will serve as a useful resource for investigating the molecular mechanisms of fruit development, and improvement of fruit related traits in a. squamosa and related species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
annona squamosa l. transcriptomicsearly-stage developing fruitde novo transcriptome assemblysimple sequence repeatsweb resourceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

