BACKGROUND
β-mannans are abundant and diverse plant structural and storage polysaccharides. certain human gut microbiota members including health-promoting bifidobacterium spp. catabolize dietary mannans. little insight is available on the enzymology of mannan deconstruction in the gut ecological niche. here, we report the biochemical properties of the first family  <dig> subfamily  <dig> glycoside hydrolase  mannanase from the probiotic bacterium bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis bl- <dig> .


RESULTS
blman5_ <dig> possesses a novel low affinity carbohydrate binding module  specific for soluble mannan and displays the highest catalytic efficiency reported to date for a gh <dig> mannanase owing to a very high kcat  and a low km  using locust bean galactomannan as substrate. the novel cbm of blman5_ <dig> mediates increased binding to soluble mannan based on affinity electrophoresis. surface plasmon resonance analysis confirmed the binding of the cbm <dig> to manno-oligosaccharides, albeit with slightly lower affinity than the catalytic module of the enzyme. this is the first example of a low-affinity mannan-specific cbm, which forms a subfamily of cbm <dig> together with close homologs present only in mannanases. members of this new subfamily lack an aromatic residue mediating binding to insoluble cellulose in canonical cbm <dig> members consistent with the observed low mannan affinity.


CONCLUSIONS
blman5_ <dig> is evolved for efficient deconstruction of soluble mannans, which is reflected by an exceptionally low km and the presence of an atypical low affinity cbm, which increases binding to specifically to soluble mannan while causing minimal decrease in catalytic efficiency as opposed to enzymes with canonical mannan binding modules. these features highlight fine tuning of catalytic and binding properties to support specialization towards a preferred substrate, which is likely to confer an advantage in the adaptation to competitive ecological niches.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
bifidobacteriumcarbohydrate-binding modulegut microbiotamannanprobiotic bacteriasurface plasmon resonanceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

