BACKGROUND
pleistocene climatic oscillations and historical geological events may both influence current patterns of genetic variation, and the species in southern china that faced unique climatic and topographical events have complex evolutionary histories. however, the relative contributions of climatic oscillations and geographical events to the genetic variation of these species remain undetermined. to investigate patterns of genetic variation and to test the hypotheses about the factors that shaped the distribution of this genetic variation in species of southern china, mitochondrial genes  and nine microsatellite loci of the omei tree frog  were amplified in this study.


RESULTS
the genetic diversity in the populations of r. omeimontis was high. the phylogenetic trees reconstructed from the mitochondrial dna  haplotypes and the bayesian genetic clustering analysis based on microsatellite data both revealed that all populations were divided into three lineages . the two most recent splitting events among the lineages coincided with recent geological events  and the pleistocene glaciations. significant expansion signals were not detected in mismatch analyses or neutrality tests. and the effective population size of each lineage was stable during the pleistocene.


CONCLUSIONS
based on the results of this study, complex geological events  and the pleistocene glaciations were apparent drivers of the rapid divergence of the r. omeimontis lineages. each diverged lineages survived in situ with limited gene exchanges, and the stable demographics of lineages indicate that the pleistocene climatic oscillations were inconsequential for this species. the analysis of genetic variation in populations of r. omeimontis contributes to the understanding of the effects of changes in climate and of geographical events on the dynamic development of contemporary patterns of genetic variation in the species of southern china.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
population genetic structuredemographic historytectonic eventspleistocene glaciationsrhacophorus omeimontissouthern chinahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china <dig> zhao mian wu hua issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

