BACKGROUND
the mormon metalmark  species complex occurs as isolated and phenotypically variable colonies in dryland areas across western north america. lange’s metalmark, a. m. langei, one of the  <dig> subspecies taxonomically recognized in the complex, is federally listed under the u.s. endangered species act of  <dig>  metalmark taxa have traditionally been described based on phenotypic and ecological characteristics, and it is unknown how well this nomenclature reflects their genetic and evolutionary distinctiveness. genetic variation in six microsatellite loci and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit i sequence was used to assess the population structure of the a. mormo species complex across  <dig> localities, and to evaluate a. m. langei’s qualifications as an evolutionarily significant unit.


RESULTS
we discovered substantial genetic divergence within the species complex, especially across the continental divide, with population genetic structure corresponding more closely with geographic proximity and local isolation than with taxonomic divisions originally based on wing color and pattern characters. lange’s metalmark was as genetically divergent as several other locally isolated populations in california, and even the unique phenotype that warranted subspecific and conservation status is reminiscent of the morphological variation found in some other populations.


CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first genetic treatment of the a. mormo complex across western north america and potentially provides a foundation for reassessing the taxonomy of the group. furthermore, these results illustrate the utility of molecular markers to aid in demarcation of biological units below the species level. from a conservation point of view, apodemia mormo langei’s diagnostic taxonomic characteristics may, by themselves, not support its evolutionary significance, which has implications for its formal listing as an endangered species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
conservationmitochondrial dnapopulation geneticsphylogenyevolutionarily significant unitesuapodemia mormo langeiriodinidaeendangered species actconservation prioritizationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

