BACKGROUND
the nac  transcriptional factors constitute a large family with more than  <dig> members in rice and some of them have been demonstrated to play crucial roles in plant abiotic stress response. here, we report the characterization of a rice stress-responsive nac gene, onac <dig>  and the exploration of its function in drought and cold stress tolerance.


RESULTS
expression of onac <dig> was up-regulated by drought stress and abscisic acid  but down-regulated by cold stress. onac <dig> protein had transactivation activity and the c <dig> domain in c-terminal was found to be critical for transactivation activity. transgenic rice lines with overexpression of onac <dig>  and dominant chimeric repressor-mediated suppression of onac <dig>  were generated. the onac095-oe plants showed comparable phenotype to wild type under drought and cold stress conditions. however, the onac095-srdx plants displayed an improved drought tolerance but exhibited an attenuated cold tolerance. the onac095-srdx plants had decreased water loss rate, increased proline and soluble sugar contents, and up-regulated expression of drought-responsive genes under drought condition, whereas the onac095-srdx plants accumulated excess reactive oxygen species, increased malondialdehyde content and down-regulated expression of cold-responsive genes under cold condition. furthermore, onac095-srdx plants showed an increased aba sensitivity, contained an elevated aba level, and displayed altered expression of aba biosynthetic and metabolic genes as well as some aba signaling-related genes.


CONCLUSIONS
functional analyses through dominant chimeric repressor-mediated suppression of onac <dig> demonstrate that onac <dig> plays opposite roles in drought and cold stress tolerance, acting as a negative regulator of drought response but as a positive regulator of cold response in rice.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
abscisic acid cold tolerancedrought tolerancenac transcription factoronac095rice national natural science foundation31272028song fengming national transgenic major project of china2014zx08009-003-001song fengming research fund for the doctoral program of higher education of china20120101110070song fengming issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

