BACKGROUND
limited information is available on aluminum -toxicity-responsive proteins in woody plant roots. seedlings of ‘xuegan’  and ‘sour pummelo’  were treated for 18 weeks with nutrient solution containing  <dig>  or  <dig>  mm alcl3 · 6h2o . thereafter, we investigated citrus root protein profiles using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification . the aims of this work were to determine the molecular mechanisms of plants to deal with al-toxicity and to identify differentially expressed proteins involved in al-tolerance.


RESULTS
c. sinensis was more tolerant to al-toxicity than c. grandis. we isolated  <dig> differentially expressed proteins from + al citrus roots. among these proteins,  <dig>  proteins only presented in c. sinensis , and  <dig> proteins were shared by the two species. of the  <dig> overlapping proteins,  <dig> proteins were regulated in the same direction upon al exposure in the both species. these proteins were classified into following categories: sulfur metabolism, stress and defense response, carbohydrate and energy metabolism, nucleic acid metabolism, protein metabolism, cell transport, biological regulation and signal transduction, cell wall and cytoskeleton metabolism, and jasmonic acid  biosynthesis. the higher al-tolerance of c. sinensis may be related to several factors, including:  activation of sulfur metabolism;  greatly improving the total ability of antioxidation and detoxification;  up-regulation of carbohydrate and energy metabolism;  enhancing cell transport;  decreased  abundances of proteins involved in protein synthesis ;  keeping a better balance between protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation; and  increasing ja biosynthesis.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrated that metabolic flexibility was more remarkable in c. sinenis than in c. grandis roots, thus improving the al-tolerance of c. sinensis. this provided the most integrated view of the adaptive responses occurring in al-toxicity roots.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aluminum-toxicitycitrusitraqproteomicsrootsulfur metabolismissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

