BACKGROUND
the neonatal bovine mammary fat pad  surrounding the mammary parenchyma  is thought to exert proliferative effects on the par through secretion of local modulators of growth induced by systemic hormones. we used bioinformatics to characterize transcriptomics differences between par and mfp from ~ <dig> d old holstein heifers. data were mined to uncover potential crosstalk through the analyses of signaling molecules preferentially expressed in one tissue relative to the other.


RESULTS
over  <dig>  differentially expressed genes  were found of which  <dig>  had a ≥ <dig> -fold difference between par and mfp. within the deg highly-expressed in par vs. mfp  we noted significant enrichment of functions related to cell cycle, structural organization, signaling, and dna/rna metabolism. only actin cytoskeletal signaling was significant among canonical pathways. deg more highly-expressed in mfp vs. par  belong to lipid metabolism, signaling, cell movement, and immune-related functions. canonical pathways associated with metabolism and signaling, particularly immune- and metabolism-related were significantly-enriched. network analysis uncovered a central role of myc, tp <dig>  and ctnnb <dig> in controlling expression of deg highly-expressed in par vs. mfp. similar analysis suggested a central role for pparg, klf <dig>  egr <dig>  and epas <dig> in regulating expression of more highly-expressed deg in mfp vs. par. gene network analyses revealed putative inter-tissue crosstalk between cytokines and growth factors preferentially expressed in one tissue  with deg preferentially expressed in the other tissue, particularly transcription factors or pathways .


CONCLUSIONS
functional analyses underscored a reciprocal influence in determining the biological features of mfp and par during neonatal development. this was exemplified by the potential effect that the signaling molecules  released preferentially  by par or mfp could have on molecular functions or signaling pathways enriched in the mfp or par. these bidirectional interactions might be required to coordinate mammary tissue development under normal circumstances or in response to nutrition.

