BACKGROUND
the product of a novel cytokine-responsive gene discovered by differential display analysis in our earlier studies on hepg <dig> cells was identified as mimitin – a small mitochondrial protein. since proinflammatory cytokines are known to affect components of the respiratory chain in mitochondria, and mimitin was reported as a possible chaperone for assembly of mitochondrial complex i, we looked for the effects of modulation of mimitin expression and for mimitin-binding partners.


RESULTS
by blocking mimitin expression in hepg <dig> cells by sirna we found that mimitin has no direct influence on caspase 3/ <dig> activities implicated in apoptosis. however, when apoptosis was induced by tnf and cycloheximide, and mimitin expression blocked, the activities of these caspases were significantly increased. this was accompanied by a slight decrease in proliferation of hepg <dig> cells. our observations suggest that mimitin may be involved in the control of apoptosis indirectly, through another protein, or proteins. using the yeast two-hybrid system and coimmunoprecipitation we found map1s among proteins interacting with mimitin. map1s is a recently identified member of the microtubule-associated protein family and has been shown to interact with nadh dehydrogenase i and cytochrome oxidase i. moreover, it was implicated in the process of mitochondrial aggregation and nuclear genome destruction. the expression of mimitin is stimulated more than  <dig> -fold by il- <dig> and by il- <dig>  with the maximum level of mimitin observed after 18– <dig> h exposure to these cytokines. we also found that the cytokine-induced signal leading to stimulation of mimitin synthesis utilizes the map kinase pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
mimitin is a mitochondrial protein upregulated by proinflammatory cytokines at the transcriptional and protein levels, with map kinases involved in il-1-dependent induction. mimitin interacts with a microtubular protein , and some changes of mimitin gene expression modulate activity of apoptotic caspases 3/ <dig>  suggesting that this protein may indirectly participate in apoptosis.

