BACKGROUND
small, isolated populations often experience loss of genetic variation due to random genetic drift. unlike neutral or nearly neutral markers , major histocompatibility complex  genes in these populations may retain high levels of polymorphism due to balancing selection. the relative roles of balancing selection and genetic drift in either small isolated or bottlenecked populations remain controversial. in this study, we examined the mechanisms maintaining polymorphisms of mhc genes in small isolated populations of the endangered golden snub-nosed monkey  by comparing genetic variation found in mhc and microsatellite loci. there are few studies of this kind conducted on highly endangered primate species.


RESULTS
two mhc genes were sequenced and sixteen microsatellite loci were genotyped from samples representing three isolated populations. we isolated nine dqa <dig> alleles and sixteen dqb <dig> alleles and validated expression of the alleles. lowest genetic variation for both mhc and microsatellites was found in the shennongjia  population. historical balancing selection was revealed at both the dqa <dig> and dqb <dig> loci, as revealed by excess non-synonymous substitutions at antigen binding sites  and maximum-likelihood-based random-site models. patterns of microsatellite variation revealed population structure. fst outlier analysis showed that population differentiation at the two mhc loci was similar to the microsatellite loci.


CONCLUSIONS
mhc genes and microsatellite loci showed the same allelic richness pattern with the lowest genetic variation occurring in snj, suggesting that genetic drift played a prominent role in these isolated populations. as mhc genes are subject to selective pressures, the maintenance of genetic variation is of particular interest in small, long-isolated populations. the results of this study may contribute to captive breeding and translocation programs for endangered species.

balancing selectionconservation geneticsgene driftmhcrhinopithecus roxellana

