BACKGROUND
contagious bovine pleuropneumonia  caused by mycoplasma mycoides subsp. mycoides small-colony type  is among the most serious threats for livestock producers in africa. glycerol metabolism-associated h2o <dig> production seems to play a crucial role in virulence of this mycoplasma. a wide number of attenuated strains of m. mycoides subsp. mycoides sc are currently used in africa as live vaccines. glycerol metabolism is not affected in these vaccine strains and therefore it does not seem to be the determinant of their attenuation. a non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism  in the bgl gene coding for the 6-phospho-β-glucosidase  has been described recently. the snp differentiates virulent african strains isolated from outbreaks with severe cbpp, which express the bgl isoform val <dig>  from strains to be considered less virulent isolated from cbpp outbreaks with low mortality and vaccine strains, which express the bgl isoform ala <dig> 


RESULTS
strains of m. mycoides subsp. mycoides sc considered virulent and possessing the bgl isoform val <dig>  but not strains with the bgl isoform ala <dig>  do trigger elevated levels of damage to embryonic bovine lung  cells upon incubation with the disaccharides  sucrose and lactose. however, strains expressing the bgl isoform val <dig> show a lower hydrolysing activity on the chromogenic substrate p-nitrophenyl-β-d-glucopyranoside  when compared to strains that possess the bgl isoform ala <dig>  defective activity of bgl in m. mycoides subsp. mycoides sc does not lead to h2o <dig> production. rather, the viability during addition of β-d-glucosides in medium-free buffers is higher for strains harbouring the bgl isoform val <dig> than for those with the isoform ala <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the studied snp in the bgl gene is one possible cause of the difference in bacterial virulence among strains of m. mycoides subsp. mycoides sc. bgl does not act as a direct virulence factor, but strains possessing the bgl isoform val <dig> with low hydrolysing activity are more prone to survive in environments that contain high levels of β-d-glucosides, thus contributing in some extent to mycoplasmaemia.

