BACKGROUND
cotton  is one of the major fibre crops of the world. although it is classified as salt tolerant crop, cotton growth and productivity are adversely affected by high salinity, especially at germination and seedling stages. identification of genes and mirnas responsible for salt tolerance in upland cotton  would help reveal the molecular mechanisms of salt tolerance. we performed physiological experiments and transcriptome sequencing  of cotton leaves under salt stress using illumina sequencing technology.


RESULTS
we investigated two distinct salt stress phases—dehydration  and ionic stress —that were identified by physiological changes of 14-day-old seedlings of two cotton genotypes, one salt tolerant and the other salt sensitive, during a 72-h nacl exposure. a comparative transcriptomics was used to monitor gene and mirna differential expression at two time points  in leaves of the two cotton genotypes under salinity conditions. the expression patterns of differentially co-expressed unigenes were divided into six groups using short time-servies expression miner software. during a 24-h salt exposure,  <dig> transcription factor unigenes were differentially expressed in both genotypes, with  <dig> unigenes specifically expressed in the salt-tolerant genotype. under salt stress,  <dig> conserved mirnas from known families were differentially expressed at two time points in the salt-tolerant genotype. we further analyzed the predicted target genes of these mirnas along with the transcriptome for each time point. important expressed genes encoding membrane receptors, transporters, and pathways involved in biosynthesis and signal transduction of calcium-dependent protein kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and hormones  were up-regulated. we also analyzed the salt stress response of some key mirnas and their target genes and found that the expressions of five of nine target genes exhibited significant inverse correlations with their corresponding mirnas. on the basis of these results, we constructed molecular regulatory pathways and a potential regulatory network for these salt-responsive mirnas.


CONCLUSIONS
our comprehensive transcriptome analysis has provided new insights into salt-stress response of upland cotton. the results should contribute to the development of genetically modified cotton with salt tolerance.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cottonsalt stressleaf transcriptometranscription factormicrornaissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

