BACKGROUND
in view of the immense value of brassica rapa in the fields of agriculture and molecular biology, the multinational brassica rapa genome sequencing project  was launched in  <dig> by five countries. the developing brgsp has valuable resources for the community, including a reference genetic map and seed bac sequences. although the initial b. rapa linkage map served as a reference for the brgsp, there was ambiguity in reconciling the linkage groups with the ten chromosomes of b. rapa. consequently, the brgsp assigned each of the linkage groups to the project members as chromosome substitutes for sequencing.


RESULTS
we identified simple sequence repeat  motifs in the b. rapa genome with the sequences of seed bacs used for the brgsp. by testing  <dig> amplicons containing ssr motifs, we identified polymorphisms that enabled the anchoring of  <dig> bacs onto the b. rapa reference linkage map consisting of  <dig> loci in the  <dig> linkage groups with an average distance of  <dig>  cm between adjacent loci. the anchored bac sequences enabled the identification of  <dig> blocks of conserved synteny, totaling  <dig>  cm in length, between the genomes of b. rapa and arabidopsis thaliana. most of these were consistent with previously reported duplication and rearrangement events that differentiate these genomes. however, we were able to identify the collinear regions for seven additional previously uncharacterized sections of the a genome. integration of the linkage map with the b. rapa cytogenetic map was accomplished by fish with probes representing  <dig> bac clones, along with probes for rdna and centromeric repeat sequences. this integration enabled unambiguous alignment and orientation of the maps representing the  <dig> b. rapa chromosomes.


CONCLUSIONS
we developed a second generation reference linkage map for b. rapa, which was aligned unambiguously to the b. rapa cytogenetic map. furthermore, using our data, we confirmed and extended the comparative genome analysis between b. rapa and a. thaliana. this work will serve as a basis for integrating the genetic, physical, and chromosome maps of the brgsp, as well as for studies on polyploidization, speciation, and genome duplication in the genus brassica.

