BACKGROUND
microbial transglutaminase  is a robust enzyme catalyzing the formation of an isopeptide bond between glutamine and lysine residues. it has found use in food applications, pharmaceuticals, textiles, and biomedicine. overexpression of soluble and active mtg in e. coli has been limited due to improper protein folding and requirement for proteolytic cleavage of the pro-domain. furthermore, to integrate mtg more fully industrially and academically, thermostable and solvent-stable variants may be imperative.


RESULTS
a novel expression system constitutively producing active mtg was designed. wild-type  mtg and a s2p variant had similar expression levels, comparable to previous studies. kinetic constants were determined by a glutamate dehydrogenase-coupled assay, and the s2p variant showed an increased affinity and a doubled enzyme efficiency towards z-gln-gly. the melting temperature  of the wt was determined by intrinsic fluorescence measurements to be  <dig>  ±  <dig>  °c and of the s2p variant to be  <dig>  ±  <dig>  °c and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  °c, showing a moderately different thermostability profile. stability in water miscible organic solvents was determined for both the wt and s2p variant. of the solvents tested, incubation of mtg in isopropanol for 24 h at 4 °c showed the strongest stabilizing effect with mtg retaining  <dig> and 72% activity for wt and s2p respectively in 70% isopropanol. both enzymes also showed an increased initial activity in the presence of organic solvents with the highest activity increase in 40% dmso. nevertheless, both enzymes were inactivated in 70% of all organic solvents tested.


CONCLUSIONS
a constitutive expression system of active mtg in e. coli without downstream proteolytic cleavage processing was used for overexpression and characterization. high throughput techniques for testing thermostability and kinetics were useful in streamlining analysis and could be used in the future for quickly identifying beneficial mutants. hitherto untested thermostability and stability of mtg in organic solvents was evaluated, which can pave the way for use of the enzyme in novel applications and processes.

keywords
microbial transglutaminaseorganic solventsthermostabledifferential scanning fluorimetermicro grants for the technion recycling initiativeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

