BACKGROUND
one of the most common diseases in intact bitches is pyometra– a potentially life-threatening disease associated with a variety of clinical and laboratory findings. the aims of the present study were to describe complications of the disease and to investigate clinically useful indicators associated with peritonitis and/or prolonged postoperative hospitalization.


RESULTS
a retrospective study was performed using records from  <dig> bitches diagnosed with pyometra during the years 2006– <dig> at the university animal hospital, swedish university of agricultural sciences, uppsala, sweden. of the  <dig> bitches,  <dig> were surgically treated by ovariohysterectomy,  <dig> were medically treated and  <dig> were euthanized without treatment. in the surgically treated bitches, univariable associations between clinical and laboratory data, risk for prolonged hospitalization  and/or signs of peritonitis, were analyzed by chi-square and fisher’s exact test. logistic regression models were used to assess multivariable associations.

the most common complication observed in surgically treated bitches was peritonitis , followed by urinary tract infection , wound infection , uveitis , and cardiac arrhythmia . leucopenia and fever/hypothermia were associated with increased risk for peritonitis . moderate to severe depression of the general condition, pale mucous membranes and leucopenia were associated with increased risk  for prolonged postoperative hospitalization.


CONCLUSIONS
several clinically useful indicators were identified. leucopenia was the most important marker, associated with 18-fold increased risk for peritonitis and an over three-point-five increased risk for prolonged hospitalization. fever/hypothermia, depression and pale mucous membranes were associated with increased risk for peritonitis and/or prolonged hospitalization. the results of the present study may be valuable for identifying peritonitis and predicting increased morbidity in surgically treated bitches with pyometra.

bitchuterine inflammationsurgical treatmenthospitalizationperitonitisriskoutcomedogs

