BACKGROUND
prognostication of breast cancer  relies largely on traditional clinical factors and biomarkers such as hormone or growth factor receptors. due to their suboptimal specificities, it is challenging to accurately identify the subset of patients who are likely to undergo recurrence and there remains a major need for markers of higher utility to guide therapeutic decisions. micrornas  are small non-coding rnas that function as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression and have shown promise as potential prognostic markers in several cancer types including bc.


RESULTS
in our study, we sequenced mirnas from  <dig> bc samples and  <dig> apparently healthy normal  breast tissues. we used case–control  and case-only  statistical paradigm to identify prognostic markers. cox-proportional hazards regression model was employed and risk score analysis was performed to identify mirna signature independent of potential confounders. representative mirnas were validated using qrt-pcr. gene targets for prognostic mirnas were identified using in silico predictions and in-house bc transcriptome dataset. gene ontology terms were identified using david bioinformatics v <dig> . a total of  <dig>  mirnas were captured. in the cc approach,  <dig> mirnas were retained with predetermined criteria for good read counts, from which  <dig> mirnas were differentially expressed. of these, four and two mirnas were significant for overall survival  and recurrence free survival , respectively. in the co approach, from  <dig> mirnas retained after filtering,  <dig> and  <dig> mirnas were significant for os and rfs, respectively. in both the approaches, the risk scores were significant after adjusting for potential confounders. the mirnas associated with os identified in our cohort were validated using an external dataset from the cancer genome atlas  project. targets for the identified mirnas were enriched for cell proliferation, invasion and migration.


CONCLUSIONS
the study identified twelve non-redundant mirnas associated with os and/or rfs. these signatures include those that were reported by others in bc or other cancers. importantly we report for the first time two new candidate mirnas  as promising prognostic markers. independent validation of signatures  using an external dataset from tcga further strengthened the study findings.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
micrornanext generation sequencingbreast cancerprognostic markermir-574-3pmir-660-5preduction mammoplastyoverall survivalrecurrence free survivaltcgacanadian breast cancer foundation- prairies/nwt chapterres0010015damaraju sambasivarao issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

