BACKGROUND
sunflower belongs to the largest plant family on earth, the genomically poorly explored compositae. downy mildew plasmopara halstedii  berlese & de toni is one of the major diseases of cultivated sunflower . in the search for new sources of downy mildew resistance, the locus plarg on linkage group  <dig>  originating from h. argophyllus is promising since it confers resistance against all known races of the pathogen. however, the mapping resolution in the plarg region is hampered by significantly suppressed recombination and by limited availability of polymorphic markers. here we examined a strategy developed for the enrichment of molecular markers linked to this specific genomic region. we combined bulked segregant analysis  with next-generation sequencing  and de novo assembly of the sunflower transcriptome for single nucleotide polymorphism  discovery in a sequence resource combining reads originating from two sunflower species, h. annuus and h. argophyllus.


RESULTS
a computational pipeline developed for snp calling and pattern detection identified  <dig> candidate genes. for a proof of concept,  <dig> resistance gene-like sequences were subjected to experimental snp validation. using a high-resolution mapping population,  <dig> snp markers were mapped to lg <dig>  we successfully verified candidate sequences either co-segregating with or closely flanking plarg.


CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first successful example to improve bulked segregant analysis with de novo transcriptome assembly using next generation sequencing. the bsta pipeline we developed provides a useful guide for similar studies in other non-model organisms. our results demonstrate this method is an efficient way to enrich molecular markers and to identify candidate genes in a specific mapping interval.

bulked segregant transcriptome analysis <dig> next-generation sequencingmarker enrichment pipelinede novo transcriptome assemblyresistance gene candidateshelianthus argophyllushelianthus annuussunflowerplasmopara halstediiplarg

