BACKGROUND
acholeplasma oculi belongs to the acholeplasmataceae family, comprising the genera acholeplasma and ‘candidatus phytoplasma’. acholeplasmas are ubiquitous saprophytic bacteria. several isolates are derived from plants or animals, whereas phytoplasmas are characterised as intracellular parasitic pathogens of plant phloem and depend on insect vectors for their spread. the complete genome sequences for eight strains of this family have been resolved so far, all of which were determined depending on clone-based sequencing.


RESULTS
the a. oculi strain 19l chromosome was sequenced using two independent approaches. the first approach comprised sequencing by synthesis  in combination with sanger sequencing, while single molecule real time sequencing  was used in the second. the genome was determined to be  <dig> ,120 bp in size. sequencing by synthesis resulted in six large genome fragments, while the single molecule real time sequencing approach yielded one circular chromosome sequence. high-quality sequences were obtained by both strategies differing in six positions, which are interpreted as reliable variations present in the culture population. our genome analysis revealed  <dig>  protein-coding genes and highlighted the absence of the f1fo-type na+ atpase system and groel/es chaperone. comparison of the four available acholeplasma sequences revealed a core-genome encoding  <dig> proteins and a pan-genome of  <dig>  proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
the application of two state-of-the-art sequencing technologies highlights the potential of single molecule real time sequencing for complete genome determination. comparative genome analyses revealed that the process of losing particular basic genetic features during genome reduction occurs in both genera, as indicated for several phytoplasma strains and at least a. oculi. the loss of the f1fo-type na+ atpase system may separate acholeplasmataceae from other mollicutes, while the loss of those genes encoding the chaperone groel/es is not a rare exception in this bacterial class.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

