BACKGROUND
in pseudomonas fluorescens st, the promoter of the styrene catabolic operon, pstya, is induced by styrene and is subject to catabolite repression. pstya regulation relies on the stys/styr two-component system and on the ihf global regulator. the phosphorylated response regulator styr  activates pstya in inducing conditions when it binds to the high-affinity site sty <dig>  located about - <dig> bp from the transcription start point. a cis-acting element upstream of sty <dig>  named ure, contains a low-affinity styr-p binding site , overlapping the ihf binding site. deletion of the ure led to a decrease of promoter activity in inducing conditions and to a partial release of catabolite repression. this study was undertaken to assess the relative role played by ihf and styr-p on the ure, and to clarify if pstya catabolite repression could rely on the interplay of these regulators.


RESULTS
styr-p and ihf compete for binding to the ure region. pstya full activity in inducing conditions is achieved when styr-p and ihf bind to site sty <dig> and to the ure, respectively. under catabolite repression conditions, styr-p binds the sty <dig> site, replacing ihf at the ure region. styr-p bound to both sty <dig> and sty <dig> sites oligomerizes, likely promoting the formation of a dna loop that closes the promoter in a repressed conformation. we found that styr and ihf protein levels did not change in catabolite repression conditions, implying that pstya repression is achieved through an increase in the styr-p/styr ratio.


CONCLUSIONS
we propose a model according to which the activity of the pstya promoter is determined by conformational changes. an open conformation is operative in inducing conditions when styr-p is bound to sty <dig> site and ihf to the ure. under catabolite repression conditions styr-p cellular levels would increase, displacing ihf from the ure and closing the promoter in a repressed conformation. the balance between the open and the closed promoter conformation would determine a fine modulation of the promoter activity. since styr and ihf protein levels do not vary in the different conditions, the key-factor regulating pstya catabolite repression is likely the kinase activity of the styr-cognate sensor protein stys.

