BACKGROUND
the medicinal leech, hirudo medicinalis, is an important model system for the study of nervous system structure, function, development, regeneration and repair. it is also a unique species in being presently approved for use in medical procedures, such as clearing of pooled blood following certain surgical procedures. it is a current, and potentially also future, source of medically useful molecular factors, such as anticoagulants and antibacterial peptides, which may have evolved as a result of its parasitizing large mammals, including humans. despite the broad focus of research on this system, little has been done at the genomic or transcriptomic levels and there is a paucity of openly available sequence data. to begin to address this problem, we constructed whole embryo and adult central nervous system  est libraries and created a clustered sequence database of the hirudo transcriptome that is available to the scientific community.


RESULTS
a total of ~ <dig>  est clones from two directionally-cloned cdna libraries, one constructed from mrna derived from whole embryos at several developmental stages and the other from adult cns cords, were sequenced in one or both directions by three different groups: genoscope , the university of iowa sequencing facility and the doe joint genome institute. these were assembled using the phrap software package into  <dig>  unique contigs and singletons, with an average length of  <dig> nt. the assembled transcripts were then translated in all six frames and compared to proteins in ncbi's non-redundant  and to the gene ontology  protein sequence databases, resulting in  <dig>  matches to  <dig>  proteins in nr and  <dig>  matches to  <dig>  proteins in go. searching the database for transcripts of genes homologous to those thought to be involved in the innate immune responses of vertebrates and other invertebrates yielded a set of nearly one hundred evolutionarily conserved sequences, representing all known pathways involved in these important functions.


CONCLUSIONS
the sequences obtained for hirudo transcripts represent the first major database of genes expressed in this important model system. comparison of translated open reading frames  with the other openly available leech datasets, the genome and transcriptome of helobdella robusta, shows an average identity at the amino acid level of 58% in matched sequences. interestingly, comparison with other available lophotrochozoans shows similar high levels of amino acid identity, where sequences match, for example, 64% with capitella capitata  and 56% with aplysia californica , as well as 58% with schistosoma mansoni . phylogenetic comparisons of putative hirudo innate immune response genes present within the hirudo transcriptome database herein described show a strong resemblance to the corresponding mammalian genes, indicating that this important physiological response may have older origins than what has been previously proposed.

