BACKGROUND
mesenchymal stem cells  are multipotent progenitor cells characterized by their ability to both self-renew and differentiate into tissues of mesodermal origin. the plasticity or transdifferentiation potential of msc is not limited to mesodermal derivatives, since under appropriate cell culture conditions and stimulation by bioactive factors, msc have also been differentiated into endodermal  and neuroectodermal  cells. the potential of msc for hepatogenic and neurogenic differentiation has been well documented in different animal models; however, few reports are currently available on large animal models. in the present study we sought to characterize the hepatogenic and neurogenic differentiation and multipotent potential of bovine msc  isolated from bone marrow  of abattoir-derived fetuses.


RESULTS
plastic-adherent bmsc isolated from fetal bm maintained a fibroblast-like morphology under monolayer culture conditions. flow cytometric analysis demonstrated that bmsc populations were positive for msc markers cd <dig> and cd <dig> and pluripotency markers oct <dig> and nanog; whereas, were negative for hematopoietic markers cd <dig> and cd <dig>  levels of mrna of hepatic genes α-fetoprotein , albumin , alpha <dig> antitrypsin , connexin  <dig> , tyrosine aminotransferase  and cytochrome p <dig>  were up-regulated in bmsc during a 28-day period of hepatogenic differentiation. functional analyses in differentiated bmsc cultures evidenced an increase  in albumin and urea production and glycogen storage. bmsc cultured under neurogenic conditions expressed nestin and map <dig> proteins at 24 h of culture; whereas, at 144 h also expressed trka and prpc. levels of map <dig> and trka mrna were up-regulated at the end of the differentiation period. conversely, bmsc expressed lower levels of nanog mrna during both hepatogenic and neurogenic differentiation processes.


CONCLUSIONS
the expression patterns of linage-specific markers and the production of functional metabolites support the potential for hepatogenic and neurogenic differentiation of bmsc isolated from bm of abattoir-derived fetuses. the simplicity of isolation and the potential to differentiate into a wide variety of cell lineages lays the foundation for bmsc as an interesting alternative for investigation in msc biology and eventual applications for regenerative therapy in veterinary medicine.

bovine fetusesmesenchymal stem celldifferentiation potentialhepatocyte-like cellneuron-like cell

