BACKGROUND
mice of the genus peromyscus are found in nearly every habitat from alaska to central america and from the atlantic to the pacific. they provide an evolutionary outgroup to the mus/rattus lineage and serve as an intermediary between that lineage and humans. although peromyscus has been studied extensively under both field and laboratory conditions, research has been limited by the lack of molecular resources. genes associated with reproduction typically evolve rapidly and thus are excellent sources of evolutionary information. in this study we describe the generation of two cdna libraries, one from placenta and one from testis, characterize the resulting ests, and describe their utility for mapping the peromyscus genome.


RESULTS
the 5' ends of  <dig>  placenta and  <dig>  testis clones were sequenced. low quality sequences were removed and after clustering and contig assembly,  <dig> unique placenta and  <dig>  unique testis sequences remained. average lengths of placenta and testis ests were  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp, respectively. approximately 82% of all ests were identified using the blastx algorithm to mus and rattus, and  <dig> – 54% of all ests could be assigned to a biological process gene ontology category in either mus or rattus. because the peromyscus genome organization resembles the rattus genome more closely than mus we examined the distribution of the peromyscus ests across the rat genome finding markers on all rat chromosomes except the y. approximately 40% of all ests were specific to only one location in the mus genome and spanned introns of an appropriate size for sequencing and snp detection. of the primers that were tried 54% provided useful assays for genotyping on interspecific backcross and whole-genome radiation hybrid cell panels.


CONCLUSIONS
the  <dig>  peromyscus placenta and testis ests described here significantly expands the molecular resources available for the genus. these ests allow for specific pcr amplification and broad coverage across the genome, creating an excellent genetic marker resource for the generation of a medium-density genomic map. thus, this resource will significantly aid research of a genus that is uniquely well-suited to both laboratory and field research.

