BACKGROUND
unlike mammals, zebrafish have the ability to regenerate damaged parts of their central nervous system  and regain functionality of the affected area. a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in zebrafish regeneration may therefore provide insight into how cns repair might be induced in mammals. although many studies have described differences in gene expression in zebrafish during cns regeneration, the regulatory mechanisms underpinning the differential expression of these genes have not been examined.


RESULTS
we used microarrays to analyse and integrate the mrna and microrna  expression profiles of zebrafish retina after optic nerve crush to identify potential regulatory mechanisms that underpin central nerve regeneration. bioinformatic analysis identified  <dig> mirnas and  <dig> mrnas that were differentially expressed after injury. we then combined inverse correlations between our mirna expression and mrna expression, and integrated these findings with target predictions from targetscan fish to identify putative mirna-gene target pairs. we focused on two over-expressed mirnas , and functionally validated seven of their predicted gene targets using rt-qpcr and luciferase assays to confirm mirna-mrna binding. gene ontology analysis placed the mirna-regulated genes  in key biological processes that included cell survival/apoptosis, ecm-cytoskeleton signaling, and heparan sulfate proteoglycan binding,


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest a key role for mir-29b and mir- <dig> in zebrafish regeneration. the identification of mirna regulation in a zebrafish injury model provides a framework for future studies in which to investigate not only the cellular processes required for cns regeneration, but also how these mechanisms might be regulated to promote successful repair and return of function in the injured mammalian brain.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
zebrafishmicrornamrnaoptic nerveregenerationcnsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

