BACKGROUND
the enhanceosome is an enhancer located upstream of the human interferon β gene, bound by transcription factor  complex of extremely rigid structure. within these rigid constraints, even a slight change of distances between transcription factor binding sites  results in loss of functionality of the enhanceosome. we hypothesized that smaller subunits of the enhanceosome may entail tf complex formation in other regulatory regions.


RESULTS
in order to verify this hypothesis we systematically searched for dimerization preferences of the tfs that have tfbs in the enhanceosome. for this we utilized our recently developed tool, taco. we performed this computational experiment in a cell-type–specific manner by utilizing cell-type–specific dnase-seq data for  <dig> human cell types. we also used  <dig> transfac motifs comprising not only the usual tfs constituting the enhanceosome but also the architectural proteins of high mobility group i . a similar experiment used  <dig> dnase-seq data sets for mouse cell types. we found  <dig> statistically significant dimer predictions in the human genome, and  <dig> predictions in the mouse genome, that matched the positioning on the enhanceosome with ± <dig> bp tolerance. to characterize these predicted tf dimers, we performed functional analysis  for sets of genes which were in the neighbourhood of predicted dimer instances. a notable feature of these instances is that  most of them are located in introns of genes,  they are enriched in regulatory states, and  those instances that are located near transcription start sites are enriched for inclusion in computationally predicted enhancers. we also investigated similarity of dimer predictions between human and mouse.


CONCLUSIONS
it follows from our experiments that, except for homodimer formed by irf proteins, the rest of the dimers were formed exclusively between one of the transcriptional activators  and a hmg i protein. nf- κb did not participate in forming dimers with other proteins. dimers predicted in mouse were fully contained in those predicted in human, with exactly the same spacing and orientation. intriguingly, in most of the cases the enhanceosome motifs have  <dig> bp wider spacing than the corresponding dimers predicted genome-wide, which is likely caused by the overall 3d structure constraints of the enhanceosome-bound complex.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
enhanceosometranscription factorsdimerizationhigh mobility group genesenhancersnational science centre, polanddec-2012/05/b/nz2/00567tiuryn jerzy issue-copyright-statement© the author 2016

