BACKGROUND
increased al concentration causes reduction of mitotic activity, induction of nucleolar alteration, increase of the production of ros and alteration of several antioxidant enzyme activities in plant cells. allium cepa is an excellent plant and a useful biomarker for environmental monitoring. limited information is available about the effects of al on nucleoli, antioxidant enzyme system, contents of mda and soluble protein in a. cepa. therefore, we carried out the investigation in order to better understand the effects of al on the growth, nucleoli in root tip cells and selected physiological and biochemical characters.


RESULTS
the results showed that the root growth exposed to  <dig> μm al was inhibited significantly.  <dig> μm al could induce some particles of argyrophilic proteins scattered in the nuclei and extruded from the nucleoli into the cytoplasm. the nucleolus did not disaggregate normally and still remained its characteristic structure during metaphase. nucleolar reconstruction was inhibited.  <dig> μm al induced high activities of sod and pod in leaves and roots significantly  when compared with control, whereas the level of cat was low significantly . at  <dig> μm al the content of mda in leaves was high significantly  at 9th day and in roots increased  with prolonging the treatment time during 6- <dig> days. the soluble protein content in leaves treated with  <dig> μm al was high significantly  at 6th day and increased with prolonging the treatment time.


CONCLUSIONS
we suggest that variations in nucleoli and the alterations of antioxidant enzyme activities, mda and soluble protein contents in allium cepa can serve as useful biomarkers, which can provide valuable information for monitoring and forecasting effects of exposure to al in real scenarios conditions. among the antioxidant enzymes sod and pod appear to play a key role in the antioxidant defense mechanism under al toxicity condition. data from mda concentration show that al indirectly produces superoxide radicals, resulting in increased lipid peroxidative products and oxidative stress.

