BACKGROUND
in the search for generic expression strategies for mammalian protein families several bacterial expression vectors were examined for their ability to promote high yields of soluble protein. proteins studied included cell surface receptors , kinases , proteases , signal transduction proteins  and transcription factors . over  <dig> experiments were performed where expression of  <dig> full-length proteins and protein domains were evaluated with  <dig> different n-terminal and  <dig> c-terminal fusion partners. expression of an additional set of  <dig> mammalian proteins was also performed to test the conclusions of this study.


RESULTS
several protein features correlated with soluble protein expression yield including molecular weight and the number of contiguous hydrophobic residues and low complexity regions. there was no relationship between successful expression and protein pi, grand average of hydropathicity , or sub-cellular location. only small globular cytoplasmic proteins with an average molecular weight of  <dig> kda did not require a solubility enhancing tag for high level soluble expression. thioredoxin  and maltose binding protein  were the best n-terminal protein fusions to promote soluble expression, but mbp was most effective as a c-terminal fusion.  <dig> of  <dig> mammalian proteins expressed at soluble levels of greater than  <dig> mg/l as n-terminal h10-mbp fusions and those that failed possessed, on average, a higher molecular weight and greater number of contiguous hydrophobic amino acids and low complexity regions.


CONCLUSIONS
by analysis of the protein features identified here, this study will help predict which mammalian proteins and domains can be successfully expressed in e. coli as soluble product and also which are best targeted for a eukaryotic expression system. in some cases proteins may be truncated to minimise molecular weight and the numbers of contiguous hydrophobic amino acids and low complexity regions to aid soluble expression in e. coli.

