BACKGROUND

haynaldia villosa  schur  is the tertiary gene pool of wheat, and thus a potential resource of genes for wheat improvement. among other, wheat yellow mosaic  resistance gene wss <dig> and a take-all resistance gene were identified on the short arm of chromosome 4 v  of h. villosa. we had obtained introgressions on 4vs chromosome arm, with the objective of utilizing the target genes. however, monitoring these introgressions has been a daunting task because of inadequate knowledge as to h.villosa genome, as reflected by the lack of specific markers.


RESULTS
this study aims to develop 4vs-specific markers by combination of chromosome sorting and next-generation sequencing. the short arm of chromosome 4vs of h.villosa was flow-sorted using a facsvantage se flow cytometer and sorter, and then sequenced by illumina sequencing. the sequence of h. villosa 4vs was assembled by the software hecate, and then was compared with the sequence assemblies of wheat chromosome arms 4al, 4bs and 4ds and ae. tauschii 4ds, with the objectives of identifying exon-exon junctions and localizing introns on chromosome 4vs of h. villosa. the intron length polymorphisms suitable for designing h. villosa primers were evaluated with criteria. consequently, we designed a total of  <dig> intron targeting  markers, among which  <dig>  markers were specific for tracing the 4vs chromatin in the wheat background.


CONCLUSIONS
the combination of chromosome sorting and next-generation sequencing to develop specific it markers for 4vs of h. villosa has high success rate and specificity, thus being applicable for the development of chromosome-specific markers for alien chromatin in wheat breeding.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
triticum aestivumhaynaldia villosamolecular markerintron polymorphism national high technology research program  of china2011aa10010201wang xiue the national natural science foundation of china3157165331501305wang haiyan xiao jin the program of introducing talents of discipline to universitiesno.b08025wang xiue the priority academic program development of jiangsu higher education institutions six talent peaks project in jiangsu province the ministry of education, youth and sports of the czech republiclo1204doležel jaroslav ‘948’ project of ministry of agriculture2015-z41wang xiue the fundamental research funds for the central universitieskyz201403wang haiyan  the fundamental research funds for the central universitieskj2013003xiao jin  the national key research and development program 2016yfd0102001wang xiue issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

