BACKGROUND
four traits related to carcass performance have been identified as economically important in beef production: carcass weight, carcass fat, carcass conformation of progeny and cull cow carcass weight. although holstein-friesian cattle are primarily utilized for milk production, they are also an important source of meat for beef production and export. because of this, there is great interest in understanding the underlying genomic structure influencing these traits. several genome-wide association studies have identified regions of the bovine genome associated with growth or carcass traits, however, little is known about the mechanisms or underlying biological pathways involved. this study aims to detect regions of the bovine genome associated with carcass performance traits  using measures of genetic merit  for  <dig>  irish holstein-friesian animals. candidate genes and biological pathways were then identified for each trait under investigation.


RESULTS
following adjustment for false discovery ,  <dig> quantitative trait loci  were associated with at least one of the four carcass traits using a single snp regression approach. using a bayesian approach,  <dig> qtl were associated  with at least one of the four traits. in total,  <dig> unique bovine genes, which mapped to  <dig> human orthologs, were within 500kbs of qtl found associated with a trait using the bayesian approach. using this information,  <dig> significantly over-represented pathways were identified across all traits. the most significantly over-represented biological pathway was the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor  signaling pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
a large number of genomic regions putatively associated with bovine carcass traits were detected using two different statistical approaches. notably, several significant associations were detected in close proximity to genes with a known role in animal growth such as glucagon and leptin. several biological pathways, including ppar signaling, were shown to be involved in various aspects of bovine carcass performance. these core genes and biological processes may form the foundation for further investigation to identify causative mutations involved in each trait. results reported here support previous findings suggesting conservation of key biological processes involved in growth and metabolism.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genome-wide associationsingle nucleotide polymorphismholstein-friesiancarcassbiological pathwaysissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

