BACKGROUND
phylogeographic analyses on the western euroasiatic fagus taxa  is available, however, the subdivision of fagus spp. is unresolved and there is no consensus on the phylogeny and on the identification  of fagus eurasiatic taxa.

for the first time molecular analyses of ancient pollen, dated at least  <dig>  years ago, were used in combination with the phylogeny analysis on current species, to identify the fagus spp. present during the last interglacial period in italy.

in this work we aim at testing if the trnl-trnf chloroplast dna  region, that has been previously proved efficient in discriminating different quercus taxa, can be employed in distinguishing the fagus species and in identifying the ancient pollen.


RESULTS
 <dig> populations from  <dig> western euroasistic taxa were sampled, and sequenced for the trnl-trnf region to verify the efficiency of this cpdna region in identifying the fagus spp.. furthermore, fagus crenata , fagus grandifolia , fagus japonica, fagus hayatae, quercus species and castanea species were analysed to better resolve the phylogenetic inference.

our results show that this cpdna region harbour some informative sites that allow to infer relationships among the species within the fagaceae family. in particular, few specific and fixed mutations were able to discriminate and identify all the different fagus species.

considering a short fragment of  <dig> base pairs within the trnl intron,  <dig> transversions were found able in distinguishing the f. orientalis complex taxa  from the remaining fagus spp. . this permits to analyse this fragment also in ancient samples, where dna is usually highly degraded.

the sequences data indicate that the dna recovered from ancient pollen belongs to the f. orientalis complex since it displays the informative sites characteristic of this complex.


CONCLUSIONS
the ancient dna sequences demonstrate for the first time that, in contrast to current knowledge based on palynological and macrofossil data, the f. orientalis complex was already present during the tyrrhenian period in what is now the venice lagoon .

this is a new and important insight considering that nowadays west europe is not the natural area of fagus orientalis complex, and up to now nobody has hypothesized the presence during the last interglacial period of f. orientalis complex in italy.

4– <dig> september  <dig> second congress of italian evolutionary biologists  florence, italy

