BACKGROUND
the drosophila sex determination hierarchy is a classic example of a transcriptional regulatory hierarchy, with sex-specific isoforms regulating morphology and behavior. we use a structural equation modeling approach, leveraging natural genetic variation from two studies on drosophila female head tissues – dspr collection  and cegs population  – to expand understanding of the sex hierarchy gene regulatory network . this approach is completely generalizable to any natural population, including humans.


RESULTS
we expanded the sex hierarchy grn adding novel links among genes, including a link from fruitless  to sex-lethal  identified in both populations. this link is further supported by the presence of fru binding sites in the sxl locus.  <dig> candidate genes were added to the pathway, including the splicing factors male-specific lethal  <dig> and rm <dig> as downstream targets of sxl which are well-supported links in males. independent studies of doublesex and transformer mutants support many additions, including evidence for a link between the sex hierarchy and metabolism, via insulin-like receptor.


CONCLUSIONS
the genes added in the cegs population were enriched for genes with sex-biased splicing and components of the spliceosome. a common goal of molecular biologists is to expand understanding about regulatory interactions among genes. using natural alleles we can not only identify novel relationships, but using supervised approaches can order genes into a regulatory hierarchy. combining these results with independent large effect mutation studies, allows clear candidates for detailed molecular follow-up to emerge.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

national institutes of health gms102227mcintyre lauren m. national institutes of health gms102227nuzhdin sergey v. national institutes of health r01mh091561nuzhdin sergey v. national institutes of health r01mh091561arbeitman michelle n. national institutes of health r01mh091561mcintyre lauren m. national institutes of health r01gm073039arbeitman michelle n. national institutes of health 5p50hg002790arbeitman michelle n. national institutes of health 5p50hg002790nuzhdin sergey v. national institutes of health 5p50hg002790tower john national institutes of health ag011833tower john issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

