BACKGROUND
sox <dig> is a core component of the transcriptional network responsible for maintaining embryonal carcinoma cells  in a pluripotent, undifferentiated state of self-renewal. as such, sox <dig> is an oncogenic transcription factor and crucial cancer stem cell  biomarker in embryonal carcinoma and, as more recently found, in the stem-like cancer cell component of many other malignancies. sox <dig> is furthermore a crucial factor in the maintenance of adult stem cell phenotypes and has additional roles in cell fate determination. the sox2-linked microrna  transcriptome and regulome has not yet been fully defined in human pluripotent cells or cscs. to improve our understanding of the sox2-linked mirna regulatory network as a contribution to the phenotype of these cell types, we used high-throughput differential mirna and gene expression analysis combined with existing genome-wide sox <dig> chromatin immunoprecipitation  data to map the sox <dig> mirna transcriptome in two human embryonal carcinoma cell  lines.


RESULTS
whole-micrornaome and genome analysis of sox2-silenced heccs revealed many mirnas regulated by sox <dig>  including several with highly characterised functions in both cancer and embryonic stem cell  biology. we subsequently performed genome-wide differential expression analysis and applied a monte carlo simulation algorithm and target prediction to identify a sox2-linked mirna regulome, which was strongly enriched with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition  markers. additionally, several deregulated mirnas important to emt processes had sox <dig> binding sites in their promoter regions.


CONCLUSIONS
in esc-like cscs, sox <dig> regulates a large mirna network that regulates and interlinks the expression of crucial genes involved in emt.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
sox2micrornaembryonic stem cellembryonal carcinomapluripotencyemtissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

