BACKGROUND
canola  is one of the most important oil-producing crops in china and worldwide. the yield and quality of canola is frequently threatened by environmental stresses including drought, cold and high salinity. calcium is a well-known ubiquitous intracellular secondary messenger in plants. calcium-dependent protein kinases  are ser/thr protein kinases found only in plants and some protozoans. cpks are ca2+ sensors that have both ca2+ sensing function and kinase activity within a single protein and play crucial roles in plant development and responses to various environmental stresses.


RESULTS
in this study, we mined the available expressed sequence tags  of b. napus and identified a total of  <dig> cpk genes, among which cdna sequences of  <dig> genes were successfully cloned from a double haploid cultivar of canola. phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that they could be clustered into four subgroups. the subcellular localization of five selected bnacpks was determined using green fluorescence protein  as the reporter. furthermore, the expression levels of  <dig> bnacpk genes in response to salt, drought, cold, heat, abscisic acid , low potassium  and oxidative stress were studied by quantitative rt-pcr and were found to respond to multiple stimuli, suggesting that canola cpks may be convergence points of different signaling pathways. we also identified and cloned five and eight clade a basic leucine zipper  and protein phosphatase type 2c  genes from canola and, using yeast two-hybrid and bimolecular fluorescence complementation , determined the interaction between individual bnacpks and bnabzips or bnapp2cs . we identified novel, interesting interaction partners for some of the bnacpk proteins.


CONCLUSIONS
we present the sequences and characterization of cpk gene family members in canola for the first time. this work provides a foundation for further crop improvement and improved understanding of signal transduction in plants.

abiotic stressbasic leucine zipper transcription factorbrassica napuscalcium-dependent protein kinaseprotein phosphatase 2c

