BACKGROUND

cynara cardunculus l. offers a natural source of phenolic compounds with the predominant molecule being chlorogenic acid. chlorogenic acid is gaining interest due to its involvement in various biological properties such as, antibacterial, antifungal, antioxidant, hepatoprotective, and anticarcinogenic activities.


RESULTS
in this work we screened a cynara cardunculus collection for new allelic variants in key genes involved in the chlorogenic acid biosynthesis pathway. the target genes encode p-coumaroyl ester 3′-hydroxylase  and hydroxycinnamoyl-coa: quinate hydroxycinnamoyl transferase , both participating in the synthesis of chlorogenic acid. using high-resolution melting, the c3′h gene proved to be highly conserved with only  <dig> haplotypes while, for hqt,  <dig> haplotypes were identified de novo. the putative influence of the identified polymorphisms in c3′h and hqt proteins was further evaluated using bioinformatics tools. we could identify some polymorphisms that may lead to protein conformational changes. chlorogenic acid content, antioxidant and antithrombin activities were also evaluated in cc leaf extracts and an association analysis was performed to assess a putative correlation between these traits and the identified polymorphisms.


CONCLUSIONS
in this work we identified allelic variants with putative impact on c3′h and hqt proteins which are significantly associated with chlorogenic acid content and antioxidant activity. further study of these alleles should be explored to assess putative relevance as genetic markers correlating with cynara cardunculus biological properties with further confirmation by functional analysis.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
cynara cardunculuschlorogenic acidc3′hhqthigh-resolution meltingsnpshaplotypeantioxidant activityantithrombin activityassociation analysishttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001871fundação para a ciência e a tecnologiasfrh/bd/84406/2012ciência 2008guerreiro olinda gonçalves sónia http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100002878consejería de economía, innovación, ciencia y empleo, junta de andalucíap12-agr-1482campus de excelencia internacional agroalimentarioceia3european regional development fund alent-09-0140-feder-000705green-it bioresources for sustainabilityuid/multi/04551/2013european regional development fund alt20-03-0145-feder-000038issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

