BACKGROUND
symptoms of grapevine leafroll disease  in red-fruited wine grape  cultivars consist of green veins and red and reddish-purple discoloration of inter-veinal areas of leaves. the reddish-purple color of symptomatic leaves may be due to the accumulation of anthocyanins and could reflect an up-regulation of genes involved in their biosynthesis.


RESULTS
we examined six putative constitutively expressed genes, ubiquitin, actin, gapdh, ef1-a, sand and nad <dig>  for their potential as references for normalization of gene expression in reverse transcription-quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction . using the genorm program, a combination of two genes  was identified as the stable set of reference genes for normalization of gene expression data obtained from grapevine leaves. by using gene-specific rt-qpcr in combination with a reliable normalization factor, we compared relative expression of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes between leaves infected with grapevine leafroll-associated virus  <dig>  and exhibiting glrd symptoms and virus-free green leaves obtained from a red-fruited wine grape cultivar . the expression levels of these different genes ranged from two- to fifty-fold increase in virus-infected leaves. among them, chs <dig>  f3'5'h, f3h <dig>  ldox, lar <dig> and myba <dig> showed greater than 10-fold increase suggesting that they were expressed at significantly higher levels in virus-infected symptomatic leaves. hplc profiling of anthocyanins extracted from leaves indicated the presence of cyanidin-3-glucoside and malvidin-3-glucoside only in virus-infected symptomatic leaves. the results also showed 24% higher levels of flavonols in virus-infected symptomatic leaves than in virus-free green leaves, with quercetin followed by myricetin being the predominant compounds. proanthocyanidins, estimated as total tannins by protein precipitation method, were 36% higher in virus-infected symptomatic leaves when compared to virus-free green leaves.


CONCLUSIONS
the results, the first example to our knowledge, showed that modulation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway occurred in glrav-3-infected leaves of a red-fruited wine grape cultivar  leading to de novo synthesis of two classes of anthocyanins. these anthocyanins have contributed to the expression of reddish-purple color of virus-infected grapevine leaves exhibiting glrd symptoms.

