BACKGROUND
biomaterials are widely used to regenerate or substitute bone tissue. in order to evaluate their potential use for clinical applications, these need to be tested and evaluated in vitro with cell culture models. frequently, immortalized osteoblastic cell lines are used in these studies. however, their uncontrolled proliferation rate, phenotypic changes or aberrations in mitotic processes limits their use in long-term investigations. recently, we described a new pluripotent-like subpopulation of dental pulp stem cells derived from the third molars  that shows genetic stability and shares some pluripotent characteristics with embryonic stem cells. in this study we aim to describe the use of dppsc to test biomaterials, since we believe that the biomaterial cues will be more critical in order to enhance the differentiation of pluripotent stem cells.

methods
the capacity of dppsc to differentiate into osteogenic lineage was compared with human sarcoma osteogenic cell line . collagen and titanium were used to assess the cell behavior in commonly used biomaterials. the analyses were performed by flow cytometry, alkaline phosphatase and mineralization stains, rt-pcr, immunohistochemistry, scanning electron microscopy, western blot and enzymatic activity. moreover, the genetic stability was evaluated and compared before and after differentiation by short-comparative genomic hybridization .


RESULTS
dppsc showed excellent differentiation into osteogenic lineages expressing bone-related markers similar to saos- <dig>  when cells were cultured on biomaterials, dppsc showed higher initial adhesion levels. nevertheless, their osteogenic differentiation showed similar trend among both cell types. interestingly, only dppsc maintained a normal chromosomal dosage before and after differentiation on 2d monolayer and on biomaterials.


CONCLUSIONS
taken together, these results promote the use of dppsc as a new pluripotent-like cell model to evaluate the biocompatibility and the differentiation capacity of biomaterials used in bone regeneration.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
dental pulpstem cellspluripotencygenetic stabilityosteogenic differentiationbiomaterialshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100003030agència de gestió d’ajuts universitaris i de recerca <dig> sgr 1060universitat internacional de catalunya - obra social la caixajunior facultyjunior facultyissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

