BACKGROUND
peripheral blood mononuclear cells  serve a sentinel role allowing the host to efficiently sense and adapt to the presence of danger signals. herein we have directly compared the genome-level expression patterns  of a human pbmc model  subjected to one of two canonical danger signals, heat shock or lipopolysaccharide .

results and discussion
based on sequential expression and statistical filters, and in comparison to control cells, we found that  <dig>  genes were differentially regulated in thp- <dig> cells subjected to lps stress, and  <dig>  genes were differentially regulated in thp- <dig> cells subjected to heat shock stress. venn analyses demonstrated that the majority of differentially regulated genes  were uniquely expressed in response to one of the two danger signals. functional analyses demonstrated that the two danger signals induced expression or repression of genes corresponding to unique pathways, molecular functions, biological processes, and gene networks. in contrast, there were  <dig> genes that were commonly upregulated by both stress signals, and  <dig> genes that were commonly downregulated by both stress signals. interestingly, the  <dig> commonly upregulated genes corresponded to a gene network broadly related to inflammation, and more specifically to chemokine signaling.

conclusion
these data demonstrate that the mononuclear cell responses to the canonical stress signals, heat shock and lps, are highly divergent. however, there is a heretofore unrecognized common pattern of gene network expression corresponding to chemokine-related biology. the data also serve as a reference database for investigators in the field of stress signaling.

RESULTS
based on sequential expression and statistical filters, and in comparison to control cells, we found that  <dig>  genes were differentially regulated in thp- <dig> cells subjected to lps stress, and  <dig>  genes were differentially regulated in thp- <dig> cells subjected to heat shock stress. venn analyses demonstrated that the majority of differentially regulated genes  were uniquely expressed in response to one of the two danger signals. functional analyses demonstrated that the two danger signals induced expression or repression of genes corresponding to unique pathways, molecular functions, biological processes, and gene networks. in contrast, there were  <dig> genes that were commonly upregulated by both stress signals, and  <dig> genes that were commonly downregulated by both stress signals. interestingly, the  <dig> commonly upregulated genes corresponded to a gene network broadly related to inflammation, and more specifically to chemokine signaling.


CONCLUSIONS
these data demonstrate that the mononuclear cell responses to the canonical stress signals, heat shock and lps, are highly divergent. however, there is a heretofore unrecognized common pattern of gene network expression corresponding to chemokine-related biology. the data also serve as a reference database for investigators in the field of stress signaling.

