BACKGROUND
cryptocaryon irritans is a parasitic ciliate that causes cryptocaryonosis  in marine fish. diagnosis of cryptocaryonosis often depends on the appearance of white spots on the surface of the fish, which are usually visible only during later stages of the disease. identifying suitable biomarkers of this parasite would aid the development of diagnostic tools and control strategies for c. irritans. the c. irritans genome is virtually unexplored; therefore, we generated and analyzed expressed sequence tags  of the parasite to identify genes that encode for surface proteins, excretory/secretory proteins and repeat-containing proteins.


RESULTS
ests were generated from a cdna library of c. irritans tomonts isolated from infected asian sea bass, lates calcarifer. clustering of the  <dig> ests produced  <dig> unique transcripts  containing  <dig> singletons and  <dig> consensi. blast analysis showed that 74% of the uts had significant similarity  to sequences that are currently available in the genbank database, with more than 15% of the significant hits showing unknown function. forty percent of the uts had significant similarity to ciliates from the genera tetrahymena and paramecium. comparative gene family analysis with related taxa showed that many protein families are conserved among the protozoans. based on gene ontology annotation, functional groups were successfully assigned to  <dig> uts. genes encoding excretory/secretory proteins and membrane and membrane-associated proteins were identified because these proteins often function as antigens and are good antibody targets. a total of  <dig> uts were classified as encoding membrane proteins,  <dig> were classified as encoding for membrane-bound proteins, and  <dig> were found to contain excretory/secretory protein-coding sequences. amino acid repeat-containing proteins and gpi-anchored proteins were also identified as potential candidates for the development of diagnostic and control strategies for c. irritans.


CONCLUSIONS
we successfully discovered and examined a large portion of the previously unexplored c. irritans transcriptome and identified potential genes for the development and validation of diagnostic and control strategies for cryptocaryonosis.

