BACKGROUND
insulin-like growth factor binding protein- <dig>  regulates the bioavailability, transportation, and localization of insulin-like growth factor-i , an effective neuroprotectant in animal stroke models especially when administered intranasally. therefore, determining igfbp-2′s endogenous distribution in the normal and ischemic brain is essential in maximizing the neuroprotective potential of the intranasal igf-i treatment approach. however, current data on igfbp- <dig> is limited to mrna and in situ hybridization studies. the purpose of this study was to determine if there are any changes in igfbp- <dig> protein levels and distribution in ischemic brain and also to determine if igfbps play a role in the transportation of intranasally administered igf-i into the brain.


RESULTS
using an in vitro approach, we show that ischemia causes changes in the distribution of igfbp- <dig> in primary cortical neurons and astrocytes. in addition, we show using the transient middle cerebral artery occlusion  model in mice that there is a significant increase in igfbp- <dig> levels in the stroke penumbra and core after 72 h. this correlated with an overall increase in igf-i after stroke, with the highest levels of igf-i in the stroke core after 72 h. brain sections from stroke mice indicate that neurons and astrocytes located in the penumbra both have increased expression of igfbp- <dig>  however, igfbp- <dig> was not detected in microglia. we used binding competition studies to show that intranasally administered exogenous igf-i uptake into the brain is not receptor mediated and is likely facilitated by igfbps.


CONCLUSIONS
the change in protein levels indicates that igfbp- <dig> plays an igf-i-dependent and -independent role in the brain’s acute  and chronic  response to hypoxic-ischemic injury. competition studies indicate that igfbps may have a role in rapid transportation of exogenous igf-i from the nasal tissue to the site of injury.

strokeischemianeuroprotectioninsulin-like growth factor binding protein-2insulin-like growth factor-iintranasal administration

