BACKGROUND
substrate, ocean current and freshwater discharge are recognized as important factors that control the larval dispersal and recruitment of intertidal species. life history traits of individual species will determine the differential responses to these physical factors, and hence resulting in contrasting phylogeography across the same biogeographic barrier. to determine how these factors affect genetic structure of rocky shore species along the china coast, a comparative phylogeographic study of four intertidal and subtidal species was conducted using mitochondrial and nuclear dna by combining new sequences from siphonaria japonica with previously published sequences from three species .


RESULTS
analysis of molecular variance and pairwise Φst revealed significant genetic differences between the yellow sea  and the other two marginal seas  for rocky-shore species , but not for muddy-shore species atrina pectinata. demographic history analysis proved that the population size of all these four species were persistent though the last glacial maximum . migration analysis revealed that gene flow differentiated northward and southward migration for these four species. however, the inferred direction of gene flow using alternatively mitochondrial or nuclear markers was contradictory in s. japonica.


CONCLUSIONS
it is concluded that there is a phylogeographical break at the yangtze river estuary for the rocky shore species and the causation of the barrier is mainly due to the unsuitable substratum and freshwater discharge. all four intertidal and subtidal species appear to have persisted through the lgm in china, indicating the lower impact of lgm on intertidal and subtidal species than generally anticipated. the imbalanced gene flow between ys and escs groups for these four species could be explained by historical refugia. the discordance between mitochondrial and nuclear markers in the migrate analysis of s. japonica prove the importance of employing multi-locus data in biogeographic study. climate change, land reclamation and dam construction, which are changing substrate and hydrological conditions around yangtze river estuary, will consequently affect the biogeographic pattern of intertidal species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
freshwater dischargerocky shore specieslife historyocean currentpopulation structuresubstrateissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

