BACKGROUND
hydrogen sulfide  is a toxic foul-smelling gas produced by subgingival biofilms in patients with periodontal disease and is suggested to be part of the pathogenesis of the disease. we studied the h2s-producing protein expression of bacterial strains associated with periodontal disease. further, we examined the effect of a cysteine-rich growth environment on the synthesis of intracellular enzymes in f. nucleatum polymorphum atcc  <dig>  the proteins were subjected to one-dimensional  and two-dimensional  gel electrophoresis an in-gel activity assay was used to detect the h2s-producing enzymes; sulfide from h2s, produced by the enzymes in the gel, reacted with bismuth forming bismuth sulfide, illustrated as brown bands  or spots  in the gel. the discovered proteins were identified with liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry .


RESULTS
cysteine synthase and proteins involved in the production of the coenzyme pyridoxal 5′phosphate  were frequently found among the discovered enzymes. interestingly, a higher expression of h2s-producing enzymes was detected from bacteria incubated without cysteine prior to the experiment.


CONCLUSIONS
numerous enzymes, identified as cysteine synthase, were involved in the production of h2s from cysteine and the expression varied among fusobacterium spp. and strains. no enzymes were detected with the in-gel activity assay among the other periodontitis-associated bacteria tested. the expression of the h2s-producing enzymes was dependent on environmental conditions such as cysteine concentration and ph but less dependent on the presence of serum and hemin.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
periodontitishydrogen sulfidefusobacterium spp.enzymesbismuth sulfideproteomics2d gel electrophoresislc-ms/mshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100007212västra götalandsregionentuagbg-89621dahlén gunnar http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100005300sveriges tandläkarförbundhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100005293göteborgs tandläkare-sällskapissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

