BACKGROUND
cancer is a complex disease driven by somatic genomic alterations  that perturb signaling pathways and consequently cellular function. identifying patterns of pathway perturbations would provide insights into common disease mechanisms shared among tumors, which is important for guiding treatment and predicting outcome. however, identifying perturbed pathways is challenging, because different tumors can have the same perturbed pathways that are perturbed by different sgas. here, we designed novel semantic representations that capture the functional similarity of distinct sgas perturbing a common pathway in different tumors. combining this representation with topic modeling would allow us to identify patterns in altered signaling pathways.


RESULTS
we represented each gene with a vector of words describing its function, and we represented the sgas of a tumor as a text document by pooling the words representing individual sgas. we applied the nested hierarchical dirichlet process  model to a collection of tumors of  <dig> cancer types from tcga. we identified topics  representing the common functional themes of different sgas. tumors were clustered based on their topic associations, such that each cluster consists of tumors sharing common functional themes. the resulting clusters contained mixtures of cancer types, which indicates that different cancer types can share disease mechanisms. survival analysis based on the clusters revealed significant differences in survival among the tumors of the same cancer type that were assigned to different clusters.


CONCLUSIONS
the results indicate that applying topic modeling to semantic representations of tumors identifies patterns in the combinations of altered functional pathways in cancer.

keywords
cancertopic modelingsemantic representationcancer genomicsdisease mechanismsthe fifteenth asia pacific bioinformatics conference apbc 2017shenzhen, china 16- <dig> january  <dig> issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

