BACKGROUND
tilapias are the second most farmed fishes in the world and a sustainable source of food. like many other fish, tilapias are sexually dimorphic and sex is a commercially important trait in these fish. in this study, we developed a significantly improved assembly of the tilapia genome using the latest genome sequencing methods and show how it improves the characterization of two sex determination regions in two tilapia species.


RESULTS
a homozygous clonal xx female nile tilapia  was sequenced to 44x coverage using pacific biosciences  smrt sequencing. dozens of candidate de novo assemblies were generated and an optimal assembly  was selected using principal component analysis of likelihood scores calculated from several paired-end sequencing libraries. comparison of the new assembly to the previous o. niloticus genome assembly reveals that recently duplicated portions of the genome are now well represented. the overall number of genes in the new assembly increased by  <dig> %, including a 67% increase in pseudogenes. the new tilapia genome assembly correctly represents two recent vasa gene duplication events that have been verified with bac sequencing. at total of 146mbp of additional transposable element sequence are now assembled, a large proportion of which are recent insertions. large centromeric satellite repeats are assembled and annotated in cichlid fish for the first time. finally, the new assembly identifies the long-range structure of both a ~9mbp xy sex determination region on lg <dig> in o. niloticus, and a ~50mbp wz sex determination region on lg <dig> in the related species o. aureus.



CONCLUSIONS
this study highlights the use of long read sequencing to correctly assemble recent duplications and to characterize repeat-filled regions of the genome. the study serves as an example of the need for high quality genome assemblies and provides a framework for identifying sex determining genes in tilapia and related fish species.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
genome assemblypacific biosciences smrt sequencingtransposable elementsgene duplicationsex chromosomesex determinationaquaculturetilapiahttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000199u.s. department of agriculturemd.w-2014-05906kocher thomas d. http://dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000002national institutes of healthr01-ey024639issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

