BACKGROUND
spontaneous immortalisation of cultured mammary epithelial cells  is an extremely rare event, and the molecular mechanism behind spontaneous immortalisation of mecs is unclear. here, we report the establishment of a spontaneously immortalised bovine mammary epithelial cell line  and the changes in gene expression associated with bme65cs cells.


RESULTS
bme65cs cells maintain the general characteristics of normal mammary epithelial cells in morphology, karyotype and immunohistochemistry, and are accompanied by the activation of endogenous btert  and stabilisation of the telomere. currently, bme65cs cells have been passed for more than  <dig> generations, and these cells exhibit non-malignant transformation. the expression of multiple genes was investigated in bme65cs cells, senescent bmecs  cells, early passage bmecs cells and mcf- <dig> cells . in comparison with early passage bmecs cells, the expression of senescence-relevant apoptosis-related gene were significantly changed in bme65cs cells. p16ink4a was downregulated, p <dig> was low expressed and bax/bcl- <dig> ratio was reversed. moreover, a slight upregulation of the oncogene c-myc, along with an undetectable level of breast tumor-related gene bag- <dig> and trps- <dig>  was observed in bme65cs cells while these genes are all highly expressed in mcf- <dig>  in addition, dnmt <dig> is upregulated in bme65cs. these results suggest that the inhibition of both senescence and mitochondrial apoptosis signalling pathways contribute to the immortality of bme65cs cells. the expression of p <dig> and p16ink4a in bme65cs was altered in the pattern of down-regulation but not "loss", suggesting that this spontaneous immortalization is possibly initiated by other mechanism rather than gene mutation of p <dig> or p16ink4a.


CONCLUSIONS
spontaneously immortalised bme65cs cells maintain many characteristics of normal bmec cells and exhibit non-malignant transformation. although this cell line displays altered patterns of gene expression, it is clearly distinct from malignant breast cancer cell line. it showed that co-inhibition of cellular senescence and mitochondrial apoptosis pathways coordinates bme65cs cells immortalisation. additionally, mechanisms other than gene mutation are likely to be involved in regulation of cellular functions. this study provides an insight into the relationship between cell senescence and immortalisation. bme65cs cells will be useful in future studies of cellular senescence and tumorigenesis.

