BACKGROUND
food allergies are increasing in prevalence but no treatment strategies are currently available to cure dogs with food allergy. over the past decade, experimental food allergen-specific sublingual immunotherapy  has emerged as a potential treatment for food allergies in human medicine. however, fa-slit has not been investigated in dogs. therefore, the objective of this study was to prospectively evaluate the safety, tolerability and dispenser sterility of fa-slit in healthy dogs before testing it in food allergic dogs.

eight experimental healthy beagle dogs, never orally exposed to peanut, were randomized in two groups to receive slit with peanut or placebo for 4 months. subjects were monitored daily for local and systemic adverse effects. blood samples for complete blood count and serum biochemistry, and urine for urinalysis were collected and the dogs’ body weight was recorded at day  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> of the slit treatment. sera for the determination of peanut-specific igg and ige were collected at day  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  intradermal tests were performed before  and after  the experiment. the content of each dispenser used to administer treatment or placebo was tested for sterility after usage. in order to assess the presence or absence of sensitization, dogs were challenged 6 months after the end of the study with 2000 μg of peanut extract daily for  <dig> to 14 days.


RESULTS
all dogs completed the study. the treatment did not provoke either local or systemic side-effects. peanut-specific igg significantly increased in treatment group. even though a significant increase in peanut-specific ige was also seen, intradermal tests were negative in all dogs before and after the experiment, and the challenge test did not trigger any adverse reactions in the treated dogs, which shows the protocol did not cause sensitization to peanut, but nevertheless primed the immune system as indicated by the humoral immune response. all dispenser solutions were sterile.


CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that the used peanut-slit protocol is well tolerated and safe in healthy dogs. further studies should evaluate tolerability, safety and efficacy in dogs with food allergy.

keywords
slitsublingual immunotherapyfood allergydogspeanutbof 01d06912issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

