BACKGROUND
we contrast the pectoralis muscle transcriptomes of broilers selected from within a single genetic line expressing divergent feed efficiency  in an effort to improve our understanding of the mechanistic basis of fe.


RESULTS
application of a virtual muscle model to gene expression data pointed to a coordinated reduction in slow twitch muscle isoforms of the contractile apparatus , consistent with diminishment in associated slow machinery  in the high fe animals. these data are in line with the repeated transition from red slow to white fast muscle fibres observed in agricultural species selected on mass and fe. surprisingly, we found that the expression of  <dig> genes encoding the broiler mitoproteome is modestly–but significantly–biased towards the high fe group, suggesting a slightly elevated mitochondrial content. this is contrary to expectation based on the slow muscle isoform data and theoretical physiological capacity arguments. reassuringly, the extreme  <dig> most de genes can successfully cluster the  <dig> individuals into the appropriate fe treatment group. functional groups contained in this de gene list include metabolic proteins , mitochondrial proteins , oxidative status  and cholesterol homeostasis . we applied a differential network method  whose aim is to use patterns of differential co-expression to detect regulatory molecules transcriptionally rewired between the groups. this analysis clearly points to alterations in progesterone signalling  as the major driver. we show the progesterone receptor localises to the mitochondria in a quail muscle cell line.


CONCLUSIONS
progesterone is sometimes used in the cattle industry in exogenous hormone mixes that lead to a ~20% increase in fe. because the progesterone receptor can localise to avian mitochondria, our data continue to point to muscle mitochondrial metabolism as an important component of the phenotypic expression of variation in broiler fe.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
feed efficiencymitochondriaprogesteronehttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /100000199u.s. department of agriculture2013-01953bottje walter issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

