BACKGROUND
surgical site infections  are a recognized risk of any surgical procedure in veterinary medicine. one of the keys to prevention of ssis is reducing exposure of the surgical site to endogenous and exogenous microbes, beginning in the preoperative period. while guidelines are available for preoperative preparation procedures, there has been no objective investigation of compliance with these recommendations in veterinary practices. the objectives of this pilot study were to describe preoperative patient and surgeon preparation practices in a sample of non-equine companion animal veterinary clinics, and to determine if there were any areas that consistently did not meet current guidelines.


RESULTS
observation of preparation practices was performed in  <dig> clinics over 9–14 days each using up to  <dig> small wireless surveillance cameras. data were coded for  <dig> surgical patients, and  <dig> surgeons performing  <dig> preoperative preparations. when patient hair removal was observed, it was most commonly done using clippers , and in only one case was it performed prior to anesthetic induction. patient contact time with soap ranged from 10-462 s , and with alcohol from 3-220 s . alcohol-based hand rub  was used preoperatively in 2/ <dig> facilities, but soap-and-water hand scrub was most commonly used at all clinics. proximal-to-distal scrubbing was noted in 95/ <dig>  of soap-and-water scrubs. contact time during surgeon hand preparation ranged from 7-529 s  for soap-and-water and from 4-123 s  for ahr. no significant changes in practices were identified over time during the observation period. practices that did not conform to guidelines available in major companion animal surgical textbooks were commonly observed.


CONCLUSIONS
some preoperative preparation practices were relatively consistent between clinics in this study, while others were quite variable. contact times with preoperative preparatory solutions for both patients and surgeons were often shorter than recommended. evidence-based guidelines for these procedures in veterinary medicine should be established and implemented in order to help reduce preventable ssis, while maintaining efficiency and cost-effectiveness.

veterinarysurgerydisinfectioncompanion animalsurgical site antisepsishand antisepsisvideo observation

