BACKGROUND
cranial cruciate ligament  rupture is a very common cause of pelvic limb lameness in dogs. few studies, using objective and validated outcome evaluation methods, have been published to evaluate long-term  outcome after ccl repair. a group of  <dig> dogs with ccl rupture treated with intracapsular, extracapsular, and osteotomy techniques, and  <dig> healthy control dogs were enrolled in this study. to evaluate long-term surgical outcome, at a minimum of  <dig>  years after unilateral ccl surgery, force plate, orthopedic, radiographic, and physiotherapeutic examinations, including evaluation of active range of motion , symmetry of thrust from the ground, symmetry of muscle mass, and static weight bearing  of pelvic limbs, and goniometry of the stifle and tarsal joints, were done.


RESULTS
at a mean of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  years after surgery, no significant differences were found in average ground reaction forces or swb between the surgically treated and control dog limbs, when dogs with no other orthopedic findings were included . however, in surgically treated limbs, approximately 30% of the dogs had decreased static or dynamic weight bearing when symmetry of weight bearing was evaluated, 40-50% of dogs showed limitations of arom in sitting position, and two-thirds of dogs had weakness in thrust from the ground. the stifle joint extension angles were lower  and flexion angles higher  in surgically treated than in contralateral joints, when dogs with no contralateral stifle problems were included . in dogs treated using the intracapsular technique, the distribution percentage per limb of peak vertical force  in surgically treated limbs was significantly lower than in dogs treated with osteotomy techniques .


CONCLUSIONS
the average long-term dynamic and static weight bearing of the surgically treated limbs returned to the level of healthy limbs. however, extension and flexion angles of the surgically treated stifles remained inferior to healthy joints, and impairment of arom and weakness in thrust from the ground in the surgically treated limbs were frequently present. ground reaction forces may be inadequate as a sole method for assessing functional outcome after cranial cruciate ligament repair.

keywords
cranial cruciate ligamentsurgical outcomeforce plate analysisgoniometrylong-termdogissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

