BACKGROUND
bursicon is a heterodimer neuropeptide responsible for regulating cuticle sclerotization and wing expansion in several insect species. recent studies indicate that the action of bursicon is mediated by a specific g protein-coupled receptor dlgr <dig> and the camp/pka signaling pathway. however, little is known regarding the genes that are regulated by bursicon. the identification of bursicon-regulated genes is the focus of this investigation.


RESULTS
we used dna microarray analysis to identify bursicon-regulated genes in neck-ligated flies  that received recombinant bursicon . fifty four genes were found to be regulated by bursicon  <dig> h post r-bursicon injection,  <dig> being up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated while  <dig> genes were influenced by r-bursicon  <dig> h post-injection . analysis of these genes by inference from the fly database  revealed that these genes encode proteins with diverse functions, including cell signaling, gene transcription, dna/rna binding, ion trafficking, proteolysis-peptidolysis, metabolism, cytoskeleton formation, immune response and cell-adhesion. twenty eight genes randomly selected from the microarray-identified list were verified by real time pcr  which supported the microarray data. temporal response studies of  <dig> identified and verified genes by qpcr revealed that the temporal expression patterns of these genes are consistent with the microarray data.


CONCLUSIONS
using r-bursicon, we identified  <dig> genes that are regulated by bursicon,  <dig> of which have no previously known function. most importantly, all genes randomly selected from the microarray-identified list were verified by real time pcr. temporal analysis of  <dig> verified genes revealed that the expression of these genes was indeed induced by bursicon and correlated well with the cuticle sclerotization process. the composite data suggest that these genes play important roles in regulating the cuticle sclerotization and wing expansion processes. the data obtained here will form the basis for future studies aimed at elucidating the exact mechanisms upstream from the secretion of bursicon and its binding to target cells.

