BACKGROUND
bacterial plasmids have a major impact on metabolic function and adaptation of their hosts. an indigenous plasmid was identified in a chinese isolate  of the invasive phytopathogen xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzicola , the causal agent of rice bacterial leaf streak . to elucidate the biological functions of the plasmid, we have sequenced and comprehensively annotated the plasmid.

methods
the plasmid dna was extracted from xoc strain gx <dig> by alkaline lysis and digested with restriction enzymes. the cloned and subcloned dna fragments in puc <dig> were sequenced by sanger sequencing. sequences were assembled by using sequencher software. gaps were closed by primer walking and sequencing, and multi-pcrs were conducted through the whole plasmid sequence for verification. blast, phylogenetic analysis and dinucleotide calculation were performed for gene annotation and dna structure analysis. transformation, transconjugation and stress tolerance tests were carried out for plasmid function assays.


RESULTS
the indigenous plasmid from xoc strain gx <dig>  designated pxocgx <dig>  is  <dig> -bp long and has been annotated to possess  <dig> open reading frames , including genes encoding type iv secretion system, heavy metal exporter, plasmid stability factors, and dna mobile factors, i.e., the tn3-like transposon. bioinformatics analysis showed that pxocgx <dig> has a mosaic structure containing different genome contexts with distinct genomic heterogeneities. phylogenetic analysis indicated that the closest relative of pxocgx <dig> is pxac <dig> from xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri str.  <dig>  it was estimated that there are four copies of pxocgx <dig> per cell of xoc gx <dig> by pcr assay and the calculation of whole genome shotgun sequencing data. we demonstrate that pxocgx <dig> is a self-transmissible plasmid and can replicate in some xanthomonas spp. strains, but not in escherichia coli dh5α. it could significantly enhance the tolerance of xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae pxo99a to the stresses of heavy metal ions. the plasmid survey indicated that nine out of  <dig> xoc chinese isolates contain plasmids.


CONCLUSIONS
pxocgx <dig> is the first report of indigenous plasmid from xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzicola, and the first completely sequenced plasmid from xanthomonas oryzae species. it is a self-transmissible plasmid and has a mosaic structure, containing genes for macromolecule secretion, heavy metal exportation, and dna mobile factors, especially the tn3-like transposon which may provide transposition function for mobile insertion cassette and play a major role in the spread of pathogenicity determinants. the results will be helpful to elucidate the biological significance of this cryptic plasmid and the adaptive evolution of xoc.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzicolaindigenous plasmidself-transmissibletn3-like transposonheavy metal toleranceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

