BACKGROUND
thermoanaerobacterium saccharolyticum is a hemicellulose-degrading thermophilic anaerobe that was previously engineered to produce ethanol at high yield. a major project was undertaken to develop this organism into an industrial biocatalyst, but the lack of genome information and resources were recognized early on as a key limitation.


RESULTS
here we present a set of genome-scale resources to enable the systems level investigation and development of this potentially important industrial organism. resources include a complete genome sequence for strain jw/sl-ys <dig>  a genome-scale reconstruction of metabolism, tiled microarray data showing transcription units, mrna expression data from  <dig> different growth conditions or timepoints and gc/ms-based metabolite analysis data from  <dig> different conditions or timepoints. growth conditions include hemicellulose hydrolysate, the inhibitors hmf, furfural, diamide, and ethanol, as well as high levels of cellulose, xylose, cellobiose or maltodextrin. the genome consists of a  <dig>  mbp chromosome and a  <dig> kbp megaplasmid. an active prophage was also detected, and the expression levels of crispr genes were observed to increase in association with those of the phage. hemicellulose hydrolysate elicited a response of carbohydrate transport and catabolism genes, as well as poorly characterized genes suggesting a redox challenge. in some conditions, a time series of combined transcription and metabolite measurements were made to allow careful study of microbial physiology under process conditions. as a demonstration of the potential utility of the metabolic reconstruction, the optknock algorithm was used to predict a set of gene knockouts that maximize growth-coupled ethanol production. the predictions validated intuitive strain designs and matched previous experimental results.


CONCLUSIONS
these data will be a useful asset for efforts to develop t. saccharolyticum for efficient industrial production of biofuels. the resources presented herein may also be useful on a comparative basis for development of other lignocellulose degrading microbes, such as clostridium thermocellum.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

