BACKGROUND
the process of solutes entrapment during liposomes formation is interesting for the investigation of the relationship between the formation of compartments and the distribution of molecules inside them; a relevant issue in the studies of the origin of life. theoretically, when no interactions are supposed among the chemical species to be entrapped, the entrapment is described by a standard poisson process. but very recent experimental findings show that, for small liposomes , the distribution of entrapped molecules is best described by a power-law function. this is of a great importance, as the two random processes give rise to two completely different scenarios. here we present an in silico stochastic simulation of the encapsulation of a cell-free molecular translation system , obtained following two different entrapment models: a pure poisson process, and a power-law. the protein synthesis inside the liposomes has been studied in both cases, with the aim to highlight experimental observables that could be measured to assess which model gives a better representation of the real process.


RESULTS
firstly, a minimal model for in vitro protein synthesis, based on the pure system molecular composition, has been formalized. then, we have designed a reliable experimental simulation where stochastic factors affect the reaction course inside the compartment. to this end,  <dig> solutes, which represent the pure system components, have been stochastically distributed among vesicles by following either a poisson or a power-law distribution. the course of the protein synthesis within each vesicle has been consequently calculated, as a function of vesicle size. our study can predict translation yield in a population of small liposomes down to the attoliter  range. our results show that the efficiency of protein synthesis peaks at approximately 3·10- <dig> l  with a poisson distribution of solutes, while a relative optimum is found at around 10- <dig> l  for the power-law statistics.


CONCLUSIONS
our simulation clearly shows that the wet-lab measurement of an effective protein synthesis at smaller volumes than 10- <dig> l would rule out, according to our models, a poisson distribution of solutes.

20- <dig> june  <dig> eighth annual meeting of the italian society of bioinformatics  pisa, italy

