BACKGROUND
a number of rna binding proteins  bind to a+u rich elements , commonly present within 3'utrs of highly regulated rnas. individual rna-bps proteins can modulate rna stability, rna localization, and/or translational efficiency. although biochemical studies have demonstrated selectivity of are-bps for individual rnas, less certain is the in vivo composition of rna-bp multiprotein complexes and how their composition is affected by signaling events and intracellular localization. using fret, we previously demonstrated that two are-bps, hur and auf <dig>  form stable homomeric and heteromeric associations in the nucleus and cytoplasm. in the current study, we use immuno-fret of endogenous proteins to examine the intracellular localization and interactions of hur and auf <dig> as well as ksrp, tia- <dig>  and hedls. these results were compared to those obtained with their exogenously expressed, fluorescently labeled counterparts.


RESULTS
all are-bps examined were found to colocalize and to form stable associations with selected other rna-bps in one or more cellular locations variably including the nucleus, cytoplasm , or in stress granules or p bodies. interestingly, fret based interaction of the translational suppressor, tia- <dig>  and the decapping protein, hedls, was found to occur at the interface of stress granules and p bodies, dynamic sites of intracellular rna storage and/or turnover. to explore the physical interactions of rna-bps with are containing rnas, in vitro transcribed cy3-labeled rna was transfected into cells. interestingly, cy3-rna was found to coalesce in p body like punctate structures and, by fret, was found to interact with the rna decapping proteins, hedls and dcp <dig> 


CONCLUSIONS
biochemical methodologies, such as co-immunoprecipitation, and cell biological approaches such as standard confocal microscopy are useful in demonstrating the possibility of proteins and/or proteins and rnas interacting. however, as demonstrated herein, colocalization of proteins and proteins and rna is not always indicative of interaction. to this point, using fret and immuno-fret, we have demonstrated that rna-bps can visually colocalize without producing a fret signal. in contrast, proteins that appear to be delimited to one or another intracellular compartment can be shown to interact when those compartments are juxtaposed.

