BACKGROUND
the very-preterm infant gut microbiota is increasingly explored due to its probable role in the development of life threatening diseases. results of high-throughput studies validate and renew the interest in approaches with lower resolution such as pcr-temporal temperature gel electrophoresis  for the follow-up of dominant microbiota dynamics. we report here an extensive longitudinal study of gut colonization in very preterm infants. we explored by 16s rdna-based pcr-ttge a total of  <dig> stool specimens sampled during routine monitoring from the 1st to the 8th week of life in  <dig> very pre-term infants born before 30 weeks of gestational age.


RESULTS
combining comparison with a diversity ladder and sequencing allowed affiliation of  <dig> species-level operational taxonomic units  as well as semi-quantitative estimation of operational taxonomic units . coagulase-negative staphylococci, mainly the staphylococcus epidermidis, was found in all the infants during the study period and was the most represented  from the first days of life. enterococci, present in 60% of the infants were early, highly represented and persistent colonizers of the premature gut. later enterobacteriaceae and the genus clostridium appeared and were found in  <dig>  and  <dig> infants , respectively. we showed a high representation of veillonella in more than a quarter of the infants and being able to persistently colonize premature gut. the genera anaerococcus, aquabacterium, bacillus, bifidobacterium, corynebacterium, micrococcus, oceanobacillus, propionibacterium, pseudomonas, rothia, sarcina, sneathia and streptococcus were observed as transient or persistent colonizers, each genus being found in a minority of infants.


CONCLUSIONS
despite low resolution, pcr-ttge remains complementary to high-throughput sequencing-based approaches because it allows the follow-up of dominant bacteria in gut microbiota in a large longitudinal cohorts of preterm neonates. we described the development of pre-term gut microbiota that should be now replaced regarding the functional role of major otus.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
extremely low birth weight infantstoolmicrobiotafollow-uppcr-ttgediversitydynamicsstaphylococcusenterococcusclostridiumenterobacteriaceaeveillonellaceaeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

