BACKGROUND
kaposi’s sarcoma associated herpes virus  is associated with tumors of endothelial and lymphoid origin. during latent infection, kshv expresses mir-k12- <dig>  an ortholog of the human tumor gene hsa-mir- <dig>  both gene products are micrornas , which are important post-transcriptional regulators that contribute to tissue specific gene expression. advances in target identification technologies and molecular interaction databases have allowed a systems biology approach to unravel the gene regulatory networks  triggered by mir-k12- <dig> in endothelial and lymphoid cells. understanding the tissue specific function of mir-k12- <dig> will help to elucidate underlying mechanisms of kshv pathogenesis.


RESULTS
ectopic expression of mir-k12- <dig> differentially affected gene expression in bjab cells of lymphoid origin and tive cells of endothelial origin. direct mirna targeting accounted for a small fraction of the observed transcriptome changes: only  <dig> genes were identified as putative direct targets of mir-k12- <dig> in both cell types. however, a number of commonly affected biological pathways, such as carbohydrate metabolism and interferon response related signaling, were revealed by gene ontology analysis. integration of transcriptome profiling, bioinformatic algorithms, and databases of protein-protein interactome from the encode project identified different nodes of grns utilized by mir-k12- <dig> in a tissue-specific fashion. these effector genes, including cancer associated transcription factors and signaling proteins, amplified the regulatory potential of a single mirna, from a small set of putative direct targets to a larger set of genes.


CONCLUSIONS
this is the first comparative analysis of mirna-k12-11’s effects in endothelial and b cells, from tissues infected with kshv in vivo. mir-k12- <dig> was able to broadly modulate gene expression in both cell types. using a systems biology approach, we inferred that mir-k12- <dig> establishes its grn by both repressing master tfs and influencing signaling pathways, to counter the host anti-viral response and to promote proliferation and survival of infected cells. the targeted grns are more reproducible and informative than target gene identification, and our approach can be applied to other regulatory factors of interest.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

