BACKGROUND
the orchidaceae is one of the largest families in the plant kingdom and orchid mycorrhizae  are indispensable in the life cycle of all orchids under natural conditions. in spite of this, little is known concerning the mechanisms underlying orchid- mycorrhizal fungi interactions. our previous work demonstrated that the non-mycorrhizal fungus umbelopsis nana zh3a- <dig> could improve the symbiotic effects of orchid mycorrhizal fungus epulorhiza repens ml <dig> by co-cultivation with cymbidium hybridum plantlets. thus, we investigated the c. hybridum transcript profile associated with different beneficial fungi.


RESULTS
more than  <dig> , <dig> clean reads were obtained from un-normalized cdna library prepared from fungal- and mock- treated cymbidium roots at four time points using rna-seq technology. these reads were assembled into  <dig>  unique transcripts, with a mean length of  <dig> bp. a total of  <dig>   sequences were annotated based on blastx results and over ninety percent of which were assigned to plant origin. the digital gene expression profiles in cymbidium root at  <dig> days post inoculation revealed that  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes were sigificantly regulated in response to ml <dig>  zh3a- <dig> and ml01+ zh3a- <dig> treatments, respectively. twenty-six genes in different regulation patterns were validated using quantitative rt-pcr. our analysis showed that general defense responses were co- induced by three treatments, including cell wall modification, reactive oxygen species detoxification, secondary biosynthesis and hormone balance. genes involved in phosphate transport and root morphogenesis were also detected to be up-regulated collectively. among the om specifically induced transcripts, genes related to signaling, protein metabolism and processing, defense, transport and auxin response were identifed. aside from these orchid transcripts, some putative fungal genes were also identified in symbiotic roots related to plant cell wall degradation, remodeling the fungal cell wall and nutrient transport.


CONCLUSIONS
the orchid root transcriptome will facilitate our understanding of orchid - associated biological mechanism. the comparative expression profiling revealed that the transcriptional reprogramming by om symbiosis generally overlapped that of arbuscular mycorrhizas and ectomycorrhizas. the molecular basis of om formation and function will improve our knowledge of plant- mycorrhzial fungi interactions, and their effects on plant and fungal growth, development and differentiation.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
root transcriptomedigital gene expressionplant mycorrhizal symbiosiscymbidium hybridumepulorhiza repens ml01umbelopsis nana zh3a-3issue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

