BACKGROUND
plants are exposed to attack from a large variety of herbivores. feeding insects can induce substantial changes of the host plant transcriptome. arabidopsis thaliana has been established as a relevant system for the discovery of genes associated with response to herbivory, including genes for specialized  metabolism as well as genes involved in plant-insect defence signalling.


RESULTS
using a 70-mer oligonulceotide microarray covering  <dig>  gene-specific elements, we monitored changes of the arabidopsis leaf transcriptome in response to feeding by diamond back moth  larvae. analysis of samples from a time course of one hour to  <dig> hours following onset of dbm feeding revealed almost three thousand  array elements  that were differentially expressed  of which  <dig>  also changed more than twofold in expression between at least two time points of the time course with p <  <dig> . while the majority of these transcripts were up-regulated within  <dig> h upon onset of insect feeding relative to untreated controls, cluster analysis identified several distinct temporal patterns of transcriptome changes. many of the dbm-induced genes fall into ontology groups annotated as stress response, secondary metabolism and signalling. among dbm-induced genes associated with plant signal molecules or phytohormones, genes associated with octadecanoid signalling were clearly overrepresented. we identified a substantial number of differentially expressed genes associated with signal transduction in response to dbm feeding, and we compared there expression profiles with those of previously reported transcriptome responses induced by other insect herbivores, specifically pieris rapae, frankliniella occidentalis, bemisia tabaci,myzus persicae, and brevicoryne brassicae.


CONCLUSIONS
arabidopsis responds to feeding dbm larvae with a drastic reprogramming of the transcriptome, which has considerable overlap with the response induced by other insect herbivores. based on a meta-analysis of microarray data we identified groups of transcription factors that are either affected by multiple forms of biotic or abiotic stress including dbm feeding or, alternatively, were responsive to dbm herbivory but not to most other forms of stress.

