BACKGROUND
androgens play an important role for the development of male fertility and gained interest as growth and survival factors for certain types of cancer. androgens act via the androgen receptor , which is involved in various cell biological processes such as sex differentiation. to study the functional mechanisms of androgen action, cell culture systems and ar-transfected cell lines are needed. transfection of ar into cell lines and subsequent gene expression analysis after androgen treatment is well established to investigate the molecular biology of target cells. however, it remains unclear how the transfection with ar itself can modulate the gene expression even without androgen stimulation. therefore, we transfected ar-deficient rat sertoli cells 93rs <dig> by electroporation using a full length human ar.


RESULTS
transfection success was confirmed by western blotting, immunofluorescence and rt-pcr. ar transfection-related gene expression alterations were detected with microarray-based genome-wide expression profiling of transfected and non-transfected 93rs <dig> cells without androgen stimulation. microarray analysis revealed  <dig> differentially regulated genes with  <dig> up- and  <dig> down-regulated genes. these genes could be assigned to four major biological categories . microarray results were confirmed by quantitative rt-pcr analysis for  <dig> candidate genes.


CONCLUSIONS
we conclude from our data, that the transfection of ar-deficient sertoli cells with ar has a measurable effect on gene expression even without androgen stimulation and cause sertoli cell damage. studies using ar-transfected cells, subsequently stimulated, should consider alterations in ar-dependent gene expression as off-target effects of the ar transfection itself.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transfectiongene expression analysisandrogen receptorsertoli cellshttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001659deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft be1061/7-1bergmann m. issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

