BACKGROUND
so far many algorithms have been proposed towards the detection of significant genes in microarray analysis problems. several of those approaches are freely available as r-packages though their engagement in gene expression analysis by non-bioinformaticians is usually a frustrating task. besides, only some of those packages offer a complete suite of tools starting from initial data import and ending to analysis report. here we present an r/bioconductor package that implements a hybrid gene selection method along with a bunch of functions to facilitate a thorough and convenient gene expression profiling analysis.


RESULTS
mapkl is an open-source r/bioconductor package that implements the map-kl hybrid gene selection method. the advantage of this method is that selects a small number of gene exemplars while achieving comparable classification results to other well established algorithms on a variety of datasets and dataset sizes. the mapkl package is accompanied with extra functionalities including  solid data import;  data sampling following a user-defined proportion;  preprocessing through several normalization and transformation alternatives;  classification with the aid of svm and performance evaluation;  network analysis of the significant genes , including degree of centrality, closeness, betweeness, clustering coefficient as well as the construction of an edge list table;  gene annotation analysis,  pathway analysis and  auto-generated analysis reporting.


CONCLUSIONS
users are able to run a thorough gene expression analysis in a timely manner starting from raw data and concluding to network characteristics of the selected gene exemplars. detailed instructions and example data are provided in the r package, which is freely available at bioconductor under the gpl- <dig> or later license http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/ <dig> /bioc/html/mapkl.html.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
feature extractiondifferential expressionmicroarraygene expressionrbioconductorissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

