BACKGROUND
the innate immune response of urinary tract is critically important in the defense to microbial attack. toll-like receptor  <dig>  controls initial mucosal response to uropathogenic escherichia coli . however, excessive and dysfunctional tlr signaling may result in severe inflammation and inappropriate tissue damage. previous studies have demonstrated that single immunoglobulin il-1r-related receptor/toll il- <dig> receptor  <dig>  is a member of the toll-interleukin- <dig> receptor  family that can negatively modulate tlr <dig> mediated signaling, but its role in the innate immunity of urinary tract infection remains incompletely defined. in this study, we investigated its cellular distribution and mechanisms involved within the human bladder epithelial cells after lps stimulation.


RESULTS
immunostaining, reverse transcription pcr and western blot results showed that sigirr was constitutively expressed in the human bladder epithelial cell lines and was downregulated after lps stimulation. to further define the role of sigirr, cells were transiently transfected with sigirr sirna and stimulated with lps. sigirr gene silencing augmented chemokine expression in response to lps, as indicated by increased levels of il- <dig> and il- <dig> secretions in the supernatants compared with negative control sirna. furthermore, lps tolerance, a protective mechanism against second lps stimulation, was significantly reduced in sigirr sirna transfected cells. moreover, transient gene silencing augmented lps-induced nf-κb and mapk activation.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our results suggest that sigirr plays an important role in the negative regulation of lps response and tolerance in human bladder epithelial cells, possibly through its impact on tlr-mediated signaling.

keywords
urinary tract infectionhuman bladder epithelial cellstoll like receptorsingle immunoglobulin il-1r-related receptorlipopolysaccharideendotoxin toleranceissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

