BACKGROUND
here, we aimed to investigate the effects of ensiled mulberry leaves  and sun-dried mulberry fruit pomace  on fecal bacterial communities in simmental crossbred finishing steers. to this end, the steers were reared on a standard tmr diet, standard diet containing eml, and standard diet containing smfp. the protein and energy levels of all the diets were similar. illumina miseq sequencing of the v <dig> region of the 16s rrna gene and quantitative real-time pcr were used to analyze and detect the fecal bacterial community.


RESULTS
most of the sequences were assigned to firmicutes  and bacteroidetes , followed by proteobacteria , verrucomicrobia  and tenericutes . the predominant genera were 5-7 n <dig> , cf <dig> , oscillospira , paludibacter  and akkermansia . no significant differences were observed in the numbers of firmicutes , bacteroidetes , proteobacteria , verrucomicrobia , and tenericutes  populations between the treatment groups. at the genus level, genera classified with high abundance  belonged primarily to bacteroidetes and firmicutes. furthermore, no differences were observed at the genus level: 5-7 n <dig>  cf <dig>  oscillospira, paludibacter, and akkermansia , except that rc4– <dig> was lower in the con and smfp groups than in the eml group . there were no significant differences in the richness estimate and diversity indices between the groups , and the different diets did not significantly influence most selected fecal bacterial species , except for ruminococcus albus, which was higher in the eml group  and streptococcus bovis, which was lower in the con group  relative to the other groups.


CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, diets supplemented with eml and smfp have little influence on the fecal bacterial community composition in finishing steers.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
fecal bacteria community compositionsequencingensiled mulberry leaves sun-dried mulberry fruit pomace http://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001809national natural science foundation of china31372335china agricultural research systemcars-38national natural science foundation of china31672449special fund for agro-scientific research in the public interest 201503134issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

