BACKGROUND
currently, a number of bioinformatics methods are available to generate appropriate lists of genes from a microarray experiment. while these lists represent an accurate primary analysis of the data, fewer options exist to contextualise those lists. the development and validation of such methods is crucial to the wider application of microarray technology in the clinical setting. two key challenges in clinical bioinformatics involve appropriate statistical modelling of dynamic transcriptomic changes, and extraction of clinically relevant meaning from very large datasets.


RESULTS
here, we apply an approach to gene set enrichment analysis that allows for detection of bi-directional enrichment within a gene set. furthermore, we apply canonical correlation analysis and fisher's exact test, using plasma marker data with known clinical relevance to aid identification of the most important gene and pathway changes in our transcriptomic dataset. after a 28-day dietary intervention with high-cla beef, a range of plasma markers indicated a marked improvement in the metabolic health of genetically obese mice. tissue transcriptomic profiles indicated that the effects were most dramatic in liver , followed by muscle  and adipose . results from modified gsea showed that the high-cla beef diet affected diverse biological processes across the three tissues, and that the majority of pathway changes reached significance only with the bi-directional test. combining the liver tissue microarray results with plasma marker data revealed  <dig> cla-sensitive genes showing strong canonical correlation with one or more plasma markers of metabolic health, and  <dig> significantly overrepresented pathways among this set; each of these pathways was also significantly changed by the high-cla diet. closer inspection of two of these pathways - selenoamino acid metabolism and steroid biosynthesis - illustrated clear diet-sensitive changes in constituent genes, as well as strong correlations between gene expression and plasma markers of metabolic syndrome independent of the dietary effect.


CONCLUSIONS
bi-directional gene set enrichment analysis more accurately reflects dynamic regulatory behaviour in biochemical pathways, and as such highlighted biologically relevant changes that were not detected using a traditional approach. in such cases where transcriptomic response to treatment is exceptionally large, canonical correlation analysis in conjunction with fisher's exact test highlights the subset of pathways showing strongest correlation with the clinical markers of interest. in this case, we have identified selenoamino acid metabolism and steroid biosynthesis as key pathways mediating the observed relationship between metabolic health and high-cla beef. these results indicate that this type of analysis has the potential to generate novel transcriptome-based biomarkers of disease.

