BACKGROUND
microarray technologies produced large amount of data. in a previous study, we have shown the interest of k-nearest neighbour approach for restoring the missing gene expression values, and its positive impact of the gene clustering by hierarchical algorithm. since, numerous replacement methods have been proposed to impute missing values  for microarray data. in this study, we have evaluated twelve different usable methods, and their influence on the quality of gene clustering. interestingly we have used several datasets, both kinetic and non kinetic experiments from yeast and human.


RESULTS
we underline the excellent efficiency of approaches proposed and implemented by bo and co-workers and especially one based on expected maximization . these improvements have been observed also on the imputation of extreme values, the most difficult predictable values. we showed that the imputed mvs have still important effects on the stability of the gene clusters. the improvement on the clustering obtained by hierarchical clustering remains limited and, not sufficient to restore completely the correct gene associations. however, a common tendency can be found between the quality of the imputation method and the gene cluster stability. even if the comparison between clustering algorithms is a complex task, we observed that k-means approach is more efficient to conserve gene associations.


CONCLUSIONS
more than  <dig> . <dig> independent simulations have assessed the quality of  <dig> imputation methods on five very different biological datasets. important improvements have so been done since our last study. the em_array approach constitutes one efficient method for restoring the missing expression gene values, with a lower estimation error level. nonetheless, the presence of mvs even at a low rate is a major factor of gene cluster instability. our study highlights the need for a systematic assessment of imputation methods and so of dedicated benchmarks. a noticeable point is the specific influence of some biological dataset.

