BACKGROUND
prokaryotes have relatively small genomes, densely-packed with protein-encoding sequences. rna sequencing has, however, revealed surprisingly complex transcriptomes and here we report the transcripts present in the model hyperthermophilic archaeon, thermococcus kodakarensis, under different physiological conditions.


RESULTS
sequencing cdna libraries, generated from rna isolated from cells under different growth and metabolic conditions has identified > <dig>  sites of transcription initiation, established a genome-wide map of transcripts, and consensus sequences for transcription initiation and post-transcription regulatory elements. the primary transcription start sites  upstream of  <dig>  annotated genes, plus  <dig> primary tss and their promoters within genes, are identified. most mrnas have a 5'-untranslated region   <dig> to  <dig> nt long , but ~20% have 5'-utrs from  <dig> to  <dig> nt long and ~14% are leaderless. approximately 50% of mrnas contain a consensus ribosome binding sequence. the results identify tss for  <dig>  antisense transcripts, most with sequences complementary to either the 5'- or 3'-region of a sense mrna, and confirm the presence of transcripts from all three crispr loci, the rnase p and 7s rnas, all trnas and rrnas and  <dig> predicted snornas. two putative riboswitch rnas were present in growing but not in stationary phase cells. the procedure used is designed to identify tss but, assuming that the number of cdna reads correlates with transcript abundance, the results also provide a semi-quantitative documentation of the differences in t. kodakarensis genome expression under different growth conditions and confirm previous observations of substrate-dependent specific gene expression. many previously unanticipated small rnas have been identified, some with relative low gc contents  and sequences that do not fold readily into base-paired secondary structures, contrary to the classical expectations for non-coding rnas in a hyperthermophile.


CONCLUSIONS
the results identify > <dig>  tss, including almost all of the primary sites of transcription initiation upstream of annotated genes, plus many secondary sites, sites within genes and sites resulting in antisense transcripts. the t. kodakarensis genome is small  and tightly packed with protein-encoding genes, but the transcriptomes established also contain many non-coding rnas and predict extensive rna-based regulation in this model archaeon.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
transcriptomearchaeapromotersantisense rnassmall non-coding rnasriboswitchhyperthermophilehydrogen regulationissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

