BACKGROUND
micrornas  are endogenous small rnas that modulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level by binding complementary sites in the 3'-utr. in a recent genome-wide study reporting a new mirna target class , we identified and validated interactions between 5'-utrs and mirnas. separately, upstream augs  in 5'-utrs are known to regulate genes translationally without affecting mrna levels, one of the mechanisms for mirna-mediated repression.


RESULTS
using sequence data from whole-genome cdna alignments we identified  <dig> uaug sequences on the 5'-utr that specifically interact with 3'-ends of conserved mirnas. we computationally identified mirnas that can target six genes through their uaugs that were previously reported to suppress translation. we extended this meta-analysis by confirming expression of these mirnas in cell-lines used in the uaug studies. similarly, seven members of the klf family of genes containing uaugs were computationally identified as interacting with several mirnas. using klf <dig> as an example , we show computationally that mirnas expressed only in hela cells and not in neuroblastoma  cells can bind the uaugs responsible for translation inhibition. our computed results demonstrate that tissue- or cell-line specific repression of protein translation by uaugs can be explained by the presence or absence of mirnas that target these uaug sequences. we propose that these uaugs represent a subset of mirna interaction sites on 5'-utrs in mibridge, whereby a mirna binding a uaug hinders the progression of ribosome scanning the mrna before it reaches the open reading frame .


CONCLUSIONS
while both mirnas and uaugs are separately known to down-regulate protein expression, we show that they may be functionally related by identifying potential interactions through a sequence-specific binding mechanism. using prior experimental evidence that shows uaug effects on translation repression together with mirna expression data specific to cell lines, we demonstrate through computational analysis that cell-specific down-regulation of protein expression  correlates well with the simultaneous presence of mirna and target uaug sequences in one cell type and not others, suggesting tissue-specific translation repression by mirnas through uaugs.

