BACKGROUND
pain intensity clamping uses the response-dependent stimulation  methodology to automatically adjust stimulus intensity to maintain a desired pain rating set-point which is continuously monitored from a subject’s real-time pain ratings. redstim blinds subjects regarding the pain intensity set-point, supporting its use for assessing intervention efficacy. by maintaining the pain intensity at a constant level, a potential decrease in pain sensitivity can be detected by an increase in thermode temperature  and not by pain ratings alone. further, previously described sensitizing and desensitizing trends within redstim provide a novel insight into human pain mechanisms overcoming limitations of conventional testing methods. the purpose of the present study was to assess the test-retest reliability of pain intensity clamping using redstim during three separate sessions.

methods
we used a method for testing changes in pain sensitivity of human subjects  where the stimulus temperature is modulated to clamp pain intensity near a desired set-point. temperature serves as the response variable and is used to infer pain sensitivity. several measures were analyzed for reliability including average temperature and area under the curve . intraclass correlation coefficients were calculated for each measure at pain rating set-points of 20/ <dig> and 35/ <dig> 


RESULTS
sixteen healthy individuals  participated in three experiments two days apart at both pain rating set-points. most reliability coefficients were in the moderate to substantial range  except for the negative auc , but only at the 20/ <dig> pain rating set-point.


CONCLUSIONS
the present study supports the test-retest reliability of pain intensity clamping using the redstim methodology while providing a novel tool to examine human pain modulatory mechanisms and overcoming common shortcomings of conventional quantitative sensory testing methods.

keywords
quantitative sensory testingpain sensitivityreliabilityissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

