BACKGROUND
the biological and clinical consequences of the tight interactions between host and microbiota are rapidly being unraveled by next generation sequencing technologies and sophisticated bioinformatics, also referred to as microbiota metagenomics. the recent success of metagenomics has created a demand to rapidly apply the technology to large case–control cohort studies and to studies of microbiota from various habitats, including habitats relatively poor in microbes. it is therefore of foremost importance to enable a robust and rapid quality assessment of metagenomic data from samples that challenge present technological limits . here we demonstrate that the distribution of overlapping k-mers of metagenome sequence data predicts sequence quality as defined by gene distribution and efficiency of sequence mapping to a reference gene catalogue.


RESULTS
we used serial dilutions of gut microbiota metagenomic datasets to generate well-defined high to low quality metagenomes. we also analyzed a collection of  <dig> microbiota-derived metagenomes. we demonstrate that k-mer distributions of metagenomic sequence data identify sequence contaminations, such as sequences derived from “empty” ligation products. of note, k-mer distributions were also able to predict the frequency of sequences mapping to a reference gene catalogue not only for the well-defined serial dilution datasets, but also for  <dig> human gut microbiota derived metagenomic datasets.


CONCLUSIONS
we propose that k-mer analysis of raw metagenome sequence reads should be implemented as a first quality assessment prior to more extensive bioinformatics analysis, such as sequence filtering and gene mapping. with the rising demand for metagenomic analysis of microbiota it is crucial to provide tools for rapid and efficient decision making. this will eventually lead to a faster turn-around time, improved analytical quality including sample quality metrics and a significant cost reduction. finally, improved quality assessment will have a major impact on the robustness of biological and clinical conclusions drawn from metagenomic studies.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
metagenomicsnext generation sequencingquality controlsampling biassample size limitsissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

