BACKGROUND
luteimonas abyssi xh031t, which was previously isolated from subseafloor environment of the south pacific gyre , was an aerobic, gram-negative bacterium, and was identified to be a novel species of the genus luteimonas in the family of xanthomonadaceae. the nutrients utilization and metabolic mechanisms of xh031t indicate its plasticity. in view of the above characteristics, its genome was sequenced, and an in-depth analysis of the xh031t genome was performed to elucidate its adaption to extreme ecological environment.


RESULTS
various macromolecules including polysaccharide, protein, lipid and dna could be degraded at low temperature by xh031t under laboratory conditions, and its degradation abilities to starch, gelatin and casein were considerably strong. genome sequence analysis indicated that xh031t possesses extensive enzyme-encoding genes compared with four other luteimonas strains. in addition, intricate systems , which are often used by bacteria to modulate the interactions of bacteria with their environments, were predicted in the genome of xh031t. genes encoding a choline-glycine betaine transporter and  <dig> extracellular peptidases featured with halophilicity were predicted in the genome, which might help the bacterium to adapt to the salty marine environment. moreover, there were many gene clusters in the genome encoding atp-binding cassette superfamily transporters, major facilitator superfamily transporters and cytochrome p450s that might function in the process of various substrate transportation and metabolisms. furthermore, drug resistance genes harbored in the genome might signify that xh031t has evolved hereditary adaptation to toxic environment. finally, the annotation of metabolic pathways of the elements  in the genome elucidated the degradation of organic matter in the deep sediment of the spg.


CONCLUSIONS
the genome analysis showed that xh031t had genetic advantages to adapt to subseafloor environment. the material metabolism manifests that the strain may play an important ecological role in the biogeochemical cycle of the spg, and various cold-adapted extracelluar enzymes produced by the strain may have significant value in application.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
luteimonas abyssigenomic analysisgenetic advantagesecological rolenational natural science foundation of china41276141zhang xiao-hua national high technology research & development program of china2012aa091605zhang xiao-hua china ocean mineral resources research & development associationdy125-15-r-03zhang xiao-hua issue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

