BACKGROUND
in higher plants, the inhibition of photosynthetic capacity under drought is attributable to stomatal and non-stomatal  effects. in particular, a disruption of photosynthetic metabolism and rubisco regulation can be observed. several studies reported reduced expression of the rbcs genes, which encode the rubisco small subunit, under water stress.


RESULTS
expression of the rbcs <dig> gene was analysed in the allopolyploid context of c. arabica, which originates from a natural cross between the c. canephora and c. eugenioides species. our study revealed the existence of two homeologous rbcs <dig> genes in c. arabica: one carried by the c. canephora sub-genome  and the other carried by the c. eugenioides sub-genome . using specific primer pairs for each homeolog, expression studies revealed that cace was expressed in c. eugenioides and c. arabica but was undetectable in c. canephora. on the other hand, cacc was expressed in c. canephora but almost completely silenced in non-introgressed  genotypes of c. arabica. however, enhanced cacc expression was observed in most c. arabica cultivars with introgressed c. canephora genome. in addition, total rbcs <dig> expression was higher for c. arabica cultivars that had recently introgressed c. canephora genome than for "pure" cultivars. for both species, water stress led to an important decrease in the abundance of rbcs <dig> transcripts. this was observed for plants grown in either greenhouse or field conditions under severe or moderate drought. however, this reduction of rbcs <dig> gene expression was not accompanied by a decrease in the corresponding protein in the leaves of c. canephora subjected to water withdrawal. in that case, the amount of rbcs <dig> was even higher under drought than under unstressed  conditions, which suggests great stability of rbcs <dig> under adverse water conditions. on the other hand, for c. arabica, high nocturnal expression of rbcs <dig> could also explain the accumulation of the rbcs <dig> protein under water stress. altogether, the results presented here suggest that the content of rbcs was not responsible for the loss of photosynthetic capacity that is commonly observed in water-stressed coffee plants.


CONCLUSIONS
we showed that the cace homeolog was expressed in c. eugenioides and non-introgressed  genotypes of c. arabica but that it was undetectable in c. canephora. on the other hand, the cacc homeolog was expressed in c. canephora but highly repressed in c. arabica. expression of the cacc homeolog was enhanced in c. arabica cultivars that experienced recent introgression with c. canephora. for both c. canephora and c. arabica species, total rbcs <dig> gene expression was highly reduced with ws. unexpectedly, the accumulation of rbcs <dig> protein was observed in the leaves of c. canephora under ws, possibly coming from nocturnal rbcs <dig> expression. these results suggest that the increase in the amount of rbcs <dig> protein could contribute to the antioxidative function of photorespiration in water-stressed coffee plants.

