BACKGROUND
in physiologic and pathologic conditions of the central nervous system , astrocytes are a double-edged sword. they not only support neuronal homeostasis but also contribute to increases in neuronal demise. a large body of experimental evidence has shown that impaired astrocytes play crucial roles in the pathologic process of cerebral ischemia; therefore, astrocytes may represent a breakthrough target for neuroprotective therapeutic strategies. agmatine, an endogenous polyamine catalyzed from l-arginine by arginine decarboxylase , is a neuromodulator and it protects neurons/glia against various injuries.


RESULTS
in this investigation, agmatine-producing mouse cortical astrocytes were developed through transduction of the human adc gene. cells were exposed to oxygen-glucose deprivation  and restored to a normoxic glucose-supplied condition. intracellular levels of agmatine were measured by high performance liquid chromatography. cell viability was evaluated by hoechest/propidium iodide nuclear staining and lactate dehydrogenase assay. expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase  and matrix metalloproteinase s  were assessed by a reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, western immunoblots, and immunofluorescence. we confirmed that adc gene-expressed astrocytes produce a great amount of agmatine. these cells were highly resistant to not only ogd but also restoration, which mimicked ischemia-reperfusion injury in vivo. the neuroprotective effects of adc seemed to be related to its ability to attenuate expression of inos and mmps.


CONCLUSIONS
our findings imply that astrocytes can be reinforced against oxidative stress by endogenous agmatine production through adc gene transduction. the results of this study provide new insights that may lead to novel therapeutic approaches to reduce cerebral ischemic injuries.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
agmatinearginine decarboxylaseastrocyteneuroprotectionoxidative stressissue-copyright-statement© the author 2014

