BACKGROUND
carotenoids are the main colouring substances found in orange-fleshed loquat fruits. the aim of this study was to unravel the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway of loquat fruit  in peel and flesh tissue during distinct on-tree developmental stages through a targeted analytical and molecular approach.


RESULTS
substantial changes regarding colour parameters, both between peel and flesh and among the different developmental stages, were monitored, concomitant with a significant increment in carotenoid content. key genes and individual compounds that are implicated in the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway were further dissected with the employment of molecular  and advanced analytical techniques . results revealed significant differences in carotenoid composition between peel and flesh. thirty-two carotenoids were found in the peel, while only eighteen carotenoids were identified in the flesh. trans-lutein and trans-β-carotene were the major carotenoids in the peel; the content of the former decreased with the progress of ripening, while the latter registered a  <dig> -fold increase. however, carotenoid profiling of loquat flesh indicated trans-β-cryptoxanthin, followed by trans-β-carotene and  <dig> -epoxy-β-carotene to be the most predominant carotenoids. high amounts of trans-β-carotene in both tissues were supported by significant induction in a chromoplast-specific lycopene β-cyclase  transcript levels. psy <dig>  zds, cycb and bch were up-regulated and crtiso, lcye, ech and vde were down-regulated in most of the developmental stages compared with the immature stage in both peel and flesh tissue. overall, differential regulation of expression levels with the progress of on-tree fruit development was more evident in the middle and downstream genes of carotenoid biosynthetic pathway.


CONCLUSIONS
carotenoid composition is greatly affected during on-tree loquat development with striking differences between peel and flesh tissue. a link between gene up- or down-regulation during the developmental stages of the loquat fruit, and how their expression affects carotenoid content per tissue  was established.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
eriobotrya japonicadevelopmental stagesmaturationripeningβ-caroteneβ-cryptoxanthinluteinlc-msbiosynthetic pathwaycyprus university of technology open access author fundissue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

