BACKGROUND
similar to common buckwheat , tartary buckwheat  shows a high level of aluminum  tolerance and accumulation. however, the molecular mechanisms for al detoxification and accumulation are still poorly understood. to begin to elucidate the molecular basis of al tolerance and accumulation, we used the illumina high-throughput mrna sequencing  technology to conduct a genome-wide transcriptome analysis on both tip and basal segments of the roots exposed to al.


RESULTS
by using the trinity method for the de novo assembly and cap <dig> software to reduce the redundancy and chimeras of the transcripts, we constructed  <dig>  transcripts with an average length of 1184 bp, among which  <dig>  transcripts were annotated by blast searches in the ncbi non-redundant protein database. gene ontology  and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  enrichment analysis showed that expression of genes involved in the defense of cell wall toxicity and oxidative stress was preferentially induced by al stress. our rna-seq data also revealed that organic acid metabolism was unlikely to be a rate-limiting step for the al-induced secretion of organic acids in buckwheat. we identified two citrate transporter genes that were highly induced by al and potentially involved in the release of citrate into the xylem. in addition, three of four conserved al-tolerance genes were found to be duplicated in tartary buckwheat and display diverse expression patterns.


CONCLUSIONS
nearly  <dig>  high quality transcript contigs were de novo assembled for tartary buckwheat, providing a reference platform for future research work in this plant species. our differential expression and phylogenetic analysis revealed novel aspects of al-tolerant mechanisms in buckwheat.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
aluminum toleranceal-tolerance genesbuckwheathomologorganic acidtranscriptomeissue-copyright-statement© the author 2015

