BACKGROUND
comparative studies suggest that sperm competition exerts stabilizing selection towards an optimal sperm design – e.g., the relative size and covariation of different sperm sections or a quantitative measure of sperm shape - that maximizes male fertility, which results in reduced levels of within-male variation in sperm morphology. yet, these studies also reveal substantial amounts of unexplained within-ejaculate variance, and the factors presiding to the maintenance of such within-male variation in sperm design at the population level still remain to be identified. sperm competition models predict that males should progressively invest more resources in their germline as their mating costs increase, i.e., the soma/germline allocation trade-off hypothesis. when access to fertile females is determined by social dominance, the soma/germline allocation trade-off hypothesis predicts that dominant males should invest less in the control of spermatogenesis. hence, dominance should positively correlate with within-male variance in sperm design.


RESULTS
in support of this hypothesis, we found that dominant house sparrow males produce ejaculates with higher levels of within-ejaculate variation in sperm design compared to subordinate males. however, after experimentally manipulating male social status, this pattern was not maintained.


CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that males might control variation in sperm design according to their social status to some extent. yet, it seems that such within-ejaculate variation in sperm design cannot be rapidly adjusted to a new status. while variation in sperm design could result from various non-exclusive sources, we discuss how strategic allocation of resources to the somatic vs. the germline functions could be an important process shaping the relationship between within-male variation in sperm design and social status.

electronic supplementary material
the online version of this article  contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

keywords
sperm competitionsocial hierarchieswithin-ejaculate variationsoma vs. germlinesperm morphologyhttp://dx.doi.org/ <dig> /501100001711schweizerischer nationalfonds zur förderung der wissenschaftlichen forschungpp00p3_139011helfenstein fabrice issue-copyright-statement© the author 2017

