BACKGROUND
for angiosperms, apomixis means asexual reproduction by seed  <cit> . it is strongly associated with hybridity and polyploidy, and molecular mechanisms responsible for it remain shrouded in complexity  <cit> . apomixis involves the reprogramming of unreduced  cells of the ovule, which thereafter follow a very different developmental trajectory than had the plant been sexual. specifically, ovules of apomictic plants produce asexual totipotent cells. these form in the nucellus, chalaza or integuments, and embryos develop from them either directly  or after 2n embryo sac  formation . apomictic  es usually resemble sexual es, but embryony in them occurs parthenogenetically and often precociously. whether in sexual plants or apomicts, embryony is the result of epigenome modifications that begin as early as floral transition  <cit> .

gametophytic apomixis is further divided into i) apospory, where the 2n aposporous es  forms from a cell of the nucellus, chalaza or rarely an integument, and ii) diplospory, where the 2n es forms from an ameiotic megasporocyte . the formation of viable seed in apomicts requires the formation of functional endosperm, and this occurs pseudogamously or autonomously, i.e. with or without fertilization of the es central cell, respectively. in adventitious embryony, a sexual es with functional endosperm forms from which the developing adventitious embryo derives nutrients. the sexual embryo may survive and compete for nutrients with adventitious embryos  <cit> .

apomixis in angiosperms occurs in polyploids or polyhaploids and is found in  <dig> of  <dig> orders . though widespread, it occurs infrequently, being reported in only  <dig> genera ,  <dig> of which belong to the poaceae. of these,  <dig> belong to the panicoideae, which is a large and ancient subfamily of grasses many members of which, including sorghum l. , have undergone few chromosome rearrangements and no whole genome duplications since a whole genome duplication occurred  <dig> million years ago that differentiated grasses from other monocots  <cit> . accordingly, sorghum is an anciently diploidized paleotetraploid . it is divided into five subgenera, sorghum, chaetosorghum, heterosorghum, parasorghum and stiposorghum. subgenus sorghum includes perennial s. halapense pers. , perennial s. propinquum  hitchc. , and annual s. bicolor  moench . the latter is divided into subsp. bicolor , subsp. drummondii , and subsp. verticilliflorum . subspecies bicolor is further divided into five races, bicolor, guinea, caudatum, kafir and durra, and  <dig> intermediate races  <cit> .

low frequency aes formation occurs in several subsp. bicolor lines  <cit> . however, none of the reports provide convincing molecular or cytological evidence of parthenogenesis, and claims to the contrary have met with skepticism  <cit> . in this respect, gustafsson  <cit>  reviewed evidence from several species that the 2n egg in an aes from a plant that rarely produces aes may not be capable of parthenogenesis, an opinion shared by asker and jerling  <cit> . nevertheless, the interrelatedness of panicoideae  <cit>  suggests that the aes formation observed in s. bicolor may be symplesiomorphic with that observed in the fully functional aposporous panicoideae.

in practice sexual and apomictic plants are differentiated by i) cytological analyses of ovule development  <cit> , ii) progeny tests using morphological or molecular markers  <cit> , and iii) flow cytometry of seed nuclei to identify distinguishing embryo to endosperm ploidy level ratios  <cit> . however, several less-distinct traits also differentiate many apomicts from their related sexuals. for example in diplosporous species of tripsacum l.  <cit>  and elymus l.  <cit> , onset of 2n es formation, relative to stage of ovule development, occurs prior to onset of meiosis in related sexuals. whether this is a general phenomenon of diplospory has not been investigated. in aposporous apomicts, the potentially competitive sexual germline is usually terminated by apoptosis from the mmc stage to early sexual es formation. aes formation is detected cytologically as early as the mmc stage to as late as es maturation. timing of apospory is not rigid, and much within species and within plant variation occurs  <cit> . likewise, parthenogenesis occurs prior to flower opening in many apomicts. this has been observed in alchemilla l., aphanes l., taraxacum cass., wikstroemia endl., ochna l., allium l., chondrilla l., hieracium l., crepis l., potentilla l., poa l., elatostema j. r. & g. forst., tripsacum, and parthenium l.  <cit> .

in the present study, we determined onset timing of megasporogenesis  and sexual es formation relative to stage of ovule development for  <dig> genotypes from three populations of s. bicolor. we also determined the frequency of aes formation for each genotype. the genotypes were then grouped according to aes frequency, and the groups were compared based on onset timing of megasporogenesis and sexual es formation. the results suggest that the apospory program in s. bicolor heterochronically accelerates, relative to stage of ovule development, the onset of meiosis and sexual es formation.

RESULTS
ovary and ovule morphometrics
regressions between ovary and ovule lengths at meiosis  and at the 1-nucleate es  and early 8-nucleate es  stages across  <dig> accessions were highly significant. however, the regression equations explained <50% of the variability  at each stage . hence, large and small ovaries contained either large or small ovules, depending on accession, and ovary length only poorly predicted germline stage across accessions. for example, ovaries  <dig>  cm long contained ovules in the meiocyte stage to the maturing es stage depending on accession .

mean  ovule curvatures and areas  were determined at two developmental stages, meiocyte and es <dig>  for  <dig> diploid genotypes and one naturally occurring tetraploid . anova was used to determine which of these two ovule development variables  would most closely correlate with germline stage . the dependent variable, coefficient of variation , was represented by the cv values of  <dig> means,  <dig> for each of the four  method-by-stage combinations . at the meiocyte and es <dig> stages, mean cv values  based on ovule curvature were  <dig>   and  <dig>  , respectively. the corresponding cv values based on ovule area were significantly larger,  <dig>   and  <dig>  , respectively. the main effects  were significant , but the interaction effect was not significant. this analysis indicated that ovule curvature was less variable than ovule area at each germline stage.

two sets of anova were conducted to determine if variation in mean ovule curvature, ovule area, and three ovule area components  varied according to taxonomic group. in the first set, all  <dig> genotypes from  <dig> accessions  were partitioned into seven taxonomic groups, which consisted of the five subsp. bicolor races, accessions of subsp. verticilliflorum, and a group  that contained breeding lines and hybrids . again, ovule curvature was more effective than ovule area in differentiating taxonomic groups, especially at the meiocyte stage. however, distinct partitioning also occurred among taxonomic groups based on the percentage of ovule area represented by the nucellus and integuments . these data further indicate that ovule shape  is more tightly correlated with germline development than is ovule area.

at the meiocyte stage, ovule curvature was most advanced for genotypes of the verticilliflorum group . in addition to strong curvature, the verticilliflorum group also had the largest and smallest percentages of ovule area represented by integuments and nucellus, respectively. as ovules mature, the integuments grow rapidly around the ovule, and consequently a larger proportion of the ovule is composed of integument. these data indicate that onset of meiosis was delayed in the verticilliflorum group compared to other groups . the opposite was observed for the kafirs. here, ovules were only slightly curved at the onset of meiosis, and the integuments and nucellus represented the smallest and largest percentages of ovule area, respectively . hence, in the kafirs, germline development is accelerated compared to other taxonomic groups. variation within taxonomic group was also observed as indicated by highly significant  effects for genotypes nested within taxonomic group and for genotypes nested within accessions . the only insignificant effect was the taxonomic group by germline stage interaction for the percentage of ovule area represented by the germ .

apospory in accessions and mapping populations
nucellar cells normally die adjacent to the expanding embryo sac. in the present study, this progressive process of programmed nucellar cell death began shortly after megasporogenesis and continued until after fertilization when the nucellus was essentially consumed. in ovules of highly aposporous angiosperms, one or more nucellar cell is re-programmed to undergo embryo sac formation. early indications of this reprogramming include an abnormal doubling in size of the nucellar cell and nuclear enlargement  <cit> . in the present study, cells assuming these traits were counted as i) aposporous initials  when they occurred in the micropylar region of the nucellus ), or ii) large stack cells  when they occurred in the chalaza proximal to the mmc, meiocyte, or functional megaspore  . lsc developed from cells at the nucellus chalaza interface and belonged to or were closely associated with the cell file  from which the mmc formed. generally, lsc were much more prevalent than ai .

we defined the fm stage as onset of fm enlargement, which coincided with dm degeneration . we defined the 1-nucleate es stage as acquisition by the fm of a vacuole similar in size to the nucleus. likewise an ai was referred to as an aes once it had produced a similarly large vacuole. aes only rarely formed from lsc . most were derived from ai and formed in the micropylar region. sexual es and aes were further characterized by number of nuclei present .

some ai, lsc and aes did not form until the fm stage. hence, to minimize underestimating apospory, only ovules ranging in development from the fm stage through the es <dig> stage were used in determining ai, aes and lsc frequencies. the es <dig> stage criterion was used because determining the origin of the es  in ovules beyond the es <dig> stage was problematic. in these ovules, megaspores and nucellar cells adjacent to the enlarging es had degenerated.

frequencies of ai, lsc and aes were determined for  <dig> s. bicolor genotypes from  <dig> accessions , a mapping population consisting of  <dig> f <dig>  and a mapping population consisting of  <dig> recombinant inbred lines . correlations between aes and ai and between aes and lsc were higher among genotypes of the accessions than among genotypes of the mapping populations . in all three populations, the frequency of aes formation was more highly correlated with the frequency of ai formation than with the frequency of lsc formation. compared to the genetically diverse accessions, regression r <dig> values between lsc and ai were twice as high in the segregated f <dig> and ril mapping populations . none of the regressions between percentage germline degeneration  and percentages of ai, aes or lsc  was significant.

eleven of the  <dig> diploid genotypes from  <dig> accessions exceeded 3% aes formation . five of these were from breeding lines of subsp. bicolor  and five were from accessions of subsp. verticilliflorum . one, a caudatum, represented all other taxonomic groups . two tests of equality of proportions were conducted. these matched the "other" group  against the breeding lines  and the "other" group against the verticilliflorum . both tests were rejected . hence, apospory was most prevalent in wild land races of subsp. verticilliflorum and in breeding lines of subsp. bicolor.

flow cytometry of leaf tissue was used to determine the ploidy of the  <dig> genotypes that exhibited ≥3% aes formation. ten were diploid, but one, which exhibited the highest aes percentage , was tetraploid . three other genotypes of this accession  were diploid. these diploids had high ai levels relative to other accessions , but only one exhibited an aes frequency >3% . several other genotypes with >3% aes formation were from accessions in which multiple genotypes were analyzed but only one genotype exhibited the high aes level . only two genotypes  exhibited >6% aes formation. eight genotypes exhibited >6% ai formation, one caudatum, three from the breeding lines, and four from subsp. verticilliflorum.

apospory and ovule morphometrics
an objective of the current study was to determine if tendencies for apospory in s. bicolor are associated with other morphometric ovule development variables. to accomplish this, k-means multivariate clustering was used to partition genotypes of accessions, f <dig>  and ril into 3- <dig> groups  with similar frequencies of ai or aes. in all three populations, meiosis and sexual es formation occurred precociously in the groups with the highest aes formation frequencies .

as noted above,  <dig> of  <dig> genotypes from  <dig> accessions exhibited an aes frequency >3%. three of these grouped together to form the highest aes k-means cluster, and the remaining eight clustered together to form the second highest k-means group. both groups underwent meiosis and sexual es formation early  compared to the other k-means groups . two of the three genotypes in the highest aes group were from a single breeding line and the third was a subsp. verticilliflorum genotype. in the second highest group , three were from breeding lines, four were from subsp. verticilliflorum and one was a caudatum . if earliness of meiosis and sexual es formation promoted apospory, a higher frequency apospory should have been observed among the kafirs . however, the kafirs exhibited low ai and aes frequencies. in contrast, five of the  <dig> highest aes-forming genotypes belonged to subsp. verticilliflorum, which on average underwent meiosis later than most of the other taxonomic groups .

ovule area values during meiosis were also significantly lower for the  <dig> highest frequency aes-forming genotypes . this was accompanied by significantly larger percentages of total ovule area represented by the meiocyte . this indicates that in these relatively small non-curved ovules , the sexual meiocyte was actively growing and dividing; and this occurred whether aes were present or not. in contrast, percentage values for ovule area represented by the nucellus and integuments for the two highest aes-forming groups were variable . note from additional file  <dig> that variability among genotypes in clusters was significant. anova were also performed for groups of genotypes defined by k-means clustering using ai frequencies, but significant differences in ovule curvature or area were not detected among these clusters.

ovule curvature data for the meiocyte, es <dig> and es <dig> stages were collected for the  <dig> genotypes of the f <dig> mapping population . as with the accessions, groups of f <dig> with the highest and the next to highest aes formation frequencies  underwent meiosis earlier than the other groups. this precociousness persisted into the es <dig> and es <dig> stages only for genotypes from the highest aes formation group . mean ovule curvatures for k-means clusters based on ai frequencies did not differ significantly at any stage. tests were conducted to determine if f <dig> plants with a low mean ovule curvature exhibited higher aes formation frequencies. for these tests, genotypes of the f <dig> population were clustered  by mean ovule curvature at the meiocyte, es <dig> and es <dig> stages, and anova were performed to determine if differences existed among clusters in frequency of aes formation. the f-values for these analyses were not significant .

precociousness of meiosis and sexual es formation in the highest aes and ai frequency clusters was more distinct among the well segregated f <dig> ril  than among the f <dig> , and the degree of earliness in the two highest aes groups was similar to that observed among the genetically diverse accessions . genotypes with high ai frequencies generally had high aes frequencies . however, several exceptions were observed. two of the eight ril in the highest ai formation group were in the lowest aes formation group. likewise one of six ril in the high aes formation group was in the low ai formation group. genotypes with several ai often did not exhibit aes formation, and some genotypes with relatively high aes formation apparently passed through the ai phase quickly as few ai were observed.

about 30% of the ril clustered into the more and most ai and aes formation groups. in contrast, only about 10% of accessions and f <dig> clustered into the more and most groups. the high percentage of ril in the high aes and ai formation groups affected the ovule curvature dynamics of the entire ril population. this was detected by clustering ril according to mean ovule curvature at the meiocyte and es <dig> stages. clusters of genotypes exhibiting the lowest ovule curvature values  exhibited significantly higher ai and aes frequencies . as noted above, such analyses were not significant for the accessions or for the f <dig> population.

discussion
in grasses, a single ovule develops from the ovary placenta. initially, the ovule primordium  grows inward and perpendicular to the inner ovary wall. as the ovule grows, the nucellus and integuments form and undergo anisotropic curvature downward and away from the developing style . in the present study, ovule curvature values at specific germline stages  were determined and found to be less variable, likely more canalized, than ovule area values. as a result, curvature measurements were superior to area measurements in detecting differences among genotypes in onset timings of germline stages.

meiosis and sexual es formation occurred precociously, relative to stage of ovule development, in high aes-producing plants . this was an unexpected result, and four possible explanations for its occurrence were considered. first, early onset of germline development may trigger apospory, especially in sorghum, which, being a panicoid grass, may already be prone to apospory . however, many genotypes underwent early germline development but were not aposporous. hence, while apospory was a good predictor of early germline development, the latter was a poor predictor of the former .

second, meiotic instabilities due to recent hybridity may trigger apospory and early germline development. as noted above, a disproportionately high percentage of genotypes with >3% aes formation were hybridization-derived breeding lines. however, aposporous activity among the  <dig> genotypes tested  was not correlated with meiocyte abortion, even at p <  <dig> . hence, while hybridity may have increased the frequency of apospory, meiotic instability does not appear to be a factor.

third, heterozygosity, due to recent hybridity, might trigger apospory and early germline development. if this were correct, we would expect apospory and early germline development to decline substantially during the production of the ril population. however, apospory was present among the homozygous f <dig> ril at nearly the same frequency  as in genotypes from the accessions  and f <dig> . thus, hybridity in s. bicolor may bring together different alleles that interact quantitatively to enhance aposporous activity, but heterozygosity does not appear to be important.

fourth, the expression of an apomixis program in s. bicolor, though weak, may cause precocious reproduction, whether apomictic or sexual. this possibility best explains our observations. as noted above, apospory in a given genotype, even at the low frequencies observed herein, was a good predictor of early onset of sexual germline development. the implication is that even though the apospory program was too weak to induce consistent aes formation, it was strong enough to more consistently induce early onset of sexual germline development. while precocious aposporous and diplosporous es formation have been documented in many apomicts  <cit> , to our knowledge the present report is the first to document what may be a controlled heterochronic acceleration of sexual germline development by apomixis. studies using additional sexual plants and closely related facultative apomicts are required to determine if precociousness of sexual reproduction in facultative apomicts is a general phenomenon. for such studies, curvature measurements should be useful in quantifying stages of ovule development.

phenological traits other than ovule development also differentiate some apomicts from related sexuals. early flowering is one. in the netherlands, peak flowering of apomictic taraxacum occurred  <dig> and  <dig> d earlier than that observed for sympatric diploid sexuals on south and north facing slopes, respectively  <cit> . early flowering in apomicts was also observed among  <dig> apomictic and  <dig> sexual angiospermous species in sweden. here, a significantly higher proportion of apomicts  flowered in the early spring  <cit> . early flowering was also observed in natural sympatric populations of sexual and apomictic antennaria gaertn., boechera Á. löve & d. löve, and elymus. for antennaria, boechera, elymus as well as tripsacum, flowering not only occurred earlier in the apomicts but tended to continue indefinitely when grown continuously in ideal greenhouse conditions. in contrast, more specific environments were required to induce flowering in related sexuals . these examples coupled with findings presented herein, of a precocious meiosis and sexual es formation, suggest that sexual dimorphism in plants  may be more life-cycle-pervasive than previously recognized. sexual dimorphism at the transcriptome level  was recently reported between male and female silene l.  <cit> .

the precocity of temporally distinct life-cycle events  may have evolved independently in apomicts. however, asker and jerling  <cit>  doubted this stating that a fitness-based rationale for such directional selection at different life-cycle stages is lacking. alternatively, the evidence to date is consistent with the existence of an apomixis program that epigenetically controls, throughout the life cycle, onset timings of temporally divergent reproduction-related events . in cyclically apomictic animals, e.g., certain water fleas, aphids, flatworms, rotifers, gall wasps, gall midges, and beetles, favorable environments induce a greatly accelerated rate of reproduction through apomictic live-birth parthenogenesis. but when these same individuals encounter stress, the apomixis program is suppressed, and sexual reproduction, through the formation of quiescent and stress-tolerant eggs, occurs  <cit> . tendencies toward a similar cyclical apomixis in plants have been reported. where this has been studied, percentage sexual es formation was highest when plants were grown in suboptimal conditions . examples include facultative apomicts of i) boechera, where sexual es formation was most frequent in stressed inflorescences  <cit> , ii) calamagrostis adans., where sexual es formation was most frequent in early-forming spikelets  <cit> , iii) ageratina spach  <cit>  and limonium mill.  <cit> , where sexual es formation was most frequent in plants exposed to cold stress, iv) dichanthium willem.  <cit> , where sexual es formation was most prevalent when these short-day plants were grown in long days, and v) paspalum l.  <cit>  and brachiaria  griseb.  <cit> , where frequency of sexual es formation was highest for plants grown in conditions unfavorable for flowering.

the hypothesis that apomixis evolves repeatedly in eukaryotes by a hybridization or polyploidization induced genetic or epigenetic uncoupling of sexual stages, where some stages are discarded and others are fortuitously retained and re-coupled  <cit> , has received serious consideration  <cit> . however, a reliance on fortuity at the molecular level is a troubling component of this hypothesis, and the hypothesis in general is inconsistent with the observation that apomixis has failed to arise spontaneously  among many tens of thousands of intra and inter-specific hybrids and amphiploids that have been produced artificially during the past  <dig> years. herein, we suggest that the apparent uncoupling/recoupling process is not fortuitous but evidence of an ancient sex/apomixis switch  the molecular components of which have been retained, to a greater or lesser extent, in relatively few eukaryote lineages during evolution. hybridization and polyploidization may occasionally epigenetically trigger the switch  but only in lineages that have retained, at the molecular level, a sufficient capacity for each mechanism. if this ancient alternatives hypothesis is correct, apomixis may be more complex than previously envisioned. it may be a life-cycle phenomenon, like sexual reproduction, that includes resetting the epigenetic clock each generation. accordingly, apomixis in eukaryotes would share a common fundamental theme, i.e., the formation of unreduced and epigenetically reset parthenogenetically active cells from germline cells or closely associated cells .

similarities in the environmental control of the sex/apomixis switch between cyclically apomictic animals and facultatively apomictic plants that exhibit cyclical apomixis tendencies were recognized in the 1960s  <cit> . these similarities suggest that the unicellular common ancestor of plants and animals was cyclically apomictic or at least possessed processes by which cyclical apomixis could evolve by parallel evolution. in this respect, the precocious meiosis and sexual es formation observed in the present study  may be regulated by the same epigenetic network that induces early flowering in apomicts, a reproductive step occurring much earlier in the life cycle, as well as precocious embryogenesis from parthenogenetic eggs  <cit> , a reproductive step occurring much later in the life cycle. molecular studies are required to evaluate these possibilities.

CONCLUSIONS
much variation was found among s. bicolor accessions in timing of germline development relative to ovary and ovule development. in this respect, ovule curvature appeared to be strongly canalized, and was more consistent than ovule area in predicting onset timing of specific germline events. aes formation was most prevalent in subsp. verticilliflorum and in the breeding lines of subsp. bicolor. it was uncommon in races of subsp. bicolor. correlations between aes and ai were lower than expected, which suggests that additional factors are required for aes formation. meiosis and sexual es formation occurred precociously in genotypes with high aes frequencies. aes formation did not appear to be triggered by early onset of sexual germline development, meiotic instabilities or heterozygosity. instead, a weakly expressed apomixis program in certain genotypes appeared to accelerate onset of reproduction, whether apomictic or sexual.

the present study adds onset of meiosis and sexual es formation to onset of the vegetative/floral transition, apomictic es formation, and parthenogenesis as processes that occur early in apomictic plants. the temporally diverse nature of these events suggests that an epigenetic memory of the apomixis status of the plant exists, which is maintained throughout the life cycle . in some plants, as in cyclically apomictic animals, this memory is degraded by reproductively marginal  conditions. the result is an increased frequency of progeny that are produced sexually.

apomictic plants share developmental and phenological traits characteristic of apomictic organisms from other kingdoms. these include i) a first division apomeiotic restitution , ii) parthenogenesis, iii) precocious onset of reproduction, and iv) tendencies toward cyclical apomixis. in cyclically apomictic animals and in plants exhibiting cyclical apomixis tendencies, sex is favored during stress and genetically reduced quiescent eggs are produced. in the same individuals, apomixis drives clonal fecundity during reproductively favorable conditions. the quiescent egg phase is skipped: cyclically apomictic animals, which produce quiescent eggs when reproducing sexually, undergo live birth, and the parthenogenetic eggs of apomictic plants produce embryos precociously. whether apomicts from diverse kingdoms share molecular components of a conserved apomixis/sex switch is a question that awaits further elucidation. such a finding would imply that apomixis is more ancient and more complex than previously envisioned.

