BACKGROUND
the ability of the euryhaline fish to adapt to a broad range of aquatic environmental salinities is an interesting phenomenon of adaptive homeostatic response that is crucial for survival and therefore provides an excellent model for investigating iono-osmoregulation and its molecular plasticity. understanding the euryhalinity of fish could provide evolutionary perspective into the adaptation of fish in various aquatic environments including the great divide between the freshwater and marine species  <cit>  while probing deeper into its molecular plasticity would yield insight into the versatile iono-osmoregulatory mechanism and control  <cit> . in turn, it would enhance our understanding of iono-osmoregulation from the molecular, cellular, tissue-organ, systems to whole-organism levels, which may contribute to fishery, environmental and even biomedical research. to be euryhaline, the fish must be able to cope with salt depletion and water gain when it is in freshwater , and deal with osmotic water loss and salt gain when it is in seawater  or hypersaline water . euryhalinity therefore requires extreme versatility in the switching of iono-osmoregulatory mechanisms and cellular remodeling in iono-osmoregulatory tissue-organ in response to changes in environmental salinity  <cit> .

the fish gill is a major iono-osmoregulatory organ and is therefore a principal site for entry and departure of ion and water molecules between its internal fluid and its external environment  <cit> . as part of the iono-osmoregulatory mechanism, the gills are actively sequestering salt and minimizing water gain when in fw environment, while in sw the gills are actively extruding excess salt and minimizing water loss into the external environment. the ability to sequester or extrude salt against concentration gradient in fw and sw, respectively, are performed by specialized distinct cell types which occupy the epithelial layer of the gill  <cit> . embedded in the plasma membrane of these cells are specific transporters and channels that worked collaboratively to ensure selective movement of ions across the epithelial layer of the gill . for a euryhaline fish to move from fw to sw environment or vice versa, it would have to remodel the cellular landscape of the gill by changing cell types along with their transporters/channels and intercellular organization in order to cope with the reversed iono-osmoregulatory challenges. it is this versatility in cellular remodeling along with the transporters and channels within the gills in response to salinity challenge that is partly responsible for euryhalinity in fish.

the mozambique tilapia oreochromis mossambicus has versatile iono-osmoregulatory ability that enables it to live in both fw  and sw , and can tolerate extreme hypersalinity of up to 80–120 ppt, i.e. about 3– <dig> fold the salinity of sw. this makes mozambique tilapia among the few remarkable successful teleost species inhabiting extreme hypersaline environment  <cit> . the versatility of the tilapia to iono-osmoregulate across a broad range of extreme salinity has been the focus of many studies ranging from physiological, morphological, biochemical to molecular levels. recent reviews had documented studies investigating iono-osmoregulatory changes in, although not limited to, tilapia gills and interested readers are advised to refer to them for details  <cit> . while many of the studies had been elegantly executed, most of them had focused mainly on several key molecules or parameters hence yielding important, albeit limited, perspectives of the iono-osmoregulation changes in response to different environmental salinities. an earlier attempt to capture a broader molecular perspective employing suppression subtractive hybridization approach reported  <dig> genes associated with  <dig> molecular processes with immediate response to salinity challenge in o. mossambicus gills  <cit> . the study was focused on immediate response to salinity challenge that occurred few hours after transfer to sw hence detecting only early gene responses and not those involved in gill salt transport in acclimated state. moreover, the suppression subtractive hybridization approach is low-throughput and is only sensitive to detect high abundant transcript changes, and the challenges of annotating partial sequences in non-model organism at the time of the study may have limited the identification of more genes. this was similarly reflected in two other osmoregulation studies on non-model euryhaline fish species subjected to salinity challenge; one study on the european eel anguilla anguilla, employed a combination of subtracted libraries and cdna arrays, identified  <dig> known genes differentially expressed in various tissues of eel acclimated to sw  <cit> , while another early response study on estuarine goby gillichthys mirabilis employed cdna arrays and identified  <dig> known genes that were differentially expressed within the first 12 hours of salinity challenge  <cit> . a recent study  <cit>  reported the japanese eel anguilla japonica’s gill transcriptome generated from a single library consisting of samples pooled together from fw and after a short-term 6 hour exposure in sw, hence did not provide transcriptomic differences between gills acclimated in fw and sw; the study focused mainly on the proteome differences of short term salinity challenge. therefore, to date there has not been a study that successfully captures the euryhaline teleost gill transcriptomic-wide changes in response to salinity.

in this study, we employed next-generation sequencing  technology to sequence and de novo assembled the gill transcriptome of euryhaline mozambique tilapia acclimated in fw and sw environments. the aim of this study is to identify transcriptomic differences associated with changes in fw- and sw-acclimated gills within a single species. with increasing quality throughput in ngs technology and improvement in algorithm used for de novo sequence assembly, it is possible to capture the gill transcriptome in almost its entirety. our differential transcriptomic analyses revealed a plethora of transcripts including many that are encoding inorganic ion transporters/channels and a myriad of signaling pathways involved in cellular remodeling that are operating in fw and sw acclimated tilapia gill. since mozambique tilapia has the ability to tolerate hypersalinity, we performed additional experiments using a new batch of fish acclimated to fw , sw  and hsw  and validated the ngs data and obtained further insights on how representative genes behave in gills subjected to extreme hypersalinity challenge. although changes in transcript abundance need not translate to corresponding changes in protein abundance, nevertheless, this study has provided an unprecedented view into the transcriptomic changes and identified many transcripts encoding proteins that could potentially alter biological signaling and processes in gills under hypo- and hyper-osmostic environments. to our best knowledge, this is the first ngs study that had provided a differential transcriptome-wide perspective in gills of a euryhaline fish acclimated to fw and sw.

RESULTS
sequencing and de novoassembly of fw and sw gill transcriptomes
to identify transcriptomic differences associated with changes in fw- and sw-acclimated gills, we sampled gill tissues from mozambique tilapias that had acclimated in their respective fw and sw environments for 3 weeks. we extracted total rna from the gill tissues of the fw and sw groups and pooled four of the highest quality rna samples from each group for preparation of the respective fw and sw cdna libraries. each cdna library was prepared from fragmented poly-a rnas that were enriched from the pooled total rnas for paired-end sequencing  on illumina hiseq  <dig> platform . after sequencing and quality checks, more than  <dig> million paired reads and  <dig> million paired reads were obtained from the fw gill and sw gill cdna libraries, respectively . since there is no genome assembly for o mossambicus, we assembled a common reference gill trancriptome using the total  <dig> million paired reads combined from both fw gill and sw gill libraries to serve as a reference for subsequent annotation and read mapping of transcript expression.figure  <dig> 
summary statistics of sequencing output and
de novo
assembly of the combined fw&sw gill transcriptome of
oreochromis mossambicus
.  schematic overview of sequencing outputs and de novo assembly of the combined fw&sw gill transcriptome using 2x101-bp paired-end reads from freshwater  and seawater  gill libraries.  distribution  of assembled contigs with different contig length . included are contig lengths for n- <dig>  n- <dig> and n- <dig>   distribution  of assembled contigs with different average coverage. note steep and gradual change in contig counts or proportion with average coverage less than and above 20-fold .



the combined fw&sw gill transcriptome was generated by performing de novo assembly using clc bio genomics workbench  on the combined fw&sw library . a total of  <dig>  contigs were assembled which corresponded to a total contig length of approximately  <dig> mbp . the average contig length was 645 bp and the n <dig> contig length was 901 bp. the contig length distribution ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  bp. with the exception of  <dig> contigs, all assembled contigs were longer than 200 bp in length . approximately  <dig> % of the contigs have an average coverage of 100-fold or greater, and a cumulative  <dig> % have 20-fold or greater, while the remaining have less than 20-fold average coverage . it was observed that the contig count increased gradually  between average coverage  <dig> to 100-fold but had increased markedly  when average coverage is below 20-fold . this indicates that a large proportion of the contigs was assembled from relatively low number of reads as the software attempted to maximise contig assembly. since low coverage contigs are more susceptible to noise and spurious assembly, it could have contributed to the sudden large increase in contig count observed when average coverage is below 20-fold. therefore, 20-fold average coverage appeared to be a good cut-off for greater confidence in the quality of the assembled contigs.

in silicoevaluation of combined fw&sw gill transcriptome
to further evaluate the quality of the assembled contigs, we downloaded  <dig> sanger-sequenced complete coding sequences of o. mossambicus from ncbi database and we performed blastn using these sequences against the combined fw&sw gill transcriptome . the findings are summarized in figure  <dig> . we first described the distribution of the  <dig> sanger full-length sequences based on the blastn e-value of the best hit . next, within different blastn e-value groups, the distribution of the sanger sequences were further partitioned into groups based on their full-length size , the percentage hit length  and average coverage of the best hit . these distributions would provide an overview on the representation of various full-length coding sequences within the combined fw&sw gill transcriptome.figure  <dig> 
in silico
evaluation of the combined fw&sw gill transcriptome using blastn with  <dig> full-length sanger coding sequences of
oreochromis mossambicus
.  percentage distribution  of the  <dig> sanger sequences with respective best hit grouped within different blastn e-value range. the x- and y-axes labels in panel  applied to all other panels.  percentage distribution  of the  <dig> sanger sequences with different percentage hit length grouped within different blastn e-value range.  percentage distribution  of the  <dig> sanger sequence with different full length sizes  grouped within different blastn e-value range.  percentage distribution  of the  <dig> sanger sequences with respective best hit having different average coverage grouped within different blastn e-value range.



among the  <dig> sanger sequences,  <dig>  had excellent hits  aligned with the assembled contigs while  <dig>  had good hits , and the remaining  <dig> sequences  had lower homology hits  . the findings indicate that 80%  of the sanger sequences were represented within e-value <  <dig> e- <dig>  among the  <dig> sanger sequences with excellent hits , these full-length sequences are of various sizes  which  <dig> out of  <dig> are longer than 1000 bp compared to  <dig> out of  <dig> for sanger sequences with good hits  . taken together, more than half  of the sanger sequences with hits within e-value <  <dig> e- <dig> were greater than 1000 bp which further suggests that both short and long coding sequences were represented within the assembly. moreover, it was found that among the  <dig> sanger sequences with excellent hits ,  <dig> of the coding sequences had their full length in perfect  alignment with the best hit  while  <dig> had greater than 75% of their coding sequence aligned and the remaining  <dig> coding sequences had less than 75% aligned . although these assembled contigs had less than 100% alignment because they were shorter than the full-length coding sequences, the average hit length of the aligned regions was about 1082 bp . the analysis indicates that full-length and long partial length transcripts of o. mossambicus were represented in the assembled contigs. it was also noted that  <dig> out of the  <dig> sanger sequences had excellent hits  with average coverage >100-fold, compared to  <dig> out of  <dig> for sanger sequences that had good hits  . this suggests that many of the o. mossambicus sequences represented within  <dig> e- <dig> have high average coverage. full-length representation by the assembled contigs included sanger sequences of 459 bp to 3456 bp and had average coverage of  <dig> to  <dig> -fold .

those sanger sequences that had lower homology hits  had average alignment of  <dig> %  and the average length of the aligned region was about 45 bp . these low homology hits may have occurred by chance as suggested by their poor e-values and relatively short alignments between the hit  and the sanger sequence. moreover, several of the sanger sequences are not known to be expressed in gill tissues such as those that encode gonadal specific proteins and they had hits with very low coverage . this is apparent in that 67%  of the hits with poor e-value had average coverage less than 20-fold which is very low when compared to house-keeping or abundantly expressed genes such as beta-actin, ribosomal protein l <dig>  protein kinase c receptor, nucleoside diphosphate kinase which had average coverage greater than  <dig> -fold based on our ngs data. transcripts associated with molecular transport such as nka alpha subunit  <dig>  nkcc1a cotransporter, and chloride-like channel  <dig>  which are known to express in the gill tissues had average coverage of hundreds to thousands of fold. taken together, the analysis further indicates specificity and representation of transcripts of various abundances within the assembled fw&sw gill transcriptome.

in silicoannotation of combined fw&sw gill transcriptome
to facilitate functional annotation of the combined fw&sw gill transcriptome, we performed blastx using assembled contigs having 20-fold or greater average coverage because low coverage contigs are more susceptible to noise and therefore increases the likelihood of spurious assembly. the selected  <dig> contigs that have 20-fold or greater average coverage were blastx to o. niloticus  protein database, danio rerio  protein database and ncbi homo sapiens  non-redundant  protein database for annotation and comparison purpose . the o. niloticus database was chosen because it is the species most closely related to o. mossambicus, and d. rerio database was chosen for comparison purpose with a fish model that is more distantly related, while human database is chosen for its extensive annotation useful for knowledge-based data mining. the findings showed that blastx to o. niloticus database consistently yielded the highest number of mapped contigs and unique identifiers, and this was followed by zebrafish database and human nr database . species with closer phylogenetic relationship with o. mossambicus such as o. niloticus, followed by d. rerio, would yield higher number of contigs and unique identifiers with higher homology hits compared to human that is of greater phylogenetic distance. the number of unique identifiers that were mapped to human and zebrafish databases is comparable at e-value ≤  <dig> e- <dig>  however, the number of unique identifiers mapped to human exceeded that of zebrafish at e-value between  <dig> e- <dig> to  <dig> e- <dig>  this is due to the higher number of unique identifiers that are of lower homology as a result of phylogenetic distance when blastx to human database. moreover, the human nr database having extensively annotated would have a larger number of sequences, therefore providing more opportunity for lower homology hits. the number of unique identifiers estimated in the fw&sw gill transcriptome at e-value ≤  <dig> e- <dig> is within the range, if not too far from the range of 11000– <dig> protein-coding genes expressed in transcriptomes of various human and mouse tissues  <cit>  although direct comparison is not possible due to different databases and data processing approach used. at e-value <  <dig> e- <dig> and e-value <  <dig> e- <dig>  the o. mossambicus fw&sw gill transcriptome has contigs that mapped to  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, of the unique identifiers found in o. niloticus protein database. this suggests that the o. mossambicus fw&sw gill transcriptome may be useful for aiding the annotation of the o. niloticus databases using high homology sequences . since tilapia identifiers are not supported by existing knowledge-based data mining software, and the human database is perhaps the best annotated with research data and supported by a wide range of software, human homologs were used to facilitate subsequent functional annotation and analyses. we adopted a more conservative e-value ≤ <dig> e- <dig> to gain greater confidence of the human homologs used in the subsequent functional analyses. approximately  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the contigs that were mapped to human homologs at e-value ≤ <dig> e- <dig>  have equivalent e-value ≤ <dig> e- <dig> and e-value ≤ <dig> e- <dig>  respectively, when blastx to o. niloticus protein database. this shows that the assembled contigs selected for functional analysis are of high homology to protein sequences found in the human and o. niloticus databases.table  <dig> 
blastx of combined fw&sw assembled contigs mapped to
oreochromis niloticus
,
danio rerio
and
homo sapiens
protein databases





*total selected contigs  = <dig>  percentage of total selected contigs =  x 100%.

**percentage of nile tilapia protein database =  x 100%. percentage of zebrafish protein database =  x 100%. direct blastx to the ncbi human non-redundant database were used and information on exact number of sequence is not available, therefore percentage of human nr database is not determined.



functional annotation analysis of transcriptomic differences between fw gill and sw gill
to determine the relative transcriptomic differences in fw gill and sw gill, the reads from each library were mapped with high stringency back to the combined fw&sw gill transcriptome. approximately,  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the reads from respective fw and sw libraries were mapped back to the combined fw&sw gill transcriptome. the read counts of fw and sw libraries for each contig were expressed in rpkm values and the expression ratio  was estimated for each contig . contigs which have e-value ≤  <dig> e- <dig> when blastx to human nr database and average coverage ≥ 20-fold as well as  <dig> -fold difference in expression value  between sw and fw gills were considered differentially expressed contigs that have high homology to a known human gene. using these criteria, we obtained  <dig> and  <dig> human homolog identifiers that were differentially expressed in fw and sw gills, respectively . the human homologs were then used for knowledge-based data mining via ingenuity pathway analysis  software and the findings are summarized in figures  <dig> and  <dig> 

the annotation for cellular localization and known functions of the human homologs indicates that fw gills has relatively larger proportion of transcripts encoding proteins that are found on the plasma membrane and extracellular space when compared to sw gills which has greater abundance of transcripts encoding nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins . further analysis revealed that fw gills has markedly higher proportion of transcripts encoding g-protein coupled receptors , transmembrane receptors , growth factors , cytokines , ion channels , ligand-dependent nuclear receptor  when compared to sw gills which in turn has more abundant transcripts encoding translation regulators , metabolic enzymes  and transporters  . analysis on the biological functions suggests that both fw and sw gills were significantly  enriched with transcripts encoding proteins associated with cellular function and maintenance, cellular movement, cellular morphology, cellular assembly and organization, cell death and survival, post-translational modification, molecular transport, carbohydrate, vitamin and mineral metabolisms . the percentage of transcripts encoding proteins associated with these biological functions was  <dig> to 12-fold higher in fw gills compared to sw gills. in addition, fw gills alone were significantly enriched with transcripts encoding proteins associated with cellular growth and proliferation, cellular development, cell-to-cell signaling and interaction. in contrast, sw gills alone were significantly enriched with transcripts encoding proteins associated with cell cycle, dna replication, recombination, and repair, protein synthesis, rna post-transcriptional modification, protein trafficking, energy production, lipid, nucleic acid and amino acid metabolisms. the analysis provides us a differential transcriptomic perspective that suggests different type of encoded proteins and their associated biological functions were enriched based on the differences in relative abundance of transcripts between fw and sw gills. even so, the enrichment of a biological function in one condition merely suggests greater relative abundance of transcripts for the encoded proteins associated with the biological function and it does not necessary mean the absence of this biological function operating in the condition that is not enriched.figure  <dig> 
functional annotation analyses of the combined fw&sw gill transcriptome of
oreochromis mossambicus
.  distribution  of the putative human homolog encoded proteins within different sub-cellular locations.  distribution of the putative human homolog encoded proteins according to their functional type.  biological functions that were significantly  enriched with putative human homolog proteins encoded by the assembled contiq sequences used in the analysis. the dotted line refers to –log <dig> bh p-value =  <dig>  which is equivalent bh p-value =  <dig>  and all the solid lines above the dotted lines have  adjusted p-value <  <dig> .
canonical signaling pathways that were significantly  enriched with putative human homolog proteins encoded by the assembled contiq sequences used in the analysis. proportion  of the signaling pathway being represented by the human homolog encoded proteins is been indicated on the x-axis. refer to additional file for complete list.



deeper analysis revealed underlying canonical signaling pathways that might be driving these biological functions in fw and sw gills . it was found that signaling pathways involving rhoa and other rho family gtpases, tight junction signaling and caveolae-mediated endocytosis were significantly  enriched in both fw and sw gills. these signaling pathways are known to be involved in cellular function and maintenance, cellular movement and morphology, cellular assembly and organization identified in figure 3c. more importantly, rhoa signaling by rho gtpases regulates actin polymerization  <cit>  which in turn affects tight junction via caveolae-mediated endocytosis and alters the intercellular permeability of the epithelial layer  <cit> . the enrichment of these signaling pathways in both fw and sw gills underscored their importance in regulating paracellular permeability of the gills. it has been proposed that tight junctions affect paracellular permeability to sodium ions in sw and fw gills  <cit>  and the expression of tight junction proteins such as claudins was altered in fw and sw gills  <cit> . in agreement with tipsmark et al.  <cit> , our data showed that human homolog claudin  <dig> was more abundant in fw gills than sw gills. moreover, our findings suggest different sets of human homologs including claudins and tight junctions are acting in these signaling pathways to bring about the differences in paracellular permeability of the gills acclimated in fw and sw environments.

in fw environment, the gills are subjected to hypo-osmotic stress with excessive water gain and salt loss. in response to the hypo- osmotic stress, signaling pathways related cell morphology and cell volume regulation will be up-regulated to reduce water gain and adjust cell volume. moreover, signaling pathways involved in the remodeling of the cellular landscape by increasing ionocytes with ability to sequester and reabsorb salt lost to the low ionic environment are anticipated to be up-regulated. consequently, signaling pathways that were enriched only in fw gills involved actin cytoskeleton, integrin, gap junction, ilk, paxillin, fak, wnt/β-catenin, and also various cell signaling pathways such as those involving pak, erk/mapk, protein kinase a, calcium, sapk/jnk, and g-protein coupled receptor . these signaling pathways could play important roles in cellular adhesion, movement and morphology in response to osmotic stress as had been documented in other cell types  <cit> . in agreement with previous studies  <cit> , our analysis indicated that transcripts associated with mapk signaling, an important pathway in osmotic stress response, abound in fw gill and they were down-regulated in sw gill of tilapia. interestingly, it has been proposed that osmotic stress may act as signals, either directly or indirectly via cell volume changes, that could induce cell proliferation and differentiation as well as programmed cell death  <cit> . signaling pathways associated with cellular growth, proliferation and development such as axonal guidance, fgf, growth hormone, angiopoeitin, igf- <dig>  ephrin receptor and sonic hedgehog, were enriched in fw gills only . in determining cell death and survival are pten signaling, 14-3-3-mediated signaling, sapk/jnk signaling which were also enriched in fw gills only. it is noteworthy that in the euryhaline killifish , the expression of 14-3-3a isoform and its protein had been demonstrated to be more abundant in fw after 24 h or 48 h transfer from sw  <cit> . consistent with their findings  <cit> , the present study showed that transcripts associated with 14-3- <dig> signaling pathway were more abundant in fw when compared to sw even after long term acclimation. besides cell death and proliferation, 14-3- <dig> proteins have been implicated in iono-regulation involving h+-atpase, nka, and chloride channels  <cit> . the signaling pathway associated with prolactin is known to be involved in fw osmoregulation  <cit> . it has been observed that both prolactin receptor  <dig> and  <dig> are expressed at higher levels in the gills of o. mossambicus acclimated long term in fw compared to sw  <cit> . prolactin has been shown to restore the expression of branchial ncc mrna levels and its encoded protein in immuno-histologically stained ionocytes of hypophysectomized o. mossambicus suggesting its essential role in the recruitment of branchial ncc-expressing ionocytes during fw acclimation  <cit> . these studies corroborated with the enriched prolactin signaling in gills of long-term fw acclimated o. mossambicus observed in the present study. although their precise mechanistic roles in gill epithelial cells are less clear, the renin-angiotensin and ‘aldosterone-like’ signaling pathways enriched in fw gill are associated with electrolyte and fluid homeostasis hence related to volume regulation in fish as observed in higher vertebrate  <cit> . the various signaling pathways represented in the fw gill suggest multiple signals acting in concert via osmotic stress signaling to balance cell proliferation, growth and development with cell death and survival. this is in agreement with recent studies reporting different signaling molecules involved in the development and functional regulation of ionocytes in fw species such as zebrafish  and medaka  <cit> .

in sw environment, fish needs to replace water loss to the hyper-osmotic environment by imbibing salt water and absorbing it via the intestinal tract, whereby water is retained in the body and excess salt is extruded via the gill. consequently, the gills need to increase the amount of specialized ionocytes enriched with mitochondria to actively extrude the excess salt against concentration gradient. in coping with hyper-osmotic stress and the energetically demanding salt extrusion, the increased cellular metabolism and mitochondrial activities could lead to oxidative stress resulting in cellular damage and turnover. in turn, signaling for dna replication and repair, protein synthesis and degradation as well as cell cycle regulation are increased. therefore, it was found that canonical signaling pathways that were enriched only in sw gill are mainly associated with the following categories: cell cycle and cell division; dna replication, recombination and repair; metabolism and energy production; protein synthesis and degradation . our findings corroborated with previous reports on remodeling of cellular landscape by increasing ionocytes in tilapia gills under salinity challenge or hyperosmostic stress . these ionocytes are responsible for active ion transport in gills which require increase cellular metabolism and energy hence they are mitochondrion-rich  <cit> . this likely contributed to the enrichment of canonical pathway associated with mitochondria activities, tca cycle and lipid  metabolism. the increase of ionocytes is a result of increase mitotic activity to increase its cellular capacity to iono-regulate  <cit> . this further explains the enrichment of many canonical pathways associated with cell cycle in sw gill such as cell cycle control of chromosomal replication, cell cycle regulation by btg family proteins, ran signaling, cyclins and cell cycle regulation, mitotic roles of polo-like kinase, cell cycle: g1/s checkpoint regulation and cell cycle: g2/m dna damage checkpoint regulation. moreover, hyperosmolality has been reported to cause dna damage in the form of dna double-strand breaks and oxidative base modification that are recognized by the cellular genome integrity surveillance machinery  <cit> . this is in agreement with the enrichment of canonical pathways such as dna double-strand break repair, mismatch repair in eukaryotes and role of brca <dig> in dna damage response in sw gill. besides dna damage, hyperosmolality also causes oxidative stress and protein damage  <cit>  which could have resulted in the enrichment of canonical pathways such as mitochondria dysfunction, nrf2-mediated oxidative stress response and protein ubiquitination. this corroborates with studies reporting that the turnover rate of ionocytes in gills under salinity challenge is faster than in fw gill  <cit>  which further explains the high level of transcripts associated with cell cycle, mitosis, dna replication and repair, as well as mitochondrial energy metabolism. these enriched signaling pathways represent the concerted efforts of the sw gill to remodel and maintain the cellular landscape to better iono-regulate in the hyperosmotic environment.

taken together, the analysis revealed a myriad of signaling pathways in fw gill coordinating the balance of cellular maintenance, volume/size adjustment, adhesion, morphology, renewal, growth and development under hypo-osmotic stress while the sw gill abounded with transcripts encoding proteins associated with signaling pathways that drive and maintain the cellular remodelled landscape with increased ionocytes to cope with the higher cellular turn-over rate and iono-regulatory demands under hyper-osmostic stress. the differential transcriptomic analyses revealed for the first time the transcriptomic differences between the gills of tilapia acclimated in fw and sw, hence expanding our view from a relatively few well-studied molecules to a plethora of transcripts in association with various biological functions and specific canonical signaling pathways. since the transcript homologs used in the analysis are of high homology  to human, it can be assumed with confidence that these signaling pathways are conserved and are actively operating in the fish gills.

transcripts associated with inorganic ion channels and transporters in fw and sw gills
in our interest to identify additional transcripts encoding ion channels and transporters that might be differentially expressed in the fw and sw gills, we selected human homologs that had been functionally annotated as ‘ion channel’ or ‘transporter’ by ipa. from the list, we further confirmed and selected out those that are associated with inorganic ion movement based on functional description in entrez/ncbi gene and genecard databases . in total, we identified  <dig> and  <dig> human homologs in fw and sw gills, respectively . among these ion channels and transporters,  <dig> of them were likely to have isoforms in fw and sw as they have different identifiers when blastx to ncbi human non-redundant database suggesting minor sequence difference between the isoforms although they were mapped to similar human gene symbols by ipa. our list identified ion channels and transporters that are well studied, and also those that are lesser known, for their iono-regulatory roles in the gill. for illustration purpose, we have presented all the identified ion channels and transporters of human homologs in simplified figures  although in actual these genes and their encoded proteins are expressed in different combinations in different cell types as reported in gill epithelia of fw and/or sw teleosts. ion channels or transporters where their subcellular localization are well established or have been reported in tilapia are shown in figure  <dig> although some of these proteins may be found in different subcellular localizations when in different cell types or in different species as discussed below.figure  <dig> 
schematic view of selected inorganic ion channels and transporters encoded by genes identified as differentially expressed in gill epithelia of tilapia
oreochromis mossambicus
acclimated in  freshwater  or  seawater . in actual, the simplified epithelial layer is made up of various cell types  and the genes encoding these proteins are expressed in different combinations in different cell types. some of these proteins may be found in different subcellular localizations in different cell types or in different species. ion channels or transporters where their subcellular localization are well established or have been reported in tilapia are represented in orange oval with solid line. ion channels or transporters that are lesser known in fish are represented in purple oval with dotted line. asterisks ‘*’ refer to putative isoforms arose from unique contigs that were mapped to identifiers assigned with the same gene symbol and appeared to be differentially expressed in both fw and sw gills. ‘?’ indicates unconfirmed or potential subcellular localization based on its putative identity. for more details refer to the text and additional file  <dig> 



in low-ionic and hypo-osmotic fw, the gill needs to reduce salt loss and water gain. to reduce salt loss, ion transporters that can aid in sequestering and reabsorbing salt from the low ionic fw environment are expressed abundantly in the fw-acclimated gills. several homologs of key ion transporters that aid in reducing salt loss such as ncc and isoforms of nka, nhe, nbc, ae, were identified as over-expressed in our fw gill transcriptome which confirmed previous reports  that these molecules were abundant in the gills of fw-acclimated fish . uptake of na+/cl- from the environment, including ions diffusively lost from adjacent pavement cells, into the gill ionocytes is partly achieved by ncc and nhe located in the apical membrane of different cell types  <cit> . recent evidence suggests that nhe together with ammonia-conducting rh proteins, especially rhcg, located apically play an important role in na+ uptake in fw environment and may couple with ammonia excretion  <cit> . transcript encoding rhbg and rhcg homologs were detected more abundant in fw-acclimated gills . additionally, apical h+-atpase immuno-localized in pavement cells of tilapia gills has been implicated in acid secretion and the generation of apical membrane potential to facilitate na+ uptake by sodium channel  <cit> . interestingly, basolateral h+-atpase has been detected in ionocytes of killifish gills, presumably working together with nka to generate a steeper electrical gradient for absorption of na+ from the low na+ environment  <cit> . the different subcellular localizations may be due to the diverse distributions and functions of h-atpase in different cell types and different species. ncc brings in na+ and cl- by utilizing the low intracellular sodium gradient generated by the nkas which facilitates the basolateral exit na+ into the blood plasma  <cit> . meanwhile, nbcs reported to be located basolaterally in ncc-positive ionocytes  <cit>  could co-transport na+ and hco3- which in turn will aid exit of na+ together with basolateral base  efflux that complements apical acid secretion in regulating intracellular ph. we detected up-regulation of a clcn <dig> homolog which may facilitate basolateral exit of cl- as proposed for some of these chloride-like channels in gills of fw-acclimated tilapia  <cit> . in addition, we have detected two fw-isoforms of anion exchanger  homologs, slc4a <dig> and slc4a <dig> , although their localization remains unclear. the presence of apical ae to aid cl- uptake/hco3- base secretion had been proposed  <cit>  but the specificity of ae <dig> detection was questioned  <cit>  and basolateral ae has been counter-proposed  <cit> . we also detected isoforms of ncx and nkcx homologs which are known to function as basolateral cation exchangers by removing ca2+ out of the cell in exchange of  <dig> na+ alone or with 1na+:1 k+ into the cell. immunohistochemical staining of fw-acclimated tilapia gill had co-localized apical ncc with basolateral nka and nbc in proposed type ii ionocytes  <cit> , as well as apical nhe with basolateral nkcc <dig> and nka in proposed type iii ionocytes  <cit> .

in sw environment, salt gained from the hyperosmotic environment need to be extruded from the gills hence ion transporters that facilitate salt extrusion are anticipated to be over-expressed in sw-acclimated gill. indeed, we were able to detect in abundance the transcript sequences for the three major ion-transporters nka, nkcc <dig> and cftr that are known to be involved in active salt extrusion . a well-accepted model for the salt extrusion involved basolateral nka and nkcc <dig> in specific ionocyte whereby nka transports  <dig> na+ outward in exchange for 2 k+ inward thus creating a low na+ and an electro-negative charged intracellular environment that is used by nkcc <dig> to transport na+, k+ and  <dig> cl- into the cell  <cit> . the cl- leaves the cell via the apical cftr which generates a positive trans-epithelial electrical potential , while the na+ is transported back into the plasma via the basolateral nka, which the na+ then leaves via a paracellular tight junction pathway driven by the positive tep. not surprising, we have detected abundance of transcript sequences for several atp-synthases and transporters operating in the mitochondrion since the ionocytes are enriched with mitochondria to support the active salt extrusion and the number of ionocytes is increased in sw gill. immunohistochemical staining that co-localized apical cftr with basolateral nka and nkcc <dig> have been demonstrated in ionocytes corresponding to the proposed type iv  ionocyte on the yolk sac embryos of mozambique tilapia acclimated in sw  <cit> .

we have also identified numerous transcript sequences of putative transporters/channels for k+, ca2+, cl-, zn2+ as well as inorganic phosphates and sulfate that are not well-studied or lesser known for ion regulation in fish gill . the many transcript sequences involved in ion-regulation of ca2+, k+ and cl- may have roles in cell volume regulation. efflux of k+ and cl- are required for regulatory volume decrease hence important for reducing cell swelling in a hypotonic environment such as gill epithelia in fw  <cit> . influx of ca2+ is also involved in regulatory volume decrease since several k+ and cl- channels are activated by ca2+, and similarly ca2+ act as secondary messenger in many intracellular processes via calcium signaling  <cit>  as enriched in fw gill transcriptome. in sw gill, increase in transcript sequences for members of slc <dig>  members may suggest flux of zn2+ from cytosol out of the cell or into organelles necessary for many catalytic and structural roles involved in transcription regulation, nucleic acid synthesis, protein trafficking and signaling  <cit> . interestingly, we detected different transcript abundance for putative gap junction  proteins where alpha forms  were more abundant in fw gill while beta forms  were more abundant in sw gill. gj proteins are intercellular channels that connect neighbouring cells permitting ions and metabolites movement between them, and possibly play a role in tissue regeneration and cellular remodeling  <cit> . the different abundance of gj protein forms may be due to the different populations of ionocytes found in the fw and sw gills using different gj proteins to interconnect with their neighbouring cells such as accessory, pavement and glycogen-rich cells. recently, the presence of different population of ionocytes, possibly including maturing ionocytes or accessory cells as well as ‘undifferentiated cells’ attaching to mature ionocytes, was detected in the tilapia gills using fluorescent staining with anti-nka, anti-brdu and dapi  <cit> . the study was on recruitment and degeneration of different population of brdu-labelled branchial ionocytes in mozambique tilapia transferred from fw to 70% sw and it reported a population of ionocyte described as ‘single brdu-labelled mitochondrion-rich cells ’ which increased in both fw and 70% sw, and another population described as ‘brdu-labelled mrc-complexes’ which increased predominantly in 70% sw  <cit> . taken together, the present findings indicate that a plethora of transcripts encoding ion channels and transporters are likely to be expressed in different cell types including ionocytes and non-ionocytes that populate the gills of fw and/or sw tilapia.

targeted gene expression in gill subjected to hypersalinity challenges
we performed additional experiments using a new batch of fish acclimated to fw , sw  and hypersaline water  to validate the ngs data and to further investigate how representative genes behave in gill subjected to hsw challenge. the mozambique tilapia is among few fish species that is able to cope with the tremendous iono-regulatory challenges under hsw. if the genes involved in iono-osmoregulation or responded to salinity challenge via up-regulation  or down-regulation  remained so, if not increased in magnitude, when the fish is subjected to hypersalinity challenge, it will show that these gene expressions are also necessary for iono-osmoregulation during hypersalinity challenge notwithstanding the short-term acclimation in hsw. we performed targeted gene expression analysis using real-time quantitative pcr on representative genes associated with biological processes/pathways identified earlier including iono-osmoregulation, cell cycle/death, dna replication, recombination and repair, growth and development, energy and metabolism, and intracellular signaling. the relative gene expression levels as determined by real-time pcr as compared to the ngs data are summarized in figures  <dig> and  <dig> . overall, the real-time pcr data for sw and fw gills were in good concordance with the ngs data although the pcr data captured greater magnitude in relative fold difference of gene expression. among the  <dig> genes investigated ,  <dig> genes  showed significant  deregulation in the same expression direction for sw- and hsw-gills when compared to fw-gills confirming that majority of these genes are responsive to salinity challenge . the validation of these representative genes provide further evidence that the associated biological processes and pathways were indeed deregulated in fw, sw and hsw gills.figure  <dig> 
ngs data and quantitative real-time pcr of representative genes encoding inorganic ion channel or transporters that were identified as differentially expressed i.e.  abundant in freshwater  gill or  abundant in seawater  gill of
oreochromis mossambicus
. data that assume normality and homogeneity of variance were subjected to anova followed by tukey-kramer post-hoc test. data that do not assume normality or homogeneity of variance were subjected to kruskal wallis followed by mann–whitney u test and bonferonni correction for multiple comparisons. **indicates p-value <  <dig>  while *indicates p-value <  <dig>  when sw and hsw are compared to fw for the same gene. n = 6– <dig> replicates.
ngs data and quantitative real-time pcr of representative genes associated with canonical signaling pathways or biological functions that were identified as differentially expressed i.e.  abundant in freshwater  gill or  abundant in seawater  gill of
oreochromis mossambicus
. data that assume normality and homogeneity of variance were subjected to anova followed by tukey-kramer post-hoc test. data that do not assume normality or homogeneity of variance were subjected to kruskal wallis followed by mann–whitney u test and bonferonni correction for multiple comparisons. **indicates p-value <  <dig>  while *indicates p-value <  <dig>  when sw and hsw are compared to fw for the same gene. n = 6– <dig> replicates.



the many similar gene-expression trends in hsw and sw when compared to the same fw control group shows that the expression of these genes are highly robust and necessary for iono-osmoregulation during hypersalinity challenge notwithstanding the different acclimation state. this is clearly evident for nkcc1a, nkaa <dig>  nkaa <dig> and cftr which are well established in their osmoregulatory roles during salinity challenge. the increase in atpsyn beta transcripts in sw and hsw represents increase in cellular energy production for active salt extrusion. in order to drive na+ to exit from the plasma to the external environment, a trans-epithelial potential  that is greater than the equilibrium potential of na+ is  is required. as internal plasma na+ is maintained constant while external na+ increased with salinity, ena will rise rapidly. with the increase of salt load into the fish due to the drinking of salt water to compensate water loss to the hyperosmostic environment, increase in basolateral nka and apical cftr activities are required to actively generate sufficient positive tep > ena in order to drive na+ against concentration gradient from the plasma into the hypersaline environment via leaky paracellular tight junctions between the ionocyte and accessory cell. the increase of nkaa <dig>  cftr, and atpsyn beta transcripts can be contributed by direct increase in expression per ionocyte as well as increase in the number of ionocytes  <cit> . since further uptake of na+ can be detrimental, this necessitated further down-regulation of the fw-abundant nhe <dig> which facilitates apical na+ uptake/acid secretion and appeared to be present at low levels in sw-gill  <cit> . likewise, aqp <dig>  which was proposed to be involved in osmoreception and regulation of cell volume by facilitating basolateral water flux between intracellular ionocyte and plasma  <cit> , was further down-regulated likely to reduce water permeability and prevent excessive shrinkage of cells when plasma osmolality rises in hsw. we have also sequenced and detected a putative aqp3-like  that was up-regulated in sw and hsw when compared to fw. this is the first report of aqp <dig>  up-regulation in sw and hsw gills although its biological significance is presently unknown. up-regulation of aqp <dig> has been proposed to facilitate glycerol transport into skin cell which is a metabolic substrate of central importance for gluconeogenesis and atp generation  <cit> . moreover, glycerol is also a natural water retention osmolyte that could reduce intracellular water loss  <cit> . therefore, aqp <dig>  up-regulation may contribute to transporting glycerol as fuel for energy production in the increased number of gill ionocytes and may also help in reducing intracellular water loss in hyperosmotic environment. it is therefore likely that the two isoforms of aqp <dig> were expressed in different subcellular localization and different cell types.

there are data suggesting a critical salinity threshold that could induce the onset of osmoregulatory stress in tilapia at 70 ppt and beyond  <cit> . in a hypersalinity experiment involving california mozambique tilapia hybrid, plasma osmolality began rising significantly between 65–75 ppt onwards when compared to 35 ppt  <cit> . this is also corroborated with a significant peak in drinking rate at 75 ppt suggesting excessive water loss hence the need to compensate by increasing drinking rate. the onset of osmoregulatory stress may have caused some of the sw- and fw-abundant genes to have changed in their direction of expression in hsw. it has been proposed that the tep generated by the increase of basolateral nka and apical cftr activities are not sufficient to drive na+ against the increasing chemical gradient as salinity rise beyond 70 ppt, hence resulting in a back-flux of salts via the paracellular tight junction pathway and in the rise of internal na+ concentration until ena falls below the tep in order for na+ extrusion to resume  <cit> . this may explain the up-regulation of cldn <dig> to manage and control the back-flux or influx rate of na+ from hsw into the plasma as it has been shown that claudin  <dig> can act as a paracellular barrier for na+ back-leakage  <cit> . in another hypersalinity experiment involving tilapia sarotherodon melanotheron, it was reported that the density and size of gill ionocyte increased significantly between fw to hsw  but the ionocyte density remained constant between hsw at 70 ppt and 90 ppt, although cell size continued to increase with concomitant increase in intensity of nka staining  <cit> . the observation suggests that the gill had to rely on increasing cell surface area and nka activity per cell rather than increasing cell number in order to increase iono-regulatory capacity when presumably maximum cell density is reached at 70 ppt. therefore cell cycling rate may be reduced to the level sufficient to maintain the cell number and this may account for the down-regulation of some of the sw-abundant genes  that are associated with cell cycle, dna replication and repair. the number of cycling and mitotic cells in hsw-gill may also be lowered to conserve energy and channel to meet the energetic demands of iono-osmoregulating in hsw. sardella et al.  <cit>  reported that the density of mature branchial ionocytes dropped significantly as salinity rose beyond 65 ppt when compared to 35 ppt, presumably as a result of apoptosis as indicated by increasing apoptotic ionocytes although immature ionocytes and accessory cells increased in numbers to replace cell loss. the up-regulation of aqp <dig> may be associated with apoptotic volume decrease hence cell shrinkage that is necessary for apoptosis to occur. aqp <dig> has been reported to facilitate water efflux for dying cell to shrink in order to complete the apoptotic process  <cit> . apoptosis may have reduced substantially certain mature ionocytes expressing specific cox <dig> isoform in hsw gill. likewise as part of the cellular remodeling in the hsw gill, up-regulation angptl7and ghr <dig> arhgap <dig> are likely associated with cellular renewal, growth, differentiation and recruitment related with the significant increase of immature ionocytes and accessory cells since these genes are known to be affecting cellular growth, development and morphology . taken together, salinity at 70 ppt may be a critical threshold for onset of osmoregulatory stress that induced unexpected but significant changes to the expression direction of several genes in the hsw gill. moreover, the different acclimation state between sw  and hsw  could also have contributed to the differences in gene expression trend, suggesting that less differences may be observed if hsw is subjected to similar long-term acclimation. nevertheless, the expression of many other genes remained unchanged in sw and hsw gills when compared to fw gills while few increased in their magnitude of change in hsw gill when compared to sw gill. the findings confirm that these genes are responsive to salinity challenge.

CONCLUSIONS
euryhaline plasticity allows individuals to exploit environment with fluctuating salinity for food, shelter and reproduction, be it temporal or long term, thus increasing their chances for survival and reducing competition with stenohaline species. in estuary, euryhaline fish can seek out iso-osmotic environment in brackish water where it is energetically less costly to iono-osmoregulate. on the other hand, the plasticity to switch from hyper-osmoregulation to hypo-osmoregulation or vice versa can be costly because it requires marked changes in the transcriptome, signaling pathways, remodelling of the cellular landscape and energetics as observed in this study. therefore, it has been proposed that the rarity of euryhaline species in comparison with stenohaline species may reflect the substantial cost of plasticity and therefore unless the benefits of euryhalinity exceed its cost, traits promoting euryhalinity will be lost during evolution hence limiting it only to certain species under special circumstances and selective pressure  <cit> . from an evolutionary perspective, euryhalinity may be a transitional trait that enables colonization of new adaptive zones hence promoting diversification leading to cladogenesis and eventually resulting in stenohaline taxa  <cit> .

we have sequenced and characterized the differential gill transcriptome of mozambique tilapia acclimated in fw and sw. in silico validation indicated that full length and partial sequence of specific transcripts of various abundance and length were represented in the assembled contigs. in addition, we have analyzed and indicated the biological significance of the transcriptomic differences of the fw and sw gills. to our best knowledge, this is the first ngs study that had captured a global perspective of the transcriptomic differences in gills of a euryhaline fish acclimated to fw and sw. the present study has identified over  <dig> annotated gene transcripts with high homology  to human genes that were differentially expressed in fw and sw gills. in addition, these human homologs were found to be significantly associated with at least  <dig> biological processes and with over  <dig> canonical signaling pathways. the association with the many canonical signaling pathways, which has not been reported in relation to gill iono-osmoregulation previously, has provided an expanded and integrated view of how their encoded proteins could co-operate in specific pathways to drive biological functions that effected cellular remodeling in gill under hypo- and hyper-osmotic stresses summarized in figure  <dig>  these canonical pathways could provide focus for future investigation into specific responsive signaling pathways operating in gill iono-osmoregulation. we have also identified over  <dig> transcripts that were specifically involved in inorganic ion transporters/channels including several isoforms in which some are known to operate in fw and sw gills while many are lesser known and could be the focus of future studies. we have also validated the expression profile of representative genes in fw and sw gills, as well as investigated their expression in hsw gill. the findings confirmed that many of these genes that responded to salinity challenge would retain their expression profile in hsw gill as in sw gill. however, it was also found that some genes had changed significantly in their expression level or direction in hsw gill when compared to sw gill. this change in gene expression coincided with the critical salinity level of about 70 ppt which is associated with the onset of osmoregulatory stress and further cellular remodeling in response to hypersalinity challenge. in addition, the different acclimation state between sw and hsw could have also contributed to the differences observed. the effects of sex, which is not accounted in this study, cannot be excluded although its effect is likely minimal because all experimental fish, regardless of their sex, have to iono-osmoregulate in order to have survived several weeks in these hypo-osmotic  and hyper-osmotic  challenging environments. our findings corroborated with other studies indicating that we have captured many of the molecules and signals at the transcriptome level that are associated with iono-osmoregulation under hypo- and hyper-osmostic stresses. finally, this study has provided an unprecedented global transcriptomic view of gill iono-osmoregulation since studies were initiated more than 80 years ago; it has expanded our molecular perspective from a relatively few well-studied molecules to a plethora of gene transcripts and a myriad of canonical signaling pathways driving various biological processes that are operating in gills under hypo-osmotic and hyper-osmotic stresses. these findings offer insights and sequence resources that will fuel future studies on gill iono-osmoregulation and cellular remodeling in response to salinity challenge and acclimation.figure  <dig> 
summary of canonical signaling pathways and their associated biological functions that effected cellular remodeling and caused changes in cell types and density, cell morphology, organization and interaction as well as ionic permeability and volume regulation in the gills of
oreochromis mossambicus
acclimated to freshwater  and seawater .




