BACKGROUND
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded  tissue samples represent an invaluable source for the study of human disease. millions of blocks are archived world wide with corresponding well-documented clinical histories and histopathological reports. the potential value of these archives for retrospective molecular studies has been well recognized  <cit> . however, the feasibility of every new technology for the molecular analysis of archival ffpe material has to be carefully evaluated using corresponding fresh-frozen material from the very same tissue sample.

the analysis of microrna expression patterns in human tumour specimens promises to provide completely new insights into tumour biology. in addition, it may contribute to the development of new diagnostic or predictive markers  <cit> . but the vast majority of published studies rely on the analysis of fresh-frozen tissue specimens. therefore, several studies have addressed the question of microrna expression profiling in ffpe samples. however, the number of routinely processed clinical specimens analyzed is altogether very low  <cit> . in some studies no fresh-frozen and corresponding archival human material is analyzed  <cit>  or only from a single human tissue specimen  <cit> . all these studies made use of pcr- or array-based methodologies

the quantification of microrna expression levels using lna probes coupled to fluorescence labelled beads offers several advantages: no amplification step is required which may introduce a potential bias and the hybridization of probes and target sequences takes place in a homogeneous system  <cit> .

so far, no systematic comparison of microrna profiles obtained from fresh-frozen and corresponding ffpe samples using the fluorescence labelled bead technology is described.

in this study we examined the expression pattern of  <dig> micrornas in routinely processed formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast cancer specimens and paired fresh-frozen specimens from the very same tumours. for this purpose the fluorescence labelled bead technology from luminex  was employed.

RESULTS
quality control of rna and recovery rate of microrna
the integrity and quality of the rna preparations was analysed using the microcapillary fluid device form agilent . the mean "rna integrity number"  <cit>  for all  <dig> fresh-frozen breast cancer specimens was  <dig>   representing quite faithfully the range of routinely processed tissue specimens with high but not perfect quality of the rna. the highly fragmented rna from the corresponding formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples displayed a mean rin of  <dig>  .

the mean fluorescence intensity, the highest fluorescence intensity, and the sum of all fluorescence intensities were not reduced in any of the ffpe samples compared to the corresponding fresh-frozen sample . therefore, no reduction in microrna recovery due to formalin-fixation was observed.

comprehensive microrna expression profiling in paired fresh-frozen and formalin-fixed specimens
the expression level of  <dig> micrornas  was measured in  <dig> fresh-frozen breast cancer specimens and corresponding formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples from the very same tumour. the measurements showed a very good correlation for all  <dig> paired samples . the spearman rank correlation factors were between  <dig>  and  <dig>   with p-values smaller than  <dig>  for all sample pairs . excluding all signals below a background corrected mean fluorescence intensity of less than  <dig>  increased the correlation factors up to  <dig>  .

expression of  <dig> selected micrornas in paired fresh-frozen and formalin-fixed specimens
 <dig> individual micrornas were selected from the literature as most frequently deregulated in primary human breast cancer .

the expression level of these  <dig> micrornas was measured in a series of  <dig> paired fresh-frozen and ffpe samples . five of these samples were already used for the profiling of  <dig> micrornas . for eight samples a statistically significant correlation was observed  whereas for four samples only a trend towards statistical significance  was observed . also, the overall pattern of expression is similar in the four samples without statistical significant correlation. the same micrornas are up- or down-regulated; only the extent of regulation is different .

validation using real-time rt-pcr methodology
the expression level of three micrornas  was measured in all samples  using the stem-loop primer real-time pcr methodology from abi . overall, the expression pattern  obtained with this completely different technique is quite similar: the expression level of mir- <dig> is only slightly higher than the expression level of mir-10b whereas mir- <dig> is much stronger expressed than mir-10b .

mean expression ratios for three selected micrornas

however, the extent of overexpression of microrna  <dig> relative to mir-10b was approx. four fold higher using real-time pcr  than using the bead-based methodology .

discussion
the systematic comparison of paired fresh-frozen and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue specimens from the very same tumour shows that reliable microrna expression pattern can be obtained from routinely processed breast cancer specimens using the fluorescence-labelled bead-based technology from luminex. however, a disadvantage of the current microrna profiling methodology from luminex is the requirement of quite large amounts of total rna  which is clearly not available for every interesting case.

the much stronger overexpression of mir- <dig> as measured by real-time pcr in comparison to the bead-based methodology could be due to slight differences in amplification efficiencies for these two micrornas. these slight differences in efficiency create a considerable difference in expression level after  <dig> or  <dig> cycles due to the exponential nature of the amplification process. additional sources of differences between the methods compared are the completely different rna processing  and differences in analytical sensitivity . but nevertheless, the overall pattern is the same using both techniques.

leaving out all signals below  <dig> arbitrary units improved the correlation quite significantly for three out of five samples, clearly indicating that most of the variability between paired samples are due to fluctuations of the signals of very weekly expressed micrornas.

nelson et al.  <cit>  analysed in their pioneering study using their newly developed assay  among other samples a single pair of fresh-frozen and formalin-fixed material from the same tumour . to the best of our knowledge this represents the very first description of the feasibility of large-scale microrna profiling in archival samples. a visual inspection of figure  <dig> from nelson et al. gives the impression of quite high concordance between the fresh-frozen and the formalin-fixed sample. however, a formal statistical analysis is not presented and only a single tumour specimen was analyzed.

li et al.  <cit>  published a comparison of microrna profiles from snap-frozen cell pellets and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded cell pellets from an immortalized cell line. the expression level of  <dig> micrornas was measured using quantitative real-time pcr and a very good correlation was observed. however, this very well controlled situation does not reflect the routine process with all its uncertainties and variability. also, the fixation process of a tissue sample is quite different from the fixation of a cell pellet.

xi et al.  <cit>  studied  <dig> micrornas using an lna-probe array. analyzing mouse liver tissue the authors found a good correlation between fresh-frozen and formalin-fixed samples . however, no corresponding pairs of routinely processed human tissue samples were analyzed. only a single archival human colon cancer specimen for which no corresponding fresh-frozen material was available was analyzed.

wang et al.  <cit>  mention at the end of the results section the analysis of  <dig> pairs of fresh-frozen and formalin-fixed breast tumours using microarray technology and report correlation coefficients similar to those described in this study . however, they do not show any primary data and do not provide any data about data validation using a different method.

lawrie et al.  <cit>  showed in a supplementary figure the analysis of corresponding fresh-frozen and formalin-fixed material from a single lymph node sample using a published microrna array. visual inspection of the figure shows a good correlation but no formal statistical analysis is provided by the authors.

the recently published study from hoefig et al.  <cit>  represents so far the largest direct comparison of microrna expression patterns obtained from fresh-frozen and corresponding ffpe samples . the authors used the real-time pcr technology from applied biosystems for the analysis of  <dig> micrornas. according to the authors, the variance caused by formalin fixation was much smaller than the variance introduced by biological differences . since the careful data analysis is exclusively based on threshold cycle  values and the shift in ct values, a direct comparison with the correlation coefficients obtained by us using a different methodology is not possible. however, both technical approaches seem to provide reliable data.

finally, the evaluation of different microrna isolation procedures recently published by doleshal et al.  <cit> , contains also the comparison of microrna expression levels in paired fresh frozen and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens using real-time pcr-based methodology, but only for three individual micrornas.

CONCLUSIONS
the data presented in this study convincingly show that routinely processed human ffpe tissue specimens are suitable for large-scale as well as small-scale microrna profiling projects using fluorescence labelled bead technology. therefore, this methodology can now be used for large retrospective studies utilizing stored archival ffpe samples together with the corresponding clinical and histopathological records.

note added in proof:

during the revision of this manuscript zhang et al. published the comparison of microrna expression patterns from fresh-frozen and corresponding ffpe lymph node specimens  using the agilent microarray platform .  <cit>  these authors also found a very good correlation between measurements of matched fresh-frozen and ffpe samples.

