BACKGROUND
the origin and diversification of novel traits are central and longstanding issues in evolutionary biology  <cit> . evolutionary novelties are lineage-restricted traits often associated with new adaptive functions  <cit> . compelling examples include angiosperm flowers, beetle horns, bird feathers, and butterfly wing color patterns. studies in evolutionary developmental biology have shown that the origin of novel traits often involves the recruitment, or co-option, of conserved genetic circuitries. this idea is captured in the expression "teaching old genes new tricks"  <cit> , used to explain the genetic mechanisms through which novel traits arise.

the "new tricks" learnt by the "old genes" can involve different, non-mutually exclusive mechanisms , such as the acquisition of novel expression domains , of novel regulators , and of novel downstream targets . despite the growing body of knowledge on the redeployment of shared genes for the development of lineage-restricted traits, key questions remain unanswered. for example, are entire pathways recruited as a whole or are individual genes co-opted and re-wired de novo  <cit> ? how do recruited or rebuilt pathways diversify along with trait diversification? widening the representation of both phylogenetic and morphological diversity, together with focus on genetic networks rather than single genes, will be crucial to solving these issues . in this study, we provide a taxonomically and genetically wide survey of a model evolutionary novelty, butterfly eyespots, to investigate the origin and diversification of the genetic circuitry associated to its development.

eyespots are wing pattern elements composed of concentric rings of different colors, found in several lepidopteran species. they are involved in mate choice  <cit>  and predator avoidance  <cit> , and their diversification is shaped by natural and sexual selection . eyespots are one of the distinct types of pattern elements recognized in the "nymphalid groundplan"  <cit> . based on morphology and position of pattern elements, this groundplan summarizes homologies across butterflies from the family nymphalidae  <cit> . series of eyespots, or border ocelli, run marginally along the antero-posterior wing axis of most nymphalids, sometimes showing dramatic variation both within and between species . at the same time, non-nymphalid species  can also have circular pattern elements whose morphology resembles that of nymphalid eyespots to different extents  <cit> , even when not in equivalent positions of the wing . in order to cover the diversity in morphology and in position of eyespots s.s.  and eyespot-like circular pattern elements - hereafter referred to as "spots" to encompass all diversity, we assayed a number of species across three butterfly families. this broad phylogenetic coverage of phenotypic diversity is presented along with data on the putative genetic circuitry associated to early eyespot specification.

butterfly eyespots provide a good illustration of the recruitment of genetic circuitry implicated in developmental processes shared by all insects for the formation of novel traits. this includes commonalities between eyespot development  and processes such as embryonic development  <cit> , appendage formation  <cit> , and wound healing  <cit>  . the colored rings that make up eyespots are sequentially formed in pupal wings  <cit> , around organizing centers which are themselves specified earlier in larval wing discs . recently, examination of the expression of conserved genes antennapedia , notch , and distal-less  during the initial stages of organizer establishment revealed intriguing differences among lineages within nymphalids  <cit> . however, the lack of gene expression data outside this clade prevented the reconstruction of the evolutionary history of the recruitment of those genes for expression in larval eyespot fields. here, we increased the taxonomic sampling by including representatives of an additional nymphalid clade and two non-nymphalid families. we also examined the expression of another transcription factor in the presumptive organizer, spalt   <cit> , in all species sampled. phylogenetic analysis of this comprehensive dataset revealed great flexibility in which genes  are expressed in association with this novel trait in different lineages.

RESULTS
to investigate the evolutionary history of the co-option of conserved genes to the location of a developing novel trait, we analyzed expression patterns in larval wings of multiple species in different butterfly families. we targeted four genes involved in transcription regulation: transcription factors antp, dll, and sal, and the transmembrane receptor n. the latter, when bound to its ligands , releases an intracellular domain that regulates gene expression when associated to dna-binding csl proteins  <cit> . the expression patterns of antp, n, and dll were previously analyzed across all stages of last-instar larval wings in nymphalids of subfamilies nymphalinae and satyrinae  <cit> . in this study, we added the expression analysis of sal for those same species , and extended the phylogenetic sampling for all four genes to an outgroup comprised of another nymphalid subfamily  and two other butterfly families . based on the complete dataset for all four proteins in the  <dig> representative species , we investigated the evolutionary history of the recruitment of these genes. we mapped the localization of transcription regulators in presumptive eyespot centers onto the species tree, and performed ancestral character reconstructions using both parsimony and maximum likelihood  methods . the species chosen in this study represent diversity in spot morphology and position on the wing , allowing for discussions about the inference of homology .

taxonomically wide sampling of genes expressed in the developing eyespot field
in a recent study, we showed that the homeobox transcription factor antp is found in the presumptive eyespot organizers before dll and n  <cit> , both of which had, in turn, been characterized as the earliest gene to be expressed in those cells  <cit> . antp was found exclusively in eyespot centers, whereas n and dll were also detected in other cells of the wing disc of different butterfly species  <cit> . here we add the analysis of expression of another conserved transcription factor previously associated to eyespot development in selected species  <cit> , sal. we found sal protein in late larval wings at around the same developmental stage as n  <cit> , at the location of future organizers and at the intervein region, consistent with what has been described for junonia coenia  <cit> . in total, we found the transcription factor sal in the location of border ocelli pattern elements in five out of ten nymphalid species, in both nymphalinae and satyrinae subfamilies .

antp expression during early organizer establishment clearly distinguished satyrinae and nymphalinae clades, being present only in the former  <cit> . in contrast, n and dll showed no clear dichotomy between those clades, being expressed in association to most, but not all, developing organizers  <cit> . our new data on sal show that its expression is also variable within nymphalids, in a pattern which does not follow that of the other genes  nor that of any particular aspect of eyespot morphology, such as the size, color, shape, or number of rings .

to infer the evolutionary history of gene recruitment to presumptive eyespot centers, we examined the expression of the four selected genes in a more distantly related nymphalid  and in three non-nymphalid species . the monarch butterfly, d. plexippus, has series of white spots along the antero-posterior margin of its wings. these appear as multiple single-color spots on each wing compartment bordered by veins, instead of one single element with multiple concentric rings as is characteristic of nymphalid border ocelli . these single-color spots are generally not considered homologous to border ocelli  <cit> , even though wing patterns of the danainae subfamily can be described in terms of the nymphalid groundplan  <cit> . on the other hand, many non-nymphalid species have diverse types of spot-like elements that diverge to different degrees from typical eyespots both in morphology  and position; illustrated here by p. rapae's single black spot, p. machaon's quasi-concentric rings, and p. apollo's concentric rings around a white center   <cit> . whether  or not  these circular pattern elements are homologous to nymphalid border ocelli is unclear. moreover, little is known about which developmental processes and genes underlie the formation of these different types of patterns. here we show that none of four transcription regulators associated to eyespot organizers in nymphalids localizes to the regions of the presumptive eyespot-like elements in the outgroup species . also, with the exception of dll for p. rapae, we could not detect any of those proteins at the intervein region, where n and dll are found in some butterfly species  <cit> .

the absence of all four transcription regulators analyzed from the position of presumptive eyespots in the outgroup species suggests that different mechanisms might be at play in the formation of their spots, as previously suggested for p. rapae  <cit> . possible scenarios include that 1) the same genes are associated with presumptive organizers but at a stage other than the last larval instar which we analyzed, when nymphalids specify their organizers  <cit> , or 2) other genes are specifying organizers in different butterfly clades, or 3) the spots in these lineages are formed by developmental mechanisms that do not involve central organizers. the latter possibility could be experimentally tested by the same type of tissue transplant or damage approaches that established nymphalid eyespot centers as organizers  <cit> , in which the transplantation of such cells to other competent regions of the wing lead to the production of an ectopic eyespot at the host site.

ancestral reconstruction of gene recruitment
we coded the localization of the four targeted proteins at the presumptive spot centers as present or absent for the  <dig> species , and mapped these characters onto the phylogeny of those species  <cit>  by parsimony and ml methods. regardless of the function of each protein in eyespot formation, their localization in putative spot centers of larval wing discs can be treated as a character. mapping this information onto the species tree allows for the inference of the evolutionary history of gene recruitment to that location. ancestral character reconstructions with both methods showed an unambiguous evolutionary history only for the expression of antp , found at the location of presumptive eyespot organizers of satyrines but not nymphalines  <cit> . our sampling of outgroup species supports that the novel antp expression is in fact exclusive to satyrines and originated in the common ancestor of the group .

ancestral reconstructions of the recruitment of other three transcription regulators resulted in an evolutionary history that is less clear. there are two equally parsimonious scenarios of losses  and gains  of eyespot-related expression for each of those genes, with many instances of homoplastic events. this ambiguity is mainly due to the character states of caligo memnon  and melitaea cinxia  in relation to all other members of their respective subfamilies . given the phylogenetic positions of these species, it is not possible to recover a single scenario for the recruitment of the three transcription regulators to the presumptive eyespot organizers. worthy of special attention is the case of the satyrine c. memnon, in which only antp is expressed in the area of presumptive eyespot centers . the forewing eyespot of this species is composed of rings of different colors and placed at the typical location of nymphalid groundplan's border ocelli . according to the parsimony reconstructions, either c. memnon represents a secondary loss of n and dll expression , or the absence of expression of these genes, together with that of sal, is the ancestral state for satyrines . even though our results do not favor one parsimony reconstruction over the other, the multiple origins or occasional losses of each character state compel us to speculate on the mechanisms by which gene recruitment evolves. for example, how would c. memnon have lost expression of both dll and sal ? alternatively, how would j. coenia and a. io convergently have gained expression of n and sal ? the level of homoplasy found in both parsimony reconstructions might indicate that gene recruitment is a flexible process, whose origin and evolution possibly require minimal changes at key nodes of conserved developmental networks . nonetheless, the expression patterns found in c. memnon - a member of the tribe brassolini, which diverged from the remaining members of the clade  some  <dig> million years ago  - uncover variation in which transcription regulators are associated to eyespot organizer regions at the level of tribes.

the ambiguity between the parsimony reconstructions is also reflected in the ancestral state inference obtained with the ml analysis, which estimates with equal probability the presence and absence for each of the three proteins in the eyespot field at the ancestral node of nymphalidae . the variable expression found for these genes could only be revealed by having a taxonomically and genetically wide sampling such as we have . however, and even though this is the largest comparative study of gene expression patterns in butterfly wing discs available, the evolutionary history of n, dll, and sal expression in eyespot organizer regions requires examination of further species, especially of different subfamilies.

evolutionary history of gene co-recruitment
so far, we have analyzed differences in the expression of individual genes in the presumptive spot centers, and shown that it varies substantially, even within butterfly subfamilies. when we consider the evolutionary history of two or more of the targeted genes together , we cannot see a consistent co-expression history, which would possibly be indicative of co-recruitment. the only consistent patterns we found were that whenever there is n expression, dll is also present  and, whenever there is sal expression, n is also present . pairwise comparisons of evolutionary histories, as analyzed by bayestraits , showed significant correlations for the recruitment of n- dll and n- sal .

the four proteins targeted in this study are known to interact in other developmental contexts. for example, antp activation of n signaling induces dll expression and produces ectopic legs in drosophila melanogaster heads  <cit> . earlier in d. melanogaster development, antp promotes the mesothoracic identity of the embryo by repressing sal expression  <cit> . in the presumptive nymphalid eyespot organizers, different combinations of those proteins are found in different species : 1) antp + n + dll + sal, as in heteropsis iboina, bicyclus anynana, and pararge aegeria, 2) n + dll without antp, as in j. coenia and aglais io, and 3) antp without any of the other three proteins, as in c. memnon. these different combinations are consistent with either of two scenarios: different proteins were recruited individually to the eyespot field and possibly re-wired de novo, or an ancestral network was co-opted and then diversified independently in several lineages  possibly involving "partial co-option" .

another example of co-option of key genes in butterfly eyespots relates to the recruitment of hedgehog   <cit> . the co-option of hh was suggested as having led to novel expression patterns of its downstream targets patched , cubitus interruptus , and engrailed  in butterfly wing discs  <cit> . an important finding, however, was that although ci and en are expressed in the presumptive eyespots of j. coenia and b. anynana's larval wing discs  <cit> , expression of hh and its receptor ptc were never found in b. anynana  <cit> . in other words, shared downstream targets of the hh signaling pathway are found in presumptive eyespot centers with and without the upstream signal . the differences between those two laboratory models, together with the variation in gene combinations found here for a large number of species, reiterate the suggestion that gene recruitment and co-recruitment is a flexible process. flexibility in the recruitment of conserved genes has been found for a few other model novel traits [e.g.  <cit> , but we do not yet know whether it is more probable to gain or to lose expression, whether it depends on particular properties of developmental networks , nor which are the more general constraints underlying genetic co-option and its evolution.

variation in gene expression and in adult phenotype
the great flexibility found in the recruitment of the four proteins analyzed to the eyespot fields possibly reflects variation in eyespot development. in examining how these putative recruited or rebuild pathways relate to trait diversification, we observed that the variation of individual or groups of genes targeted in this study does not correlate to any particular aspect of spot morphology  or position . while spot position is likely established in larval wings where organizing centers are specified  <cit> , the color and size of the rings produced around organizers are determined later, in pupal wings  <cit> . a comparative study of transcription factor localization in eyespot fields at this later stage has also reported great flexibility in the association between combinations of transcription factors and the color of nymphalid eyespot rings  <cit> .

when looking at the association between circular pattern elements and the proteins putatively associated with their development, we observed that eyespot morphology, position, and underlying gene expression include three types of potentially conflicting messages . first, eyespots with very similar morphologies and located at the same position in the wing can be found with different combinations of proteins . second, very different eyespot morphologies are found even when the same genes are expressed at the same position in the developing wing . third, similar eyespot morphologies with the same gene expression are also found in spots at different positions .

inferring homology depends on establishing phenotypic criteria  that ideally are matched by developmental criteria   <cit> . despite the sometimes extreme differences in morphology , all nymphalid eyespots along the distal half of the wing are considered homologous  <cit> . our data showed that the putative genetic circuitry of nymphalid eyespot organizer specification is highly variable, reflecting that "homologous structures need not be controlled by homologous genes"  <cit> . there are other examples of homologous characters that diverge in their development or underlying genetics  and show discontinuity in homology inference at different levels of biological organization  <cit> . this discontinuity is explained by what has been called phenogenetic drift, that is, the "drift in the relationship between genotypes and a given phenotype"  <cit>  . at the same time, disparate eyespot phenotypes within nymphalids  can be found associated to the expression of the same set of proteins in the larval eyespot field . a similar result has been reported for later stages of eyespot development in pupal wings, where the same transcription factors were found in presumably non-homologous spots  of a nymphalid and a saturniid moth  <cit> . the pattern elements in lepidopteran wings are a good illustration that phenotypic diversity is not necessarily followed by equivalent levels of genetic diversity  <cit> , being sometimes more and sometimes less variable than the underlying patterns of gene expression.

CONCLUSIONS
our analysis of the evolutionary history of transcription regulators localization in the spot fields in larval wings of a variety of butterfly species has revealed substantial variation in the expression of n, dll, and sal within nymphalids. it also established a single origin of antp expression at the presumptive organizer in the common ancestor of the satyrinae clade. ancestral reconstructions by parsimony and ml methods for all proteins, together with the lack of phylogenetic evidence for their co-recruitment, revealed ambiguity consistent with both divergence of a co-opted network or independent recruitment of individual genes. the variation found from ancient lineage divergences  to more recent ones  shows that the evolution of gene expression associated to the development of this novel trait is highly flexible. additionally, different butterfly clades  seem to be using different mechanisms to specify the circular patterns on their wings. butterfly eyespots illustrate that phenotypic similarity is not necessarily paralleled by similarity in which genes are expressed in association with trait development. conversely, distantly related species might use orthologous genes to produce non-homologous circular pattern elements on their wings. the differences found between phenotypic and genetic evidence underscore the importance of covering phylogenetic diversity in relation to multiple components of potentially co-opted networks to understand the origin and diversification of novel traits.

