BACKGROUND
ischemic brain stroke is one of the major contributors to mortality and disability worldwide. as the result of a critical reduction of blood flow in the brain, it causes massive loss of neurons and leads to the formation of the necrotic core and the penumbra zone  <cit> .

one of the drugs that is effectively employed currently in cerebral stroke therapy is the semax , which is a synthetic peptide consisting of a fragment of acth and the c-terminal tripeptide pro-gly-pro . studies have shown that semax promotes the survival of neurons during hypoxia  <cit>  and glutamate neurotoxicity  <cit> . it also shows neuroprotective properties and contributes to mitochondrial stability under stress induced by the deregulation of calcium ion flow  <cit> . the action of semax causes the inhibition of nitric oxide synthesis  <cit> , improves the trophic supply of the brain  <cit> , and protects the nervous system effectively against diseases of the optic nerve  <cit> . this peptide also possesses nootropic activity  <cit> .

however, the molecular mechanisms underlying the action of semax remain unclear. we have previously shown the effect of semax on the expression of genes that encode neurotrophic factors and their receptors in an experimental model ischemia in the rat brain  <cit> .

this genome-wide study was performed to elucidate the transcriptome response of the ischemized focal tissues of the rat brain to the action of semax in vivo. the main task of our study was to identify genes with an altered expression that accounts for the positive effect exerted by semax in the treatment of patients with ischemic stroke  <cit> .

RESULTS
semax-induced increase and decrease in gene expression
the genome-wide expression changes induced by semax in rat brain cortex tissues damaged by focal ischemia were studied using the genome-wide ratref- <dig> expression beadchip , which contains  <dig>  genes, according to ncbi. data on the gene expression changes induced by the peptide were compared with the gene expression levels in the “ischemia” group at  <dig> and 24 h after pmcao.

the largest number of genes  that exhibited altered expression  in response to semax administration was detected 3 h after the onset of ischemia ; moreover, the amount of the genes with decreased expression was insignificantly larger than that of those with increased expression . semax altered the expression of  <dig> genes 24 h after occlusion : the expression of  <dig> genes was increased and the amount of genes with decreased expression was considerably lower than that observed at 3 h after the onset of ischemia.

note that different gene groups exhibited semax-induced alteration of expression at 3 h and 24 h. the overlapping group comprised only  <dig> genes with responses to the peptide that were contradictory .

the table shows the genes that exhibited significantly changed expression under semax treatment at both time points . the logarithmic transformed value visually represents the symmetric changes in expression levels: negative value indicates decrease and positive value – increase of the gene expression level. the cut-off of gene-expression changes was  <dig> . ratio – relative expression level.

molecular functions of the protein products of genes with altered expression under semax treatment
the grouping of the genes according to the molecular functions of their products and to the ireport web tool revealed that the expression of transcription regulator genes was predominantly enhanced, and that that of genes encoding transmembrane receptors, transport proteins, and various enzymes was decreased 3 h after the onset of ischemia under semax treatment ; about 39% of the genes with altered expression encoded proteins with molecular functions that were unrelated to the groups presented or were not yet identified. gene expression was increased mostly at 24 h . the largest increase in expression was observed for immunoglobulin and cytokine  genes . the molecular functions of 24% of the protein products of the genes that exhibited altered expression levels were unknown.

entrez gene is ncbi's repository for gene-specific information. in the table, p-values are in the form of an exponential number format.

biological processes that were significantly associated with the genes that exhibited altered expression levels in response to the administration of the peptide
we used an online program  <cit>  to analyze genes with altered expression in response to the intermittent administration of semax to ischemized animals. this led to the identification of several biological processes that were associated with the gene expression changes observed . the reliability of these processes was calculated by fisher’s exact test.

three hours after pmcao, semax exerted considerable influence on various general biological processes , on vascular system processes, brain cell processes, and on the immune system . twenty-four hours after occlusion, similar to observed effects 3 h after the procedure, semax, acting in conditions of focal ischemia, altered the expression of genes involved in cell proliferation and migration. one day after the occlusion, however, unlike at 3 h after the procedure, additional processes supplemented the general processes, namely, the organization of the cytoskeleton, tissue development, and the quantity of metal . special attention should be drawn to the processes that were most significantly associated with immune cell activity and calcium ion regulation, namely, the migration and attraction of dendritic cells , the attraction of leukocytes , and the regulation of the levels of ca2+ .

entrez gene is ncbi's repository for gene-specific information. in the table, p-values are in the form of an exponential number format.

semax altered the expression of genes related to the immune system to a large degree . in conditions of experimental focal ischemia, the action of semax observed 3 h after the onset of ischemia influenced the expression of several genes that are involved in the regulation of the activity of immune cells: macrophages, neutrophils, and lymphocytes . the effect of semax on the immune response was increased significantly 24 h after pmcao. the genes involved in this process represented over 50% of the total amount of the genes that exhibited altered expression levels. semax-induced upregulation of transcripts was observed for a majority of the immune-response genes; among these, immunoglobulin genes formed the most prominent group, with half of them exhibiting the highest amplitude of expression alteration among the genes for which the level of transcripts was affected by the peptide .

another remarkable group of genes with semax-induced alteration in expression levels consisted of genes involved in the vascular system. the expression of  <dig> and  <dig> genes was altered  <dig> and 24 hours after pmcao, respectively .

entrez gene is ncbi's repository for gene-specific information. in the table, p-values are in the form of an exponential number format.

genes that regulate the levels of ca2+ formed a separate group of genes exhibiting a significant semax-induced alteration of expression 24 h after occlusion .

discussion
different profiles of gene expression elicited by semax administration  <dig> and 24 h after pmcao
the dynamic state of mrna expression in mammalian tissues changes during pathophysiological processes and after the introduction of medicinal peptides into the organism. in this context, we studied transcriptome changes caused by the action of neuropeptide semax in the ischemized rat brain cortex. this genome-wide study showed that semax affected the transcript level of several dozens of genes  <dig> and 24 h after pmcao; however, the functional significance of many of them remains unknown.

three hours after pmcao was used in the analysis as a time point inside the therapeutic window of the drug and within the response time of early-response genes  <cit> . at that time point, we found a considerable alteration of the expression of genes encoding transcription factors that could set off new signal pathways that allow the correction of the destructive processes that developed after vascular occlusion. during the active stage of ischemia and the response of late-response genes, i.e., 24 h after pmcao, we observed increased levels of transcripts encoding transmembrane receptors and enzymes, especially cytokines and immunoglobulins. one can presume that processes initiated by transcription factors during the first hours of therapy of ischemized animals were developing further. several similar processes were observed in the course of the associative analysis of biological processes.

response of immune system cells to semax administration and regulation of the expression of genes encoding chemokines and immunoglobulins
the detailed analysis of genes that exhibited altered levels of expression  <dig> and 24 h after pmcao allowed the determination of the effect of semax on various biological processes that were categorized under broad subgroups, namely, general category, brain cell, immune, and vascular processes. the neuroprotective and nootropic properties of semax were previously associated only with events that are directly relevant to nervous tissues  <cit> . here, we uncovered the action of semax on the immune system for the first time. three hours after pmcao, semax acted on microglia and immune system cells. the process of leukocyte activation was affected most significantly  in the immune response subgroup. the processes that developed 24 h after pmcao, which involved leukocytes, remained significant. in addition, semax affected dcs, the presence of which in rat cerebral hemisphere ischemia-damaged tissues had been reported by other researchers  <cit> . dcs constitute a heterogeneous class of antigen-presenting cells that are capable of immune response initiation  <cit>  and cytokine production  <cit> .

both inflammation and immune response play an important role in ischemic stroke. it is well known that the penetration of inflammatory/immune cells into brain tissues during the postischemia hours aggravates the situation  <cit> . in addition, no data have been reported to date indicating the presence of a specific cause-and-effect relationship between the penetration of leukocytes into the damaged tissues and the pathogenesis of the ischemia itself  <cit> . however, some studies support the neuroprotective abilities of immune cells  <cit> .

it should be mentioned that the most noticeable immune response to semax action was observed at 24 h after pmcao. a high level of immunoglobulin transcripts was found at that time point in the ischemized rat brain cortex. several studies had shown previously that intravenous immunoglobulin  has a strong neuroprotective effect against ischemic impairment of the brain  <cit> . it is believed that ivig application is one of the options for acute brain stroke therapy  <cit> . whether or not the neuroprotective effect of semax can be a consequence of the enhancement of the expression of immunoglobulin should be addressed in future studies.

cytokines , which are one of the most important participants in the immune response, were also expressed actively 24 h after pmcao under the influence of semax in the region of the brain where the ischemic lesion was localized. many reports have described chemokine expression in astrocytes, microglia, and even neurons  <cit> . it is accepted that some chemokines and their receptors are involved in various neurodegenerative diseases  <cit> , including ischemic brain damage  <cit> .

recent research has shown that chemokines are a unique class of neuromediators that ensure the cross-talk between neurons and cells from their surrounding microenvironment  <cit> . in accordance with this, the division of chemokines into pro- and anti-inflammatory factors seems to be too simplified and gives rise to contradicting opinions regarding the neuroprotective and neurodegenerative functions of chemokines  <cit> . enhanced expression of chemokine-encoding genes is one more evidence in favor of the possible existence of a semax immunomodulatory effect in conditions of focal cerebral ischemia of the brain.

semax-induced activation of chemokine genes presumably accounted for the altered transcript level of genes associated with the regulation of the quantity of ca2+ . the ability of some chemokines to raise the level of intracellular ca2+, which plays a messenger role in nervous tissues, has been described in several studies  <cit> . a study that used human neutrophils  <cit>  offered experiment-based support of the effect of semax on the ca2+ level in cells, and showed an increase in ca2+ levels caused by the effect of semax on the mechanisms that regulate ca2+-dependent channels.

it is well known that ischemia-induced energy depletion in cells results in disturbed operation of potential-dependent calcium channels and na+/ca2+ pumps, excessive intracellular accumulation of ca2+ ions, and neuronal death  <cit> . however, it has been shown that semax contributes to neuron survivability in the conditions of glutamate neurotoxicity that accompany ischemia  <cit> . some authors have suggested that cellular death is caused by the ca2+ influx pathway, and not by ca2+ load  <cit> . possibly, the neuroprotective effect of semax on ischemia-damaged nervous tissues includes the impact of ca2+ penetration into the cell on the regulatory processes. this idea is based on recent studies of the neuroprotective effect of ca2+-activated potassium channels in conditions of brain ischemic damage  <cit> .

the opinions on the role of the immune system in the pathogenesis of ischemia vary. studies are available regarding the contribution of the immune system to ischemic damages  <cit> , the neuroprotective and healing effect of immune-cell activation  <cit> , the protective role of the immune system, and its therapeutic function  <cit> . it cannot be ruled out that the observed effect of semax on brain stroke can be explained by its impact on protective immune mechanisms. some recent reports have described interactions between nervous tissues and the immune system, which were observed after the administration of neuropeptides. for instance, the nootropic medication cerebrolysin favored the survival of immunocompetent cells  <cit> . another preparation, the vasoactive intestinal peptide , which has neurotrophic effects, acted as an immunomodulator  <cit> . the possible effect of neuromodulation on the consequences of ischemia is believed to be real, although it has not been studied sufficiently  <cit> .

response of the vascular system to the administration of the neuropeptide semax
here, we found changes in the expression levels of several genes involved in the functioning of the vascular system as a response to semax administration. the formation of new blood vessels in the ischemized areas represents one of the approaches used in the treatment of brain stroke  <cit> . it should be mentioned that the presence of immune cells in the damaged tissues is a typical feature of postischemic revascularization  <cit> . three hours after pmcao, semax affected the expression of genes involved in vasculogenesis and the transcription levels of genes associated with hematopoiesis and the migration of endothelial cells. some signal pathways are well known to be active in both hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis  <cit> . moreover, a large number of genes are expressed in both endothelial cells and hematopoietic precursor cells of the adult organism  <cit> . three hours after occlusion, semax altered the expression of genes associated with the artery vasodilation process as well. our earlier studies showed that capillary bore extension was observed as early as 15 min after the administration of the peptide  <cit> .

as shown in figure 3b, 24 h after occlusion, semax affected the development of the endothelial tissue and the migration of smooth muscle cells, which was an indication of vessel formation and stabilization  <cit> . finally, another biological process, i.e., the activation of blood cells, was affected by semax 24 h after pmcao, which followed logically after the process of the formation of blood cells induced by semax 3 h after the occlusion.

thus, as demonstrated here, the action of semax on the expression of genes that ensure the formation and functioning of the vascular system in ischemic conditions also uncovered its possible vascular and regenerative properties, in addition to its neuroprotective and vasoactive effects.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we analyzed the action of the neuroprotective peptide semax on the transcriptome of rat brain cortical cells in conditions of experimental focal ischemia. although semax has been shown to be effective in brain stroke therapy, the molecular mechanisms underlying its neuroprotective action remain unknown.

as shown here, semax influenced various biological processes that contribute to the functioning of the different systems of the organism. the immune response was most markedly affected by the action of semax. the peptide increased the amount and mobility of immune cells and enhanced the expression of chemokine and immunoglobulin genes.

our data showed that semax is likely to influence processes that accompany the formation of new blood vessels during early ischemia cascade stages, as well as their stabilization at later stages.

the expression of genes responsible for the intracellular level of ca2+ was sensitive to semax administration against the background of the unfolding pmcao-induced neurodegenerative processes. our results showed that semax enhanced the expression of genes encoding protein products that promote intracellular ca2+ accumulation. possibly, the neuroprotective effect of semax on ischemia-damaged nervous tissues includes an impact on processes involved in the incorporation of ca2+ into cells.

thus, the immunomodulating effects of semax described here, as well as its influence on the vascular system in conditions of ischemia, are likely to be key factors in the neuroprotective effects of the peptide. it cannot be ruled out that the large amount of genes that exhibited changed levels of expression, the functions of which remain unknown or not well studied, will help disclose other, hitherto unknown pathways of semax action on damaged brain tissues. we must state at the same time that the baffling complexity of the multicomponent nature of cerebral ischemia and the ability of semax to affect a large number of biological processes require future research to uncover the full scope of the mechanisms of action of this peptide.

