BACKGROUND
the indian subcontinent has a biogeographic key position between africa, madagascar and eurasia. it has been involved in faunal exchange between the continents during the late cretaceous and paleogene by either serving as a biotic ferry for a gondwana fauna  <cit> , or as a target  <cit> , stepping-stone  <cit>  or source  <cit>  for dispersal. for all biogeographic scenarios involving the indian subcontinent, the assumed geological setting is of major importance; especially the time of fragmentation of eastern gondwana, the position of greater india on its move northwards relative to the adjacent continents, and the timing of the indian-eurasian collision.

the standard geological view dates the indian-eurasian collision to the paleocene/early eocene at 50- <dig> ma  <cit> . however, there is stringent evidence from both geological data and plate modeling approaches for a much later collision around  <dig> ma, preceded by collision with an intraoceanic island arc around  <dig> ma  <cit> . ali and aitchison  <cit>  presented two hypotheses on the location of india during its eocene northward movement. the first is based on the motion path of the indian subcontinent according to schettino and scotese  <cit>  and assumes india in an isolated position until final contact with tibet . the second hypothesis, using the motion path of acton  <cit> , reconstructs india in close proximity to southeast asia from eocene to oligocene, possibly tracking along sumatra, the malay peninsula and burma, and allowing terrestrial connections . depending on which of the two geological models fits better to the actual indian motion path, one should expect different biogeographic and phylogenetic patterns as both models allow different spatial and temporal dispersal pathways. in particular, the geological history should be reflected by taxa with limited marine dispersal capabilities, e.g., terrestrial non-volant or limnic organisms.

freshwater crabs are considered to be good indicators of zoogeographic patterns  <cit> . their ontogeny is completely independent from the marine realm, and they are thought to be drainage basin specific  <cit> . although freshwater crabs can to some extent be saltwater tolerant under laboratory conditions  <cit>  and may incidently have surmounted shorter marine passages by rafting  <cit> , there is no evidence for transoceanic long-distance dispersal of freshwater crabs  <cit> .

the palaeotropic freshwater crab family gecarcinucidae occurs from the indian subcontinent to australia, including tropical east asia, the indonesian and philippine archipelagos, the moluccas and new guinea  <cit> . this distribution pattern makes the gecarcinucidae a well suited model taxon to estimate timing, direction, and possible mechanisms of faunal exchange between southeast asia and india during the cenozoic.

we construct a robust molecular phylogeny of the gecarcinucidae, provide molecular clock estimates and use these data to reconstruct ancestral ranges. specifically, we test the fit of the respective biological data to the recently developed geological models of the indian-eurasian collision.

RESULTS
 <dig>  phylogenetic analyses and molecular clock estimates
the inferred phylogenetic topology of the gecarcinucidae is congruent in all deeper splits to a previously published phylogeny  <cit> . also our maximum likelihood and bayesian analyses do not conflict at the basal splits within the gecarcinucidae. within the subfamily parathelphusinae our analyses retrieve the lineages identified by klaus et al.  <cit> , although the relationship between these lineages have low support and differ between both of our phylogenetic approaches. the maximum likelihood analysis supports the sister group relationship of the genus parathelphusa with the malesian-australian group . monophyletic and well supported are two subfamilies, the liotelphusinae and the parathelphusinae, while the third subfamily gecarcinucinae is paraphyletic .

the time estimate for the root of the gecarcinucidae ranges from the oligocene to the cretaceous with a 95% highest posterior density credibility interval  of  <dig> - <dig>  ma. for biogeographic inference of the early evolution of the gecarcinucidae, two nodes are of major importance: the most recent common ancestor  of the liotelphusinae  and the mrca of the parathelphusinae , as at these nodes indian and southeast asian species split. the divergence time estimation for both nodes shows a large 95% credibility interval. therefore, we tested different temporal models that assume divergence before, during or after the final indian-eurasian collision around  <dig> ma. a middle eocene origin for the mrca of both parathelphusinae and liotelphusinae is strongly supported, thus most likely predating the final indian-eurasian collision .

testing of the temporal models with different time constraints in million years for the most recent common ancestor  for the subfamilies parathelphusinae  and liotelphusinae . the first three models  constrain the age of both mrcas before, during and after the assumed final collision of india and eurasia; the next four models assume different ages for the mrca of parathelphusinae and liotelphusinae, i.e., either before or during collision of plates, or during and after this event. the natural logarithm of the models posterior probabilities and its standard error, and the common logarithm of the bayes factor between models are given. models in the left column are tested against the models in the first row . the first model, constraining the mrca of both subfamilies into the middle eocene , i.e., before the final indian-eurasian collision, is superior to all other models.

 <dig>  origin of the gecarcinucidae and their subfamilies
the reconstruction of the ancestral range of the gecarcinucidae according to the bayesian inference of ancestral character states  remains equivocal. however, none of the present ancestral area reconstructions of the bayestraits analysis has support over alternative reconstructions . this points out the necessity to test the significance of the favoured reconstruction when using this method for biogeographic purposes. also dispersal-vicariance analysis  does not assign the root of the gecarcinucidae unequivocally to one area, but assumes a widespread range comprising both india and southeast asia.

therefore, we also applied a likelihood approach to geographic range evolution based on dispersal, extinction and cladogenesis  to investigate if dispersal from india or from southeast asia can better explain the present range patterns. of the three different dispersal-models calculated , the akaike information criterion  and akaike weight support the hi→a-model  with a dispersal rate of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> and an extinction rate of  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  thus, dispersal from india to southeast asia gives the best explanation of the present data. the resulting reconstruction is shown in fig.  <dig> 

different dispersal models for the gecarcinucidae that were tested in lagrange to investigate the direction of faunal exchange between india and southeast asia. given are the global maximum likelihood at the root node, the aic, and the akaike weight  of the respective dispersal models. the h <dig> model is without any dispersal constraint, hi→aonly allows dispersal from india to southeast asia, ha→i only from southeast asia to india.

the indian subcontinent consistently emerges in all three biogeographic methods as the most likely ancestral area of the mrca of the subfamilies gecarcinucinae and parathelphusinae. the indian range is retained throughout the paraphyletic gecarcinucinae and passed over to the parathelphusinae, with the latter reaching southeast asia only once. within this parathelphusine southeast asian clade a complex pattern of range evolution is reconstructed, with several transitions of the wallace line.

for the mrca of the liotelphusinae the ancestral range with the best likelihood value  comprises both indian and southeast asian areas . the indian area is lost in the ancestor of lepidothelphusa cognetti, whereas the indian-southeast asian area was retained in the liotelphusinae until the divergence of the genus liotelphusa . in contrast, diva reconstructs an asian mrca and secondary dispersal to india followed by vicariance.

discussion
in agreement with previous results  <cit> , the present data reject an early gondwana distribution for the gecarcinucidae, both concerning tree topology and time estimates. the gondwana hypothesis for the old world freshwater crabs does not hold against the freshwater crab fossil record , and is not in accordance with divergence time estimates  <cit>  and phylogenetic reconstructions that do not reflect the break up of eastern gondwana  <cit> . moreover, the initial separation of western  and eastern gondwana predates the first fossils of heterotreme marine brachyurans by approximately  <dig> million years.

the hypothesis of an african origin of the gecarcinucidae can not be validated with the present data. the presumed dispersal to the indian subcontinent via madagascar and the seychelles bank during oligocene low sea level  <cit>  can be rejected as the gecarcinucidae do not nest within a paraphyletic african potamonautidae; in contrast, the freshwater crabs of madagascar and the seychelles are monophyletic with the potamonautidae. also the estimated divergence times of the most basal splits within the gecarcinucidae are likely to predate the oligocene. nevertheless, the age of separation between east african deckenia mitis and seychellum alluaudi from the seychelles  and the age of the deepest split within the potamonautid subfamily deckeniinae  do not conflict with the hypothesis of these oligocene stepping stones. these could have enabled independent colonization of madagascar and the seychelles from africa, as it was already proposed for amphibians and cichlid fishes  <cit> , and is additionally supported by the reconstruction of paleogene ocean currents  <cit> . the age of the root of the present phylogeny, and the estimated age of the gecarcinucidae fit very well into the period of intensive brachyuran radiation, i.e., upper cretaceous to early eocene, that is apparent from the fossil record  <cit> . we hypothesize that during this time span the marine ancestor of the old world freshwater crabs might have invaded the limnic habitat from the ancient tethys ocean. according to our biogeographic reconstruction, at least for the clade , this transition occurred most likely at the shores of the indian subcontinent.

the results of the temporal model testing indicate that the separation of indian and southeast asian species within the subfamily parathelphusinae more likely occurred in the middle eocene than in the oligocene, and according to the biogeographic reconstructions, the indian subcontinent was by far more likely the area of origin for both gecarcinucinae and parathelphusinae than southeast asia. provided that the final collision of india and the tibet-part of eurasia took place in the late eocene  <cit> , we must either assume that gecarcinucid freshwater crabs surmounted a marine barrier to reach southeast asia, or that a land connection between india and southeast asia existed. as transoceanic long distance dispersal of freshwater crabs appears highly unlikely  <cit> , we conclude that india and southeast asia were at least very close. an early to middle eocene exchange of freshwater organisms is best explained by the indian motion path of acton  <cit>  which implies direct contact of plates and probably would allow terrestrial connections . in contrast, the position of the indian subcontinent based on schettino and scotese  <cit>  hypothesizes an open marine strait of about  <dig> km between the indian plate and eurasia . in fact, the exact position of western southeast asia during the eocene, decisive for the present considerations, is not definitively solved and could be placed slightly eastward . as in the parathelphusinae, a middle eocene age for the mrca of the liotelphusinae is the preferred model, also predating the indian-eurasian collision. according to the dec-model of range evolution the mrca inhabited both indian and southeast asian areas, while diva and the bayestraits analysis favours a southeast asian origin . several scenarios could explain this pattern: the liotelphusine ancestor could have had a widespread range comprising india and southeast asia during the middle eocene, as reconstructed in lagrange. this would fit to the geological model that assumes contiguity of the indian plate and southeast asia during that time. alternatively, early diverging indian representatives are not sampled in the present data set or could have gone extinct, raising the possibility that the ancestor of the genus liotelphusa dispersed back to the indian subcontinent after the final indian-asian collision. also, an independent colonization of the freshwater habitat can not be excluded with certainty. to solve the history of this subfamily with confidence, a larger sampling of the enigmatic indian liotelphusine species will be necessary. eocene faunal exchange between india and southeast asia could not only be facilitated by the paleogeographic proximity of the indian subcontinent and southeast asia, but also favored by equal climatic conditions. as indicated by coal deposits, both areas most probably have been dominated by closed-canopy megathermal rain forests during the early eocene, and displayed an everwet tropical climate  <cit> . this indian-southeast asian moist corridor was already assumed to enable dispersal of indian floral elements into southeast asia, corroborated by palynological evidence  <cit> .

several asian faunal or floral elements are claimed to be gondwana relics, entering asia via the northwards drifting indian subcontinent, i.e., the ''out-of-india' scenario  <cit> . these comprise ranoid and hyloid frogs  <cit> , gymnophionans  <cit> , agamid lizards  <cit> , cichlids  <cit> , aplocheiloid fishes  <cit> , the asian arowana  <cit> , crypteroniaceae  <cit>  and dipterocarpaceae  <cit> . in contrast, we present here for the first time evidence that the gecarcinucidae, a taxon that is definitely not a gondwana element, originated on the indian subcontinent, at least with the subfamily gecarcinucidae, and dispersed into southeast asia during the middle eocene.

the early range evolution of gecarcinucid freshwater crabs exemplifies that the recently developed geological models of the indian-eurasian convergence are generally in accordance with biogeography  <cit> . very likely this direct eocene biotic exchange between india and southeast asia, possibly in both directions, accounts for the distribution patterns of a large set of organisms and probably contributed profoundly to the vast biodiversity of present south and southeast asia.

CONCLUSIONS
the asian freshwater crab family gecarcinucidae most probably originated on the indian subcontinent and dispersed secondarily into southeast asia. within the subfamilies gecarcinucinae and liotelphusinae indian and southeast asian species split in the middle eocene, before the final indian-eurasian collision. we postulate that the indian plate and southeast asia were close enough for exchange of freshwater organisms during that period. our data support geological models that assume the indian plate having tracked along southeast asia during its move northwards.

