BACKGROUND
reproductive parasites represent a diverse assemblage of maternally inherited microorganisms that induce aberrations in their hosts' reproductive biology in order to proliferate within arthropod populations. their vertical transmission route greatly limits opportunities for interspecific transfer. however, phylogenies of hosts and parasites are generally not congruent, indicating that interspecific horizontal transfer events characterise the evolutionary history of these selfish genetic elements  <cit> .

two different modes of reproductive parasitism exist that aid the maintenance of these microbes in host populations. some maternally inherited parasites bias host progeny sex ratios in favour of female offspring, through which they then achieve transmission ; others modify sperm of infected males, in order to reduce the fitness of the uninfected females with which they mate   <cit> . whilst wolbachia is the best known, a variety of other microbial taxa has also evolved to manipulate arthropod reproduction, including microsporidia, gamma proteobacteria and members of the genera cardinium, rickettsia and spiroplasma  <cit> .

individual symbioses between reproductive parasites and host species are generally short-lived relative to the speciation rate of hosts  <cit>  . transience may be due to host resistance evolution  <cit>  or alternatively some sex ratio distorters risk driving host extinction due to male shortage  <cit> . long term persistence of parasite lineages therefore demands horizontal transfer to exploit new host species. it seems logical that horizontal transfer should be more common within species than between them. nevertheless strong linkage disequilibrium usually exists between bacterial strains and host mitochondrial dna, indicating that intraspecific horizontal transfer is exceptionally rare  <cit> ; opportunities for transmission between species must thus be highly restricted. one exception is the close ecological contact between parasitoids and their hosts, which may facilitate transfer between wasps following oviposition in a common host  <cit>  and between host and parasitoid  <cit> .

three potential routes exist for a species to acquire a reproductive parasite infection: direct transfer of infective material, introgressive hybridisation or co-speciation of host and bacterium. phylogenetic studies indicate that the majority of symbioses originate from infective transfer: bacterial strains are usually considerably more closely related to each other than are their hosts  <cit> . however, such studies cannot generally distinguish whether transfer occurred directly between two hosts, or if unstudied intermediate species were involved . although rare, cases exist where high recent host speciation rates have enabled host-parasite co-speciation  <cit> . furthermore, hybridisation between closely related hosts has permitted introgression of wolbachia in at least two cases and may be responsible for others  <cit> . whatever the transmission route, phylogenetic studies reveal that closely related reproductive parasite strains may specialise on closely related arthropod species; either reflecting symbiont adaptation to similar hosts or the frequency of horizontal transmission opportunities  <cit> . once a reproductive parasite has infected a novel host, the probability of invasion will be determined by its ability to induce a reproductive phenotype, its vertical transmission efficiency and its virulence in the new species.

an increasing number of studies report experimental interspecific transfers of wolbachia and other symbionts  <cit> ; most of these transfers have been intra-generic. transfection of the drosophila simulans cytoplasmic incompatibility  strain wri into d. melanogaster and parthenogenesis inducing  wolbachia within the trichogramma genus both resulted in maternal transmission and expression of the original phenotype  <cit> . host-shifts of increasing phylogenetic distance have had variable success. whilst the d. simulans wri strain transmitted and induced ci in aedes albopictus, a pi wolbachia from muscidifurax uniraptor transmitted but induced no phenotype in d. simulans  <cit> . experimental transfer of drosophila sros  generally led to establishment in other drosophila species; however, in some cases male-killing ability was reduced and maternal transmission unstable  <cit> .

the experimental transfer of reproductive parasites between host species is of practical as well as evolutionary interest. due to their ability to spread deterministically through host populations, microbes such as wolbachia have been proposed as potential gene drive systems to control insect pest population sizes and manipulate vector competence  <cit> . in addition to genetically engineering the symbionts concerned, such techniques may require infection of target species with well characterised bacterial strains from other hosts. some successful transfers to vector species have recently been reported  <cit>  but others have had less promising results  <cit> .

there is phylogenetic evidence for horizontal transfer of bacteria between both closely and distantly related host species and an increasing number of reports demonstrating experimental transfection. however, only a minority of studies have attempted transfers outside the native genus and systematic research to investigate the effect of phylogenetic distance on the success of experimental infections is lacking. it also seems likely that there is a publication bias towards reports of successful transfection studies.

this study tested the hypothesis that increasing phylogenetic distance between native and novel hosts decreases the likelihood of reproductive parasites colonising a new species. the spiroplasma male-killer of the coccinellid beetle adalia bipunctata was employed because it has previously been demonstrated to transfer repeatably by injection  <cit> . the bacterium was injected into pupae of seven novel coccinellid species. within the adalia genus it was injected into both the native host a. bipunctata and its sister species a. decempunctata. we transfected five species outside the adalia genus but within the coccinellinae subfamily: coccinella septempunctata, harmonia quadripunctata, anisosticta novemdecimpunctata, calvia quatuordecimguttata and propylea quatuordecimpunctata. we also injected exochomus quadripustulatus, which lies in the chilocorinae subfamily  <cit> . finally, we injected the non-male-killing spiroplasma symbiont of the aphid acyrthosiphon pisum  <cit>  into a. bipunctata. in each case three questions were investigated: could the bacterium establish an infection, could it transmit trans-ovarially and did it kill males in the novel host?

RESULTS
phylogenetic relationships between host species
we produced  <dig> bp of 16s and  <dig> bp of 12s mitochondrial rdna sequence; of the  <dig> sites in our dataset,  <dig> were variable and  <dig> parsimony informative. the neighbour joining tree produced  broadly confirmed existing phylogenetic positions based on morphological characters  <cit> .

parental lines
the female parents of all species from which recipient pupae for injection were derived produced offspring sex ratios not significantly different from equity . negative pcr results demonstrated that no parents were infected by the bacterial taxa spiroplasma, rickettsia, wolbachia or flavobacteria.

adalia genus transfers
in total  <dig> a. bipunctata control females that had been injected with their native spiroplasma were bred. they produced no male offspring . mean progeny per line was  <dig>  ; in all,  <dig> females resulted. matriline sex ratios differed significantly from equity in  <dig> cases . all females laying substantial numbers of eggs had hatch-rates below 50%  indicating that male-killing was taking place . an f <dig> female from each line was confirmed infected with spiroplasma by pcr. the microinjection technique was thus both effective and replicable; infectivity of all homogenate samples used to inject novel species was confirmed.

complete male-killer expression also occurred in a. decempunctata transfected lines. sixteen females were bred, which all solely produced female offspring,  <dig> in total . mean offspring number per line was  <dig>  ,  <dig> progeny sex ratios differed significantly from equity . low hatch rates were again recorded  and one offspring from each female was demonstrated spiroplasma infected by pcr.

inter-genus transfers
pcr tests at least six weeks after injection detected spiroplasma infections in 100% of the parental females for all six species outside the adalia genus . the bacterium therefore survived and replicated in these novel hosts. however, inter-genus transfers generally resulted in incomplete sex ratio distortion and impaired vertical transmission. these factors could not be assessed in c. septempunctata for which all females  injected with the spiroplasma were sterile . in total, across the five remaining species  <dig> fertile females produced  <dig> offspring, 66% were female. all species exhibited significantly female-biased sex ratios except for e. quadripustulatus . many females of the five species displayed low egg hatch rates, fecundity and survivorship. however, except in c. septempunctata, a considerable proportion of eggs hatched or reached late embryonic development ; thus low hatch rates did not result from infertility and were indicative of male-killing . pooling across species, sex ratio distortion was significantly impaired in females outside the native genus  in comparison to transfers to congeneric a. decempunctata hosts   = 208; p <  <dig> ). furthermore, a significant positive correlation between mean offspring sex ratio and genetic distance of transfection existed across species, indicating that progressively more distant host shifts reduced the degree of sex ratio distortion the bacterium achieved   =  <dig> ; p <  <dig> ).

spiroplasma transmission rates in novel host-parasite associations were assessed by pcr . vertical transmission was perfect in a. bipunctata and a. decempunctata. however, only in two of the five fertile species outside the adalia genus  did all offspring inherit the bacterium. calvia quatuordecimguttata females behaved inconsistently: three females transmitted the spiroplasma to all offspring tested , whereas five females transmitted it to none . harmonia quadripunctata females were similarly variable: one female produced a significant sex ratio bias of  <dig>   and transmitted to all offspring tested , whereas another whose sex ratio was  <dig>   transmitted to only 19% of progeny . propylea quatuordecimpunctata females produced a strongly female-biased sex ratio  but surprisingly only 15% of offspring were infected when assayed as adults . the bacterial transmission rate in hosts following inter-generic transfers  was significantly lower than that in congeneric a. decempunctata females   =  <dig> p <  <dig> ). however, considering all interspecfic transfections, the negative relationship between mean transmission rate and genetic distance was not significant   = - <dig> ; p =  <dig> ). in three non-adalia species  a considerable percentage of male progeny were infected . pooling across all inter-genus transfers 46%  of male offspring survived embryonic infection and carried the spiroplasma as adults.

offspring of injected females were tested by pcr for spiroplasma infection when adults. numbers of infected males and females from each species are shown separately. the adalia species produced no males. coccinella septempunctata produced no fertile eggs, but clutches did carry the bacterium. the number of matrilines from which the offspring tested were derived is shown .

coccinella septempunctata responded unusually to spiroplasma injection: all females were sterile. thirteen injected females laid eggs, however not one hatched . all eggs remained yellow and showed no signs of embryonic development. each female was mated to at least two independent males to ensure male infertility was not the cause. egg clutches laid by these females carried the spiroplasma . subsequently,  <dig> further females were produced that had been injected with homogenate of uninfected a. bipunctata females. ten were fertile  with hatch rates ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . the mean hatch rates of females injected with uninfected and infected homogenate  differed significantly =  <dig> ; p =  <dig> ).

in addition, a non-male-killing spiroplasma from the aphid acyrthosiphon pisum was injected into a. bipunctata pupae. one egg clutch was tested for spiroplasma from each of  <dig> injected females; none was infected. these  <dig> females were all similarly uninfected when they were killed and tested by pcr at least  <dig> weeks post-injection. four individuals tested within two days of injection shortly after pupal emergence were all positive.

discussion
this study investigated the host specificity of a reproductive parasite, the male-killing spiroplasma of the coccinellid beetle adalia bipunctata. we injected it into seven novel species and investigated bacterial transmission and sex ratio distortion. we tested the hypothesis that the phylogenetic distance between native and potential novel species has constrained host-shifts during male-killer evolution. the full male-killing phenotype was retained following transfers within the native genus, but in more distantly related species inefficient transmission or incomplete sex ratio distortion occurred.

across every species tested injections always established an infection; bacteria were thus consistently able to survive the immune response associated with host injury and interact with cells in novel species. wolbachia and spiroplasma reproductive parasites do not naturally stimulate their hosts' immune systems, but spiroplasma densities do fall following artificial immune challenge  <cit> . this male-killer was therefore probably able to maintain immune evasion in novel hosts. immune evasion may be aided if bacteria reside permanently or at times within host cells, where the antimicrobial response does not operate. the failure of the inter-order transfer of the non-male-killing a. pisum symbiont suggests that spiroplasma tolerance to novel host environments is not without limit.

bacteria were detected in eggs and offspring of all novel species following interspecific transfer between coccinellids. thus no qualitative constraint to trans-ovarial transmission exists at this phylogenetic level. bacterial transmission in novel species suggests absence of very tight specificity in the molecular interactions required, or considerable evolutionary conservation of the host molecules exploited. however, the efficiency and consistency of maternal inheritance did vary between species. whilst transmission was perfect in a. bipunctata and a. decempunctata, in some cases outside the native genus it was reduced. overall there was no consistent correlation between host-shift genetic distance and transmission rate; indeed no uninfected offspring were detected in two of the more distantly related species a. novemdecimpunctata and e. quadripustulatus.

the spiroplasma maintained an ability to distort sex ratios following all inter-specific shifts across the native sub-family . however, as genetic distance of the novel host increased the degree of sex ratio distortion achieved by the bacterium fell. whilst male-killing did occur outside the adalia genus, in most other species infected males were produced. therefore, in some cases, whilst the bacterium did transmit, male-killing failed. to distort sex ratios male-killers must interact with host sex determination mechanisms or male-specific gene products  <cit>  and also be present in high enough density to kill male embryos  <cit> . it is possible that bacterial density in distantly related species was lower than in the native host, as has been reported following other interspecific transfections  <cit> . if correct, this hypothesis could explain the variable and reduced transmission rates as well as inefficient male-killing observed in some novel hosts. phylogenetic variation in the molecules used to detect or kill males  may provide a further explanation for low male-killing penetrance in novel species. male-killers require the ecological advantage provided by male embryo death to spread in host populations  <cit> , therefore incomplete sex ratio distortion  would inhibit invasion of novel host species.

we did not set out to investigate the virulence of this bacterium in novel species. however, we found all c. septempunctata hosts were sterile following injection of the spiroplasma. it is possible this resulted from specific pathogeneic effects of infection, or an inability of the bacterium to selectively kill only male embryos in this species. strong selection acts on vertically transmitted parasites to reduce virulence costs on their hosts  <cit> . future studies might assess pathogenic effects of reproductive parasites following host shifts . increased virulence would represent another factor reducing the probability of population invasion following interspecific transfers.

our study has assessed the average performance of a reproductive parasite in a panel of novel host species. there was variation in male-killing and transmission between individuals in most transfected species. it therefore remains possible that infections that kill males and transmit efficiently may occasionally establish following transfers beyond the genus level. such events, however rare, might provide opportunities for parasites to successfully invade. in addition, we have not assessed transmission and sex ratio distortion past the f <dig> generation. nevertheless, our data provide controlled comparisons of the likelihood of reproductive parasites retaining high fitness and establishing in a population following host shifts. a previous study transferred a. novemdecimpunctata's native male-killing spiroplasma into a. bipunctata and also reported incomplete male-killing  <cit> . therefore our data might have general relevance beyond this particular male-killing parasite. the manipulations of reproductive parasites employing other phenotypes may well be adversely affected by host shifts in a similar phylogenetically dependent manner.

we have demonstrated clear phylogenetic constraints to the interspecific movement of a male-killing bacterium. molecular studies suggest that natural reproductive parasite host-shifts have occurred more frequently between closely related hosts  <cit> . the present data indicate this may be the result of similarity in host physiology or genetics. given molecular evidence that closely related bacterial strains do infect distantly related species  <cit> , we propose two scenarios for horizontal interspecific movement. firstly, male-killers may make phylogenetically 'small steps' with relative ease whilst retaining efficiency of the original reproductive manipulation. secondly, if phylogenetic 'giant leaps' occur, then persistence in novel hosts may require rapid bacterial evolution to improve sex ratio distortion, transmission or virulence.

one widely discussed application for bacterial reproductive parasites is in the control of insect pest or disease vector populations  <cit> . releases of ci wolbachia strains might be used to reduce pest species population sizes  <cit> . alternatively, the invasive nature of ci wolbachia might be exploited to drive trans-genes conferring refractoriness to human disease transmission through insect vector populations  <cit> . the technical and practical aspects of these techniques have yet to be fully resolved. however, most require the introduction of well characterised symbionts into the target species. such experimental transfers have indeed been achieved . nevertheless our study emphasises that except in the case of small phylogenetic steps, ensuring high bacterial transmission fidelity and phenotype retention in field conditions may be a considerable challenge. engineering native infections of the species concerned may be more generally successful than introducing novel bacteria.

CONCLUSIONS
this study indicates that constraints of host physiology or genetics have limited opportunities for successful horizontal transfers during reproductive parasite evolution. we demonstrated that the adalia bipunctata male-killing spiroplasma was only able to maintain full transmission and offspring sex ratio distortion after being injected into hosts within the native genus; more distant transfers resulted in low-fitness infections. reproductive parasites thus exhibit a considerable degree of evolutionary specialisation on their natural host. host-shift genetic distance was significantly correlated with sex ratio distortion ability but its relationship with transmission rate was inconsistent and not significant. this finding suggests the possibility that the reproductive manipulations of these parasites may be more generally sensitive to host shifts than their transovarial transmission. our data offer experimental support for phylogenetic studies which indicate that host-shifts are relatively frequent between closely related species.

