BACKGROUND
the recent developments in high throughput sequencing technologies allow for surveys of transcriptomes at unprecedented completeness and resolution. the 'next generation' rna sequencing technology  has several advantages, such as the ability to detect unannotated transcriptional activity, to differentiate between different transcriptional or splicing isoforms, and to provide digital measurements at single base resolution. recently, the efficacy of rna-seq has been demonstrated in humans  <cit>  and model organisms including yeast  <cit> , arabidopsis  <cit> , and mice  <cit> . an rna-seq experiment typically sequences millions of cdna fragments, which are subsequently aligned to a reference genome or assembled de novo to recover structural models of annotated and unannotated genes and/or infer expression. due to its attractive features and continually decreasing cost, rna-seq is quickly replacing traditional technologies such as microarrays for high throughput transcriptomic studies.

the recent sequencing and analysis of the bovine genome have provided opportunities for further post-genomic investigations of this important livestock species  <cit> . despite the increasingly wide applications of rna-seq, its use in cattle had not yet been reported. in this study, we present the first application of rna-seq in cattle by sequencing rna from embryos cultured in vitro. because early embryonic loss accounts for the majority of cow infertility  <cit> , we have previously created an in vitro fertilization  system to recapitulate the early development of cattle and allow systematic investigations of abnormities during the very early stages of development  <cit> . the transcriptomes of ivf embryos showing distinct developmental statuses were previously profiled using microarrays, and few gene expression differences were detected in embryos undergoing abnormal versus normal development  <cit> .

expression microarrays, however, rely on existing genome annotations and lack the ability to detect more complex regulations in gene expression such as changes in alternative splicing. therefore, in this study, we seek to take advantage of rna-seq to identify transcriptomic changes associated with abnormal bovine early embryonic development, especially for transcriptional activities that have not been annotated before and differential alternative splicing that could not be detected by expression microarrays. although the importance of alternative splicing in regulating complex traits has been long recognized and extensively studied, there is limited information on the pattern of alternative splicing in cattle or its roles in bovine embryonic development.

herein, using rna-seq, we estimated and compared digital gene expression in ivf embryos. in addition, unannotated transcribed regions in the bovine genome and novel splice junctions were discovered. finally, we show that alternative splicing is widespread in the bovine embryonic transcriptome, and we have identified alternative splicing events associated with abnormal bovine embryonic development. this study is the first application of rna-seq in cattle and provides fine-scale insights into bovine preimplantation embryonic development.

RESULTS
massively sequencing the bovine embryonic transcriptome
to overcome the scarcity of rna present in individual embryos, we linearly amplified rna  <cit>  from two pools of embryos: one comprised  <dig> embryos that properly completed embryonic development to blastocyst stage ; the other consisted of  <dig> embryos that showed retarded morphology by the same developmental time point . the amplified rna  was complementary to the polyadenylated rna species and considered equivalent to polya+ rna. the arna samples were sequenced according to illumina's mrna-seq protocol on a genome analyzer iix. approximately  <dig> million fragments were sequenced  for both blastocysts and degeneratives .

sequencing reads were mapped to the reference genome  using the software package tophat  <cit> . approximately 60% of total sequenced fragments could be mapped contiguously or to exon-exon junctions of the nuclear genome, among which over 90% were mapped uniquely . reads that could not be mapped initially by tophat were examined for evidence of polya tails, trimmed to contain non-polya sequences, and mapped to the reference genome using the software package bowtie  <cit> . in total,  <dig>  and  <dig>  polya containing fragments could be mapped uniquely in blastocysts and degeneratives respectively, corresponding to  <dig>  and  <dig>  putative polya signals  within  <dig> bases of the cleavage sites.

among the uniquely mapped fragments,  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> were mapped to annotated genes  in blastocysts and degeneratives, respectively, including  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> fragments mapped to annotated exon-exon junctions . we noticed a marked difference between the fractions of intronic fragments in blastocysts  and degeneratives . this observation will be dicussed in more detail below. moreover, the substantially smaller number of junction fragments in degenerative embryos was likely a result of a higher fraction of fragments overlapped with introns . nevertheless, using tophat, a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  novel splice junctions supported by at least two fragments were discovered in blastocysts and degeneratives respectively, among which  <dig>  were found in both samples .

digital gene expression estimated by rna-seq
we next obtained digital gene expression values by counting aligned fragments entirely overlapped with constitutive exons. to enable comparison with microarray data obtained in a previous study  <cit> , only overall expressions of  <dig>  annotated protein coding genes were obtained to this end. among all genes analyzed,  <dig>  and  <dig>  were overlapped by at least one sequencing fragment in blastocysts and degeneratives, respectively. raw sequencing fragment counts per gene were quantile normalized, which has been shown to reduce bias when comparing gene expression between samples  <cit> . differentially-expressed genes were called at a false discovery rate  of 1% using the deseq package in r  <cit> , which models count data by a negative binomial distribution. similar to our previous findings  <cit> , overall gene expression in degenerative embryos was largely the same as in blastocysts. the correlation between blastocysts and degeneratives was as high as  <dig>  and relatively few genes  were differentially expressed . because no replication was performed, the statistical significance could only represent differences in these two particular samples. nevertheless, because  <dig> embryos were pooled to generate each of the sequencing libraries, the gene expression measurements represented averages across  <dig> embryos.

to evaluate the rna-seq gene expression measurements, we compared them to normalized expression microarray measurements for  <dig>  genes that could be uniquely identified on both platforms. rna-seq was particularly advantageous for low-abundance transcripts, for which microarrays are generally insensitive . the correlations between the two platforms were high for both blastocysts  and degeneratives . moreover, the correlation between fold changes on two platforms was also high . interestingly, we observed a clear curvature towards the rna-seq axis when comparing rna-seq and microarray gene expressions , suggesting that microarrays likely underestimated expressions of genes that were most highly expressed.

gene ontology enrichment analysis
to gain insights into the biological processes that are regulated during abnormal embryonic development, we tested for enrichment of differentially expressed genes in gene ontology  terms. genes that showed a nominal significance of p =  <dig>  and had go annotations  were selected and tested against the background set of all genes with go annotations . we found several go terms significantly enriched  for differentially expressed genes, among which were go processes related to developmental processes .

identification and analysis of novel transcribed units
one important feature of rna-seq is its independence from gene annotations, which allows investigating unannotated transcriptional activities. uniquely mapped alignments were assembled using the software package scripture  <cit> , and the assembled transcripts were compared to known gene models to look for transcriptional activities in intergenic regions. we have defined novel transcribed units  as regions containing transcripts that were 1) at least  <dig> bp away from known gene boundaries; 2) of length ≥  <dig> bp; 3) covered by at least  <dig> fragments per kb ; and 4) <50% repetitive sequence. we found  <dig>  and  <dig>  novel tus meeting these criteria in blastocysts and degeneratives, respectively . importantly, a substantial fraction of novel tus was supported by confident polya-containing fragments, suggesting that the transcripts were potentially polyadenylated .

we then looked for evidence to support the novel tus found by our rna-seq experiment from external sources. est alignments were downloaded from ucsc genome browser  and compared to novel tus. about two thirds of the novel tus in both blastocysts and degeneratives were supported by est alignments. in addition, phastcons scores  <cit>  calculated from the 5-way alignment of five mammalian species  were also obtained for all novel tus and annotated genes. although novel tus appeared to be less conserved than annotated genes distributionally, more than 20% of them exhibited very conserved mean phastcons scores, especially those supported by polya reads and est alignments .

a tu located on chromosome  <dig> that met our definitions of a novel tu is shown as an example in figure  <dig>  this novel tu was supported by polya fragments and est alignments and showed remarkable conservation among mammals. furthermore, a blast search of the mrna sequence against the human refseq database also revealed a highly similar transcript coding for the zdhhc <dig> protein.

in total, we have identified  <dig> , <dig> transcribed bases in a combined total of  <dig>  regions outside gene boundaries that have not been annotated, indicating that the current bovine genome annotation is incomplete. to test for differential expression between blastocysts and degeneratives for these novel tus, raw fragment counts from novel tus and annotated genes were combined, quantile normalized, and analyzed using the "deseq" package. we found  <dig> novel tus significantly altered in degeneratives . one particularly interesting example of differentially expressed novel tus was located on the x chromosome, which showed almost exclusive expression at a high level in degeneratives .

analysis of alternative splicing
we utilized the rna-seq data to characterize and compare the patterns of alternative splicing in blastocysts and degeneratives. we first asked how frequently alternative splicing occurred in ivf embryos. because detection of alternative splicing events is critically limited by the number of junction fragments, we first combined the datasets to increase the sensitivity of detection. we detected a total of  <dig>  "exon skipping", "alternative 5' splice site", and "alternative 3' splice site" in  <dig>  multi-exon genes in the combined dataset , suggesting that alternative splicing is widespread in preimplantation bovine embryos.

the numbers of detected intra-sample alternative splicing events were substantially smaller , primarily due to fewer junction fragments and sample specific alternative splicing. the absolute numbers of detected alternative splicing events in separate samples should not be compared directly as they were confounded by the numbers of junction fragments in these datasets. instead, we tested differential alternative splicing using fisher's exact test for all events that can be detected in the combined dataset. among the  <dig>  "exon skipping" events tested,  <dig> were significantly associated  with embryonic developmental status; among those, two were still significant after multiple testing correction and controlling fdr at 1%. for example, the sixth exon of the myl <dig>  gene showed a significantly higher inclusion ratio  in degeneratives than in blastocysts . similarly, three "alternative 5' splice site" and  <dig> "alternative 3' splice site" events showed nominal significance , yet none of them retained significance after multiple testing correction.

discussion
in this study, we present the first application of rna-seq in cattle using ivf embryos. we show the high potential of rna-seq in transcriptomic studies, particularly in organisms that are not fully annotated. we found unannotated genes that may play roles in early embryonic development and several genes that showed differential alternative splicing between blastocysts and degeneratives. our findings clearly demonstrate the power of rna-seq and provided further insights into bovine early embryonic development at a finer resolution.

rna-seq has been frequently cited as more advantageous than microarrays in many aspects  <cit> . indeed, with a typical sequencing depth, we were able to obtain digital expression measures for many low-abundance genes, for which expression microarrays do not have sufficient sensitivity . perhaps a more important feature of rna-seq, particularly for incompletely annotated genomes such as cattle, is its independence from existing annotations. applying stringent criteria, we were able to identify a combined total of  <dig>  novel tus covering more than  <dig>  million bases in intergenic regions that have not been annotated before. interestingly, a substantial fraction of these novel tus were differentially expressed , including a tu that showed almost exclusive expression in degenerative embryos. this x chromosome linked transcript  was supported by est alignments showing the same gene structure. it is located in a region that lacks conservation among mammals and was predicted to have the potential to code for a  <dig> amino acid protein. rna-seq is believed to have a higher dynamic range than microarrays, partly because microarrays often have detection limits. when comparing gene expression measures on the same sample for both platforms, we observed a clear curvature towards the rna-seq axis as expression increased , indicating that microarray measurements were likely biased for highly-expressed genes, leading to a lower dynamic range. however, the agreement between fold changes on the two platforms was high, and we did not detect a systematic decrease in fold change estimates by microarrays .

another important advantage of rna-seq is its ability to detect alternative splicing events. indeed, we detected thousands of alternative splicing events and tested for their association with the status of embryonic development . among the differentially spliced genes between blastocysts and degenratives, myl <dig> showed a higher inclusion ratio of its sixth exon in degeneratives, which was validated experimentally using real time rt-pcr. the inclusion and exclusion of exon six of the myl <dig> gene switch between the smooth muscle isoform and the non-muscle isoform of myosin light chain, respectively  <cit> . in degeneratives, the smooth muscle isoform expressed at a higher ratio than in blastocysts. importantly, the protein and nucleotide sequences, as well as the alternative splicing pattern, are conserved in mammals. furthermore, gene expression of myl <dig> has been previously shown to be associated with bovine blastocyst formation, suggesting an important role of this gene in preimplantation embryonic development in cattle  <cit> .

the differentially expressed novel tus and differential alternative splicing events identified in this study adds additional layers of information to transcriptomic changes associated with abnormal embryonic development, especially for the bovine genome that has incomplete annotation and limited information on alternative splicing.

meanwhile, we also asked if we were able to identify differentially expressed genes or pathways that were previously known to affect early embryonic development. for example, igfbp <dig>  was upregulated by about eight fold in degenerative embryos significantly . importantly, this protein has been shown to promote apoptosis  <cit>  and may have played a role in the embryonic degeneration process. moreover, we found an enrichment of differentially expressed genes located to extracellular matrix . this result, together with previous findings on the possible involvement cell communication and cell adhesion in early embryonic development  <cit> , suggested that defective communication between cells may play an important role in the abnormal development of degeneratives. indeed, many of the detected differentially expressed or spliced genes do not have known roles in embryonic development. the identification of such novel candidate genes would necessitate further investigation.

the linear amplification of mrna was necessary to obtain sufficient materials to generate sequencing libraries from embryos. we were able to amplify approximately  <dig> ug arna from  <dig> ng total rna. assuming a 2% mrna fraction, this was about 1000-fold amplification, providing a convenient approach for rna-seq with limited starting materials. however, the effect of mrna amplification on digital gene expression measurements by rna-seq is not known. as expected, we observed higher coverage towards the 3' ends of transcripts in rna-seq  as well as in probe hybridization in the microarray data. this also limited our ability to reconstruct full length transcripts, particularly for those expressed at low level. more systematic investigation is required to assess how this artificial shortening of transcripts during mrna amplification may affect rna-seq results.

we observed a substantial fraction of intronic reads in both embryo samples. meanwhile, degeneratives contained considerably more intronic reads . in addition, we did not detect any particular subset of genes that preferentially contained intronic reads in degenerative embryos. the evidence on the distribution of sequencing reads in the genome in rna-seq was not consistent from other studies. using polya-selected rna from liver total rna, mortazivi et al.  <cit>  reported 93% and 3% of mapped reads aligned to exons and introns, respectively. in contrast, marioni et al.  <cit>  observed 32% genic reads mapped to introns, using liver and kidney rna samples and similar sequencing protocols as mortazavi et al. <cit> . there are several possible explanations for the high fraction of intronic reads in our degenerative embryo sample. first, minimal dna contamination may be fragmented, selected, and pcr enriched during library generation, though the chance was likely small, particularly because rna had been amplified  and the fragmentation protocol in rna-seq specifically targeted rna. to test for possible dna contamination in our arna samples experimentally, we randomly selected several intergenic and intronic genomic regions, and the results indicated no dna contamination at detectable level by pcr . second, nuclear pre-mrna containing polya tail may also be purified, amplified, and sequenced. it is important to point out that introns contain many more bases than exons thus a slight increase in pre-mrna fraction may increase intronic reads disproportionally. finally, alternative splicing events that retain introns may also increase the fraction of intronic reads. however, this would require many genes or highly-expressed genes to undergo such alternative splicing, which was not observed in our data.

because a slight increase in the pre-mrna fraction may result in dramatic increase in intronic reads , for rna-seq experiments that contain a substantial fraction of intronic reads, normalization by total mapped reads may severely bias gene expression estimates. for example, normalization by total mapped reads such as reads per kilobase per million mapped reads  may underestimate gene expression if the intronic fraction is higher because there would be fewer reads on exons but the total reads remain the same. in addition, total read counts can also be dramatically affected by a few genes that express at a very high level. for these reasons, we chose to quantile normalize raw read counts, which is less affected by total read counts and has been shown to reduce bias for differential gene expression analysis  <cit> .

our results indicated that the current bovine genome annotation is far from complete. in addition to a combined total of  <dig>  novel junctions, we also discovered  <dig>  novel tus. although rna-seq is able to detect unannotated transcriptional activities, various filters are needed to avoid detection of spurious "genes". several software packages have been developed to identify novel splice junctions  <cit>  and reconstruct transcripts from rna-seq data  <cit> , yet sufficient sequencing depth and length are required. manual inspection of reconstructed transcripts in our data showed that the accuracy was significantly affected by false splice junctions and low coverage. as sequencing technologies evolve to longer and more accurate reads, and more powerful software packages are developed, the need for a complete annotation is further limited. nonetheless, a more complete annotation of the bovine genome will likely benefit rna-seq at the current point.

despite rna-seq providing a deep survey of the transcriptomes of ivf embryos, little difference in overall gene expression was detected in degenerative embryos. nevertheless, preference for a particular spliced isoform was observed for several genes in degeneratives. in addition, the frequent occurrence of alternative splicing in ivf embryos provided a repository for regulation of gene expression. although we sequenced at standard depth , it became apparent that deeper sequencing was required to detect subtler changes in alternative splicing with sufficient statistical power.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we demonstrated rna-seq in cattle, providing for the first time a high resolution map of transcriptional and alternative splicing activities in ivf embryos. the results provided further systematic understanding of mammalian embryonic development at a fine scale.

