BACKGROUND
the two main components of the function of a gene are its molecular function  and its functional context . though both aspects can only be decisively determined in in vivo experiments, the incredible and increasing amount of experimental information assembled in databases enables more and more accurate predictions  <cit> . because of the accuracy and speed with which algorithms can identify sequence similarity, the most commonly used tool for predicting gene function is doubtlessly sequence conservation. as the sequence is the blueprint for the three-dimensional structure, and therewith the enzymatic function of a gene, this method is particularly suitable for predicting the molecular function of an unknown gene, for example in a newly sequenced species.

predicting functional context, on the other hand, is a different story. this means inferring in silico in which process the gene plays a role. whereas the molecular function is concrete, and can be described by the catalyzed chemical reaction, the functional context is more elusive and may best be described as a composition of the context  of the encoded protein and the regulation of its expression in time and space  <cit> . a way to estimate the functional context is in terms of the collection of cells or tissues and biological processes or circumstances that determine when the gene is expressed. dna microarrays measure the expression levels of many genes under the same experimental condition, and combining the information from many such experiments allows the clustering of genes based on correlations in their expression patterns  <cit> . if two genes are co-expressed, i.e. they have a comparable expression profile, they are assumed to have a comparable functional context, independent of what this functional context is. using co-expression as a function prediction tool is particularly powerful when the co-expression is conserved in different organisms  <cit> .

here, we introduce a method to take the step from the comparative study of expression evolution based on the pairwise co-expression between two genes, to a definition on a global level. we present the "expression context" of a gene, based not on the expression across a range of tissues or circumstances, but on the co-expression with a range of genes. if two genes are co-expressed with the same other genes, i.e. they have a comparable co-expression profile, they thus have a comparable expression context. not only does this allow a global view on expression evolution, but it also solves the issue of comparing gene expression between distantly related species. when studying e.g. caenorhabditis elegans and saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> , one can not assign equivalent tissues like between homo sapiens and mus musculus  <cit> . the expression context method overcomes this limitation by substituting identical tissues for orthologous genes, and levels of expression for co-expression values. in this study, we include four eukaryote species , for which gene co-expression data have been determined on a large scale  <cit> . the first issue we address in this paper is how much our new global estimate of expression context is conserved between species.

in a comparative analysis of gene properties between different species, a solid definition of orthology is critical. current state of the art orthology methods allow for the expansion of an orthologous gene pair in one or both of the species compared. the existence of these so called in-paralogs, raises the question to what extent the expression contexts of the gene copies have diverged. previously, we have studied genes that are duplicated in c. elegans relative to s. cerevisiae  <cit> . we showed that the c. elegans orthologs of genes that in s. cerevisiae are reliably co-regulated with the ancestral gene, have a tendency to retain co-expression with one of the two duplicated orthologs in c. elegans, while the link with the other is lost . one of the important questions this paper left us with is whether the derived gene that had retained the ancestral regulatory context was also the least diverged at the sequence level. therefore, the second issue addressed in the current work is the relationship between the evolution of the gene sequence and the evolution of the expression context after a gene duplication. we present an analysis between orthologous groups , and an analysis between sibling genes  within expanded orthologous groups , and show that sequence and expression context tend to diverge independently.

RESULTS
orthology
inparanoid is a pairwise definition of orthology that allows for species specific gene expansions . in the case of this group orthology, two or more genes from one species are evolutionarily equally orthologous to one or more genes in the other species. such a scheme is necessary if we want to study the divergence in expression context between two recent gene copies, which would not be found in, for example, a reciprocal best hit approach. on the other hand, algorithms that identify group orthology between more organisms at once would annul the resolution obtained in a pairwise definition  <cit> . we constructed orthology relationships separately for all species pairs, and separated the resulting orthologous groups into two categories: 1- <dig> orthologous groups  and x-x orthologs . there are about twice as many 1- <dig> orthologs as there are x-x orthologous groups .

expression context
the global definition of expression context introduced here is based on the expression correlations between a query gene in one species and all the members in that species of all 1- <dig> orthologous groups present between the two species compared . the expression context conservation is then obtained by correlating the expression correlation values of the query genes from two different species and the corresponding 1- <dig> orthologs in their species . to test how meaningful this measure is, we compared the expression context conservation between different categories of orthologs and random non-orthologous gene pairs. the histograms in fig.  <dig> are normalized, and the data is pooled over all species comparisons. as a null model, we composed a random data set of  <dig> non-orthologous gene pairs drawn from each species pair. though the distributions of the expression context conservation scores lie close to zero, we find that the expression context of both 1- <dig> orthologs and of x-x orthologs is significantly higher than that of random genes . this significant conservation reveals the functional and evolutionary relevance of the expression context.

which genes have a conserved expression context?
we looked at the function of the genes with a conserved expression context using the kog functional categories  <cit> . the functional categories were counted for all 1- <dig> orthologs assigned to a kog . for each functional category, the fraction of 1- <dig> orthologous genes with an expression context conservation score higher than zero is shown in fig.  <dig>  we find that all "information storage and processing" categories have a higher level of expression context conservation than all "metabolism" categories. within the "cellular processes and signaling" class, which lies between the two extremes, we also find the categories with more informational genes to have a higher expression context conservation than those containing operational genes. "nuclear structure"  for example has a large fraction of genes with a highly conserved expression context, while "cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis"  and "extracellular structures"  have a low expression context conservation. these results are in accordance with other studies: the conservation of co-expression has previously been shown to be high for genes involved in core informational cellular processes . informational genes are also found to be more conserved than operational genes with respect to other properties, e.g. they have been shown to be less prone to horizontal gene transfer  <cit> .

differential expression context conservation between in-paralogs
our previous work suggests that in an x-x orthologous group, the ancestral expression context may have been retained by one of the in-paralogs in each of the species  <cit> , possibly because they are functionally the most conserved. we therefore sub-classify each x-x orthologous group into the gene pair that has the highest expression context conservation within this orthologous group on the one hand , and on the other hand the remaining, "less conserved x-x orthologs" .

comparing the distribution of the expression context conservation scores in these sub-categories of orthologs with the other histograms in fig.  <dig> reveals that only the set of random gene pairs and the less conserved x-x orthologs do not have significantly different distributions . the expression context conservation in these two data sets was lowest, followed by, in order, all x-x orthologs, the 1- <dig> orthologs, and finally the most conserved x-x orthologs . all the other pairs of distributions are highly significantly different from one another .

correlation of sequence identity and expression context conservation between orthologous groups
to find out how the conservation of expression context  is reflected in the sequence conservation, we first analyzed how the sequence divergence between orthologous groups relates to the divergence in expression context in an orthologous gene pair after speciation. to avoid having to make a potentially controversial choice on how to functionally and evolutionary interpret the multiple orthologous relationships in x-x orthologous groups  <cit> , we only used the 1- <dig> orthologs for this comparison. these gene pairs originated at the speciation event, so they have all had the same amount of time to diverge. table  <dig> presents the correlation coefficients between expression context conservation and sequence identity of the 1- <dig> orthologs for all species pairs.

though the correlation coefficients are significantly positive , they are very low . in this analysis of the relationship between expression context conservation and sequence identity across orthologous groups, we conclude that the evolution rate of the gene sequence does not depend on its expression context.

a trend that we seem to observe is that the correlation between sequence evolution and expression context evolution reflects the predictive span of the expression data. in figs. 2d-f of the paper by stuart et al., the accuracy-coverage plots of d. melanogaster and h. sapiens are always lower than those of c. elegans and s. cerevisiae. in our results, we also observe the highest correlation between expression context conservation and sequence identity for the 1- <dig> orthologs of s. cerevisiae and c. elegans, rather than for two closer related metazoa. thus some of the variation in our results reflect the quality of the microarray data for function prediction.

correlation of sequence identity and expression context conservation between orthologs after a single gene duplication
the simplest case where we can study the divergence of duplicated genes within orthologous groups is for 1– <dig> orthologs, where one gene duplication occurred in one of the two daughter species since the speciation event. we carry out a straightforward analysis by counting how often the gene with the highest expression context conservation also has the highest sequence identity. fig.  <dig> shows the consistency of sequence evolution with expression context evolution in the 1– <dig> orthologous groups.

it is immediately striking how little difference there is between the observed consistent and observed inconsistent bars in fig.  <dig>  for all species comparisons, there is no significant over-representation of consistent observations, apart for a few exceptions  and hs1-sc <dig> orthologs; p <  <dig> , binomial distribution). in general, all the pvalues are very high, so this analysis shows that for 1– <dig> orthologs, the expression context is not better conserved in the ortholog with the highest sequence identity.

given the large overlap between the expression context conservation scores of the most conserved x-x orthologous gene pair and the less conserved x-x orthologs , a substantial fraction of inconsistent cases is expected based on this overlap alone. we therefore examined whether the small differences between the observed consistent and inconsistent frequencies in fig.  <dig> resulted from this overlap. to do this, we split the expression context conservation scores of all 1– <dig> orthologous groups into two data sets: one containing the highest  expression context conservation scores, the other containing the lower  scores. we computed the expected maximum consistent and minimum inconsistent observations by drawing from these data sets consistently with the sequence conservation . the triangles in fig.  <dig> show that many more consistent observations are expected if the data was initially organized consistently, even when the distributions of the most conserved and the less conserved x-x orthologs have such a large overlap.

in this analysis, we observed that the difference in sequence identity for the two duplicated genes was often small. this may in part be due to the fact that we compare evolutionarily divergent species, where the differences between in-paralogs  are small relative to the differences between orthologs . to be able to compare the rate of sequence evolution more accurately, we studied in detail the ce1-sc <dig> orthologous groups, and included the genome of ashbya gossypii, a fungus closely related to s. cerevisiae. where we found an ag1-sc <dig> orthologous group consisting of the same two s. cerevisiae genes as in the accompanying ce1-sc <dig> orthologous group, we calculated the ka/ks ratio between both gene pairs in the ag1-sc <dig> orthologous group to determine the rate of evolution for both s. cerevisiae genes. the ratio of nonsynonymous  to synonymous  nucleotide substitution rates is an indicator of selective pressures on genes  <cit> : a ratio higher than one indicates genes that are under positive selection pressure to change their sequence, a ratio lower than one indicates stabilizing selection. we found that the expression context was conserved for the slowest evolving s. cerevisiae gene in no more than 50% of the cases. these results confirm that gene sequence and expression context evolve independently after a gene duplication in 1– <dig> orthologous groups.

diverged expression contexts in the two β-subunits of the nascent polypeptide-associated complex in s. cerevisiae
as an example, we have looked in detail at a pair of in-paralogs in s. cerevisiae with a large difference in expression context conservation: β1nac  and β3nac . this example was selected because the in-paralogs in s. cerevisiae have an especially large difference in expression context conservation relative to c. elegans . in general, one should be alert when interpreting microarray data for a particular gene. for example, its spot may not hybridize well and the level of expression, co-expression or even expression context of the gene will be correspondingly influenced. we therefore checked these two genes and found that they behave normally: the fraction of experiments where they are over- and under-expressed is comparable to that of average genes .

the β-subunit of the nascent polypeptide-associated complex  is represented by two copies in s. cerevisiae: β1nac  and β3nac   <cit> . other species have only one copy of this gene: icd- <dig> in c. elegans, bic in d. melanogaster and btf <dig> in h. sapiens. comparing the expression context of each of these three genes to the two s. cerevisiae genes revealed that for all species comparisons, the expression context of egd <dig> was highly conserved, while the expression context of btt <dig> had diverged . compared to icd- <dig> in c. elegans, the expression context correlation of btt <dig> was even negative. when we compare the sequence identity of the two genes with their single orthologs in the other three species in this study, we find indeed that btt <dig> is more diverged than egd <dig> in all cases , i.e. sequence divergence and expression context divergence are completely consistent.

the function of these two gene copies remains unclear. so far, the only difference in function found for these two genes comes from deletion experiments. disruption of either of the s. cerevisiae βnac copies yielded viable strains, that differ only in the level of gal <dig> and gal <dig> induction after transmission to a medium containing galactose in stead of glucose  <cit> . the cross bred double negative βnac mutant showed an increase in the expression of several genes, including the gal genes. hu and ronne  suggested that egd <dig> and btt <dig> have a redundant function, but based on the diverged expression context, it is likely that the two genes are expressed under highly divergent cellular circumstances. given the consistent hints from the differential conservation of both the expression context and the protein sequence, we predict that egd <dig> is the true ortholog of icd- <dig>  bic and btf <dig> 

correlation of sequence identity and expression context conservation within orthologous groups after multiple gene duplications
we also compared sequence conservation with expression context conservation in more expanded x-x orthologous groups, i.e. all orthologous groups with four or more genes in two species. here, we considered sequence identity and expression context conservation consistent if they are positively correlated over all the gene pairs within an x-x orthologous group, and inconsistent when they are negatively correlated .

fig.  <dig> shows that these results and the results of the analysis of simple duplications  are very comparable. in almost all species comparisons, there is no significant difference between the number of consistent and inconsistent observations . the predominantly inconsistent x-x orthologous groups between d. melanogaster and h. sapiens may be the result of the lower predictive relevance of the expression data in these species .

if in both species the most conserved x-x orthologs are the only two genes with a selective constraint to maintain the ancestral function, the less conserved x-x orthologs may diverge randomly. thus, it is possible that the negative correlation between sequence identity and expression context conservation in the whole x-x orthologous group arose by chance. for those x-x orthologous groups with a negative correlation, we therefore checked if there was one gene pair that harbored both the highest expression context conservation and the highest sequence identity. however, this was the case for only 10% of these inconsistent x-x orthologous groups, so we must conclude that their negative correlation between sequence identity and expression context conservation is not the result of one of the x-x orthologous gene pairs being conserved, and the rest of the genes diverging randomly. rather, the conclusion is that as in 1– <dig> orthologs, the sequence and the expression context also evolve independently in other, more expanded x-x orthologous groups.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we introduce a global definition of expression context based on gene expression data. as equivalent tissues or experiments can not be assigned between distantly related species, our method uses orthologous genes to define convertible expression contexts between species. we represent the expression context of a query gene as the co-expression profile with a range of genes, rather than as the expression profile across corresponding experimental conditions. though the microarrays were carried out under highly divergent conditions in the four eukaryotes in this study , the expression context of one gene is based on many expression correlation values, each of which in turn integrates a large collection of experiments. to test the coverage and homogeneity of the experimental data sets, we calculated the expression correlation values of all gene pairs separately over two random halves of the microarray experiments. in d. melanogaster  and s. cerevisiae , these scores were highly correlated . thus, we do not expect biases in the microarray experimental conditions to severely influence the correlations in expression context. application of our method reveals that the expression context is conserved between orthologs across all species pairs, though x-x orthologs are less well conserved than 1- <dig> orthologs . we also find that informational genes have a more conserved expression context than operational genes . taken together, these results show that the expression context presented here is a meaningful measure of the global expression context of a gene.

using this method, we analyzed the correlation between the rates of evolution of the protein sequence and of the expression context. a correlation might be expected if the selective constraints on sequence and expression context were linked. in a comparison between all unexpanded orthologous groups, we find that this correlation is very low . this analysis compares genes that have branched apart at the speciation event, which means all differences in sequence conservation or expression context conservation are due to orthologous group specific evolution rates. because of the wide range of functions carried out by the different orthologous groups, it is likely that there are also differences in the evolution rates between orthologous groups. to eliminate the possible resulting biases in the comparison between orthologous groups, we have also compared the rates of sequence and expression context evolution within orthologous groups, i.e. after one  or multiple  gene duplication events. in these analyses, not all genes in one comparison have originated at the same time, but biases due to orthologous group specific evolution rates are absent. still, the conclusions are the same as in the comparison between orthologous groups. for 1– <dig> orthologs as well as for the other x-x orthologs, the cases where sequence identity and expression context conservation were correlated were not significantly over-represented . the only species pair with significantly more consistent observations in both analyses was c. elegans and h. sapiens, though only the ce1-hs <dig> and not the hs1-ce <dig> orthologs were consistent. comparing the types of microarray experiments carried out in these two species shows that there is little overlap  <cit> . nonetheless, these species are almost the only pair with a significant over-representation of consistency between sequence identity and expression context conservation.

the methods employed in this research show that the expression context is conserved in orthologs between species. sequence identity and expression context conservation are not correlated after gene duplication. thus, annotation of different expression contexts to orthologs can not be based on sequence similarity alone.

many of the expression correlations that compose the expression context may be irrelevant. according to the global definition of expression context introduced here, the expression correlation scores of all 1- <dig> orthologs in the genome add to the expression context. as few genes will possess a functional network containing all 1- <dig> orthologs, many co-expression values in the vector defining the expression context may be irrelevant. as an alternative, we have therefore also performed all analyses presented in this research using another method, that defined the expression context conservation as the number of overlapping orthologous groups in the top <dig> co-expressed 1- <dig> orthologs between two genes. in other words, this method counts how many of the highly co-expressed 1- <dig> orthologs are shared between two genes. qualitatively, the results found using this alternative method were identical, indicating a robustness of the results to different definitions of expression context.

previously, we have shown that after a gene duplication, one of the in-paralogs has a tendency to keep the ancestral regulatory interaction, while this link is lost in the other  <cit> . we could not find evidence for such partial conservation using the global definitions of functional conservation introduced here. in other words, although reliably predicted co-regulatory links are asymmetrically conserved after gene duplication, the co-expression of in-paralogs remains similar from a global point of view. this can be explained if the divergence  indicates sub-functionalization, while the in-paralogs remain within in the same cellular process .

