BACKGROUND
in biomedical sciences, experimental results often come in the form of one or more gene sets, and biologists are commonly tasked with the interpretation of these lists, which can easily become overwhelming considering the amount of data and number of data sources currently available. frequently, gene products carry out their function by working closely with the products of other genes, which motivates the study of genes as a set, instead of as individual units. we refer to these multi-gene units when carrying out one or more related biological processes as 'functional modules'. there are a number of rationales for studying genes through a modular perspective  <cit> . modules of genes may be interesting because of physical interactions  <cit> , common subcellular location  <cit> , or they may be meaningful players in a system of interconnected biologically processes. whichever the case, it is of significant interest to be able to hone in on interesting subsets of genes  <cit>  that perform coherent functions, particularly by making use of multiple types of information sources  <cit> .

currently, a common approach to discovering functional modules from a gene list is via the use of enrichment-based methods  <cit> , which determine if constituents of a predefined collection of gene sets are observed more frequently than expected in the list. often, these predefined reference gene sets reflect a single information source; for example, gene sets are commonly grouped according to annotations based on the gene ontology  to narrow the search based on one or more known functions. the requirement of predefined gene sets subjects the methods to limits imposed by those who construct the gene sets, thus reducing the chances of finding de novo coherent subsets. in situations where the nature of the interesting subsets is unknown, data-driven methods are more suitable than methods based on predefined reference sets. additionally, because evidence for gene-gene relationships within a module may occur in different forms, a caveat of most existing methods is that they do not consider the connections across distinct biological aspects, and thus would fail to identify diverse types of functional modules.

experimental methods and thus their resulting data come in many diverse forms, and in light of this it remains challenging to assess the functional coherence of a group of genes by considering multiple biological aspects. as an example, consider the following hypothetical scenario: from protein-protein interaction data, we find that protein a physically interacts with protein b, and from a signal transduction database one learns that protein b is a kinase that phosphorylates protein c. the challenge is to find out that proteins a, b, and c are functionally related in an automated way. here, we describe a novel approach for revealing functionally coherent subsets ab initio from an arbitrary gene list by assimilating information from multiple data sources.

there are two main challenges with combining heterogeneous information to identify functionally coherent subsets from a gene list. first, storing and accessing multiple information sources can be challenging for organisms of modest to large genome size, for which we implemented a web server to handle storage and facilitate access . second, it remains an active research area to encode diverse information regarding genes in a fashion that enables identification of functional modules. one notable method  <cit>  that uses a bayesian approach to integrate heterogeneous data sources was devised for the purposes of function prediction. the problem of identifying functionally coherent subgroups is a related but distinct problem to that of function prediction.

in this study, we represented genes as nodes of a graph whose edges reflect functional relatedness among the genes, based on available information regarding genes. then the task of identifying coherent gene subsets is reduced to the task of finding highly connected subgraphs from the graph, for which different existing graph-cut algorithms can be employed. finally, it is non-trivial to integrate information from multiple sources in a unified manner such that coherence of the gene subset is assessed utilizing all information. this is particularly important because information from each source can be limited but complementary to each other, thus combining them can potentially enhance the overall performance of revealing coherent subsets. to this end, we propose to use a spectral projection approach, described in figure  <dig>  in which relationships between genes are represented as graphs in different information spaces  and are further combined in kernel-transformed space. under such a setting, coherence subsets were further refined using spectral clustering methods. this work represents the following methodological contributions: first, we show that functional modules can be recovered by applying a graph-cut algorithm, presented as a form of the spectral clustering algorithm originally introduced by ng, jordan and weiss  <cit> . second, we demonstrate that combining data in kernel-transformed space enhances the ability of the algorithm to recover gene sets. additionally, the method is recast in a way to account for the potentially large percentages of noise present in gene lists coming from experiments. finally, an application of the approach to gene expression data  <cit>  revealed that many of the uncovered gene subsets were biologically sensible in that they belong to appropriate biological processes.

RESULTS
in this section, we detail the results of a number of simulation experiments as well as an example application. using a simulation approach, we examined the algorithm's ability to retrieve gene subsets, and specifically, we studied how the addition of new data sources impacts performance. then, we tested the usefulness of our approach in recovering coherent gene set from 'noisy' gene lists as is often encountered in high-throughput experiments. we then show the results of applying our method to a real-world data set.

discrimination of gene sets by spectral clustering
given a gene list, our task is to identify functionally coherent gene subsets. here, we used simulation experiments to evaluate the efficacy of spectral clustering for this task. in the simulation experiments, a number of functionally coherent gene subsets, ranging from 3- <dig>  was randomly mixed in multiple experiments, and our method was then used to recover the original subset partitions. we used pathways from kegg database  <cit>  and protein complexes from the mint  <cit>  database as 'known' functionally coherent modules, in that the proteins in these modules either perform related functions or form physical modules.

we performed a series of experiments by mixing an increasing number of 'known' functionally coherent gene sets, k, which was repeated with the given k  <dig> times. the experiments were carried out using the go annotations as the information source for the algorithm. the results in terms of recall, precision and f <dig> scores are summarized for s. cerevisiae in figure  <dig>  also, shown in the figure are the results of randomly assigned cluster labels as a control experiment.

the figure shows that the spectral clustering algorithm significantly outperforms random cluster assignments, and the difference becomes more obvious as k increases. overall, the trend for spectral clustering is that of decreasing efficacy with increasing k, and in the case of the go precision and recall, both are similarly affected. this decreasing trend is likely due to the fact that in general, clustering tasks become more difficult as more gene sets are mixed. an additional reason for the declining performance might be the fact that many metabolic and signal transduction pathways, as well as molecular complexes, are comprised of a mixture of functional modules, or coherent gene sets, and thus assigning modules to an appropriate pathway is not a straightforward task, especially as the number of modules and potential pathways increases.

information integration to enhance clustering
we then tested if information integration would further enhance the algorithm's ability to correctly partition mixtures of genes. we used data from the gene ontology  and pubmed databases as the information sources for this experiment. we also considered the information pertaining to different species: saccharomyces cerevisiae, mus musculus and homo sapiens, in order to test the generalizability of spectral clustering and information integration in this context. a total of  <dig> simulations were run for each species and each combination of information sources, using both kegg and mint as positive controls. the results are summarized in figure  <dig>  if we use average f <dig> scores to summarize the performance under all simulations, the spectral clustering algorithm performed better in each case when data were combined than for either single-source version. in general, simulations carried out on s. cerevisiae had greater precision and recall than those done on h. sapiens and m. musculus. the pattern is likely due to the fact that the higher eukaryotes have larger genomes, and correspondingly, the information available is sparser when compared to the well-studied and genomically smaller baker's yeast. each bar is an average of  <dig> simulations ranging in specified k from 3- <dig>  we also observed that the go alone has better precision than the literature alone for all species studied, and the combination of go and publications consistently performs the best of the information sources.

the observed improvements in data partitioning due to information integration is highly encouraging. the results indicate that indeed, different information sources contain distinct yet complementary information, and efficient information integration techniques can be employed to utilize such complementary information in order to achieve a better gene set recovery. the kernel fusion and transformation step in spectral clustering  provided a principled way of integrating information in that the sum of two kernel functions does not require exceptions and heuristics.

our results show that spectral clustering performs better using the go as an information source in comparison to gene co-mentioning data . one possible explanation is that information from the go database is 'richer' in comparison to that of the gene co-mentioning. it is easier to establish the relatedness among a pair of genes in terms of function because many genes are annotated in the go databases, and our approach of revealing functional relationships using the graphical representation of the go can easily assess the relatedness between a pair of genes, even though they may be annotated with different go terms. we believe the strength of our approach lies in the fact that it captures the functional relationship between genes, by taking into account both the structure of the go and the strength of the relationship using semantic distance. this observation may lead to other possible approaches of representing the functional relationship between genes; for example one could use rigorous topic modeling of literature information that are associated with a gene in order to capture the functional relationships between genes  <cit> . on the other hand, the gene co-mentioning data matrix is fairly sparse, and not all information is directly relevant; thus, as an information source alone, gene co-mentioning does not perform well. finally, a key observation from this experiment is that, although an information source may not be rich in information, it may be valuable if it is complementary to other information sources.

discovering modules amongst noise
biologists and experimentalists are accustomed to working under the assumption that there is at least a minimal level of stochastic fluctuations in the accuracy of experimental results. a key for analyzing biological experimental results is to identify real signal from within the 'noisy' data; in our case, to recover coherent gene sets from data contaminated with noise. in this experiment, we used mint and kegg derived gene sets , and we injected genes randomly selected from the genome to serve as noise. the experiment was repeated at seven levels of noise for  <dig> kegg and  <dig> mint gene sets. the goal was to run the algorithm, without making an assumption for k, and check the ability to recover the original coherent subsets. using combined go and pubmed data as information sources, our algorithm broke each gene set into k clusters for which each was then subjected to coherence testing using the gosteiner method  <cit> . only statistically significant modules were considered coherent. based on observed f <dig> scores in figure  <dig> we can summarize that our procedure identified correct genes, while minimizing false positives for minimal levels of noise contamination . at higher levels of noise the average performance among gene sets drops to less desirable levels. the pattern for kegg and mint gene sets is comparable, with mint performing slightly better at high  levels of noise. the levels of injected noise are not the realized amount of noise, which are generally a few percentage points lower, due to the fact that not all genes have information with respect to the data sources. overall, this is an impressive result indicating that the techniques in our procedure  successfully revealed the majority of the truly coherent genes even at relatively high levels of noise.

to further evaluate the results, we plotted the individual simulations as graphs, and inspected the calls made by the algorithm . from these observations, we see that, in general, the false positive genes are weakly connected to the rest of the true positive genes, which explains why they were not included as part of the noise group. also, the true positive genes are generally highly connected, in terms of edge weights, which indicates that spectral clustering is capable of accurately capturing the relatedness of functionally coherent genes, and our overall procedure is capable of dealing with noise inevitably found in biological data.

application to gene expression data
the proceeding sections provided both theoretical and empirical rationales for using the proposed information integration framework to mine large gene lists for functional modules. to test the method with a real-world data set, we chose to use a gene expression data set that is well-studied  <cit> . the animal model is the rd <dig> mouse, which is a commonly used model  <cit>  for retinitis pigmentosa , a disease characterized by rod photoreceptor degeneration and apoptosis  <cit> . recent work  <cit>  provided guidance in creating the gene set of interest . here, we tested the ability of our procedure to identify functionally coherent subsets from this real-world data set, which is within the range of small to moderately sized gene sets  often observed in experiments. the results are summarized in figure  <dig>  for each information source combination, the filtered set of genes was partitioned using spectral clustering and each subset was subsequently tested for statistical significance using gosteiner  <cit> . the results are summarized using a weighted average of p-values with the p-value for a given gene corresponding to that of its assigned cluster. all combinations of data sources containing the gene expression information source arranged the genes in to less functionally coherent gene sets when compared to the other information sources. gene expression data likely does not provide sufficient information regarding the function of genes, based on the current state of data sources and hence we do not suggest including it unless the study is exploratory in nature. it is possible that gene expression derived gene sets are quite meaningful functionally, however it is difficult to evaluate uncharacterized gene interactions. interestingly, the go alone is not the best performing, which provides additional support for the use of publications as an additional data source. for the publications alone, we already know from the simulation studies  that we cannot expect robust subset discovery, however in combination with other sources the effect appears to be additive.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, the methods presented in this paper allow for efficient gene subset searching in both simulated and the real-world data. our approach should be of interest to a spectrum of biologists: it can be used to sift through large amounts of experimental data, and will help the experimentalist to identify specific genes or biological functions of interest. a method that effectively partitions mixtures of genes into functional modules is highly desirable in contemporary high throughput biology, particularly in microarray studies. our results show the value of spectral clustering, and particularly information integration in this setting. this research also prompts new research avenues, including: the discovery of additional informative data sources, and the adaption of these techniques to other problems like the prediction of gene function.

