BACKGROUND
in recent years there has been a resurge of interest in bacterial growth laws, a field of study initiated over 60 years ago but not yet fully understood  <cit> . studies on microbial growth kinetics were initiated by the seminal studies of monod  <cit>  who measured the relation between sugar concentration and bacterial growth rate. for high sugar levels, where the substrate concentration was in excess, monod directly measured the exponential growth rate. at low initial sugar levels, that declined during growth due to bacterial consumption, monod was unable to measure the substrate levels directly, and relied on the assumption that bacteria grow with a constant yield – that is, a unit increase in biomass corresponds to a constant times a unit decrease in sugar concentration. therefore, the total generated biomass in a density interval along the growth curve allows one to infer the amount of substrate utilized. monod found a simple mathematical relation connecting the bacterial growth rate μ to the concentration of a growth-limiting substrate s, known as the monod law:

  μ=μ0sks+s 

where μ <dig> is the growth rate at saturating substrate, and ks is the substrate level at which growth rate is half maximal  <cit> . many subsequent theoretical and experimental studies with several substrates and different bacteria found similar growth laws, and suggested several modifications to this law  <cit> .

most of these studies on growth laws measured bacteria in a steady-state situation, using a chemostat or balanced growth in a batch culture inoculated at high dilution  <cit> . measuring growth laws in dynamical situations - such as batch cultures which deplete substrate and enter the stationary phase  <cit>  - is much more complicated. a highly dynamical situation occurs in the transition phase between exponential growth and stationary phase where growth stops . this period, in which μ is strongly influenced by s, is brief, making it difficult to analyze  <cit> , both in terms of substrate-growth relations, and gene expression: most studies on gene expression lack the temporal resolution to address such rapidly changing situations  <cit> .

here, we study the last stages of growth in limiting nutrient, in which nutrient levels drop dramatically. to achieve this, we use a robotic assay that allows for the measurement of bacterial growth and gene expression at high temporal resolution . we also calculate the concentration of the limiting substrate during growth using monod’s constant yield assumption. we used e. coli grown on limiting concentrations of ammonia or glucose as model systems and found that when the bacteria run out of substrate, growth stops abruptly. in the last generation prior to this abrupt stop in growth, bacteria increase the activity of the promoters of metabolic genes in the pathways that utilize the nutrient in a pulse like manner. consequently, bacteria can maintain their maximal growth rate during this last generation. when the promoter activity reaches its maximal level, growth rate drops in a way that fits monod law. genetic perturbations that abolish this pulse of gene expression alter the way that cells decelerate growth, turning an abrupt stop into a gradual one.

RESULTS
high resolution dynamic measurements of growth rate under nutrient limiting conditions
we measured the growth curve of e. coli grown on m <dig> minimal medium supplemented with different amounts of nitrogen in the form of ammonia  ranging from a severely limiting level , to saturating level . optical density in 96-well plates was measured every 3 min, in a robotic system which moved the plate between an incubator  and an automated fluorimeter. each plate contained two conditions, with  <dig> replicates each. averaging over the  <dig> repeats yields a standard error in od on the order of 2% at each time-point. experiments were repeated 2– <dig> times with a day-day reproducibility error of 7%.

the exponential growth rate was very similar at all nitrogen levels . we found that for limiting nitrogen levels, the cells grow exponentially and then abruptly stop growth. the lower the nitrogen level, the earlier growth stopped and the lower the final od level . thus, a limiting level of a nutrient in the context of this study means a level which does not support the final od obtained for the saturating nutrient level, rather than a level which reduces growth rate.

we further analyzed the declaration phase of growth, experiments that are enabled by the 3 min temporal resolution of our assay. we find that at low nitrogen levels, cells stop growth abruptly, going from maximal to zero growth within 27 ± 4 min . such an abrupt stop of growth on limiting ammonia levels was previously reported qualitatively  <cit> . at the highest nitrogen levels,  <dig>  mm – at which nitrogen is not limiting - cells slow growth gradually as they enter stationary phase  <cit> . this gradual drop lasts about 4 h . at intermediate nitrogen levels, cells show a switch between these two behaviors: they first slow growth gradually, and then abruptly stop .

we find similar results for glucose as a limiting substrate. cells grown on m <dig> minimal medium with ample nitrogen  and low levels of glucose  stop growth abruptly, going from maximal growth rate to zero growth within 30 ± 3 min . an abrupt stop of growth in glucose limitation for e. coli was previously observed qualitatively  <cit> . at high glucose levels , growth slows gradually over about 4 h . at intermediate glucose levels cells show a transition between gradual slowing and abrupt stop of growth .

decline in growth rate as a function of substrate level is well described by the monod equation
the present assay allows estimation of the substrate level at each time point. instead of a direct measurement of the substrate level, which is challenging to perform at high temporal resolution and accuracy at low substrate levels, we inferred the substrate level from the bacterial density. to do this, we assume, that the substrate removed from the medium by the cells is incorporated into their biomass with a constant yield  <cit>  ; and that the total biomass  produced is proportional to the od, as previously demonstrated  <cit> . indeed, we found that as long as the substrate is limiting, the final od reached by the culture is proportional to the initial substrate level . since under-limiting conditions the final od is significantly lower than the maximal od  it is unlikely that growth is limited by factors other than the limiting nutrient . the relation between final od and initial substrate level only begins to saturate when the substrate become non-limiting ). the slope of the proportionality line, c, allows one to translate od units into substrate units. in this way we calculate the substrate at each time point s, using the od reached at time t:

  st=st=0-codt 

next, we plotted the observed growth rate as a function of the inferred substrate at each time point. we found that for low substrate media – in which growth stops abruptly - the decline in growth rate in the deceleration phase is well described by the monod law, with ks =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm for nitrogen . similar results are found for glucose, with ks = 5 ± 1 μm .

the ks values estimated here can be compared to those estimated in steady-state exponential growth. to our knowledge, the value of ks for nitrogen has not been previously reported. the value for glucose lies within the large range of previously measured ks which spans almost  <dig> orders of magnitude . these large differences were attributed to strain variations, differences in growth methods, bacterial density, length of exposure to low glucose concentrations, or the history of the inoculi  <cit> .

promoter activity of nitrogen and carbon assimilation genes rises sharply in the last generation before growth stops
the present assay allows measuring, along with the growth rate at each moment, the promoter activity of selected genes. for this purpose, we used reporter strains in which the promoter of interest controls the expression of a green fluorescent protein . reporter strains were taken from a comprehensive library of e. coli reporters, in which promoters control the expression of the fast folding and highly stable gfpmut <dig>  <cit> . we studied the dynamic expression from selected promoters at a time resolution of 8 min. promoter activity is measured by the rate of accumulation of green fluorescence per od unit as described  <cit> .

we studied the glna promoter which controls an operon of genes essential for ammonia assimilation . we find that under nitrogen limiting conditions the glna promoter during exponential phase had moderate activity that is independent of nitrogen levels. then, about one generation before growth stopped, promoter activity rose sharply by about 4– <dig> fold . promoter activity dropped back to low levels when growth stopped. the level of nitrogen at which the rise occurs is about the same,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm, for the three lowest nitrogen levels tested .

in contrast to the pulse of activity at the end of growth on limiting nitrogen, glna promoter activity remained roughly constant throughout growth on non-limiting nitrogen , and it gradually declined during entry to stationary phase . we also tested the glnk promoter which controls other genes involved in ammonia assimilation . we found very similar results: a sharp rise of promoter activity one generation before growth halts on limiting nitrogen, and a basal level that is nitrogen independent during exponential growth . this is consistent with previous experiments by ninfa and colleagues who showed that glna and glnk are activated when e. coli is starved for ammonia  <cit> . in contrast, non-related promoters  showed no increase in promoter activity at the end of growth under nitrogen limiting conditions . moreover, the abrupt stop in growth upon nitrogen limitation is not accompanied by increased activity of promoters controlling known stationary phase genes  <cit> .

the strong promoter activity peaks and shut-down follow a hill-like function  reminiscent to previous experimental and theoretical studies which found bi-stability and positive feedback loops in the nitrogen assimilation enzymes and transporters under very low nitrogen levels  <cit> .

the rise in glna promoter activity in the last generation before growth stops at low nitrogen, is consistent with previous findings that under severely limiting nitrogen , glna expressed from a regulated promoter must be over-expressed by 4– <dig> fold over its wild-type basal levels  in order to attain the same growth rate  <cit> . in that experiment, glna was deleted from the chromosome and placed under control of a tac promoter. thus, the pulsed expression of glna in the last generation of growth is prevented. we tested this mutant strain in the present system, and found that it showed a gradual reduction in growth rate, rather than a sharp stop, at limiting nitrogen levels and low induction levels . at high induction of glna, the abrupt stop is restored .

we also tested the effect of removing ntrc- a transcriptional regulator of the glna operon- as well as other operons involved in nitrogen metabolism  <cit> . an ntrc deletion strain which is defective in the regulation of nitrogen metabolic genes showed slower growth rate at low nitrogen levels, and gradual rather than abrupt stop of growth . this finding indicates that transcription regulation by ntrc is essential in order to obtain maximal growth rate and an abrupt stop of growth under nitrogen limiting conditions.

similar results are also found on limiting glucose . here, we studied a reporter for the activity of crp, a central regulator of sugar metabolism. the reporter plasmid contains a consensus site for crp controlling gfp expression  <cit> . we find that crp activity is moderate and glucose-level-independent throughout exponential growth . in glucose limitation it shows a rise of about 3-5-fold that lasts about one half of a generation, before growth stops . in non-limiting glucose , crp activity rises gradually, remaining high in early stationary phase . similar results were also found for the ptsg promoter, which controls the expression of the ptsg subunit of the pts glucose permease  <cit>  . it should be noted that in this case the promoter is highly active also in the non-limiting conditions since glucose is the sole carbon source but the increase and decline in promoter activity is moderate compared to the limiting conditions. this observation is in line with recent findings showing a pulse of camp level and a sharp increase in the promoter activity of the acs gene upon glucose exhaustion  <cit> .

taken together, these results suggest that up regulation of the relevant metabolic genes in the last generation of growth allows prolonged exponential growth followed by a sharp decline in growth. the pulse of metabolic proteins at the last generation may compensate for the sharp decline in substrate in this phase of growth.

discussion
we used a robotic assay to measure bacterial growth rate, substrate level and promoter activity at high temporal resolution across the growth curve. we find that growth stops abruptly under limiting nitrogen or carbon but slows gradually when these nutrients are not limiting. the abrupt stop is accompanied by a pulse-like up regulation of the expression of genes in the relevant nutrient assimilation pathways. disrupting the regulation of these genes abolishes the pulse of expression, and turns the sharp stop of growth into a gradual deceleration. reduction in growth rate under nutrient limitation follows monod’s law, evaluated at each moment with the instantaneous level of substrate.

bacterial growth laws have mostly been measured in exponential phase in batch culture or in chemostats . studies of growth dependence on substrate in dynamical situations are scarce due to lack of experimental methods that can accurately probe such situations  <cit> . the present assay enables measurement of growth laws in a batch culture, including the stages where substrate is rapidly depleted by cells nearing stationary phase. the measurements were enabled by the high temporal resolution of the robotic assay, and the large number of repeats which allowed growth to be measured with a standard error of about 2%. difficulties in measuring very low substrate concentrations are by passed by using accurate measurements of od and a calibration curve relating od  to substrate  <cit>  - a method that can in principle be generalized to other substrates that are incorporated into biomass. using this approach we could add many experimental points to monod’s original data on glucose limitation and extend it to nitrogen limitation. in both cases we found that monod equation fits the data well.

the results suggest a mechanism used by the cells to prolong exponential growth under limiting substrate. the cells express a low basal level of assimilation proteins throughout exponential growth . then, when substrate drops below a critical level , the cells up regulate the enzymes, regulators and transporters in the assimilation pathway. such maximal regulator activity only at extreme signal is consistent with the finding that positive feedback regulation in the pho system is active only at very low signal levels  <cit>  . in our system the pulse of expression allows cells to maintain their rapid exponential growth rate for about one more generation . in this generation, they are able to utilize the remaining substrate. in other words, instead of growth rate declining at  <dig>  mm nitrogen, the enzymes allow rapid growth until about 100-fold lower nitrogen levels, on the order of ks =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  µm. growth stops when substrate drops below ks.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study extends our understanding of the last generation of bacterial growth in batch culture prior to entry into stationary phase. we find that growth stops abruptly under limiting nitrogen or carbon and that reduction in growth rate follows monod’s law. by following promoter activity of different genes we found that the abrupt stop of growth is accompanied by a pulse-like up-regulation of the expression of genes in the relevant nutrient assimilation pathways. this mechanism allows the cells to maintain their growth rate for about one more generation in which they are able to utilize low levels of substrate. the results presented in this study suggest a strategy used by the cells to prolong exponential growth under limiting substrate.

