BACKGROUND
hfq is a ubiquitous and abundant bacterial protein which assembles into ~ <dig> kda ring-shaped homohexamers that resemble those formed by the sm proteins of the eukaryotic splicing complex  <cit> . it was originally identified in the model bacterium escherichia coli as a host factor essential for qβ rna bacteriophage replication  <cit> . in uninfected bacteria hfq retains the ability to bind many mrnas and trans-acting antisense small non-coding regulatory rnas , thereby influencing, directly or indirectly, on the stability and/or translation of functionally diverse rna molecules  <cit> . this variety of interactions place hfq at a crucial node in bacterial post-transcriptional regulatory networks underlying a wide range of cellular processes and pathways  <cit> . consequently, mutations in the hfq gene were early observed to have a severe impact on bacterial physiology resulting in alterations in growth rate, cell morphology and tolerance to harsh environments  <cit> . in several enterobacteria and other facultative intracellular mammal pathogens these deficiencies ultimately compromise virulence traits such as motility, host invasion or growth/survival in the intracellular niche  <cit> . the virulence-related phenotypes of the hfq mutants have been shown to be largely dependent on the deregulation of the membrane homeostasis and rpos- or rpoe-mediated stress response pathways, which have been reported to involve the activity of srnas in some of these pathogenic bacteria  <cit> .

the α subdivision of the proteobacteria includes diverse species which share the capacity to establish a variety of long-term interactions with higher eukaryotes  <cit> . the pleiotropic phenotype conferred by hfq mutations is also common to all α-proteobacteria representatives in which the hfq function has been genetically addressed. for example, in brucella spp. the hfq defective mutants showed osmosensitivity, reduction in the fitness of long-term cultures and impaired survival into host macrophages, further supporting the relevant role of this protein in the establishment and maintenance of chronic intracellular infections  <cit> . besides its general contribution to stress adaptation hfq has been also shown to influence the nitrogen fixation process in free-living  and symbiotic  α-proteobacterial diazotrophs  <cit> . in these microorganisms hfq acts as a positive post-transcriptional regulator of nifa, the gene encoding the major transcriptional activator of the genes coding for the nitrogenase complex. however, in contrast to the situation in a. caulinodans hfq is not essential for the diazotrophic growth of the phototrophic purple bacterium r. capsulatus  <cit> .

sinorhizobium meliloti belongs to the group of α-proteobacterial species  able to engage in symbioses with legume plants. the outcome of these interactions is the formation of new specialized organs within the host, the root nodules, where bacteria undergo a process of profound morphological differentiation to their endosymbiotic form, the bacteroid. the nodules provide the microoxic environment demanded by the rhizobial nitrogenases to catalyze the reduction of the chemically inert atmospheric dinitrogen to ammonia that can be metabolized by the plant. the s. meliloti-medicago truncatula  symbiosis is a recognized tractable model system for deciphering molecular mechanisms employed by the infective rhizobia in their transition from a free-living state in soil to their final residence within the nodule cells  <cit> . despite the emerging role of hfq in the establishment of successful prokaryote-eukaryote interactions, the functions of this rna chaperone in α-proteobacteria, and in particular in the nitrogen-fixing endosymbionts, have remained largely unexplored. nonetheless, a recent study has revealed the influence of hfq on the stability of known s. meliloti srnas, thus anticipating the importance of this protein in srna-mediated regulatory pathways in this model symbiotic bacterium  <cit> . here, we have determined global hfq-dependent changes in gene expression and protein accumulation coupled with the characterization of the symbiotic behavior of hfq knock-out mutants to pinpoint the function of this rna chaperone in the alfalfa symbiont s. meliloti. we found that loss of hfq alters growth and energy-producing carbon metabolic pathways in free-living bacteria, and severely compromises the nodulation competitiveness and the efficiency of the symbiosis with alfalfa. furthermore, we provide experimental evidence of hfq binding to some of the recently identified s. meliloti srnas  <cit> , which predicts that these molecules could be major players in the rhizobial hfq regulatory network.

RESULTS
the s. meliloti hfq genomic region
the hfq gene corresponds to orf smc <dig>  of the s. meliloti genome project  which has been annotated at bps 1577127- <dig> in the chromosome of the reference strain  <dig>  <cit> . it is predicted to encode an  <dig> amino acids-long polypeptide with 72% similarity and 45% identity to the well-characterized e. coli hfq protein and 77%-100% identity to its α-proteobacterial counterparts. a multiple amino acid sequence alignment revealed that the conservation between the rhizobial and enterobacterial hfq proteins is restricted to the predicted sm <dig> and sm <dig> motifs likely forming the rna-binding pocket, whereas the enterobacterial genomes encode a protein with a c-terminal extension .

the s. meliloti hfq gene seems to form a dicistronic operon with the downstream hflx-like gene coding for a putative gtp-binding protein. upstream of hfq are smc <dig> and trka coding for a d-alanine aminotransferase and a potassium transporter, respectively . immediately upstream of trka is the gene cluster specifying the nitrogen assimilation system ntr . this genomic arrangement is essentially conserved in all the nitrogen-fixing endosymbionts of the order rhizobiales. the exception is the absence of either the trka or smc <dig> homologs between the ntr operon and hfq in a few species . in contrast, the s. meliloti hfq upstream region totally diverges from that of its related intracellular animal pathogens . enterobacterial and α-proteobacterial genomes only conserve the hflx gene downstream of hfq in this chromosomal region.

construction and growth characteristics of the s. meliloti hfq mutants
as a first approach to address the s. meliloti hfq functions in vivo two independent hfq knock-out mutants were constructed in strains  <dig> and  <dig>  these s. meliloti strains are derived from the same progenitor  although they exhibit some phenotypic differences in growth, induction of host gene expression or response to phosphate starvation  <cit> . nonetheless, partial sequence and restriction analyses revealed that the  <dig> and  <dig> hfq genomic regions are identical .

a mutant  and a control strain  were first generated in  <dig> by disruption of hfq with the mobilizable suicide vector pk18mobsacb mediated by single homologous recombination events. pcr amplification and sequence analyses of the resulting mutant alleles revealed that in 2011- <dig>  pk18mobsacb disrupted the predicted sm <dig> domain by inserting after nt  <dig> of the hfq coding sequence . in 2011- <dig> , plasmid integration was mapped to nt  <dig> of the hfq orf, thus affecting the translation of the non conserved last three amino acids of the protein . both hfq strains formed colonies with wild-type morphology when grown in ty agar. however, the 2011- <dig>  mutant exhibited a markedly slower growth than the strain 2011- <dig> , which behaved as the wild-type  <dig> strain on plates . when grown in ty broth with aeration no differences were observed between the wild-type  <dig> strain and its derivative 2011- <dig>  whereas the hfq insertion mutant 2011- <dig>  showed a delayed lag phase and reached the stationary phase at lower optical density . this new observation further supports that the reduced growth of the 2011- <dig>  strain was due to hfq inactivation rather than to polar effects caused by pk18mobsacb integration. furthermore, the plasmid pjbhfq expressing the hfq gene from its own promoter fully complemented the growth phenotype of the hfq insertion mutant.

a second mutant was constructed in the reference strain  <dig> by pk18mobsacb-mediated double crossing over resulting into a complete marker-free deletion of the hfq orf . the growth phenotype on ty agar plates previously observed in the 2011- <dig>  hfq insertion mutant was used as a reference to discriminate between the colonies corresponding to the 1021Δhfq strain and those of the wild-type revertants after the second cross over event. a southern hybridization further confirmed the expected genomic arrangement in the mutant . in liquid ty medium the 1021Δhfq strain also exhibited reduced growth rate which was complemented with plasmid pjbhfq as expected .

therefore, 2011- <dig>  and 1021Δhfq mutants displayed apparent indistinguishable free-living growth defects when compared to their respective parent strains and they have been combined in this study as independent genetic tools to identify general rather than strain-specific hfq functions in s. meliloti.

hfq-dependent alterations of the free-living s. meliloti transcriptome and proteome
hfq-dependent changes in transcript abundance were first investigated by comparing the expression profiles of wild-type  <dig> and 1021Δhfq strains grown to lag phase  on whole genome sm14koli microarrays . hybridization signals to oligonucleotide probes corresponding to the intergenic regions were not analyzed further in this study. a total of  <dig> genes  displayed at least 2-fold changes in their mrna levels  and were catalogued as differentially expressed in both strains . of these,  <dig> were found to be down-regulated and  <dig> up-regulated in the 1021Δhfq mutant. replicon distribution of the  <dig> hfq-dependent genes revealed that  <dig>  were chromosomal and  <dig> had plasmid location;  <dig>  in psyma and  <dig>  in psymb . taking into account the gene content of s. meliloti  <dig> with 54% genes annotated in the chromosome, 21% in psyma and 24% located on psymb, this distribution showed a replicon bias in hfq activity with  <dig> -fold more impact than expected on psyma-encoded transcripts. the former observation is more evident when looking at the location of genes scored as down-regulated in the 1021Δhfq mutant; as many as  <dig>  of these  <dig> down-regulated genes were psyma-borne which is almost  <dig> -fold more than expected for the orf content of this megaplasmid.

according to the s. meliloti  <dig> genome sequence annotations and the kegg database   <dig>  out of the  <dig> genes with altered expression in 1021Δhfq could be assigned to particular functional categories, whereas  <dig>  exhibited global or partial homology to database entries corresponding to putative genes with unknown function . more than half of the genes with functional homology are predicted to encode proteins and enzymes for the transport  and metabolism  of small molecules, mainly sugars and amino acids, whereas the remaining  <dig> are related to regulation of transcription , electron transport or nitrogen fixation  and other cell processes  such as macromolecule or central intermediary metabolism. within the latter group several genes with a major role in translation and cellular rna/protein turnover were differentially regulated in the mutant; smc <dig> coding for rnasej, smc <dig> encoding a putative endoribonuclease l-psp likely involved in mrnas cleavage, sma <dig>  degp <dig> and degp <dig> annotated as determinants of different types of proteases, and rpls/rpma both encoding ribosomal proteins. all these genes except sma <dig> and degp <dig>  were up-regulated in the mutant.

as an independent supporting approach to investigate the hfq function in s. meliloti the proteomic profiling of the wild-type strain  <dig> and its hfq mutant derivative 2011- <dig>  was also determined. analysis of  <dig> coomassie-stained 2d-gels from bacteria grown on ty medium to lag phase  revealed on average  <dig> spots of which  <dig> corresponded to individual polypeptides with reliable differential accumulation in the wild-type and mutant strains . mass spectrometry  revealed that  <dig> of these proteins are encoded in chromosomally located genes,  <dig> in psymb and only one in the psyma megaplasmid, thus confirming the major role of hfq in regulating s. meliloti chromosomal traits . of these  <dig> proteins,  <dig> were over-represented and  <dig> under-represented in the 2011- <dig>  mutant strain. classification of the differentially expressed proteins according to the s. meliloti  <dig> and kegg databases identified three main functional categories; transport , small molecule metabolism  and chaperones and/or stress factors  whereas the remaining  <dig> were catalogued either as involved in translation  or as hypothetical conserved proteins with unpredicted function  .

comparison of the transcriptomic and proteomic profiles described in this study revealed an overlap of  <dig> genes identified as differentially expressed in hfq mutants and wild-type strains in both analyses. their predicted encoded proteins are the periplasmic components of the abc transporters of myo-inositol , fructose , α-glucosides , amino acids , leucine  and l-amino acids  as well as two enzymes related to myo-inositol catabolism, iole and iold. therefore, regardless the recognized phenotypic differences between the  <dig> and  <dig> strains both approaches support the general conclusion that hfq has a major impact in the regulation of transport and metabolism in s. meliloti.

hfq influences central metabolic pathways in s. meliloti
among the  <dig> genes found to be down-regulated in the hfq deletion mutant,  <dig>  are predicted to encode functions for the uptake  and metabolism  of small molecules with a major proportion related to the utilization of carbon substrates . eleven of these genes form part of operons encoding the different components  of the abc transporters for myo-inositol , α-glucosides , fructose , ribose , glycerol , and other organic acids/alcohols   <cit> . an additional gene , displaying more than 32-fold reduction  in transcript abundance in the hfq mutant has been annotated as coding for a putative myo-inositol-induced periplasmic solute-binding protein  <cit> . however, it seems to be an independent transcription unit, not clustered apparently with genes related to sugar uptake. the remaining  <dig> down-regulated transporter genes are likely involved in the uptake of glycine betaine  and iron . the predicted reduced efficiency in the import of primary carbon substrates by the 1021Δhfq mutant was accompanied by the down-regulation of  <dig> genes involved in sugar catabolism: iolc, iold, iole and iolb integrating the operon for the utilization of myo-inositol, smc <dig> which encodes a putative glucose-fructose oxidoreductase, smc <dig> likely encoding a dioxygenase, and  <dig> putative alcohol dehydrogenase-encoding genes, adha <dig> and sma <dig>  predicted to be involved in fermentation of carbon substrates. lack of hfq also led to a reduction in the abundance of the sma <dig> transcript, which likely codes for a transcriptional regulator of the crp superfamily, some of which have been shown to govern central carbon metabolic pathways in bacteria through camp binding  <cit> . in addition to the down-regulation of genes of energy production pathways, some transcripts encoding components of the electron transfer chain such as cyca, etfa <dig> or sma <dig>  were less abundant in the mutant. another set of down-regulated genes in the hfq deletion mutant includes those involved in processes fuelled by sugar catabolism such as the biosynthesis of amino acids , vitamins  and purines/pyrimidines .

this transcriptomic profiling predicts a physiological state of bacteria demanding alternative nutrient sources to support growth and macromolecule biosynthesis in the hfq mutant. indeed, our results also revealed that more than 50% of the transcripts with enhanced abundance in the mutant as compared to the wild-type strain encode proteins for the transport and catabolism of different n compounds. up-regulated transport genes have been shown or predicted to be involved in the uptake of l-aminoacids or peptides , branched-chain aminoacids , uracil/uridine , sugar amines  or other complex n substrates such as the polyamines spermidine and putrescine . consequently, loss of hfq also resulted in the up-regulation of an important set of genes likely related to the utilization or modification of amino acids and other n compounds. the transcripts corresponding to the  <dig> genes specifying the glycine cleavage system, gcvp, gcvh and gcvt , and to smc <dig>  encoding a putative methylmalonyl-coa epimerase likely operating in the catabolism of branched-chain amino acids were particularly over-represented in the mutant.

the proteomic analysis of the other hfq mutant  used in this study identified periplasmic solute binding proteins of abc transporters and metabolic enzymes as the predominant sets of polypeptides which accumulation in the cell was altered by disruption of the hfq gene by the insertion of pk18mobsacb . down-regulated transport proteins are all involved in the uptake of different sugars; myo-inositol , mannose/xylose/glucose , fructose  and α-glucosides . accordingly, several enzymes of the central carbon metabolism were also less abundant in the mutant: a putative myo-inositol catabolic protein , a predicted malonic semialdehyde oxidative decarboxylase  and a probable acetyl-coa synthetase . conversely, the transporters overproduced by the 2011- <dig>  mutant are all related to the import of n substrates such as peptides , leucine , l-amino acids , other aminoacids , glycine betaine  or choline . other up-regulated proteins as a result of the hfq mutation include metabolic enzymes such as ornithine cyclodeaminase , a probable arginase , a putative adenosylhomocysteinase  and a phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase . ocd and argi <dig> catalyze enzymatic reactions of the urea cycle whereas ahcy is involved in the metabolism of sulphur-containing aminoacids. pcka catalyzes the conversion of oxalacetate into phospho-enol pyruvate, thus initiating the gluconeogenic pathway.

in summary, transcriptomics and proteomics independently suggest that in both s. meliloti hfq knock-out mutants metabolism is biased towards the gluconeogenesis pathway so that growth of free-living bacteria is mainly supported by the utilization of amino acids rather than primary carbon substrates as energy sources.

loss of hfq affects s. meliloti nodulation kinetics, competitiveness and symbiotic nitrogen fixation
nodulation and competition tests were first performed in order to evaluate the symbiotic behaviour of the s. meliloti hfq mutants. sets of  <dig> alfalfa plants grown hydroponically in test tubes were independently inoculated with bacterial suspensions of the wild-type strains  and the knock-out hfq mutants . the number of nodules per plant induced by each strain and the percentage of nodulated plants were recorded at daily intervals post-inoculation . no significant differences were observed in the onset of nodulation  or the average number of nodules per plant at the end of the experiment  when the wild-type s. meliloti  <dig> strain and the mutant 1021Δhfq were compared . the hfq mutant was also able to nodulate 100% inoculated plants, further supporting similar nodulation efficiency of both strains . however, a discrete delay in nodulation of the mutant when compared to the wild-type nodulation kinetics was revealed by both assays. comparison of the symbiotic behaviour of the 2011- <dig>  mutant with that of its parent strain  <dig> led to identical conclusions . together these results suggest that the loss of hfq does not affect the ability of s. meliloti to elicit nodule organogenesis on alfalfa roots but it probably influences on bacterial adaptations to the plant rhizosphere.

competition assays were then performed on alfalfa plants grown in two different solid media; leonard assemblies and agar plates . taking advantage of the tagging of the 2011- <dig>  mutant with the km resistance marker of pk18mobsacb co-inoculation suspensions were prepared in this case by mixing s. meliloti  <dig> and 2011- <dig>  suspensions at 1: <dig> ratio. thirty dpi nodules were able to fix nitrogen as revealed by their pink colour because of the presence of leghemoglobin. a total of  <dig> nodules  were excised from roots, crushed and simultaneously plated on ty and ty-km to identify nodule-occupying bacteria. only  <dig> % of the nodules analyzed  were found to contain the mutant 2011- <dig>  . nonetheless, wild-type bacteria were also found within these nodules and therefore the former percentage represents double occupancy. the remaining nodules  were exclusively occupied by the wild-type  <dig> strain. these findings revealed that loss of hfq has a major impact on nodulation competitiveness of s. meliloti on alfalfa roots.

major differences in the symbiotic behaviour of the  <dig> wild-type strain and the 1021Δhfq mutant were also observed when looking at the final number of nitrogen-fixing nodules  induced by each strain when inoculated independently on alfalfa plants. this parameter was determined in plants grown either in test tubes or agar plates. at the end of the experiment  95% nodules elicited by the wild-type strain were pink as indicative of active nitrogen-fixation, whatever the plant growth conditions, whereas 55% -64%  nodules induced by the 1021Δhfq mutant remained white . furthermore, the first wild-type pink nodule appeared on average  <dig> dpi. in contrast, this time was estimated to be  <dig> dpi in plants inoculated with the 1021Δhfq strain. finally, growth of alfalfa plants inoculated with s. meliloti  <dig> and 1021Δhfq strains were also compared in experiments performed on leonard jars during  <dig> days . plants inoculated with the hfq mutant exhibited leaves with pale green colour and reached roughly half of the height of the 1021-inoculated plants. dry weight determinations of individual plants confirmed this perception; the average weight of plants inoculated with the 1021Δhfq strain was hardly 64% of that of wild-type-inoculated plants. these results indicate that hfq also influenced late symbiotic stages and is required for the establishment of an efficient nitrogen-fixing symbiosis.

1021Δhfq-induced nodules are almost devoid of nitrogen-fixing bacteroids
to analyse in more detail the endosymbiotic phenotype associated to an hfq mutation we performed optical microscopy on nodules induced by the  <dig> wild-type strain and its 1021Δhfq mutant derivative . wild-type nodules were elongated and pink coloured as indicator of active symbiotic nitrogen fixation . bright-field microscopy of longitudinal sections of these nodules revealed the successive zones characterizing the histology of indeterminate nodules: the apical meristem or zone i, the infection zone ii; the bacteroids-infected zones ii-iii and iii; and the proximal senescence zone iv containing plant cells appearing empty under the light microscope   <cit> . merged images of the same nodule section observed under green and blue filters , confirmed the uniform colonization of central nodule tissues by differentiated green autofluorescent bacteroids . a magnification of a section of the nitrogen-fixation zone iii further showed evident signs of active leghemoglobin expression in the majority of plant cells which were fully and homogeneously invaded by bacteroids that are visualized as little vesicles .

a large proportion of 1021Δhfq-induced nodules were white and less elongated than those induced by the wild-type strain, thus revealing symbiotic deficiencies . the remaining nodules appeared pink and exhibited wild-type histology . light microscopic observation of longitudinal sections of the fix--looking nodules revealed that the bacteroid-infected tissues were restricted to the interzone ii-iii which even showed much less autofluorescence than in wild-type nodules when observed under  <dig> nm light . the underlaying zone, extending to the base of the nodule, did not look as a typical nitrogen-fixation zone iii but instead it resembled the senescence tissues  of wild-type nodules. a detail of this zone  further evidenced the histological reminiscences of zone iv where a major proportion of plant cells were devoid of differentiated bacteria and started to collapse as revealed by the appearance of some cell debris  <cit> . the few plant cells housing bacteroids were not pink as in the wild-type nodules, but rather they appeared dark, probably because of leghemoglobin degradation concomitant to bacterial death. we interpret this histology as the 1021Δhfq mutant retained some capacity to infect the host and to differentiate into bacteroids but it was compromised in the survival as endosymbiotic bacteria within the nodule cells. this deficiency is the major determinant of the fix- phenotype observed in these nodules.

hfq contributes to the regulation of nifa and fixk1/k2
an important set of psyma-encoded transcripts with a decreased accumulation in the 1021Δhfq mutant included those corresponding to the two copies of the fixk regulator  and their downstream-dependent genes coding for the components of the respiratory chain associated to the nitrogenase complex  . this was a surprising finding since it is well documented that transcription of nitrogen fixation genes  is oxygen-regulated in legume nodules and only induced under microoxic conditions in free-living bacteria  <cit> . nonetheless, it has been also reported that a moderate decrease of the ambient oxygen concentration  in the gas phase over a culture is sufficient to trigger atp-dependent autophosphorylation of the deoxygenated fixl hemoprotein in the fixlj-fixk phosphorelay cascade  <cit> . in s. meliloti phosphorylated fixj not only activates transcription of the fixk1/k <dig> regulatory genes but also of nifa, the transcriptional activator of the nif genes specifying the nitrogenase complex. expression of nifa has been shown to demand more stringent microaerobic conditions  <cit> . therefore, down-regulation of the fix genes in the hfq mutant can be only explained if our culture conditions  enabled some level of expression of fixk1/fixk <dig> in the wild-type  <dig> strain and the accumulation of the corresponding transcripts is influenced by the lack of hfq. indeed, β-galactosidase assays in the wild-type  <dig> strain carrying a fixk::lacz transcriptional fusion demonstrated a 4-fold induction of fixk transcription in our culture conditions compared to better aerated cultures . similar experiments with a nifa::lacz transcriptional fusion revealed no signs of transcription of nifa whatever the aeration of the culture . these findings and the fact that nifa expression had been also shown to be influenced by hfq in other α-proteobacterial diazotrophs  <cit>  prompted us to further investigate the effects of hfq on both nifa and fixk expression in more stringent microaerobic conditions by rt-pcr . confirming the results of microarray experiments fixk transcripts were readily detected in rna from wild-type bacteria grown under assumed aerobiosis , whereas the 1021Δhfq failed to accumulate these transcripts in these culture conditions . as expected, after  <dig> hours incubation in a microoxic atmosphere  wild-type fixk expression was clearly induced as compared to aerobiosis . strikingly, similar amounts of the fixk transcript were detected in the rna from the hfq mutant extracted after the same treatment . in contrast, nifa expression was only detected after bacterial incubation in microaerobiosis , further confirming that transcription of this gene demands lower o <dig> concentrations than fixk. a significant reduced amount of nifa amplification product was detected in the 1021Δhfq mutant rna, although this was still visible in ethidium bromide stained gels . together, these results indicate that full expression of fixk and nifa requires hfq. nonetheless, hfq-mediated regulation of fixk does not operate under in vitro microoxic conditions and, therefore it could not be relevant to symbiosis.

some s. meliloti srnas bind hfq
mechanisms underlying hfq-dependent post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression could involve interaction of the protein with either mrna or srna molecules. we have recently reported on the computational prediction and experimental validation of seven s. meliloti srnas, denoted as smr rnas, exhibiting differential expression patterns potentially relevant to symbiosis  <cit> . to test which of these smr transcripts are hfq targets we have used rna co-inmunoprecipitation  with a chromosomally-encoded flag epitope-tagged hfq protein specifically recognized by monoclonal anti-flag antibodies in cell extracts of a s. meliloti hfqflag strain . this modification did not alter the growth phenotype of the wild-type strain , thus suggesting that the tagged variant of the s. meliloti hfq protein is uncompromised in its ability to bind rna, as reported in other bacterial species  <cit> . coip rnas were subjected to northern analysis with oligonucleotide probes for the smr rnas  <cit> . for each srna, hfq binding was assessed at the growth phase in ty broth where the srna was previously shown to be most abundant; log phase for transcripts smrc <dig>  smrc <dig>  smrc <dig>  smrc <dig>  smrb <dig> and smrc <dig> and stationary phase for smrc <dig>  as a control of binding specificity, identical analyses were performed in extracts from the wild-type strain  <dig> which does not express any polypeptide recognized by the anti-flag antibodies . as expected, no hybridization signal was detected for any of the tested srnas in coip samples from this control strain . in contrast, hybridization bands corresponding to smrc <dig>  smrc <dig>  smrc <dig> and smrc <dig> full-length transcripts were readily detected in coip rna from the s. meliloti hfqflag strain and thus, they were concluded to specifically bind to the epitope-tagged hfq protein . comparison of smr transcripts abundance in the coip samples and their expression levels in s. meliloti likely revealed different binding efficiencies of these srnas to hfq. therefore, the lack of hybridization signals to smrc <dig>  smrc <dig> and smrb <dig> probes could be interpreted as either absence in the coip rna or very low binding affinity to hfq which renders these srnas under the detection level of the northern hybridization. additional bands of different intensity, not detected in the s. meliloti total rna, corresponding to rna species smaller than the full-length transcripts were also visible when coip rna was hybridized to smrc <dig>  smrc <dig> and smrc <dig> probes. a recent report addressing the stability of the seemingly homologous smrc <dig> and smrc <dig> srnas in a s. meliloti  <dig> Δhfq mutant suggested that hfq protects both full-length transcripts from degradation and stabilises degradation products corresponding specifically to the 3'-half of smrc <dig>  <cit> . our results corroborate that both, smrc <dig> and smrc <dig> srnas do bind hfq and also suggest that the major band detected by the smrc <dig> probe could correspond to a degradation product of this transcript interacting with a particular high efficiency with the protein. nonetheless, the identity of this smrc16-derived product remains controversial since the probe used in our study hybridizes to the 5'-half rather than to the 3'-end of the full-length transcript. thus, further verifications should be carried out to elucidate this apparent contradiction. similarly, the additional faint hybridization bands detected with smrc <dig> and smrc <dig> probes could be interpreted as corresponding to degradation products of these srnas retaining a less efficient binding capacity to hfq than the full-length transcripts.

discussion
there is increasing evidence that the ubiquitous rna chaperone hfq acts as a global post-transcriptional regulator controlling gene networks underlying key steps in the interactions of pathogenic bacteria with their eukaryotic hosts  <cit> . however, its role in beneficial host-microbe interactions had not been investigated in detail. here, we have genetically addressed the function of hfq in the nitrogen-fixing endosymbiont s. meliloti, both as free-living bacterium and during the symbiotic interaction with its legume host alfalfa. as summarized in the model shown in fig.  <dig>  our results suggest the involvement of hfq in bacterial pathways affecting central metabolism, rhizospheric competence, survival within the nodule cells and symbiotic nitrogen fixation. hfq had been previously reported to have a role in the regulation of nitrogen fixation genes in several α-proteobacterial diazotrophs  <cit> . therefore, the present study extends the role of hfq in beneficial nitrogen-fixing bacteria to other processes related to the interaction with the plant host, further supporting the predicted universal role of hfq in the establishment and maintenance of chronic intracellular residences regardless the outcome of these infections. furthermore, we provide the first experimental evidence of s. meliloti srnas-binding hfq, thus anticipating the involvement of these molecules at different levels in the complex s. meliloti hfq regulatory network.

hfq influences growth and central carbon metabolism in s. meliloti
hfq loss-of-function affected the free-living growth of s. meliloti, thus confirming the predicted pleiotropy of this mutation in bacteria. to investigate the molecular basis of this growth deficiency we combined transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of two independent s. meliloti hfq mutants  exhibiting similar free-living growth defects. these experiments identified  <dig> transcripts and  <dig> polypeptides displaying reliable differential accumulation in the respective mutant and wild-type strains, with  <dig> genes common to both sets. the differences between the wild-type  <dig> and  <dig> strains could partially explain the limited overlap between proteins and transcripts regulated by hfq in both genetic backgrounds. however, this has been also observed in salmonella and more likely reflects the differential global effects of this protein on transcription, transcript stability and translation  <cit> . nonetheless, both analyses converged in the identification of genes coding for periplasmic solute binding proteins of abc transporters and metabolic enzymes as the dominant functional categories influenced by an hfq mutation. the extensive role of hfq in the regulation of nutrient uptake and central metabolism has been also highlighted by global transcriptome/proteome analyses of other hfq mutants such as those of e. coli, salmonella tiphymurium, pseudomonas aeruginosa or yersinia pestis  <cit> . furthermore, in salmonella and e. coli the massive regulation of genes encoding periplasmic substrate-binding proteins of abc uptake systems for amino acids and peptides involves the hfq-dependent gcvb srna  <cit> . gcvb homologs of distantly related bacteria conserve a g/u-rich stretch that binds to extended complementary c/a-rich regions, which may serve as translational enhancer elements, in the mrna targets  <cit> . the apparent widespread distribution of gcvb rnas in bacteria suggests that a similar regulatory mechanism for abc transporters could also exist in s. meliloti. loss of hfq also resulted in the general down-regulation of genes of the main central energy production pathways based on sugar uptake and catabolism as well as of some other genes predicted to participate in the biosynthesis of macromolecule building blocks such as amino acids or nucleosides. this seems to impose a metabolic shift favouring tca and gluconeogenesis which are supported by the up-regulation of the amino acid supply and nitrogen metabolism . furthermore, some genes encoding components of the electron transfer chains were also down-regulated in the mutant, which predicts the reduction of the proton motive force across the cytoplasmic membrane. we conclude that this metabolic rearrangement could explain the growth phenotype of the s. meliloti hfq knock-out mutants.

lack of hfq affects different stages of the s. meliloti-alfalfa symbiosis
early events of the symbiotic interaction of rhizobia with their legume hosts involve active colonization of the plant rhizosphere and the subsequent response to specific root-exuded compounds  to trigger nod factor signalling pathways leading to nodule organogenesis  <cit> . the rhizosphere is a complex environment providing bacteria with a wide range of carbon and nitrogen compounds. therefore, the ecological success of the legume symbionts demands high metabolic plasticity, which in s. meliloti is guaranteed by the large sets of genes encoding abc transporters and metabolic enzymes  <cit> . it is well documented that metabolic traits related to carbon supply and catabolism are important for s. meliloti to successfully compete for nodulation in the rhizosphere  <cit> . we have shown that the s. meliloti hfq mutants, when independently inoculated, are able to nodulate alfalfa roots at similar rates than the wild-type strains; although a slight delay in nodulation was observed. these results evidence that the hfq mutation did not compromise the perception and production of the specific symbiotic signals  that trigger nodule organogenesis but suggest that bacterial adaptation in the rhizosphere was affected. indeed, in the presence of the wild-type strain an hfq knock-out mutant was unable to elicit nodules, further supporting that the metabolic alterations linked to the loss of hfq represent a major disadvantage for the competitive colonization of the alfalfa rhizosphere.

although the s. meliloti hfq mutants were able to induce nodules on alfalfa roots  we noticed that a large proportion of these nodules looked non-fixing. furthermore, we also observed a significant delay in the onset of symbiotic nitrogen-fixation  in the remaining mutant-induced nodules  as compared to wild-type kinetics. as expected, these symbiotic deficiencies negatively affected the outcome of symbiosis . together, these findings indicate an influence of hfq in intermediate and/or late symbiotic stages. a closer examination of the white 1021Δhfq-induced nodules revealed scarce presence of leghemoglobin and a small proportion of plant cells containing nitrogen-fixing endosymbiotic bacteria. furthermore, signs of premature bacteroid senescence were observed in these nodules. these results suggest that loss of hfq affects the ability of s. meliloti to survive within the intracellular environment of the host. this phenotype has been reported as a common feature of hfq mutants of phylogenetically distant pathogenic bacteria  <cit> .

legumes provide invading bacteria with defined and dominant energy sources  other than the carbon substrates used for free-living growth in the rhizosphere  <cit> . therefore, although the alteration of central metabolic pathways could contribute to different extent to the colonization of developing nodules, they provide only a partial explanation for the hfq endosymbiotic phenotype. besides nutrient compounds, invading bacteria has to perceive and respond to a variety of plant signals to successfully colonize legume nodules  <cit> , these include; reactive oxygen species released by the host upon infection  <cit> , peptides likely transported into bacterial cells by the product of the baca gene to launch bacteroid differentiation  <cit> , the low ph of intracellular compartments  <cit>  or the microoxic environment demanded by the nitrogenase complex to fix atmospheric nitrogen  <cit> . our proteomic analysis identified groel <dig>  groel <dig>  grpe and ibpa chaperons as deregulated in the 2011- <dig>  hfq mutant. four groesl operons and an additional groel gene are present in the s. meliloti genome, being the groel <dig> required for nodulation and nitrogen-fixation  <cit> . thus, it can be speculated that hfq-dependent chaperones could help also infective rhizobia to cope with the prolonged stress within the plant host. on the other hand, the transcriptomic profiling revealed that the accumulation of fixk1/fixk <dig> transcripts is hfq-dependent. rt-pcr experiments on rna obtained from cells subjected to more stringent microaerophilic conditions revealed that hfq-mediated regulation of fixk operates in our assumed aerobic conditions but not in microaerobiosis. in s. meliloti fixk expression is also subjected to indirect autoregulation through the inhibition of the fixl sensor kinase by the fixt protein  <cit> . therefore, our findings add another level of complexity to the fixk-dependent regulatory circuit whose biological significance remains to be elucidated. the same rt-pcr experiments showed that hfq also contributes to the positive regulation of nifa, although transcripts of this gene were still detected in the mutant. down-regulation of nifa would impact on nitrogenase synthesis, thus explaining the hfq effects on the onset and probably the efficiency of nitrogen fixation itself in 36%-45% nodules that supported growth and development of the 1021Δhfq-inoculated plants in our assays. in addition, it has been recently reported that the effects of a mutation in the nifa gene extends beyond the regulation of the nitrogen fixation genes to influence other cellular processes such as motility or synthesis of extracellular proteins  <cit> . therefore, the down-regulation of this gene provides further explanation for the symbiotic phenotype of the hfq mutant. it has been recently reported that the hfq-mediated post-transcriptional regulation of nifa in r. leguminosarum bv. viciae involves the cleavage of nifa mrna in its 5' region by rnasee, thereby making the shine-dalgarno sequence accessible for the ribosomes  <cit> . given the synteny of the nifa genomic region in s. meliloti and r. leguminosarum it is tempting to speculate on a similar mechanism controlling nifa translation in the alfalfa endosymbiont.

detailed genome-wide identification of hfq-dependent symbiotic genes in planta is a technical difficult task that can be approached by mimicking specific symbiotic conditions in bacterial cultures. therefore, our study is definitely worth extending to all abiotic and biotic stresses impacting the s. meliloti symbiotic lifestyle. nonetheless, the similarities among hfq-related phenotypes in phylogenetically distant bacterial species anticipate a conservation of major hfq downstream target genes governing common adaptive responses of bacteria for the interaction with and the invasion of their eukaryotic hosts.

some s. meliloti srnas are hfq targets
trans-acting antisense regulatory srnas are major components of hfq-dependent regulatory networks helping bacteria to deal with external stimuli  <cit> . cellular processes controlled by hfq-binding srnas include quorum sensing, transport and metabolism, synthesis of virulence factors, sensitivity to antimicrobial peptides or general adaptation to a variety of abiotic stresses including low ph or oxidative stress  <cit> . therefore, many of the recently identified s. meliloti srnas are predicted to fulfil similar functions in an hfq-dependent manner  <cit> . we used a genetically modified s. meliloti  <dig> strain expressing a chromosomally-encoded flag-epitope tagged hfq protein to search for hfq targets among the seven differentially expressed srnas identified and mapped in our previous work  <cit> . this is a generic strategy that has been shown to retrieve high amounts of hfq-binding rnas with high specificity  <cit> . our coip experiments identified  <dig> out of the  <dig> srna transcripts as specific targets of hfq: smrc <dig>  smrc <dig>  smrc <dig> and smrc <dig>  accordingly, the conserved secondary structure of these srnas, as inferred from co-variance models, revealed several single stranded au-rich stretches  which are predicted to interact with hfq  <cit> . s. meliloti encodes an hfq protein conserving the rna binding core but lacking the c-terminal extension of γ- and β-proteobacterial hfqs. in e. coli this c-terminal domain is dispensable for srna binding but required for auto- and riboregulation  <cit> . therefore, the mechanistic and biological implications of srnas binding to a naturally-occurring truncated variant of hfq remain as open questions.

CONCLUSIONS
the s. meliloti rna chaperone hfq is a pleiotropic regulator influencing central metabolic pathways in free-living bacteria and several aspects of the symbiosis with its legume host alfalfa: nodulation competitiveness, survival of endosymbiotic bacteria within the nodule cells and expression of the key regulators of nitrogen-fixation. the identified hfq-dependent phenotypes, mrnas and srnas in a beneficial plant-interacting rhizobacteria such as s. meliloti constitute a new baseline to further investigate the hfq-mediated pathways controlling common strategies of phylogenetically distant bacteria to colonize, infect and survive within their eukaryotic host cells.

