BACKGROUND
the class alphaproteobacteria encompasses a multitude of noteworthy taxa with diverse physiologies. members of the group range from human and livestock pathogens, such as rickettsia and brucella, to rhizobial species, such as sinorhizobium meliloti and agrobacterium tumefaciens , that benefit or damage agricultural crops  <cit> . the possible progenitor of present-day mitochondria, and several highly abundant marine groups, including roseobacter, sar <dig>  and sar <dig>  also belong to this class  <cit> . in-depth molecular studies of various representatives have led to significant insights regarding cell cycle progression  <cit> , organelle biogenesis  <cit> , metabolic pathways  <cit> , microbe-host interactions  <cit> , and potential for biofuel production  <cit> .

the availability of genetic tools in readily culturable bacteria facilitates the investigation of their physiologies. in particular, an inducible promoter that allows tight titration of gene expression enables functional analysis of cellular factors that are toxic at low levels or essential for viability. for example, investigators working with escherichia coli, a gamma-proteobacterium, possess an array of such tools at their disposal: some commonly used ones are the arabinose-inducible pbad promoter  <cit> , the rhamnose-inducible prhab promoter  <cit> , and various derivatives of the original lac and tet promoters  <cit> . within the alpha-proteobacteria group, caulobacter crescentus is perhaps one of the representative members most amenable to genetic manipulation, with two well characterized, regulatable promoters, inducible by xylose or vanillate  <cit> . identification of these control elements has helped c. crescentus emerge as a prominent model for study of bacterial cell biology  <cit> .

in contrast, the agriculturally important alpha-proteobacterium s. meliloti, which forms mutualistic symbiosis with legume plants, lacks a selection of such fully developed induction systems. following reciprocal exchange of chemical signals between a suitable plant host and the endosymbiont, s. meliloti infects and colonizes nodules that develop along the plant root; the bacteria enter membrane-bound compartments within cortical cells and differentiate into bacteroids, capable of converting atmospheric dinitrogen to ammonia  <cit> . the ability of s. meliloti to fix nitrogen for its hosts, especially alfalfa, improves crop yield, reduces expensive reliance on synthetic fertilizers, and enriches soil fertility in an ecologically sound manner  <cit> . better tools for manipulating the bacterium would facilitate investigation of this model rhizobial-plant symbiosis. our goal is to identify expression systems that can be modulated and efficiently shut off, thus permitting characterization of phenotypes that would otherwise be obscured by leaky expression. we are particularly interested in a system that is functional and easily transferrable among different alpha-proteobacteria. derivatives of the e. coli lac promoter, inducible by isopropyl-beta-d-thiogalactopyranoside , appear to serve this purpose  <cit> . nevertheless, additional candidates that would enlarge the repertoire of genetic tools deserve further examination.

we chose to compare four potential promoter regions--paraa, ptaua, prhar, and pmela--each with varying degrees of prior characterization. we selected these candidates because  their respective inducers are relatively affordable;  previous studies suggested potentials for modulating gene expression by at least one order of magnitude; and  genomic integrations of transcriptional fusions to the promoters can be achieved easily without disrupting genes involved in the metabolic pathways under investigation. the paraa promoter region is located on the psymb megaplasmid, upstream of the araabcdef operon , which was shown to be required for arabinose catabolism and inducible by arabinose more than 100-fold in defined medium  <cit> . however, expression may be subject to a certain degree of catabolite repression and inducer exclusion  <cit> . ptaua, prhar, and pmela expression were tested in a large-scale screen for induction profiles of solute transporters and found to increase at least 100-, 6-, and 60-fold when cells were exposed to taurine , rhamnose, or melibiose, respectively  <cit> . located on psymb and upstream of genes thought to be involved in taurine assimilation   <cit> , the ptaua promoter region has allowed controlled expression of reporter genes in rhizobial and rhodobacter species  <cit>  and of the site-specific recombinase cre in s. meliloti  <cit> . the prhar promoter region is located upstream of rhar, which encodes a transcriptional regulator, and between chromosomal genes involved in rhamnose metabolism   <cit> . the pmela promoter is located between agpt and mela on the psymb megaplasmid ; mela and downstream genes are required for assimilation of alpha-galactosides, such as raffinose and melibiose, while agpt is an arac-like transcriptional activator, required for induction of the pmela promoter  <cit> . pmela has been used successfully in physiological studies of s. meliloti  <cit>  and as a biosensor for environmental galactosides  <cit> , but catabolite repression and inducer exclusion by succinate and other preferred compounds can also affect its induction  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
schematics depicting integration of plasmids into the
s. meliloti
genome to generate transcriptional fusions. integration of  pjc <dig>   pjc <dig>   pjc <dig>  and  pjc <dig> resulted in fusions of the uida reporter to promoter regions upstream of araa , taua , rhar , and mela , respectively. the sizes of the regions that enabled homologous recombination are shown below each plasmid. gbpr, taur, rhar, and agpt represent potential or confirmed regulators of genes involved in arabinose , taurine , rhamnose , or melibiose/alpha-galactoside  metabolism. white pentagonal blocks indicate genes without assigned function.



we used transcriptional fusions to the genomic loci of these four promoters to assess their induction profiles in both complex and defined media. our results suggested that ptaua and pmela offered both tighter regulation and wider ranges of expression compared to the other promoters. further characterization of the ptaua promoter indicated that the surrounding tau genes are required for taurine metabolism and affect expression from the promoter. we demonstrate the utility of the promoter by showing that ptaua allows modulated expression of reporter genes in two other model alpha-proteobacteria, c. crescentus and zymomonas mobilis. moreover, we verified that ptaua enables tight shut-off and depletion of essential genes in s. meliloti. thus, this study establishes the feasibility of using ptaua as a regulatory switch in diverse alpha-proteobacteria.

RESULTS
comparison of promoter regions in complex and defined media
to identify a promoter region that allows controlled expression of desired genes, we compared the levels of inducible expression from four different potential promoters: paraa, ptaua, prhar, and pmela. these regions were chosen according to the criteria described above after reviewing previously published studies for candidates. each promoter region was transcriptionally fused to the uida gene  on a suicide plasmid, which was subsequently integrated into the s. meliloti genome via homologous recombination . we designed the constructs to minimize disruption of the target genomic regions, such that the surrounding genes and their regulation remained intact, by integrating between divergently transcribed genes. strains carrying the reporter constructs were grown in complex  or defined  media for three hours to mid-log phase, with or without appropriate inducers: arabinose for paraa, taurine for ptaua, rhamnose for prhar, and melibiose for pmela. for comparison in m <dig> minimal medium, strains were first grown in m <dig> supplemented with glucose , washed with m <dig>  and then grown for three hours in m9g or m <dig> plus inducer as the sole carbon source. samples were subsequently harvested for measurement of gus activities.

all strains exhibited higher levels of reporter gene expression in the presence of their respective inducers . for the paraa promoter region, the maximal change occurred in m <dig> minimal medium, with a 10-fold increase in expression. much larger changes in expression were reported in a previous study, possibly for a couple of reasons:  the induction time was longer; and  the reporter gene was inserted into araf, which is involved in arabinose catabolism  <cit> . compared to other promoters, paraa showed the highest level of induced expression in all rich and defined media tested: pye, lb, m <dig>  and m <dig> plus casamino acids . however, paraa also showed relatively high levels of basal expression in the absence of arabinose. basal expression was lowest in m9g , but it was still significantly higher than the basal expression of other promoters. thus, while the paraa promoter region is not suitable for tight regulation, it may serve as a useful tool for overexpression of desired genes.figure  <dig> 
comparison of promoter strengths in different culture media. strains  carrying transcriptional fusions of uida to arabinose-, taurine-, rhamnose-, and melibiose-dependent promoter regions were grown in  pye,  lb,  m <dig>  or  m <dig> plus casamino acids  liquid media for three hours, to mid-log phase, in the presence or absence of appropriate inducers. cultures were then harvested to measure the levels of beta-glucuronidase  expression. for m9 + caa, strains were either first grown in m9 + caa without glucose  and then diluted into the same medium with or without inducer; or they were first grown in m9 + caa supplemented with  <dig> % glucose  and diluted into m9 + caa supplemented with the inducer  or glucose . error bars indicate the standard errors of the mean gus activities. see methods for further details.



the prhar promoter demonstrated obvious elevation in expression when induced with rhamnose, increasing 10-fold  in pye complex medium and 38-fold  in m <dig> minimal medium. however, prhar also showed the lowest levels of expression, whether induced or uninduced, when compared to other promoters under similar conditions. we only measured expression from prhar in pye and m <dig> and did not test it in lb or m9 + caa because other promoter regions all exhibited lower expression in lb compared to pye and in m9 + caa compared to m <dig>  the results in pye and m <dig> media had already suggested that the rhar promoter region would not permit regulating genes that require high levels of expression.

the remaining two promoter regions, ptaua and pmela, showed significant increases in gus activities when induced. for ptaua, the increase ranged from 8-fold in m9 + caa to 41-fold in m <dig>  while for pmela the increase ranged from 8-fold in pye to 19-fold in m <dig>  both demonstrated low levels of basal expression and robust expression when induced. the notable exception occurred for pmela in pye, which exhibited higher levels of basal expression, suggesting leakiness in that particular medium . nevertheless, both ptaua and pmela emerged as useful candidates for modulating expression of desired genes.

in addition to melibiose , we had also tested raffinose  as a potential inducer for the pmela promoter region. unlike melibiose, raffinose led to very little change in reporter gene expression during the three-hour induction period in all media tested . because this result contrasted with previous reports of raffinose as an inducer of mela and agpa expression  <cit> , we examined induction of pmela more closely in pye. induction occurred when the reporter strain carrying pmela-uida was grown with raffinose or melibiose for 20 hours to stationary phase, with melibiose leading to stronger induction . when the strain was grown with raffinose or melibiose for 12 hours, raffinose induced gus expression if the culture reached stationary phase but not if the culture was maintained in log phase, whereas melibiose induced expression in either case . catabolic repression has been shown to influence induction of pmela by raffinose  <cit> , but melibiose seems to bypass this regulation in pye rich medium. therefore, raffinose appears to act as an inducer of the pmela promoter in complex medium only if the culture reaches stationary phase, while melibiose is a more versatile inducer.figure  <dig> 
induction of p
mela
promoter with melibiose  or raffinose . strain joe <dig>  which carries the pmela-uida reporter fusion, was grown in pye rich medium and induced for  3 hours, to mid-log phase;  20 hours, to stationary phase; or  12 hours, to mid-log or stationary phase. error bars represent standard errors of the mean gus activities. see methods for further details.



because ptaua exhibited low levels of basal activity and a potentially more dynamic range of expression compared to other promoter regions, we characterized it further. the reporter strain carrying the genomic ptaua-uida fusion was used to monitor expression over a range of taurine concentrations, following a three-hour induction period, in both pye  and m9g . the levels of expression exhibited clear dosage-dependent responses in both media. in pye, the promoter approached maximal expression at  <dig> to <dig> mm taurine.  expression increased from  <dig>  to  <dig> miller units, a 117-fold change. in m9g medium, expression became saturated by 5 mm taurine. the range of expression was smaller, from an average of  <dig>  to  <dig> miller units, a 52-fold change. these results indicated that the ptaua promoter exhibits a wide range of expression in both defined and complex media.figure  <dig> 
dose-dependent expression of the genomic p
taua
-
uida
reporter fusion. strain joe <dig> was grown for 3 hours, to mid-log phase, in  pye rich medium or  m <dig> plus  <dig> % glucose  defined medium containing increasing concentrations of taurine and assayed for beta-glucuronidase  activity.  error bars indicate the standard errors of the mean gus activities.



effects of taur, tauc, and tauy on ptaua expression
next, we examined the effects of representative genes in the tau region  on ptaua expression. taur  encodes a transcriptional regulator of the gntr family, tauc  encodes the permease component of a probable taurine abc transporter, and tauy  encodes the large subunit of the putative taurine dehydrogenase  <cit> . genetic analyses suggested that orthologs of the tauabc transporter in e. coli and rhodobacter capsulatus participate in taurine utilization  <cit> . also, previous studies indicated that the taur ortholog in r. capsulatus  activates expression of genes necessary for taurine dissimilation  <cit> , and s. meliloti ptaua requires its cognate taur for expression in rhizobium leguminosarum  <cit> . we expected similar behaviors in s. meliloti.

we first constructed strains with individual in-frame deletions of taur, tauc, or tauy and tested their ability to utilize taurine as the sole carbon and energy source . the rm <dig> wild-type strain formed visible colonies on m <dig> minimal medium supplemented with taurine after five to seven days of incubation at 30°c, whereas all three tau mutants failed to exhibit detectable growth. thus, taur, tauc, and tauy are each required for taurine dissimilation in s. meliloti. growth was restored when each mutant was complemented with the appropriate gene on a plasmid, suggesting that the individual deletions did not deter expression of downstream genes; i.e., they were not polar mutations.figure  <dig> 
effects of representative
tau
mutations on taurine metabolism and p
taua
expression. 
s. meliloti rm <dig> wild-type and tau mutants were grown on m <dig> minimal medium supplemented with 100 mm taurine as the sole carbon source. plate images, captured after 7 days of incubation at 30°c, are shown on the left, while strain genotypes are shown on the right. strains used were rm <dig>  joe <dig>  joe <dig>  and joe3848; plasmids used were pjc <dig>  pjc <dig>  pjc <dig>  and pjc <dig>   expression of a plasmid-borne ptaua-uida reporter was assessed in rm <dig> wild-type and tau mutant backgrounds in pye rich medium. strains with reporter plasmids containing or lacking the taur gene  were grown in pye with or without 10 mm taurine . error bars represent standard errors. strains used were rm <dig>  joe <dig>  joe <dig>  and joe3848; plasmids used were pjc <dig> and pjc <dig>  wild-type strains carrying plasmids without the uida gene  exhibited negligible levels of gus activity .  dose-dependent expression of a plasmid-borne ptaua-mcherry reporter was measured in  pye and  m9g media. strains were grown for 20 hours in pye or m9g supplemented with different concentrations of taurine. wild type carrying the vector  was used to determine background fluorescence levels. error bars represent standard errors of the mean of at least five biological samples. strains used were rm <dig>  joe <dig>  joe <dig>  and joe <dig> 



to assess the effects of the tau deletions, we used two similar plasmids carrying the ptaua-uida reporter fusion, one with taur also on the plasmid , and the other without . wild-type and mutant strains transformed with the plasmids were grown in pye in the presence or absence of taurine for three hours and then harvested to measure gene expression . except for the Δtaur mutant, all strains showed similar patterns of expression with both reporter plasmids: low basal activities in the absence of taurine and high levels of expression when induced. the Δtaur mutant exhibited induction when taur was present on the reporter plasmid but no induction when taur was absent, confirming that taur is the transcriptional activator for the ptaua promoter, as previously shown  <cit> . behavior of the Δtauc mutant was indistinguishable from that of the wild type, suggesting that the abc transporter is not required for taurine to enter the cell in complex medium. finally, whether induced or uninduced, the Δtauy mutant displayed the highest levels of reporter expression compared to other strains grown under similar conditions. these results are consistent with an increased accumulation of taurine, and thus enhanced expression, in the Δtauy mutant due to its inability to degrade the sulfonate compound. higher basal expression may be attributed to low levels of taurine in the pye complex medium itself.

somewhat unexpectedly, deletion of tauc, which encodes a component of the putative taurine transporter, did not affect ptaua expression in pye medium; because tauc is required for taurine utilization , we decided to assess the effects of the tau mutations over a range of inducer concentrations in both complex and defined media. to facilitate measurement of promoter activity, we generated a plasmid bearing taur as well as a ptaua-mcherry reporter fusion. wild-type and deletion strains carrying the plasmid were grown for 20 hours with different concentrations of taurine in pye or m9g prior to measurement of mcherry fluorescence. for all strains in pye rich medium , an increase in fluorescence directly correlated with an increase in taurine concentration. as expected, since the taur mutation is complemented by a copy of taur on the plasmid, the wild-type rm <dig> and Δtaur strains behaved similarly. moreover, in agreement with the gus assay results , the Δtauy mutant exhibited much higher levels of expression compared to the other strains, reaching saturation at relatively low levels of inducer . the Δtauc mutant displayed slightly lower expression of ptaua-mcherry compared to the wild type, with the difference becoming more noticeable at higher concentrations of taurine. this subtle difference in expression suggests that while tauc and its associated abc-type transporter are not absolutely required for taurine import in complex medium, they may enhance the process.

in contrast, tauc is required in m9g minimal medium for import of taurine to induce ptaua expression. only basal levels of fluorescence were observed with the Δtauc mutant, regardless of taurine concentration, compared to the wild type and other tau mutants, where fluorescence correlated with increasing taurine concentration . similar to results obtained with the gus reporter , wild-type rm <dig> required much lower levels of taurine to achieve full induction in m9g compared to pye. the Δtauy mutant again exhibited the highest levels of expression. intriguingly, in m9g medium the Δtaur mutant showed consistently higher expression relative to wild-type rm <dig> and reached levels similar to that of the Δtauy mutant at higher taurine concentrations. we do not have a clear explanation for this observation. the rm <dig> strain actually carries two copies of taur  and should activate expression more readily than the Δtaur mutant, which only has one copy of the transcriptional regulator gene on the plasmid. one possibility is that genomic deletion of taur influences expression of surrounding genes, such as reducing the levels of taurine dehydrogenase, and thus affects expression from the reporter plasmid.

taken together, our results indicate that taur encodes a transcriptional activator necessary for expression from the ptaua promoter. tauy is involved in the degradation of taurine, most likely by forming part of the taurine dehydrogenase. the abc transporter that contains tauc is required to import taurine in minimal, but not complex, medium. we speculate that the abc transporter encoded by smc02829- <dig> serves as an alternative taurine uptake pathway in complex medium, because smc <dig> expression is induced by taurine, valine, isoleucine, and leucine  <cit> .

taurine-dependent expression in c. crescentus and z. mobilis
to explore the usefulness of the ptaua promoter in other alpha-proteobacteria, we investigated its dependence on taurine for expression in c. crescentus, a model system for studying bacterial cell cycle progression and organelle biogenesis  <cit> . wild-type na <dig> carrying reporter plasmids with the ptaua-uida fusion were harvested for gus assays after two hours of growth in pye medium with or without taurine. when the reporter plasmid also contained taur , gus activity was high in the presence of taurine and low in its absence, indicating induction . when the reporter plasmid lacked taur , gus activities remained low regardless of taurine concentration . these results confirmed that taur is necessary to activate expression from the ptaua promoter. furthermore, c. crescentus does not have a functional homolog to substitute for s. meliloti taur.figure  <dig> 
expression of plasmid-borne transcriptional fusions to p
taua
in
c. crescentus
na <dig>   na <dig> carrying ptaua-uida reporter plasmids, without or with taur , were grown for two hours in pye rich medium without or with 10 mm taurine and assayed for gus activity.  na <dig> carrying pjc <dig> was induced for two hours with increasing concentrations of taurine in pye. wild-type strains carrying plasmids without the uida gene  exhibited negligible levels of gus activity .  ptaua-mcherry expression level depends on taurine concentration in  pye rich medium or  m2g defined medium. na <dig> carrying pjc <dig> was induced for four hours with increasing concentrations of taurine and assayed for fluorescence. fluorescence values were adjusted by subtracting the background fluorescence of a strain carrying the vector prvmcs- <dig>  error bars represent standard errors of the mean of at least six independent measurements.



the same ptaua-uida reporter strain  was used to determine the possible range of expression in pye medium . gus activity increased with taurine concentration and reached maximum at approximately 10 mm taurine. thus, much lower levels of the inducer were needed to saturate the ptaua expression system in c. crescentus relative to s. meliloti. expression varied approximately 19-fold, from  <dig> to  <dig> miller units. similar results were obtained using a reporter plasmid carrying taur-ptaua-mcherry: fluorescence levels increased with taurine concentration and approached maximum at 10 mm taurine in pye  and  <dig>  mm taurine in m2g minimal medium . therefore, the ptaua promoter should be useful for modulating gene expression in c. crescentus.

we also examined ptaua expression in a more distantly related alpha-proteobacterium, z. mobilis, which possesses notable ethanol production properties of particular interest for biofuel synthesis  <cit> . wild-type zm <dig> carrying taur-ptaua-mcherry on a plasmid were grown in rm complex or bm defined media with increasing concentrations of taurine. fluorescence measurements yielded trends similar to those observed in s. meliloti and c. crescentus. first, increases in fluorescence correlated with increases in taurine concentrations in both rm  and bm  media. second, the expression system approached maximal induction at lower taurine concentrations in defined medium  compared to complex medium . thus, the ptaua promoter can regulate gene expression in z. mobilis. moreover, because we observed taurine-dependent expression in both c. crescentus and z. mobilis, which belong to different phylogenetic orders , the ptaua promoter from s. meliloti  may serve as a convenient genetic tool in divergent members of the class alphaproteobacteria  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
dose-dependent expression of a plasmid-borne p
taua
-
mcherry
reporter in
z. mobilis
. strains carrying pjc <dig> were grown for 20 hours in  rm rich medium or  bm basal medium supplemented with increasing concentrations of taurine and assayed for mcherry fluorescence. wild-type zm <dig> carrying the vector  was used to determine and subtract the background fluorescence levels. error bars represent standard errors of the mean of at least four independent biological samples.



depletion of essential proteins in s. meliloti
to demonstrate the utility of the ptaua promoter, we constructed showcase s. meliloti strains that allowed depletion of cellular factors essential for viability. essential genes were placed under the control of the ptaua promoter, which enabled expression in the presence of taurine and shut off expression in its absence. the first example we chose was plec, encoding a conserved histidine kinase required for cell division in s. meliloti  <cit> . the 5’ portion of plec was transcriptionally fused to ptaua on a suicide plasmid, which was subsequently integrated into the native plec locus via homologous recombination, such that the only intact copy of plec is regulated by ptaua . the resultant strain  has already been shown to require taurine for viability  <cit>  and is included here for comparison. another depletion strain , in which the only copy of plec is under the control of ptaua on a plasmid, also exhibited a similar dependence on taurine for growth  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
schematics depicting integration of plasmids into the
s. meliloti
chromosome to generate depletion strains. integration of  pjc <dig> or  pjc <dig> placed the only intact copy of plec or tatb, respectively, under control of the ptaua promoter. the sizes of the regions that enabled homologous recombination are shown below each plasmid.



the second example we chose was tatabc, three contiguous genes that encode essential components of the twin arginine transport system in s. meliloti  <cit> . we took an approach similar to that for plec. because tata is relatively small in size, and we wanted >500 bp of homology for efficient recombination, both tata and the 5’ portion of tatb were fused to ptaua on the suicide plasmid. the resultant depletion strain has tatabc under control of ptaua, but also an intact copy of tata under control of its native promoter . presumably tatb and tatc are depleted in this strain when expression is blocked in the absence of taurine.

the plec and tatb depletion strains grew normally, similar to wild-type, in the presence of taurine in pye rich medium but stopped duplicating when grown in medium lacking taurine . the plec depletion strain began slowing its growth 600 minutes  after shifting into medium without taurine, and halted approximately 1320 minutes  after the shift. the tatb depletion strain showed slower growth 960 minutes  after medium shift and stopped growing also after approximately 1320 minutes. in contrast, wild-type rm <dig> displayed typical doubling regardless of taurine availability, except that the presence of taurine seemed to stimulate slightly more robust growth, most likely due to its use as a nutritional source. these results indicate that the ptaua promoter can exert tight control over the expression of essential genes and facilitate studies of physiological consequences when vital cellular components are depleted.figure  <dig> 
representative growth curves showing depletion of plec and tatb.  plec depletion ,  tatb depletion , and  wild-type rm <dig> strains were grown in pye rich medium without or with 100 mm taurine. absorbance at 600 nm  was used to monitor the growth of cultures, and measurements were adjusted accordingly when cultures were diluted to maintain growth in log phase.



CONCLUSIONS
together with previously published results  <cit> , our analysis demonstrates that the ptaua promoter of s. meliloti rm <dig>  when paired with its cognate transcriptional activator taur, can provide robust tuning of gene expression in diverse model organisms of the class alphaproteobacteria, including members of rhizobiales , rhodobacterales , sphingomonadales , and caulobacterales . import of taurine does not appear to pose a challenge, despite the absence of known or obvious transporters for the inducer in many of the organisms tested. ptaua and taur, as well as other promoter regions described above, can be readily amplified from plasmids reported here and elsewhere  <cit>  and cloned into other vectors that are more suitable for the end user. therefore, this study adds to the repertoire of tools available for analyzing genetic models of alphaproteobacteria. because taurine has been shown to activate expression of genes other than those in the tau region, such as rpoe <dig> and rpoe <dig>  in s. meliloti  <cit> , the addition of taurine as an inducer may cause ancillary and potentially undesirable effects, particularly in untested organisms. thus, appropriate control strains, such as one harboring an empty vector, should be included for comparison when examining the physiological consequences of inducing a gene of interest under the control of ptaua.

in its native host, ptaua permits depletion of essential proteins and tight regulation of potentially toxic genes, especially if combined with careful manipulation of translational efficiency; specifically, harrison et al.  <cit>  was able to reduce the level of expression from ptaua by modifying sequences adjacent to the ribosome binding site such that they form rna secondary structures. overexpression of the gene under ptaua control can be conducted in the Δtauy background, in which inducer level remains high due to the inability to degrade taurine. considering the ranges of expression observed, similar levels of control in other host organisms should be achievable with appropriate adjustments, including alterations of copy number via placement in the genome or on plasmids. the possibility of using the same construct to control expression in different alpha-proteobacteria can expedite examination of gene function across species: for example, we can use the same plasmid to determine whether an essential gene from one organism can complement null mutations in its orthologs. although ptaua currently does not appear regulatable outside of the alpha-proteobacteria group, for instance in e. coli or pseudomonas aeruginosa  <cit> , further investigation and engineering may broaden the range of its functionality.

