BACKGROUND
the composition of the lipid phase of plant plasma membranes adjusts to the varying conditions in the plant environment. the adjustments include selective lipid degradation, increased incorporation of certain lipid classes and/or lipid molecular species and possibly re-tailoring of the lipids within the membrane as well  <cit> . in addition to their structural role, plasma membrane lipids are crucial intermediates in several signaling pathways  <cit> .

de novo synthesis of plasma membrane phospholipids occurs mainly in the endoplasmic reticulum   <cit> . the major plasma membrane phospholipids, phosphatidylcholine  and phosphatidylethanolamine  with c <dig> and c <dig> acylation of the sn- <dig> and sn- <dig> positions of the glycerol backbone, respectively, have been reported to be transported to the plasma membrane independently of the vesicular secretory pathway  <cit> . the nature of lipid transport to the plant plasma membrane outside this pathway remains to be established, but for yeast and/or animal cells, lipid transport has been demonstrated to occur at membrane contacts sites  between for example er and mitochondria and er and trans-golgi membranes  <cit> . in yeast, a plasma membrane-associated er region was isolated. the fraction was denoted pam , and lipid synthesis was enriched compared to bulk er, whereas transport of lipids remains to be demonstrated  <cit> . mcss between er and plasma membranes have not been reported for plants, but a close proximity between these membranes has been visualized by freeze fracture microscopy of suspension-cultured sycamore cells  <cit>  and by confocal microscopy of arabidopsis transformed with fluorescent tags on specific er membrane proteins  <cit> .

mitochondria and chloroplast pc are also of er origin  <cit> . presently, the most favoured model for lipid delivery to the mitochondria is that of lipid delivery at contact zones between a specialized er region, denoted mams , and the mitochondria  <cit> . biochemical  <cit>  as well as biophysical  <cit>  evidence is emerging for corresponding zones of contact between chloroplasts and a special region of the er, denoted plams . mitochondria  <cit>  and chloroplasts  <cit>  isolated from plant tissue both possess highly active lysopc acylation activities and it has been suggested that in both cases, lysopc is the lipid transported from the closely associated er to the respective organelle.

to investigate the possibilities that phospholipid delivery to the plant plasma membrane outside the secretory apparatus could involve acylation of transported lysophospholipid and that a region of the er could be involved, analogous to the situation for mitochondria and chloroplasts, we examined lysophosholipid acylation in isolated plasma membrane and a putative pam fraction. we also present evidence for a pam fraction in association with the plasma membrane.

RESULTS
membrane fractionation
the purities of the plasma membrane fractions had been established previously for both pea  and soybean . renewed marker enzyme assays verified the purities of the isolated fractions . for pea, we assayed marker enzyme activities also on membrane fractions obtained from fractionation of shoot microsomal membranes by a 10-step aqueous polymer two-phase counter current distribution  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the distribution of proteins and of markers for mitochondrial inner membranes, er, golgi apparatus, thylakoids and plasma membranes between the  <dig> fractions. mitochondrial inner membranes, golgi membranes and thylakoids were recovered in the earlier fractions, whereas plasma membranes were recovered predominantly in fractions 6– <dig>  the er marker choline phosphotransferase was predominantly recovered in the first two fractions and a minor second peak co-localized with the plasma membrane marker, in fractions 6– <dig>  the polypeptide patterns of the fractions reflected the marker assays, with fractions 6– <dig> being remarkably similar to that of isolated plasma membrane . the prominent >  <dig> kd band of fractions 6– <dig> and the plasma membrane probably represented the p-type atpase, whereas the prominent 55– <dig> kd bands in fractions 1– <dig> probably represented the mitochondrial atp synthase α- and β-chains and adp/atp transporter, respectively  <cit> . the differences in intensity of these bands in fractions 1– <dig> followed the differences in specific activity of the mitochondrial marker enzyme in these fractions .

plasma membrane lipid acylation
incorporation of 18:1-coa into native pc and pe was analysed in the membrane fractions obtained from the 10-step counter current two-phase separation. the incorporation of 18:1-coa into pc occurred in all  <dig> fractions, but was markedly strongest in the first two fractions , thus co-migrating with the er membrane marker choline phosphotransferase . the result is consistent with the model that the plant er contains a highly active lysopc acyl transferase  <cit> . acyl group incorporation into pe also occurred in all fractions, with similar rates in the er- and plasma membrane-containing fractions. in the plasma membrane fractions  the ratio of acyl group incorporation into pe over pc was the highest, between  <dig> – <dig> .

to investigate lipid acylation in more detail, we used isolated plasma membrane fractions. when pea plasma membranes were incubated with 18:1-coa  or 16:0-coa , the radiolabel was recovered predominantly as free fatty acids, indicating that the plasma membranes contained a highly active acyl-coa thioesterase. as acyl-coas play important roles in cellular processes such as regulation of enzyme activities, membrane fusion and signal transduction  <cit> , the high thioesterase activity might reflect that the plasma membrane has the capability to regulate the size of the acyl-coa pool in its vicinity.

the remaining acyl-coa radiolabel was recovered in phospholipids, predominantly pc . the labelling was higher with 18:1-coa than with 16:0-coa as substrate, indicating a preference for acyl incorporation into the sn- <dig> position. after  <dig> min incubation with 18:1-coa, 62% of the phospholipid radiolabel was recovered in pc, whereas  <dig> and 11% was recovered in pe and phosphatidylinositol , respectively . with 16:0-coa, acyl incorporation was more evenly distributed between these three lipid classes: after  <dig> min incubation  <dig>   <dig> and 26% of the phospholipid radiolabel was recovered in pc, pe and pi, respectively . radiolabel was never recovered in phosphatidylglycerol. however, in a few experiments, 2–5% of the acyl-coa radiolabel was recovered in phosphatidic acid  . when the radiolabelled acyl-coa substrates were substituted with the corresponding radiolabelled free fatty acids, no radiolabelling of phospholipids was observed, demonstrating that the substrate for the acyltransferase was acyl-coa .

the incorporation of radiolabel from acyl-coa into a phospholipid could reflect acylation of the corresponding lysophospholipid and/or re-tailoring of the phospholipid. to investigate whether lysolipids functioned as substrate, two approaches were used. in the first approach, different amounts of lysopc, lysope and lysopa were included in the assay, together with radiolabelled acyl-coa. at concentrations slightly below the critical micellar concentration , no increase in radiolabel incorporation into phospholipids was detected . when  <dig> μm lysopc was included, there was a drastic increase in the labelling of pc both with 16:0-coa  and 18:1-coa . the same concentration of lysopa stimulated labelling of pa but also of pc. this stimulation was markedly smaller and occurred only with 18:1-coa. labelling of pe remained unaffected by inclusion of  <dig> μm of its lyso derivative. when plasma membranes were incubated with radiolabelled lysopc and non-radiolabelled acyl-coa, radiolabelled pc was formed, verifying the reaction .

a pea shoot plasma membrane fraction was the starting material for the isolation of the pam fraction. the pam-decreased plasma membrane fraction represents the plasma membranes obtained after the removal of the pam. the er-enriched fraction is fraction number  <dig> from the 10-step counter current distribution . all fractions were incubated with 18:1-coa on its or in the presence of  <dig> μm lysopc , without or with  <dig> μm ag no <dig>  mean values are presented for 2– <dig> independent experiments, with standard deviations less than 10%.

the second approach to study the substrate role of lysophospholipids was to investigate whether stimulated formation of these lipids in the membrane had any effects. endogenous pla <dig> activity was low against exogenously supplied radiolabelled pc, but exogenous pla <dig> stimulated the formation of lysopc and free fatty acids from this substrate . when non-radiolabelled 18:1-coa was included in the assay, the proportion of radiolabel associated with lysopc decreased whereas that of pc increased . the resulting pc pool exhibited a decreased radiolabelling of the sn- <dig> position, demonstrating that both the pla <dig> and re-acylation activities occurred at the sn- <dig> position . as bee venom pla <dig> supposedly acts rather un-specifically on membrane phospholipids  <cit> , an increase in several lysophospholipid classes would be the expected result. however, concomitant incubation of plasma membranes with pla <dig> and radiolabelled acyl-coa, resulted in increased radiolabelling of pc only, and only with 18:1-coa as substrate , which suggests that the lipase was more specific towards pc than generally assumed or that the lysolipid acylase strongly preferred lysopc.

lipid acylation in pam, a fraction of plasma membrane-associated membranes
the 10-step counter current membrane fractionation revealed that the er marker choline phosphotransferase was active in fractions enriched in plasma membrane , indicating presence also of er in these fractions. with isolated pea plasma membranes as starting material, we isolated a light membrane fraction, denoted pam. we investigated acyl incorporation into pc and pe in the starting plasma membrane fraction, the pam fraction, the pam-free plasma membranes and the first, er-rich, fraction from the 10-step counter current procedure. acyl group incorporation from 18:1-coa into pc and pe verified the earlier results, that acyl incorporation into pc was faster in the er-rich fraction than in the plasma membrane, whereas the reverse applied for acyl incorporation into pe . acyl incorporation into pc appeared somewhat sensitive to the procedure employed to fractionate the plasma membrane fraction, as this activity were lower in the pam and pam-free plasma membranes. addition of lysopc markedly stimulated acyl incorporation into pc in all fractions, with the highest rates in the er-rich and pam fractions. here, the plasma membrane fraction was intermediate between the pam and pam-free plasma membrane fractions. the lysopc acylation activity was sensitive to agno <dig>  a known inhibitor of lysopc acyl transferase  <cit> , suggesting that a major part of the observed lysopc acylation was indeed catalysed by this transferase.

plasma membrane and pam polypeptides
we separated the pea plasma membrane polypeptides by native gel electrophoresis and analyzed excised  <dig> mm sections for lysopc acylation. the activity was present as a broad peak co-migrating with a broader major protein peak . the fraction with the highest lysopc acylation activity was submitted to tryptic digestion and linear ion trap mass spectrometry. the fraction contained a large number of polypeptides, but none related to lipid metabolism, probably due to the lack of annotation not only of pea peptides but also largely of lipid-related proteins.

the pam fraction polypeptide pattern was very similar to that of the plasma membrane, but certain polypeptide bands were specific for one of the fractions only . analysis of the specific pam polypepetide bands as above has so far failed to yield any information as to polypeptide identity.

optical evidence for pams
using transformed a. thaliana, tagged with green fluorescent protein  in the er lumen  <cit> , we previously showed that the er forms a network throughout the cytosol and that small green fluorescing bodies were associated with isolated chloroplasts  <cit> . plasma membranes were isolated from the leaves of this transformed a. thaliana and subjected to repeated cycles of freezing and thawing to invert a population of the vesicles  <cit> . when a concentrated suspension of these plasma membranes was incubated with a fluorescent probe for membrane lipids, fm4- <dig>  and observed by confocal laser beam microscopy, the membranes appeared red . small fluorescent green bodies were also evident  and when these images were merged, it was evident that the er-derived gfp-fluorescing bodies co-localized with the plasma membranes . fm4- <dig> apparently had a preference for plasma membrane over er, as evidenced from e.g. the lower right corner in the images, where the fluorescence of fm4- <dig> and gfp did not overlap . we observed that a portion of the plasma membrane material was not associated with green fluorescent bodies, but green fluorescent bodies never appeared on their own, only together with plasma membranes .

discussion
acylation of lysopc has been demonstrated to occur in er, chloroplasts and mitochondria, isolated from plant tissues. we here report that also plant plasma membranes catalyse the incorporation of acyl groups from acyl-coa into phospholipids, with the dominant product being pc. the incorporation of the acyl group of acyl-coa into plasma membrane phospholipids could have one or several roles:  to adjust the acylation pattern of plasma membrane phospholipids by trans-acylation as an involvement in the response to an altered external condition ,  to acylate lysophopsholipids to turn off signalling systems that utilize pla <dig>  and/or  to acylate lysophospholipids to provide the final step in supplying the plasma membrane with pc, analogous to that reported for mitochondria and chloroplasts, namely acylation of lysopc of er origin.

we clearly could demonstrate lysolipid acylation. the concentration of lysophospholipids in isolated plasma membranes has usually been reported to be very low  <cit> , which fits well with their proposed signalling and regulatory roles. for example, lysopc and lysope have been proposed to act as second messengers to auxin  <cit>  and to be involved in systemic responses in wounded plants  <cit> . lysopc was recently reported to induce host plant genes that are involved in arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis  <cit> . lysope and lysopi have been shown to inhibit, but lysopa to stimulate, plant phospholipase d  <cit> . lysolipids also affect membrane fusion  <cit> . evidently, the lysophospholipid content of the plasma membrane is strictly regulated. a lysophospholipid acylation activity may thus function to regulate signal-response cascades, enzyme activities or the fusibility of the plasma membrane.

since 18:1-coa was preferred over 16:0-coa in the acylation reaction, the endogenous lysophospholipids probably had derived from pla2-catalyzed phospholipid degradation. this conclusion is based on that plant plasma membrane phospholipids usually contain unsaturated c <dig> fatty acids in the sn- <dig> position, whereas 16: <dig> is usually restricted to the sn- <dig> position  <cit> . the acylation activity increased when the content of lysophospholipids increased through addition of exogenous pla <dig>  the activity of pla <dig> has been shown to suddenly increase at a threshold concentration of added lysopc  <cit> . this activation was thought to reflect an increased susceptibility of the membrane to pla <dig>  a similar change in membrane properties at a threshold concentration of lysophospholipid could be relevant also in the present case. however, the added lysopc did not only stimulate the pla <dig> activity, as incubations with radiolabelled lysopc demonstrated their role as substrate for the acylation reaction.

when provided with exogenous lysophospholipid, the plasma membrane acylation activity had a markedly higher specificity for lysopc than for other lysophospholipids. larger than cmc concentrations of lysopc was required to stimulate the reaction, which could reflect that the enzyme is activated in situ by a high local concentration of the substrate. the stimulatory effect of lysopa on lysopc acylation could indicate a regulatory role for lysopa. the sensitivity to agno <dig> indicates that the activity is related to previously reported lysopc acyl transferases.

without added lysophospholipids, acyl group incorporation from acyl-coa into phospholipids occurred with several phospholipid classes, whereas with exogenous substrate, only lysopc was acylated. these results may suggest that more than one lysophospholipid acyl transferase is present in the plant plasma membrane. another interpretation is that acyl group incorporation from acyl-coa into phospholipids in the absence of added lysophospholipid represented a transacylase activity.

it has been demonstrated that pc and pe acylated with c16/c <dig> fatty acids are delivered to the plasma membrane independently of the vesicular secretory pathway  <cit> . as it has been demonstrated that er closely associates with the plasma membrane in yeast  <cit>  and plant cells  <cit> , we hypothesized that the delivery of lysopc to the plant plasma membrane could occur at regions in close contact with the er. support for the hypothesis comes from several sources. in the 10-step counter-current separation of pea shoot membranes, the er marker choline phosphotransferase to a minor extent also migrated with the plasma membrane marker . in a previous 10-step separation of root membranes from phosphate-deficient oat  <cit> , the er marker nadph cytochrome c reductase exhibited a dual distribution with the minor peak co-migrating with the plasma membrane. in an earlier report of a 5-step counter-current separation of microsomal membranes from cauliflower inflorescences  <cit> , nadph cytochrome c reductase and choline phosphotransferase activities co-localized in one major peak in the first tube as well as in a minor one co-migrating with the plasma membrane marker. in addition, we also observed that when plasma membranes were isolated from leaves of a. thaliana tagged with gfp in the er lumen, small er-derived structures co-isolated with the plasma membranes . the association between the membranes was strong enough to survive the repeated freezing- and thawing procedure employed to invert a portion of the plasma membrane vesicles.

to isolate a putative membrane fraction of er origin from the isolated plasma membrane, we modified the method developed for yeast pams  <cit> . as aqueous polymer two-phase partition isolates cytoplasmic side-in plasma membrane vesicles  <cit> , the putative pam would be present inside the isolated plasma membrane vesicles. we therefore had to invert the plasma membrane vesicles prior to the yeast protocol treatment of lowering the ph to separate the pams from the plasma membrane  <cit> . the protein patterns of the pam and plasma membrane fractions were largely similar, although some proteins of the plasma membrane fraction were missing from the pam fraction, whereas others were slightly enriched in the pam fraction. apparently, the pam fraction was contaminated with plasma membrane. the freezing and thawing procedure employed to invert the plasma membrane vesicles prior to the pam isolation probably resulted in the formation of small plasma membrane vesicles that co-isolated with the light pam membrane vesicles. in addition, the freezing and thawing process could also have produced vesicles with surface properties intermediate between cytosolic side-out and cytosolic side-in plasma membrane vesicles, as we earlier reported for wheat plasma membranes  <cit> . in the present case, we therefore cannot rule out that the isolation process could have produced vesicles of mixed plasma membrane and pam origin.

in the pam, addition of lysopc caused a stronger increase in acyl group incorporation into pc compared with the original plasma membrane fraction, whereas in the pam-decreased plasma membrane, the activity was much lower than in the original plasma membrane fraction. the differences may suggest different sets of acyl transferases or transacylases in the plasma membrane and its adjacent pam. another explanation could be that lysopc acylation/pc transacylation actually resides in the er regions associated with the plasma membrane, the pam. if this is the case, the contamination of the pam fraction with plasma membrane would have diluted the higher pam-associated activity and as all pam probably was not washed away from the plasma membrane, the difference in acylation/transacylation acitivies between the two fractions would have been underestimated. if lipid acylation/transacylation activities of isolated plasma membrane actually reflect pam activities, such lipid metabolizing activities are not evenly distributed over the er. a future extended characterization of pam awaits development of an isolation protocol that increases fraction yield and purity.

we did not succeed in identifying any acyl transferase among the peptides present in the plasma membrane peptide fraction with the highest lysolipid acylation activity, which may reflect that these types of enzymes are not well characerized and therefore not annotated.

CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that isolated plant plasma membranes possess phospholipid acylation and/or transacylation activities. with endogenous substrate, the activity had a different lysophospholipid substrate preference than the corresponding activity of the er. with added lysophospholipid substrate, both fractions were highly specific for lysopc. we also present visual evidence for and the first tentative isolation of a plant pam fraction, a membrane fraction of putative er origin closely associated with the plasma membrane. the lysopc acyl transferase activity was higher in this pam fraction than in its parent plasma membrane fraction, whereas it was markedly lowered in the pam-decreased plasma membrane. we propose that the zones of close contact between the er and the plasma membrane, the pams, represents areas of the er specialized in providing the plasma membrane with precursor for as well as synthesis of the pc that is delivered to the plasma membrane outside the secretory vesicular pathway. whether both lysopc acyl transferase and/or pc transacylase are constituents of the plasma membrane or the former or both activities are restricted to pam is not yet resolved. the transport route for pe remains elusive.

