BACKGROUND
most cellular processes are controlled by protein phosphorylation, and aberrant kinase activity has been implicated in the etiology of a wide spectrum of diseases, including cancer, chronic inflammatory disorders and neurodegeneration. studies on protein kinases are important not only to elucidate molecular mechanisms of signal transduction, but also for drug development. therefore, methods for measuring kinase activity and for the identification of kinase inhibitors have become increasingly important in biomedical research  <cit> .

a widely employed type of assay is based on the use of radioactively labelled atp as phosphate donor and subsequent detection of phosphate incorporation into a protein or peptide substrate that contains the respective kinase recognition motif  <cit> . this radiometric technique is simple and suitable for detection of protein kinase activity with high sensitivity but depends on the use of radioactive isotopes . use of radioactivity requires special handling, is associated with inherent high costs of waste disposal, and restricts the flexibility because of the short half life of 32p and 33p. furthermore, these assays are carried out at subphysiological levels of atp owing to the necessity of keeping atp levels, and thus the usage of radioisotopes, within reasonable limits.

to circumvent these drawbacks, a wide variety of non-radiometric techniques have been developed to measure kinase activity, particularly for use in high throughput screening of kinase inhibitors  in neurogenesis in drosophila  <cit> , and dyrk1a in mammalian brain development and in neurodegeneration  <cit> . interestingly, alterations in neuronal development were observed in mouse models both with a selective gain or partial loss of function of dyrk1a . this gene dosage effect implies that subtle changes in the activity of this dyrk family kinase can have severe consequences.

many investigators are characterising the role of dyrks in various biological processes or their involvement in human diseases  <cit> . for measuring the activity of dyrks, radiometric assays are presently the standard in laboratory practice. we aimed at developing a non-radiometric assay sufficiently sensitive to measure kinase activity of endogenous dyrks. by a modification of the existing elisa configurations, we accomplished to reach a detection limit in the range of radiometric assays. the sensitivity of the assay was sufficient to measure the activity of dyrk1a in mouse heart. moreover, we used the new method to characterize the activity of a dyrk <dig> isoform expressed in xenopus laevis oocytes.

RESULTS
development and characterization of the assay
considering that the sensitivity in phospho-elisa methods is mainly limited by the number of substrate binding sites available for immobilization, we reasoned that this problem could be overcome by using the phosphospecific antibody for capturing the small amounts of phosphopeptide from the complex reaction mixture. we decided to use a substrate peptide mimicking the sequence around thr <dig> in the tau protein . this is a well characterized phosphorylation site of dyrk1a  <cit> , and phosphospecific antibodies directed against this site are commercially available. we used a biotinylated substrate peptide to allow for colorimetric detection of the bound phosphopeptide with the help a streptavidin-hrp conjugate . concentrations of the capture antibody and the streptavidin-hrp conjugate were optimized to develop the standard protocol used in all experiments shown here .

we performed a titration experiment to determine the key parameters of the assay, i.e. the power to discriminate between the phosphorylated and unphosphorylated biotinylated tau peptide , the absolute lower detection limit, and the linear range of the assay. as shown in figure 1b, the detection limit was about 5- <dig> fmol phosphopeptide per well. a comparable signal was obtained with  <dig> pmol of the unphosphorylated peptide, indicating that this combination of phosphospecific antibody and substrate peptide offers excellent selectivity for the detection of the phosphorylated substrate . saturation of the assay was reached at about  <dig> pmol of phosphopeptide, but the linear plot  illustrates that the useful measuring range was between  <dig>  pmol and  <dig>  pmol. thus, the sensitivity of the elisa compares well with radiometric assays, where about  <dig>  pmol of phosphopeptide can be routinely detected. for comparison, we analysed the same concentrations of phosphorylated and unphosphorylated tau207- <dig> in the inverse configuration, in which the phosphospecific antibody was used to detect the biotinylated peptide after binding to streptavidin-coated plates . this assay was much less sensitive  and suffered from crossreaction of the antibody with the unphosphorylated peptide at concentrations greater than ~  <dig> pmol per well.

next we tested whether small amounts of the phosphopeptide can be detected in mixtures with a large excess of the unphosphorylated peptide. although the experiment shown in figure 1b suggested that 50- <dig> pmol of unphosphorylated peptide should only marginally contribute to the total signal, these concentrations reduced signal intensities obtained with 10- <dig> fmol phosphopeptide . we decided to apply a maximum of  <dig> pmol total peptide per well in subsequent experiments, and to keep this amount constant in all samples of an assay .

measurement of dyrk1a kinase activity
we performed in vitro-kinase reactions with varying concentrations of recombinant gst-dyrk1a-Δc to determine the minimal detectable amount of kinase activity . the titration revealed a useable linear measuring range between  <dig> and  <dig> μu kinase activity, corresponding to 20- <dig> pg of the recombinant kinase. this results is in the range that could be predicted from the detection limit of the elisa , because  <dig> μu of kinase should phosphorylate  <dig> fmol substrate within  <dig> min, given that a sample of 1/ <dig> of the reaction mix was loaded per well and that the excess of unphosphorylated peptide does not severely affect detection of the phosphopeptide . a similar sensitivity was achieved for gst-dyrk <dig>  consistent with the previous finding that both dyrk1a and dyrk <dig> can phosphorylate thr <dig> in the tau protein  <cit> .

next we tested whether this sensitivity was sufficient to detect endogenous activity of dyrk1a immunoprecipitated from mammalian tissue. we used mouse heart for this experiment, because dyrk1a has recently been identified as a negative regulator of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy  <cit> . the lysate was used for parallel immunoprecipitations with a dyrk1a-specific antibody and anti flag antibody as a negative control. after the washing steps, the resin of each sample was split and subjected in parallel to a non-radiometric and a radiometric immunocomplex kinase assay. the activity of the bound kinase was calculated from the amount of phosphate incorporation  or by comparison with a standard curve . the results in table  <dig> show that the elisa method was sufficiently sensitive to detect endogenous dyrk1a activity in mouse heart, although background levels were somewhat higher than in the radiometric assay.

*subtraction of background 

immunoprecipitates from mouse heart lysate were split and subjected either to a radiometric or a non-radiometric kinase reaction each carried out under the same conditions . the amounts of phosphorylated peptide were calculated from incorporation of 33p or determined by elisa using a standard curve. as a background control, a parallel immunocomplex kinase assay was performed with anti-flag antibody instead of the anti-dyrk1a antibody. aliquots of kinase reactions were diluted 1: <dig> for the elisa. results are means of duplicate measurements.

activity measurements of a dyrk1-related kinase in xenopus laevis oocytes
dyrk kinases from distantly related organisms exhibit high sequence conservation in the catalytic domain  and are thus likely to recognize similar sequences in their substrates. therefore, we reasoned that the elisa assay established for mammalian dyrk1a could also be useful to measure dyrks in other species. we decided to use xenopus oocytes as a model system to test this assumption, because dyrk1a has been reported to play a role in oocyte maturation  <cit> . database searching revealed sequences of two dyrk <dig> isoforms encoded by different genes . one of these kinases shows 97% of sequence identity with human dyrk1a in the catalytic domain and can be regarded as the xenopus ortholog of dyrk1a . the other one shows comparable sequence similarity with human dyrk1a and dyrk1b in the catalytic domain, but is much more similar to dyrk1b than dyrk1a in the c-terminal domain . for the purpose of this report, we designate the latter kinase xdyrk1b.

a http://www.xenbase.org; b http://www.uniprot.orgc http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/unigene

d human dyrk1a contains a repeat of  <dig> consecutive histidines, human dyrk1b contains no histidine repeat

the mrna originally detected in xenopus oocytes by qu et al.  <cit>  corresponds to xdyrk1b . to immunoprecipitate this kinase, we took advantage of a polyclonal antiserum we had previously raised against a peptide with the sequence of the  <dig> c-terminal amino acids of mouse dyrk1b  <cit> , of which  <dig> are identical with xdyrk1b . to test whether this antiserum also recognized xdyrk1b, we overexpressed xdyrk1b in mammalian cells. as shown in figure 3b, the antiserum was indeed suitable for immunoprecipitation and subsequent immunodetection of recombinant xdyrk1b by western blot analysis. no band was detected in a control immunoprecipitation with serum taken from the same rabbit before immunization. the immunopurified protein contained immunodetectable phosphotyrosine, a common feature of the members of the dyrk family. taking advantage of the fact that mammalian and xenopus dyrk1a have identical sequences in the region corresponding to the immunogenic peptide , we overexpressed gfp-dyrk1a in hela cells to assess whether the dyrk1b antiserum might crossreact with xdyrk1a. importantly, anti dyrk1b did not immunoprecipate gfp-dyrk1a , implying that it specifically immunoprecipitates xdyrk1b and not xdyrk1a from the oocytes.

we used the dyrk1b antibody for immunocomplex kinase assays to determine whether unstimulated xenopus oocytes contained active xdyrk1b. first we determined the phosphorylation of tau207- <dig> by the immunoprecipitates over time . kinase activity was well detectable in the anti dyrk1b immunoprecipitates, with little background in the preimmune serum control. we decided to use an incubation time of  <dig> min for the following assays because the turnover was flattening after this time point. the detection of xdyrk1b activity was reproduced in three independent assays with different batches of oocytes and was also confirmed in a radiometric assay with a different substrate peptide  . in spite of this unequivocal detection of active xdyrk1b in xenopus oocytes, we failed to detect the immunopreciptated xdyrk1b on western blots , apparently because the immunodetection of xdyrk1b on western blots was less sensitive than the assay of its catalytic activity.

immunocomplex kinase assays were performed with lysates of about  <dig> μl settled oocytes per assay. results of three independent elisa assays  with tau207- <dig> and one radiometric assay with dyrktide are reported.

discussion
in the present report we describe a simple and non-radiometric assay sufficiently sensitive to measure endogenous activities of dyrks in cell and tissue lysates. we demonstrate the usefulness of the method by measuring the activity of dyrk1a in mouse heart lysate and of a novel dyrk1b-related kinase in xenopus laevis oocytes.

the novel assay relies on the detection of the phosphorylated substrate peptide by a phosphospecific antibody in a direct sandwich elisa configuration. existing phospho-elisa procedures for in vitro-kinase assays have been designed mainly for screening application of protein kinase inhibitors, where recombinant kinases are used and sensitivity is not a major issue . in our elisa configuration, we use the phospho-specific antibody as a capturing antibody. this set-up has already been utilized for the detection of phosphoproteins in cellular lysates, where the sensitive detection of a small fraction of phosphoprotein is a key issue  <cit> . here we show that this configuration allows the detection of small amounts  of phosphopeptide in reaction mixtures containing a great excess of the unphosphorylated substrate. the inverse configuration of the elisa, in which the biotinylated peptide was bound to streptavidin-coated wells, was much less sensitive with a detection limit of about  <dig> pmol phosphorylated peptide . we have not further investigated the reason for this difference, but we speculate that the high density of the biotinylated peptide that is immobilized by the streptavidin, as compared with the few phosphorylated molecules that are captured by the phosphoantibody, impedes the binding of the detection antibody to the epitope. further analysis of other peptide/antibody pairs will be necessary to determine whether this difference between the two configurations of the elisa is generally valid.

advantages of our method in comparison with other kinase assays are i) the high sensitivity ii) the possibility to use high atp levels, iii) the avoidance of radioisotopes and iv) the simple set-up, i.e. the independence of specialized reagents  or instruments. apart from the plate reader, the method basically requires a high-quality phosphospecific antibody and a biotinylated substrate peptide. a drawback of elisas in comparison with radiometric assays is the semiquantitative nature with respect to the determination of the amount of phosphate incorporated into substrate. however, even radiometric assays of kinase activities are only rarely evaluated in a quantitative manner, because they frequently aim at the comparison of kinase activities in different samples analysed in parallel. in addition, the elisa allows for the quantification of the dyrk activity in a given lysate by relating samples to a phosphopeptide standard. a minor limitation of the elisa is the narrow linear range of detection, which can make it necessary to determine a suitable dilution of the reaction mixes.

we show that the present assay with tau207- <dig> as the substrate peptide can also be employed for measuring the activity of dyrk <dig>  a kinase with 46% sequence identity with dyrk1a in the catalytic domain. thr <dig> in tau has also been reported to be phosphorylated by other kinases such as protein kinase a  and cyclin-dependent kinase  <dig>   <cit> . this lack of specificity precludes the use of this particular substrate for assays of a specific kinase in cell lysates, but on the other hand should allow its use for pka and cdk <dig> in immunocomplex kinase assays. obviously, the method should be applicable for other protein kinases, provided that suitable substrate peptide sequences are known and that the respective phosphoepitope-specific antibodies are available. it should be noted that the quality of the phosphospecific antibody is a critical issue, because any binding of the unphosphorylated peptide will directly affect the background and thereby limit sensitivity.

the evolutionary conservation of the dyrk family encouraged us to assess whether the elisa could be used for measuring the activity of non-mammalian dyrks. given that in many species dyrks are involved in differentiation processes  <cit> , early xenopus development is an interesting model system to study the role of dyrks in vertebrate embryogenesis. here we have for the first time determined the activity of a kinase related to mammalian dyrk1b  in xenopus laevis oocytes. in a previous report, an mrna for a dyrk1-releated kinase has been identified in a microarray experiment with mrna from xenopus laevis oocytes and been designated "dyrk1a"  <cit> . however, the probe on the array was derived from a xenopus tropicalis expressed sequence tag  that is derived from the dyrk1a. <dig> gene, which is more closely related to dyrk1b . surprisingly, qu et al.  <cit>  used a polyclonal antibody directed against the c-terminus of human dyrk1a to detect a 90-kd band in lysates of matured oocytes. these results may suggest that both xdyrk1a and xdyrk1b are expressed in xenopus oocytes. our attempts to immunoprecipitate xdyrk1a from the oocyte lysates remained unsuccessful , but it is possible that the monoclonal anti human dyrk1a antibody that we used  does not recognize xdyrk1a. further studies will be necessary to dissect the roles of xdyrk1a and xdyrk1b in xenopus development.

CONCLUSIONS
the use of a phosphospecific capture antibody in elisa-based kinase assays allows for the sensitive measurement of endogenous dyrk activity in diverse biological samples. with the help of this method, kinase activity of dyrk1b was detected in xenopus laevis oocytes. we expect that this assay should prove useful for the study of kinase functions in various model systems.

