BACKGROUND
despite the emergence of new techniques to nucleic acids investigation such as next generation sequence and array chips, the polymerase chain reaction  and its variations still prevail in clinical laboratories. the use of pcr has grown increasingly in different applications ranging from microorganisms detection to diagnosis of complex genetic diseases . the simple implementation and the possibility of post-pcr analysis automation make pcr a great tool for high throughput analysis  <cit> . since its introduction with lifecycler®, the post pcr low resolution melting analysis using sybr® green i dye is the method used to confirm the reaction specificity or to detect primer dimer formation and other non-specific products  <cit> . some years later, the high resolution melting analysis  became possible with the advent of new intercalating dyes that could be used in high concentrations without compromising the pcr efficiency  <cit> . the hrma technique allows fast high throughput analysis of pcr products and reinvigorated the use of dna melting for a wide range of applications, including snp genotyping and dna mapping , gene scanning  <cit> , heterozygosity screening  <cit> , species identification  <cit>  and many others.

the secondary structure formed by a particular nucleic acid molecule influences their dna melting profile. many bioinformatic tools designed to predict melting curves of nucleic acids are available . softwares that predict melting curves can efficiently validate regions with different denaturation profiles and these regions can be exploited to differentiate similar sequences and to define targets to post-pcr tests  <cit> . until now, studies that attempt to develop molecular tools based on melting curves are restricted to denaturation of double-stranded dna  molecules. reports of secondary structures formed by a single nucleic acid strand, particularly single strand rna , are focused in the determination of viral or viroid genome structures , noncoding rnas  and small interfering rnas  .

using carefully calculated thermodynamic parameters, algorithms can be used to predict the secondary structure of a rna strand . one of the most cited online servers that provide tools to work with rna structures is the vienna rna package
 <cit> . among the tools provided, rnafold calculates the minimum free energy and predicts an optimal secondary structure using mccaskill’s algorithm  <cit> . vienna rna package also provides the unique tool to assess ssrna melting curves, the rnaheat software, which reads rna sequences and calculates their specific heat in a determined temperature range, from the partition function by numeric differentiation .

the identification of rna secondary structures is particularly interesting when viral genomes are analyzed. previous studies demonstrated that conserved stem loops, extensive long-range interactions and small palindromic stem–loops generate structures that are generally associated with viral packing capacity and regulate viral replication  <cit> . however, such processes and mechanisms are not fully understood in totiviridae family. viruses of this family infect protozoa, fungi, insects and shrimps and some of these organisms have medical, zootechnical and agricultural importance . totiviridae members have monopartite double strand rna  genomes organized in two orfs. orf <dig> encodes a capsid protein  and orf <dig> encodes an rna-dependent rna polymerase  that is highly conserved among the family species  <cit> .

in the present study we propose that the information extracted from a melting curve of a single stranded rna molecule allows more precise detection of nucleotide variations than the traditional hrma. to demonstrate our hypothesis, two softwares, rnaheat and meltsim, were used to generate melting curves of nucleic acid sequences from totiviridae viruses. melting curves generated were used to reconstruct groups determined by a traditional phylogenetic analysis, based on rdrp sequence alignment. subsequently, ssrna and dsdna melting curves were compared for its potential to discriminate trichomonas vaginalis virus isolates. our results indicate that the information obtained by ssrna denaturation may be used as a support to the development of more accurate methods to detect differences in nucleic acid sequences.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis of totiviridae family
rna-dependent rna polymerases sequences are conserved within members of the families totiviridae and chrysoviridae  <cit> . hence they were used to estimate the phylogenetic relationships among these viruses. twenty eight rdrp aminoacid sequences referenced intable  <dig> and two sequences referenced in table  <dig> were aligned, and their phylogenetic relationships are shown in figure 1a. eight monophyletic groups can be defined in the obtained dendogram, and they were named following liu et al. classification  <cit> . the groups imnv-like, which comprises viruses that infect arthropods, glv-like and scv-like matched with previously described inferences  <cit> . four new groups were retrieved: mov-like that comprising viruses that infect plants and fungi, tvv-like and lrv-like that comprises virus that infect human protozoan parasites, and garv-like comprising fungus viruses. to ensure the efficiency of the analysis, relationships between tvv-like, lrv-like and glv-like groups and their integrants were determined using the sequences referenced in table  <dig> in a second phylogenetic analysis showed in figure 1b. all observed groups are in agreement with the classification proposed by international committee on taxonomy of viruses   <cit> . glv-like comprises viruses of the genus giardiavirus and scv-like comprises viruses of the genus totivirus. the genus victorivirus includes two gropus, mov-like and garv-like. the genera leishmaniavirus and trichomonasvirus include groups lrv-like and tvv-like respectively. imnv-like group appears as less derived group near to glv-like and does is not classified by ictv. the zygosaccharomyces bailii virus  and two other related viruses isolated from plants and fungus clustered together to form a zbv-z-like clade, on a basal branch of the phylogenetic tree . indeed, this group was formerly referred as a primitive, less derived group, distantly related to totiviruses, and includes virions with distinct genomic organization from this family. a new family amalgamaviridae has been proposed to accommodate these three viruses  <cit> .table  <dig> 
totiviridae aminoacid sequences used in this study grouped according to phylogenetic analysis



mov-like

beauveria bassiana rna virus 1

tolypocladium cylindrosporum virus 1

botryotinia fuckeliana totivirus 1

helminthosporium victoriae virus 190s

chalara elegans rna virus 1

helicobasidium mompa totivirus 1-17

magnaporthe oryzae virus 1

imnv-like

infectious myonecrosis virus

tianjin totivirus

omono river virus

drosophila melanogaster totivirus sw-2009a

armigeres subalbatus virus sax06-ak20

glv-like

piscine myocarditis virus al v-708



zbv-z like



zygosaccharomyces bailii virus z

scv-like



saccharomyces cerevisiae virus l-a

black raspberry virus f


garv-like

sphaeropsis sapinea rna virus 2

coniothyrium minitans rna virus

epichloe festucae virus 1

gremmeniella abietina rna virus l2

other sequence

eimeria brunetti rna virus 1

*accession numbers correspond to nucleotide sequences of complete genomes. numbers in brackets correspond to first and last nucleotides of rdrp coding sequences.

aminoacid sequences of
trichomonasvirus
,
leishmaniavirus
and
giardiavirus
used in this study grouped according to phylogenetic analysis



tvv4

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv4-1

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv4-oc3

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv4-oc5

tvv3

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv3-ur1

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv3-oc5

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv3-oc3

trichomonas vaginalis virus 3

tvv2

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv2-oc3

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv2-ur1

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv2-oc5

trichomonas vaginalis virus ii

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> isolate c76

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> isolate c351

tvv1

trichomonas vaginalis virus

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> isolate c344

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv1-uh9

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv1-oc4

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv1-oc3

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv1-ur1

trichomonas vaginalis virus  <dig> strain tvv1-oc5

lrv-like

leishmania rna virus  <dig> - 1

leishmania rna virus  <dig> - 4

leishmania rna virus  <dig> - 1

glv-like

giardia canis virus from china

giardia lamblia virus

giardia lamblia virusphylogenetic relationships between totiviridae family members. trees were calculated from an alignment of rdrp aminoacid sequences from representative members of the totiviridae family, using bayesian inference. the ids of the sequences in trees a and b are shown in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  the numbers in branch nodes indicate posterior probabilities. the right curly brackets indicate the groups identified in this study, named in accordance with liu et al.  <cit>  and de colors represent the genera in according to ictv.



identification of conserved rna secondary structures and melting curves generation
in hrma, nucleotide variations between two pcr products are detected comparing their melting curves. although this approach has been successfully used to identify sequence polymorphisms , and to discriminate bacterial strains and viruses variants  <cit> , it can be rather inconclusive in some cases. high-resolution instruments and expensive dyes are required to detect punctual mutations or in situations where is necessary to detect multiple mutations in a same sequence  <cit> . considering that ssrna melting curve is closed related to the secondary structure assumed by a ssrna molecule, we decided to investigate if a melting curve of a ssrna is more informative than a melting curve generated from a dsdna. for this, rna sequences from totiviridae viruses coding for rdrp proteins were inspected in order to identify regions with conserved secondary structures. conserved regions were selected to avoid major structural variation between the sequences. initially, rna sequences referenced in tables  <dig> and  <dig> were screened but conserved rna structures common to all sequences were not found. interestingly, the alignment of the sequences from each group individually revealed regions with high probability  to form conserved rna structures in groups imnv-like, garv-like and glv-like. members of the mov-like group showed conserved regions only when analyzed in subgroups, botryv, tcv- <dig> and hvv-190s showed regions with conserved rna structure in the second half of orf <dig> when taken together. the same was observed to mov-like members beauv and mov- <dig> when analyzed individually . the groups zbv-z-like, scv-like, tvv-like and lrv-like do not show rna conserved regions with high rnaz score, nevertheless, one conserved region of each group could be selected manually from alignments . it is clear that the similarity between sequences increases the chance of finding regions with conserved rna structure. in agreement with phylogenetic trees showed in figure  <dig>  individuals that share a secondary rna structure belongs to groups with shorter branches.table  <dig> 
totiviridae nucleotide sequences used in this study grouped according to phylogenetic analysis



mov-like








imnv-like






glv-like




zbv-z like




scv-like

ustilago maydis virus h1





garv-like





other sequence


accession codes correspond to nucleotide sequences of complete genomes. numbers in brackets correspond to first and last nucleotides of rdrp coding sequences.

nucleotide sequences of
trichomonasvirus
,
giardiavirus
and
leishmaniavirus
used in this study grouped according to phylogenetic analysis



tvv4




tvv3





tvv2







tvv1








lrv-like




glv-like




accession codes correspond to nucleotide sequences of complete genomes. numbers in brackets correspond to first and last nucleotides of rdrp coding sequences.




rna secondary structures of the conserved regions found in groups imnv-like, glv-like and garv-like were predicted using the software rnafold. rna fragments that show conserved rna secondary structures in imnv-like group are indicated in figure  <dig> column a. the respective models generated from each sequence are showed in figure  <dig> column b. these sequences were also used to perform a in silico melting curve analysis using softwares rnaheat and meltsim, in order to obtain ssrna melting curves  and dsdna melting curves . the results of the same analysis from groups glv-like and garv-like are showed in additional file 1: figure s <dig> and additional file 2: figure s <dig> respectively. is interesting to observe that, in all cases, ssrna melting curve presents higher variation than the profile generated by denaturation of dsdna. this variation is possibly due to the presence of "bubbles" or “hairpins” formed as result of regions that not have perfect base pair complementarities. these regions may comprise several small pieces that present different melting temperatures. when dsdna is used, the melting curve variation is generated only due to differences in the number of hydrogen bonds between the strands, which can be caused by nucleotide mispairing. this subtle variation in dsdna melting curve can be detected only using more sensitive and expensive methods. denaturation profile generated by ssrna, as a result of the loss of its secondary structure, reflects more intense variations in nucleotide sequence unambiguously. these variations are more pronounced if the number of paired regions interspersed with non complementary regions is high. this can be easily observed when comparing the graphs of columns c and d in figure  <dig>  is possible to distinguish five profiles in column c visually, but is not possible to do it comparing profiles that are in column d.figure  <dig> 
regions with conserved rna secondary structures and their respective melting curves. this figure corresponds to analysis of imnv-like group sequences.  indication of regions with conserved secondary structure inside rdrp coding sequences, identified using rnaz.  minimum free energy models calculated using rnafold corresponding to each conserved region identified by rnaz. structures are colored according to base-pairing probabilities. red color denotes the high probability and purple denotes low probability of a given base is paired or not. for unpaired regions the color denotes the probability of being unpaired.  melting curves calculated from conserved regions using softwares rnaheat and meltsim respectively.



clustering groups using melting curves
to confirm that information extracted from a ssrna melting curve is more detailed than its correspondent dsdna melting curve, clustering analyses were performed using melting curves from each ssrna and dsdna sequences of groups imnv-like, garv-like and glv-like. the curves were compared per group and clustered using r  <cit> . the results are represented as dendograms in figure  <dig> and in additional file 3: figure s <dig>  the relationships between individuals are determined exclusively by the similarity between the melting curves generated by the programs rnaheat and meltsim. the groups obtained from r analyses  were compared to groups obtained in phylogenetic analysis. it was surprising that the imnv-like and garv-like groups could be perfectly reconstructed by the clustering of the rnaheat melting curves data, but not by the clustering based on meltsim melting curves. in these two cases, the analysis using ssrna melting curves showed more resolution than the analysis using dsdna melting curve. in other words, these results strongly indicate that ssrna melting curve is a good source of information about the nucleic acid sequence. additional tests using the conserved sequences manually selected from the other groups confirm that the resolution of dendrograms generated from rnaheat curves is never less than the resolution of dendograms generated from meltsim curves .figure  <dig> 
cluster analysis and dendograms of groups imnv-like and garv-like. melting curves generated for each conserved rna sequence in a same group were compared and clustered using a statistical inference. the proximity between individuals of groups indicated in the column  is due exclusively to the similarity between the melting curves generated in silico. columns  and  shows the dendograms calculated from curves generated by rnaheat and melstsim for the members of each group.



it is already known that the formation of secondary structures in dna can exerts significant influence in the molecule functions during dna replication, transcription or translation. these secondary structures may vary within the molecule or when dna is transcribed to rna in according to cellular context involved. considering this fact, is perfectly plausible that a given nucleic acid sequence may suffer different selective pressures in according with variations of it conformation in different stages of its “life cyle”. in single stranded rna viruses, the secondary structure of rna could be selected by a large number of factors acting at the same time, including the compactation of the genetic material into capsid. therefore, we opted to eliminate any noise that could compromise the analysis of rna conserved secondary structures and ensure that natural selection would be acting mainly on the structure detected by rnaz. due to this fact the totiviridae family seems a perfect model. during all replication steps the genetic material of totiviridae remains as rna and the formation of rna secondary structures occur only when rna is being replicated. this factor can be decisive for the perfect reconstruction of phylogenetic groups comparing secondary structures of rna.

potential of single strand melting curve to pathogen identification
whereas the analysis of single strand denaturation enables a higher resolution to phylogenetic groups reconstruction, it is expected to be also more efficient in distinguishing individuals within the same group. to confirm this, a phylogenetic analysis of sequences from a large number of members of tvv-like group was performed . the analysis of different variants of trichomonas vaginalis virus, revealed four five sub-groups called tvv <dig>  tvv <dig>  tvv <dig> and tvv <dig>  all belonging to the group tvv-like and to genus trichomonasvirus. the sub-group tvv <dig> was selected to generate melting curves in silico. an alignment of rdrp rna sequences was used for rnaz screening. this analysis revealed one region with conserved rna structure shared by all viruses of this group in the second half or rdrp rna sequence. then, two regions were selected, a non-conserved region and the conserved region detected by rnaz . these regions were used to generate melting curves using rnaheat and meltsim . it was clear that the melting curves generated from ssrna are more informative than the curves generated by denaturation of dsdna. observing the curves generated by rnaheat in both sets of melting curves is possible to differentiate seven trichomonasvirus variants. the discrimination of each virus is more difficult if the graphs generated by meltsim, because the variation in the melting curves occurs in a restricted temperature range.figure  <dig> 
differentiating members of the subgroup tvv <dig> using
in silico
melting curves. a region with variable rna secondary structure  and a region with conserved rna structure  were obtained from the alignment of orf <dig> of all members of the group using the software rnaz. the curves were generated by rnaheat and meltsim to conserved regions  and variable regions . each denaturation curve is marked with a different color: dark blue lines to tvv1-c344; orange lines to tvv1-oc3; yellow lines to tvv1-oc4; green lines to tvv1-oc5; dark red lines to tvv1-ur1; light blue lines to tvv1-uh <dig> and dark green lines to tvv1_i.



CONCLUSIONS
the results presented here are a strong indication that the ssrna melting curves are more informative than dsdna melting curves. in addition, they demonstrate that common rna conserved regions may be determined from analysis of individuals that are phylogenetically related, and that these regions may be used to support the reconstitution of their phylogenetic groups. these findings are a robust basis for the development of in vitro systems to ssrna melting curves detection.

