BACKGROUND
recent investigations indicate that use of alternative initiation codons for protein translation expands the diversity of protein products encoded by mammalian genomes. alternative initiation addresses the selection of non-aug codons of mrnas as start sites for protein translation. utilization of alternative translation initiation codons  has been demonstrated with increasing frequency in mammalian species, as well as in viruses, yeast, and drosophila  <cit> .

it is known that a single mrna may give rise to multiple protein isoforms based on utilization of alternative initiation codons  <cit> . thus, non-aug codons, as well as the classical aug start codon, should be jointly considered in mechanisms for translation of mrnas.

numerous mammalian regulatory proteins utilize alternative initiation sites. many of these proteins utilizing atis participate as regulators of metabolism, intracellular signal transduction, transcription and gene expression, growth mechanisms, and related cellular functions. for example, translation of dihydrofolate reductase mrna can utilize gug, uug, cug, aua, auc, and auu codons as shown in mutagenesis studies  <cit> . while comprehensive research on all possible mechanisms for selection has not been performed, it has been noted that successful translation at an atis can result from leaky scanning or internal entry of ribosomes  <cit> . isoforms of the tyrosine kinase hck are specified by alternative translation initiation sites  <cit> . novel protein isoforms of the wilms' tumor  suppressor gene, wti, are generated by translation initiation at a cug codon  <cit> . furthermore, human fibroblast growth factor  utilizes cug start sites for the production of unique isoforms of fgf  <cit> . in all three cases, the isoforms result in significant differences in localization and therefore function. transcription factor, c-myc, is known to result in isoforms from atis start site cug that results in unique transcriptional activity and is expressed higher in high cell density in lymphoid, erythroid and embryo fibroblast cells  <cit> . these examples represent the expanding group of mammalian proteins produced by alternative initiation for synthesis of proteins that regulate biological processes in health and disease.

while analysis of the human genome utilized aug for initiation of protein translation from predicted mrnas  <cit> , alternative initiation sites have not yet been considered for predictions of translated protein gene products. it is essential to computationally define the properties of atis to allow prediction of alternative initiation codons and resulting protein products. for this reason, this bioinformatic study analyzed the nucleotide sequence parameters of 5'-utr regions of mrnas that utilize atis to determine the unique profile of nucleotide sequence properties that can accurately predict alternative initiation codons in mammalian mrnas.

in the first part of this bioinformatic analysis, a classification tree that assessed the properties of 5'-utr regions of mrnas determined the presence or absence of potential atiss. in the second part of this bioinformatic study, critical parameters of 5'-utrs were subjected to analyses by an artificial neural network  that identified the predicted atis codon and its location. systematic evaluation of primary and secondary 5'-utr regions of mrna sequences provided knowledge of the most influential parameters for accurate prediction of atis. importantly, training with a group of mrnas known to utilize atis resulted in highly reliable bioinformatic predictions of atis by the integrated analyses of the classification tree and the ann systems. this achievement for bioinformatic prediction of atis is an important step towards predicting protein products derived from utilization of alternative translation initiation sites.

RESULTS
atis training set
the classification tree and ann analyses utilized a training set of mrna sequences that have been experimentally demonstrated to use alternative initiation sites for protein translation  <cit> . a positive training set of mammalian mrnas that utilize atis for protein translation was obtained as validated refseq sequences . this group of  <dig> non-redundant mrnas was considered exclusively for training since these mrnas were validated and confirmed by curators to utilize atis  <cit> . human, mouse, and rat mrnas are primarily represented . functional classification of mrna sequences containing atis locations demonstrated that the translated proteins are responsible for highly regulated functions that include growth factors, transcriptional regulation, protein kinases, nucleotide metabolism, viral functions, protein translation, calcium  and atp binding, and apoptosis . it will be important to define the nucleotide sequence properties of the 5'-utr domains that define use of atis for mrna translation of such regulatory proteins.

this positive set of  <dig> validated refseq mammalian sequences have been identified as containing at least one alternative initiation site. this information was obtained from genbank records and includes accession, protein name, annotated start codon, species and the relative start position. references for each alternative start site are provided .

codon context
a specific investigation of start codon context was performed in order to determine the most optimal representation for classification and identification. the traditional kozak consensus sequence ranges from - <dig> to + <dig> with the critical base positions located at - <dig> and + <dig>  <cit> . to study the effects of more distant codons, we analyzed a larger window for nucleotides at positions - <dig> to + <dig> . we identified the critical positions in this window that represent unique consensus sequences near atis  using an adaptation of the weblogo application  <cit> . weblogo presents a graphical representation of the conservation of nucelotides at each position in the supplied window. in order to compare the results of atis conservation, we performed the same analysis on the negative set of sequences which used aug as the start site  notably, the distinct consensus sequences at the atis  differ from consensus sequences at aug initiation sites . the 5'-utr of the atis sequences showed conservation of g and c in the - <dig> position, and c in the - <dig> position, which were present at a significant level in the positive training set. in contrast, the aug initiation sites showed consensus at position - <dig> for a and g, and at position  <dig> for g and a; these characteristics represent features of the kozak sequence  <cit> . clearly, consensus 5'-utr sequences near atis differ from those near aug initiation sites.

sequence classification
the goal of the classification tree was to determine the critical parameters that provide the most accurate categorization of sequences that utilize atis, and those sequences that do not use atis. analyses of 5'-utr sequence properties illustrated that mrnas utilizing atis possess distinct parameters with respect to consensus sequences, nucleotide sequence features, and secondary structure . the consensus sequence pattern of 5'-utr regions of mrnas with atis was considered exclusively for consensus at the - <dig> position  and the - <dig> position , in contrast to the traditional kozak consensus pattern . nucleotide sequence structural features were also considered with respect to the length of the mrna, 5'-utr length, g/c ratio, number of upstream augs, and codon bias. secondary structure was assessed by the presence or absence of internal ribosome entry site  which directs translation, and the glucose transporter  <dig>  or terminal oligopyrimidine  features which inhibit translation  <cit> . these properties allowed classification of the mrna sequences into the 'yes' category for the presence of an atis, or the 'no' category for the absence of an atis .

this table illustrates the parameters  of 5'-utr regions of mrnas utilizing atis with respect to distinct consensus sequence patterns compared to the traditional kozak pattern, sequence parameters of 5'-utr regions, and secondary structure features. the distinct consensus sequence pattern consists of c at position - <dig> and g/c at position - <dig> . 5'-utr length is defined as the length of the mrna sequence from the beginning of the 5'-utr to the translation initiation site and sequence length as annotated in genbank. number of augs is determined from the start of the 5'-utr to the first annotated start site. secondary structure features considered are internal ribosome entry sites , glucose transporter  <dig> , and terminal oligopyrimidine .

for purposes of training the classification tree,  <dig> of the  <dig> validated atis sequences were used as the positive training set, combined with an equal number  from the negative aug training set randomly selected from the  <dig> sequences from the negative set; this provided a 'training' set of  <dig> mrna sequences. the negative aug set was composed of validated refseq mammalian sequences known to translate with one or more aug start sites, and which have not been identified as utilizing atis . the c <dig>  classification tree was used as the algorithm to categorize mrnas as those that utilize atis, and those that do not utilize atis. testing under several conditions defined the properties for the 'yes' and 'no' decision tree that considered the distinct properties of atis with respect to upstream augs, 5'-utr length, distinct consensus sequences at positions - <dig> and - <dig>  ires secondary structure, and g/c ratio .

the classification tree demonstrated a high level of accuracy in classifying mrnas for atis . with the 'training' set, the classification tree correctly classified  <dig> out of  <dig> sequences. an 'independent testing' set composed of  <dig> positive validated atis sequences and  <dig> negative aug sequences, resulted in the correct classification of  <dig> out of the  <dig> sequences. in both 'training' and 'independent testing' sets, the classification tree correctly identified all sequences containing atiss. due to the small size of the 'training' set, 10-fold 'cross-validation' was performed and resulted in correct classification of  <dig> sequences out of the total of  <dig> sequences. cross-validation is the process by which the data set  is divided into  <dig> random segments and tested for observation of any differences in error resulting from the randomization. the high number of correctly classified atis sequences by cross-validation supports decisions of the classification tree. the decision tree then evaluated a 'provisional' atis set of sequences. the provisional set contained the positive set of  <dig> refseq sequences predicted to contain at least one atis combined with a negative set of  <dig> randomly selected aug sequences, for a total of  <dig> sequences in the 'provisional' set. the predicted set had high homology to the validated set, resulting in a total of  <dig> sequences from the  <dig> total identified to have conserved atis start sites among mammalian species . testing of the classification tree resulted in correct classification of  <dig> out of  <dig> sequences as those that contain atis form the 'provisional' set.

the results of testing the various data sets  indicated that the classification tree utilized the 5'-utr properties consisting of the number of upstream aug start sites, 5'-utr length, unique consensus sequence patterns at positions - <dig> and - <dig>  ires feature, and g/c ratio. differences in these properties were observed for 5'-utr regions of atis compared to non-atis mrnas . the atis sequences were twice as likely to utilize the distinct  consensus pattern, as 60% of atis sequences contained this consensus pattern. also, a higher portion of atis-containing sequences possessed ires secondary structure, compared to non-atis sequences. additionally, atis sequences appeared to contain longer 5'-utr domains compared to non-atis sequences. while the g/c ratio was less important than the other variables, it resulted in a split in the classification tree and, therefore, is included as a parameter required for the final classification results. overall, these properties of the 5'-utr regions provided predictions of known atis within mrnas by analyses with the classification tree.

results of the c <dig>  classification tree on training, testing, cross-validation, full negative set and provisional data sets are presented here. the classification tree was able to effectively distinguish between sequences that contain atis sites and those that do not. the  <dig> refseq sequences validated as containing alternative start sites were combined with  <dig> randomly selected sequences without alternative start sites resulting in  <dig> sequences used for the data sets and training. of these  <dig> sequences,  <dig> were used for the 'training' set and the remaining  <dig> were used as an 'independent' testing set. 'cross-validation' of the c <dig>  classification tree was performed using  <dig> fold cross-validation on the full set of  <dig> sequences, represented by the training and independent testing sets. the 'full negative set' was the full set of  <dig> non-atis sequences which was compiled for generation of testing sets. the resulting performance of this set provides a measure of the ability of the classification tree to generalize to larger datasets. the 'provisional' set consisted of sequences predicted to contain at least one atis; this data set performed well during classification. the mean absolute error is calculated as the fraction of incorrectly classified sequences compared to the total number of mrna sequences in the designated training sets.

critical parameters in the classification tree are illustrated with respect to their average values for alternative start sites and non-alternative start sites. differences among these values facilitated the effective classification of mrnas with atis. the number of augs is a count of the number of augs in the 5'-utr. consensus sequences matches against a c in the - <dig> position from the start site and a g or c in the - <dig> position. the sequences are also scanned for the ires secondary structure and the ratio of guanine and cytosine in the 5' utr is also measured. although the g/c ratio was the least important variable, it resulted in a split in the classification tree and is, therefore, listed as an parameter required for the final classification results.

atis identification by the artificial neural network 
identification of atiss within mrnas, based on selected parameters , was achieved by analyses with the artificial neural network  algorithm. parameters used by the ann analyses included the two consensus sequence patterns at positions - <dig> and - <dig>  as well as positions - <dig> and + <dig>  5'-utr length, length of the open reading frame , number of upstream augs, the codon used for translation initiation, and g/c ratio. in addition, secondary structure considerations utilized calculation of the free energy of a 50-base pair stem-loop region containing the initiation codon  which was presented as input to the ann. these parameters of 5'-utr mrna regions were utilized by the ann system for analyses and testing for identifying alternative initiation codons .

the ann analyses were conducted with three types of data sets . firstly, the 'training' set of the ann was composed of  <dig> of the  <dig> atis positive training set, combined with and  <dig> of the  <dig> non-atis sequences within the same set of mrnas, for a total of  <dig> members. the ann analyses achieved 83% accuracy for predicting atiss in this 'training' set . of these, the ann resulted in  <dig> false negatives and  <dig> false positives. secondly, evaluation with a small 'independent testing' set, composed of  <dig> sequences from the positive atis set and  <dig> randomly selected non-atis from the same  <dig> sequences , resulted in  <dig> % accuracy for identifying atis. thirdly, the ann analyzed a larger 'full' set, consisting of the  <dig> atis sequences from the positive set and  <dig> non-atis codons obtained from the same positive set of mrnas, which comprised a total of  <dig> sequences for the 'full' set. analyses of the 'full' set provided a rigorous test of the ann. the ann correctly identified  <dig> of the  <dig> atiss, and correctly identified  <dig> of the non-atiss, resulting in a high overall accuracy of  <dig> %. overall, these results demonstrate effective prediction of alternative initiation sites within 5'-utr regions of mrnas by the ann system.

properties of 5'-utr sequences of mrnas using atis are shown according to their application in the ann. the derivation of each feature is shown, as well as the range of representation to the ann for training and testing. these features are implemented in the ann analyses which includes refined representations of secondary structure.

results of the ann on the training, testing, and full data sets are shown here. for the purpose of identifying the atiss, the  <dig> validated alternative start sites were combined with  <dig> non-alternative start sites randomly selected from the same sequences, resulting in a set of  <dig> sites.  <dig> of the  <dig> sites are used for the 'training' set, and the remaining  <dig> are used as an 'independent testing' set. further all  <dig> potential start sites from the full set of  <dig> sequences containing alternative start sites were compiled and tested by the ann. the full set represents all potential start sites present in the  <dig> positive set of mrnas, and tests the ability of the ann to define which sites are likely to act as an alternative initiation start site.

discussion
regulation of protein translation of mrnas is critical for the control of gene expression. it is important to gain knowledge concerning mechanisms responsible for regulating translation of mrnas into function protein gene products, especially those not yet discovered. significantly, increasing numbers of mammalian mrnas have been found to utilize alternative translation initiation sites  for the expression of novel protein isoforms. therefore, investigation of the parameters that define functional atiss must be conducted to gain knowledge of factors that participate in generating the diversity of protein gene products.

in this study, bioinformatics analyses of 5'-utr regions of mrnas utilizing atis by the joint classification tree and ann system resulted in organization of key properties that provide prediction of atis for protein expression. analyses by the classification tree of 5'-utr regions of mrnas utilizing atis revealed the importance of distinct consensus sequences , upstream augs, 5'-utr sequence length, g/c ratio, and ires secondary structure as properties that categorized mrnas as those with and without atis. the ann further analyzed 5'-utr properties to identity atis sites among mrnas sequences obtained from the classification tree as possessing atiss. the combined classification tree and ann analyses for atis provide a significant advance towards defining the properties of 5'-utr sequences for alternative initiation sites. organization of selected criteria for identification of atis by the combined classification tree and ann algorithm has far reaching potential for elucidation of novel protein isoforms with key regulatory functions.

more specifically, since alternative translation initiation is a rare process in mammalian mrna, we ensured that the sequence classification algorithm does not exclude any sequences which may contain an atis. the classification algorithm is intended to identify sequences which may contain atiss and should be investigated further. the algorithm supplied by the ann then is able to utilize the results of the sequence classification algorithm and perform analysis on a significantly reduced set of sequences. the computational requirements of secondary structure determination applied in the atis location algorithm are significant, so the classification tree acts as a pre-filter.

codon context
the kozak consensus sequence as well as secondary structure is known to be critical in the determination of start sites  <cit> . these two parameters were researched in detail for the best representation in the classification and identification algorithms. independent analysis of the codon context served an important role of identifying how inclusive the window should be as well as the relative importance of individual base positions. in our investigation, we saw a clear preference of the - <dig>  and - <dig>  positions within our set of sequences containing atiss. while the traditional kozak consensus base positions  were also conserved, they were much more conserved within our negative set of sequences which did not utilize alternative translation. it is clear that within our set, - <dig> and - <dig> positions may be necessary if the alternative site is not in an ideal kozak sequence.

it is also of note, that cug was the most common atis found  within the validated set and resulted in 50% of the atiss in the predicted set. the gug start site was the second most common site in the predicted set. this is consistent with initial studies done to compare the relative expression levels of products resulting from single base polymorphisms of the traditional aug start site  <cit> . it is also of note, that cug and gug are the most common atis in species known to use this as form of expression regulation such as drosophila and e-coli  <cit> .

secondary structure
the specific nucleotide composition in a given region aids in determining the stability of the region in terms of the secondary structures that are produced  <cit> . secondary structures are composed of simple stems and loops resulting from rna folding and bonding due to chemical interactions of the nucleotide bases. the stability of these structures is a result of the strength of the bonds that form them. several patterns have been identified that lead to complex secondary structures. these structures have been identified for their specific effects on translation during various biological conditions. the codon's position within the structure effects the efficiency of ribosome scanning and binding  <cit> . the greater the stability, the more difficult it is for the ribosome to bind and begin translation. in terms of complex structures, the individual loops are known to be less stable than the stem portions. the stability is measured in terms of free energy, and energies greater than - <dig> kcal/mol are known to be inhibitory  <cit> . while these inhibitory regions aid to halt ribosome scanning and begin translation, stable downstream secondary structures can direct ribosomal scanning and aid in translation initiation  <cit> . consideration of the structures as well as the related free energies were critical in examining their effect on alternative initiation.

sequence classification
since the c <dig>  classification algorithm operates on the theory of information gain, parameters yielding the greatest information occur earlier in the classification tree. by using a set of continuous and categorical variables, we achieved a set of 'if-then' rules capable of identifying mrna sequences which are likely to contain atiss. the clustering algorithm indicated that the most critical parameters included the number of upstream augs, utr length, the consensus sequence pattern featuring positions - <dig> and - <dig>  the presence or absence of the ires, and the g/c ratio.

in situations where no other augs are present, alternative initiation may occur at an alternative start site in an ideal consensus sequence. this accounts principally for the fact that a count of zero augs is a high indication of alternative initiation in our decision tree. on the other hand, multiple augs are often an indication that translation is highly regulated. unique protein isoforms may be produced at various efficiencies allowing for lower or higher expression levels of a particular product. the length of the 5'-utr has always been considered an indication of highly regulated sequences. long 5'-utrs often contain complex, stable secondary structures, and other long regulatory sequences  <cit> . the influence of both the novel consensus sequences  and the kozak consensus sequences were consistent with the previous examination of the patterns within our training set. the g/c ratio was also determined to be an influential feature in classification. with a higher the g/c ratio, more inhibition is present for translation. finally, the presence of secondary structures, specifically the ires was critical for classification. notably, ires structures are important for their directional influence on translation  <cit> .

atis identification by the classification tree and artificial neural network 
the resulting decision made by the classification tree provided near perfect classification of mrnas with atis, utilizing a defined set of parameters. the purpose of the ann was to then evaluate these critical parameters to further examine the role of secondary structure in a broader investigation aimed at actual identification of predicted atis. by examining all potential start sites with the ann, this study was able to assess the predictive potential of the resulting network as applied to a much larger data set in which many of the examples were not known to be atiss. on the initial training set of data, the ann achieved  <dig> % accuracy. when this was expanded to the much larger data set of all potential start sites, the ann achieved  <dig> % overall accuracy in the full data set of all potential start sites using atis and aug start sites. it should be noted that the predicted set was highly homologous to the validated set. significantly, these results compare favorably with previous prediction algorithms developed for aug start site location which have been found to yield optimal results from 82% to 94% accuracy  <cit> . we attribute these results to factoring in structural information which was not examined in previous predictive start site algorithms.

we note that our ability to fully consider secondary structure is limited by the inability to determine structures under the biological conditions which have in some cases, modified the folding, to permit the selection of an atis. specific examples of conditions such as stress, heat and salinity effecting the selection of the atis and thus resulting isoforms has been noted in fibroblast growth factor  where specific conditions favor the aug isoform with a localization in the cytoplasmic region and the remaining cug isoforms localize within the nucleus  <cit> .

the ann system utilized multiple parameters for analyses, consisting of the 5'-utr length, orf length, free energy, downstream free energy, local secondary structure,  and  consensus sequences, g/c ratio, atis codon, and aug count. all of these parameters were required for optimum ann analyses. the parameters involving structural features  were especially important, since their removal resulted in results equivalent to random selection. significantly, the ann analyses has defined multiple parameters that together allow identification of alternative initiation sites.

overall, the classification tree and ann system provide prediction of alternative initiation sites of mrnas, based on the distinct profile of 5'-utr sequence properties of atis. the ability to evaluate alternative translation initiation sites in mammalian sequences has far reaching potential for the discovery of previously unknown proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
alternative initiation of translation is responsible for the synthesis of protein isoforms that have distinct biological functions. to facilitate the discovery of new alternative translation initiation locations, this bioinformatic study provided the combined classification tree-ann approach for the identification of potential alternative initiation start sites using a critical group of parameters representing sequence properties of 5'-utr regions of mrnas. this approach provided a high degree of accuracy when tested against a set of previously identified atiss. the two-phase approach to this study allows for the classification tree to rapidly identify sequences which may contain atis and for the ann to take on the more computationally intensive process of selecting the start site location. the predictive folding conducted by the ann is a computationally intensive process which must be repeated for every potential start site used by the ann. for the purpose of batch processing, the classification tree allows for filtering out sequences which do not contain alternative start sites prior to the ann phase. current algorithms for gene prediction in mammalian species do not consider the potential for alternative initiation and as a result, it is likely that this phenomenon has led to an under representation of proteins. future elucidation of all potential alternative initiation sites for protein translation is required to understand the breadth of genome functions that underlie health and disease conditions.

