BACKGROUND
the arrangement and orientation of genes in genomes is often shaped through evolution by mechanisms such as unequal crossing over followed by random genetic drift or natural selection  <cit> . recent studies indicate that the distribution of genes in genomes does not always happen at random  <cit> . in the human genome, housekeeping genes show a strong tendency to cluster together  <cit> , and genes that participate in the same pathway also tend to lie adjacent to each other in the genome  <cit> . moreover, several studies indicate that adjacent genes in human seem to co-express regardless of their intergenic distance  <cit> . similar phenomena have been observed in drosophila, nematode, and yeast  <cit> . among these observations, the co-expression of adjacent pairs is crucial because changes in such genome organization could alter the co-regulated transcription over the pairs  <cit> .

how co-expressed genes are regulated is still unclear. two major mechanisms proposed are alterations of chromatin structure and sharing of the same regulatory elements  <cit> . the open conformation of the chromatin structure is required for genes to be transcribed into rnas and thus become expressed. a general hypothesis is that clusters of genes in the same chromatin domain have a higher chance to be expressed simultaneously than genes located in different chromatin domains  <cit> . alternatively, cis-regulatory elements could behave like fine modules that alter gene expression locally. therefore, adjacent pairs with common upstream activation sites  or shared regulatory systems are more likely to be co-expressed  <cit> .

several attempts have been made to investigate the mechanism for co-expression of adjacent gene pairs. in human, the abundance of divergent pairs relative to convergent and tandem pairs has been reported  <cit> , and the common cpg islands that were often found between divergent pairs were known to be associated with an "open" or "active" chromatin  <cit> . however, co-expressed groups of adjacent genes spanning 20– <dig> kilobases in the drosophila genome did not show any correlation with known chromosomal structures  <cit> . later, the idea of co-expression among clustered genes was rejected by thygesen and zwinderman  <cit> , whose study also failed to discover any correlation between the chromatin domain and co-expressed genes in drosophila.

it is evident that in yeast adjacent gene pairs display stronger co-expression than random pairs do  <cit> . kruglyak and tand  <cit>  proposed that some co-expressed pairs resulted from sharing a single regulatory system, despite the fact that many genes controlled by separate regulatory systems may also have highly co-expressed patterns. hurst et al.  <cit>  also concluded that divergent orientation is dominant for co-regulation and for conservation of pairs, but the finding had weak statistical support. although these studies suggested that the sharing of a common uas plays an important role in regulating co-expressed pairs, and that divergent pairs are more likely to share the same regulatory system, the co-expression level  of divergent pairs is not significantly higher than that of tandem pairs with a similar intergenic distance  <cit> . the relative contribution of the two major mechanisms to the co-expression of adjacent genes is still in debate for different organisms.

recently, byrnes et al.  <cit>  proposed that the majority of gene loss in yeast happened after whole-genome duplication  by single-gene deletion. their observation implied that adjacent gene pairs were not preserved after wgd. on the other hand, several studies indicated that adjacent pairs were conserved in some organisms due to the sharing of regulatory elements  <cit> . to investigate the contribution of regulatory elements to the co-expression of adjacent pairs, we first examined the conservation of adjacency in five yeast species. it is of particular interest to study the conservation of adjacent pairs using yeast species which have undergone wgd, because the duplicated adjacent relationship would in theory be free of evolutionary selection. importantly, the advancement of technology has led to the establishment of databases of transcription factors  and transcription factor binding sites . these tools allow researchers to investigate the mechanism for co-expression of adjacent pairs by studying sharing of common regulatory systems. herein, we present a comprehensive examination of the intergenic regions between adjacent genes to inquire whether these pairs frequently share common tfs. our study provides clear evidence that sharing of the common tfs is not an exclusive component of the driving force in co-regulation of adjacent gene pairs in yeast.

RESULTS
conservation of adjacent pairs in five yeast species
in order to investigate the conservation of adjacent pairs during the evolution of yeast, we collected s. cerevisiae orthologues from four saccharomyces sensu stricto species . in all cases, the proportions of conservation for different adjacent patterns  were similar to those for random sampling composition , suggesting that the three adjacent patterns have equal chances to be preserved. in more detailed analysis of stringently conserved pairs , we found that only a small fraction of adjacent pairs had maintained their particular adjacency relationships across these species. the conservation ratios are relatively low compared to those of the adjacent pairs found in s. cerevisiae  . the low preservation ratios indicate that the adjacent relationship is not tightly maintained during the course of yeast evolution.

afor analysis, the annotated orfs exclude dubious and silent orfs as well as overlapping genes.

bthe orthologous adjacent pairs of the sensu stricto species are determined based on conservation of the orthologs as well as their adjacency relationship in s. cerevisiae.

cgene pairs with adjacency relationship preserved in all five species for the orthologous pairs.

dgene pairs with adjacency relationship preserved in any three species, or in s. castelli with at least one another yeast species used in this study.

ethe proportions of conservation for different adjacent patterns are similar to those for random sampling composition .

co-expression of conserved adjacent pairs
as shown in fig. 1a, all three pairing types of stringently conserved pairs have significant levels of co-expression compared to that of random pairs . however, there is no obvious difference in co-expression levels between the three adjacent patterns . in particular the divergent pairs did not show a higher co-expression as expected. on the contrary, in comparing the expression dataset of loosely conserved pairs, convergent and divergent pairs displayed higher co-expression levels than did tandem pairs with statistical support  .

to investigate the conservation of co-expression tendency in adjacent pairs, the co-expression levels between conserved pairs and non-conserved pairs were compared. expression patterns are available for  <dig> stringently and  <dig>  loosely conserved adjacent pairs . neither dataset showed significant differences in co-expression level between conserved and non-conserved adjacent pairs . therefore, conservation of adjacency does not necessarily have an effect on the co-expression of adjacent genes.

commonly shared tfs of adjacent pairs
since the co-expression level is not particularly high in conserved versus in non-conserved adjacent pairs, it was of great interest to address whether co-expression of adjacent pairs resulted from shared regulatory system  <cit> . in our analysis the proportion of adjacent pairs sharing common tfs was relatively low . in addition, among the conserved adjacent pairs , only about  <dig> % of them shared single common tf and  <dig> % shared multiple tfs . the small fraction of sharing tfs among conserved adjacent pairs suggests that the co-expression of adjacent genes does not necessarily correlate with the shared regulatory system. interestingly, the portion of sharing tfs among conserved adjacent pairs is similar to that found in non-conserved adjacent pairs, implying that adjacent pairs with shared tfs are not necessarily subjected to a stronger evolutionary constraint than those without shared tfs.

a <dig> random pairs from s. cerevisiae were used for analysis.

to explore whether adjacent pairs with shared tfs are more likely to be co-expressed, we compared the co-expression level of adjacent pairs with common tfs to those without. the result showed that both groups have significantly higher levels of co-expression relative to that of random pairs, but no significant difference was detected between the two groups  . this suggests that sharing of tfs may not be the main cause for the co-expression of adjacent pairs.

we acknowledge the potential bias and noise that microarray data may bear. to circumvent this problem, we also analyzed the condition-specific datasets separately  and obtained observations similar to those using the merged dataset.

the co-expression of pac- and rrpe-regulated divergent pairs
since the proportion of adjacent pairs sharing tfs is low as aforementioned, it is important to inquire whether the shared tfs in divergent pairs are more likely to co-regulate the divergent genes. we present a case here to illustrate the effects of sharing regulatory system on co-expression. beer and tavazoie studied two computationally discovered sequence elements, pac  and rrpe , which are considered to have combinatorial regulations on their target genes  <cit> . the authors found very similar expression patterns among genes with pac located within  <dig> bp and rrpe within  <dig> bp of the atg start codon, respectively.

to investigate whether such a pattern or any particular spatial arrangement of cis-regulatory motifs exists in divergent relationships, we selected  <dig> divergent pairs separated by an intergenic region of less than  <dig> bp and carrying both pac and rrpe elements as annotated in the mybs database  <cit> . their expression profiles were extracted and compared using the method described above. in this analysis, sixteen divergent pairs revealed no sign of co-expression between the adjacent partners, while the other six pairs showed positive correlations for expression. interestingly, the sixteen independently expressed pairs bore only a single occurrence of rrpe and pac, in which the genes proximal to the motifs displayed similar expression patterns while the distal ones showed little correlation . in contrast, the remaining six divergent pairs exhibited co-expression of flanking genes on both sides, and they all carried multiple occurrences of rrpe or pac in their common promoter regions .

two implications can be drawn from this analysis. first, tfs tend to exert stronger regulatory effects on the gene proximal to their binding sites in a divergent pair. second, sharing of tfs per se does not warrant co-regulation of adjacent genes, yet an increase in the motif occurrences may ensure simultaneous modulation on both sides in the situations where co-regulation is required. altogether our results suggest that genes in a divergent pair do not necessarily use the same regulatory machinery, which in turn may lead to differential expression between the pair partners.

discussion
low conservation ratio of adjacent pairs in five yeast species
we compared the adjacency relationships of gene pairs among five yeast species which had undergone wgd and found random distribution for all three adjacent patterns. the evidence supported the hypothesis that the selection on types of adjacency along the s. cerevisiae lineage was neutral after wgd  <cit> . this neutrality also explained our observation of a low proportion of conserved adjacent pairs in five yeast species . similar results were found in orthologous gene pairs between the s. cerevisiae and c. albicans genomes which had diverged before wgd  <cit> . since adjacent pairs have a tendency to co-express in yeast  <cit> , observations from these studies contradict the hypothesis that adjacent pairs with co-expression patterns are more likely to maintain the adjacent relationship during evolution  <cit> . this implied that co-expression of adjacent pairs may be due to other mechanisms such as chromatin opening.

in contrast to yeast, a higher proportion of conserved adjacent pairs were observed in the genomes of mammalian lineage  <cit> . it is possible that the selection strength and/or mechanism over adjacency is different in yeast than in human  <cit> . it is also interesting to note that the ratios of conserved divergent, convergent, and tandem pairs are similar. this leads to the conclusion that for yeast divergent relationship is not appreciably favored by selection, even though these pairs are more likely to share a regulatory system and thus are more likely to display co-expression. importantly, this notion is also different from that drawn from the vertebrate genomes, in which the conservation ratio of divergent pairs is higher than that of tandem pairs, suggesting a negative selection on the separation of divergent pairs during evolution of vertebrates  <cit> .

it is proposed that the conservation of divergent pairs in human has functional importance. this hypothesis is supported by the significant expression correlation and functional association among divergent pairs  <cit> . although several cases in yeast have shown functional associations for conserved divergent pairs  <cit> , a higher co-expression level in divergent pairs could not be detected when compared to tandem pairs  <cit> . consistent with this finding, we found no difference in the co-expression level among three adjacency patterns for the stringently conserved group, supporting the observation of neutrality in adjacency types. in addition, we found the co-expression levels of conserved adjacent pairs and non-conserved adjacent pairs to be approximately the same in yeast, indicating that the adjacent relationship of co-expressed pairs is free from selection constraint in yeast. it seems that a bias toward divergent gene organization is only observed in the lineage leading to mammals  <cit> . if this is true, a possible explanation is that the mechanisms concerning the co-expression of adjacent pairs in yeast are different from those in mammals. for example, mechanisms such as sharing of cis-regulatory elements and antisense transcription, both of which explained the co-expression of human adjacent genes  <cit> , are actually rare in yeast genome  <cit> .

low ratio of sharing common tfs in adjacent pairs
it has been suggested that when adjacent yeast genes are controlled by a single regulatory system, their expression patterns should be highly correlated  <cit> . in order to investigate whether shared tfs in adjacent pairs are responsible for the co-expression, we collected the tf information from adjacent pairs of s. cerevisiae for further analysis. surprisingly, the ratio of adjacent pairs with shared tfs is low . a similar trend is observed when the dataset is separated into conserved and non-conserved adjacent pairs, indicating that such feature is not particularly favored by selection. therefore, it is reasonable to infer that co-expression of adjacent pairs in yeast does not merely result from sharing the tf-based regulatory system. this is also contrary to the findings that in human a high proportion of the adjacent pairs share a regulatory system which consequently drives co-expression of neighboring genes  <cit> .

a case study from the co-expression of pac and rrpe
it is commonly believed that genes with the same regulators have similar expression profiles. however, we observed that the co-expression level of tf-sharing adjacent pairs is not higher than that of those without common tfs. we performed a case study on pac and rrpe, two combinatorial cis-acting sequences whose target genes are expected to display high levels of co-expression. but our analysis showed the contrary that only  <dig> out of  <dig> divergent pairs had similar expression profile, and 72%  of the divergent pairs are not co-expressed. furthermore, the six co-expressed divergent pairs appear to have independent cis-regulatory elements. these results suggest that the shared regulatory system of adjacent genes in s. cerevisiae is not highly relevant to their co-expression.

considering the low prevalence of sharing tfs and the lack of selection constraint on adjacency of adjacent pairs, one possible explanation for the co-expression phenomenon is chromatin modifications  <cit> . mechanisms such as histone acetylation, deacetylation and dna methylation, may contribute significantly to the co-expression of neighboring genes in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . detailed analyses of transcription pattern as well as chromatin structure of co-expressed genes are required to shed light on the questions raised by this report.

CONCLUSIONS
the purpose of this study arose from speculating on the impact that sharing of tfs might have on driving concurrent expression of adjacent gene pairs. we found that gene adjacency was not strongly favored during yeast evolution. furthermore, the analysis on co-expression in adjacent gene pairs and shared tfs showed an indistinct relationship. albeit the bias or noise potentially present in microarray data, the clear result of the divergent pairs co-regulated by pac and rrpe led us to conclude that the shared tfs can not fully explain the co-expression of divergent pairs.

in summary, our study does not refute the contribution of commonly shared tfs to co-regulation of adjacent genes in yeast, but our finding does suggest that tf sharing is not the sole determinant of such regulation. we believe that during evolution yeasts have developed a sophisticated regulatory system which integrates both tf-based and non-tf based mechanisms, of which the latter may account for a greater extent in driving co-expression of neighboring genes. this integrative regulatory system allows yeasts to simultaneously modulate expression of neighboring genes in order to adapt to changing environments rapidly and efficiently.

