BACKGROUND
two-thirds of all the known antibiotics are produced by streptomyces which possess complex morphological differentiation  <cit> . antibiotic biosynthesis is highly regulated and generally occurs in a growth-phase-dependent manner  <cit> . moreover, the regulation of antibiotic biosynthesis involves complex networks that consist of pathway-specific regulatory genes, pleiotropic regulatory genes and global regulatory genes  <cit> . over a decade of years, many transcriptional regulators have been identified and their biological functions have been revealed. among them, the best known system under γ-butyrolactone control has been characterized in s. griseus  <cit> . previous studies reported a model describing how a-factor and its receptor-arpa mediate pleiotropic effects on morphological differentiation and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in streptomyces. binding of a-factor to arpa derepresses the expression of adpa that encodes a global transcriptional activator. adpa initiates the expression of pathway-specific regulatory genes, such as strr in streptomycin biosynthesis, grir in grixazone biosynthesis and other genes  related to aerial mycelium formation  <cit> . streptomyces antibiotic regulatory proteins  are the most common activators of antibiotic biosynthetic gene clusters. thus, sarps are potentially the ultimate target for some quorum-sensing signaling pathways that switch on antibiotic biosynthesis  <cit> .

the peptidyl nucleoside antibiotic nikkomycin, produced by streptomyces ansochromogenes  <dig>  <cit>  and streptomyces tendae tü  <dig>  <cit> , is a promising antibiotic against phytopathogenic fungi and human pathogens. in recent years, considerable progress has been made in understanding nikkomycin biosynthesis  <cit> . the san gene cluster for the nikkomycin biosynthesis includes over  <dig> open reading frames  consisting of three deduced transcriptional units  and a pathway-specific regulatory gene . among them, the role of sang has been studied in s. ansochromogenes  <cit> . the previous work proved that sang regulated nikkomycin production by controlling the transcription of the sano-v and sann-i operons directly, but did not control the expression of sanf-x operon  <cit> . the non-coding region of sang extends to  <dig> kb upstream of sang contains five binding sites of adpa-l which positively controls the transcription of sang  <cit> . except adpa-l, no any other factors triggering the transcriptional changes of sang have been reported up to now.

a regulatory gene  outside of san cluster was cloned from s. ansochromogenes previously. disruption of sabr retarded nikkomycin production in liquid media containing glucose or glycerol as carbon source and enhanced the sporulation of s. ansochromogenes  <cit> . the deduced product of sabr belongs to a large family of tetr-like proteins and it is similar to γ-butyrolactone receptor which has the features with helix-turn-helix  motif located in the n-termini and butyrolactone-binding motif in the c-termini. most proteins of this family act as repressors of secondary metabolism in streptomyces  <cit> . recently, several genes encoded this family proteins have been found to play a positive role during morphological development and secondary metabolism, such as tara  <cit> , crpa  <cit>  and spbr  <cit> . in this study, the function of sabr on the regulation of sang expression was studied. these results will expand the limited understanding of regulatory mechanism during nikkomycin biosynthesis.

RESULTS
disruption of sabr enhanced its own transcription
to determine the transcription start point  of sabr and to investigate whether sabr regulates its own transcription, s <dig> nuclease protection assay was performed. total rnas isolated from s. ansochromogenes and sabr disruption mutant with different time points were hybridized with 32p-labelled probe . the result showed that sabr has a single transcription start point , which is localized at the nucleotide t at position  <dig> bp upstream of the potential sabr translational start codon  . disruption of sabr quickly enhanced its own transcriptional level in the sp medium at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> h, whereas the transcriptional levels of sabr in wild-type strain tend to be weaker and constant at the same conditions . after  <dig> h, the transcription of sabr in its disruption mutant was decreased to the same level as wild-type strain . these results suggested that the expression of sabr could repress its own transcription at the early stage of growth.

* the nucleotide positions for sang, sann, sano, sanf, sabr and hrdb are given with respect to their transcription start points as + <dig>  the enzyme recognition sites are underlined in the primer sequence.

over-expression of sabr accelerated nikkomycin production
in order to over-express sabr, the pij8600::sabr  in which the ptipa replaced the promoter of sabr was constructed, then this recombinant plasmid was introduced into the streptomyces ansochromogenes  by conjugal transfer as described previously  <cit> . the resulting transformant was designated as 8600r. the nikkomycin bioassay and phenotype showed that the over-expression of sabr accelerated nikkomycin production and delayed the morphological differentiation of 8600r in the presence of thiostrepton, whereas nikkomycin production and the morphological differentiation have no obvious difference comparing with the control in the absence of thiostrepton . the delayed morphological differentiation of 8600r grown on mmg medium was observed by scanning electron microscopy after incubation for  <dig> h, and the difference was gradually disappeared after incubation for  <dig> h. it seems that glucose used as carbon source played an associated role in this regulatory process since the phenotype was not appeared in the media using mannitol as carbon source. these results further confirmed that sabr regulates the nikkomycin biosynthesis positively and morphological differentiation negatively under certain conditions.

disruption of sabr decreased the transcription of sang and sanf
in order to know how sabr regulates nikkomycin biosynthesis in s. ansochromogenes, the effect of sabr on the transcriptions of sang and sanf-x operon was measured by real-time quantitative pcr. the transcripts of sang and sanf were lower in the sabr disruption mutant in comparison with that in the wild-type strain after fermentation for  <dig> h to  <dig> h . especially, the transcripts of sang and sanf were almost reduced to 50% in the sabr disruption mutant  in contrast to wild-type strain  at  <dig> h. after  <dig> h, the transcripts of sang and sanf in sabrdm gradually restored to the same level of wt , suggesting that sabr could positively regulate the nikkomycin biosynthesis by modulating the transcription of sang and sanf at the early stage of cell growth.

sabr bound to the upstream region of sang
to determine the role of sabr in the regulation of nikkomycin biosynthesis, a series of emsas were performed. sabr was over-expressed in e. coli as his6-tagged protein and purified to near homogeneity by a single chromatography on ni-nta resin . the sang probes , sabr probe er, sanf probe ef, as well as one probe eno covering the transcription start points of sann and sano were used . emsas showed that the purified his6-tagged sabr bound to the probe eg <dig> of sang to form a complex, but no complex was formed to the probe eg <dig> and eg <dig> of sang. meanwhile, no significant shift was found for probes sabr, sanf, sann and sano, suggesting that sabr regulated the transcription of sabr and sanf indirectly . emsas with unlabelled specific and non-specific competitor dna were used as controls . these results indicated that sabr regulated nikkomycin biosynthesis directly by interaction with the upstream region of sang. as sang controls the transcription of sann and sano, sabr regulates the transcription of sann and sano via directly modulating the transcription of sang.

detection of the sabr-binding sites
to identify the specific binding sites of sabr in the upstream region of sang, dnase  <dig> footprinting assay was carried out using -labeled probe. one region at positions - <dig> to - <dig> nucleotides was protected by sabr from dnase  <dig> digestion, its sequence was 5'-ctttaagtcacctggctcattcgcgttcgcccagct-3' . this sequence showed resemblance to the reported are which were bound by γ-butyrolactone receptors described previously , and it was designated as sare. these results confirmed that sabr regulated nikkomycin biosynthesis by interaction with sare sequences upstream of sang directly.

the function of sare upstream of sang
in order to know the function of sare and its relationship with sabr in vivo, sare deletion mutant  was constructed. the bioassay showed that nikkomycin production was delayed in the saredm as that in the sabrdm from  <dig> h to  <dig> h fermentation. after  <dig> h, the nikkomycin production in saredm gradually restored to the level of wt, even slightly higher at  <dig> h . therefore, sare exhibited identical effect as sabr on nikkomycin production, further confirming that sabr positively regulates nikkomycin biosynthesis by interaction with sare region upstream of sang positively.

discussion
our results revealed that sabr played not only the positive role for nikkomycin biosynthesis but also a negative role for morphological differentiation in s. ansochromogenes. disruption of sabr resulted in the decrease of nikkomycin production, a phenomenon identical to pristinamycin production in spbr disruption mutant of s. pristinaespiralis  <cit> . however, disruption of arpa led to increased streptomycin biosynthesis in s. griseus  <cit>  and inactivation of the bara led to precocious virginiamycin biosynthesis in s. virginiae  <cit> . different γ-butyrolactone receptors have different effects on the morphological differentiation. sabr and arpa repressed the morphological differentiation of s. ansochromogenes and s. griseus  <cit> , bara did not affect the morphological differentiation of s. virginiae. these results reflected that γ-butyrolactone receptors play alternative physiological roles involved in species-specific regulatory systems. in fact, two categories of homologs of autoregulator receptors are found in streptomyces. one group is real receptors  in which binding of autoregulator is confirmed either by direct binding of natural or synthetic ligands or by gel-shift assay using crude culture filtrate  <cit> ; the second group includes regulators  which show similarity to the first group receptors but lack binding of any autoregulators  <cit> . the regulators belonging to the second group widely distribute in streptomyces and are usually involved in control of secondary metabolism and/or morphological differentiation. so far, no γ-butyrolactone or its analogue has been identified in s. ansochromogenes and no any ligands of sabr were found, but sabr could bind to the sare region without ligand . the lack of sabr binding to its upstream region, in spite of the clear repression on sabr expression and opposite effect on nikkomycin production, implied that sabr belongs to the second group.

the demonstration that sabr interacted with the promoter region of sang supported that are existed upstream of genes involved in antibiotic biosynthesis. the results of dnase  <dig> footprinting showed that sabr protected a sequence similar to those protected by papr <dig>  tyls and ccar and provided the experimental evidence that γ-butyrolactone receptors recognized are motifs  <cit> . however, the disability of sabr binding to the upstream region of sabr was unexpected. the lack of sabr binding to its upstream region, mild effect of sabr disruption on sang expression and almost complete recovery of nikkomycin production in sabr disruption mutant  or saredm at  <dig> h or  <dig> h cultivation implied that there should be one or more critical regulators other than sabr to control nikkomycin biosynthesis. further experimental analysis will hopefully elucidate the detailed regulatory relationship between sabr and nikkomycin biosynthesis.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study presented detailed molecular and genetic analysis for sabr on the production of nikkomycin in s. ansochromogenes. the results revealed that the sabr regulated nikkomycin biosynthesis positively via interaction with the upstream region of sang. it might be useful to expand the limited understanding of regulation exerted by sabr.

