BACKGROUND
differences in nucleotide substitution rates among taxa are a common phenomenon in molecular studies  <cit> , and the presence of an exact molecular clock  <cit>  appears to be a rare exception in molecular evolution, if present at all. a number of different causes are invoked to explain differences in evolutionary rates among taxa. recently, kay et al.  <cit>  demonstrated correlations of substitution rates and life histories. in angiosperms, herbaceous plants have substitution rates almost twice as high as woody plants  <cit> , while no phylogenetic constraint on rates was found in their study among lineages. previously, higher substitution rates had been found in annual compared to perennial plants  <cit> . these studies in plants agree with previous studies suggesting that shorter generation times are associated with accelerated evolutionary rates  <cit> .

significant departure from constant rates of a molecular clock have so far only been demonstrated for the kingdom fungi in basidiomycota  <cit>  and in four endosymbiotic pyrenomycetes  <cit> . in these cases accelerated evolutionary rates were significantly associated with mutualism. in one of the largest classes of ascomycota, lecanoromycetes  <cit> , significant differences in nucleotide substitution rates have not yet been shown. however, in previous studies  <cit>  we have found remarkable differences in branch lengths between clades in parmelioid lichens . taxa of one clade  had consistently longer branches in phylogenetic trees than taxa in other clades, which suggested an accelerated evolutionary rate in that group.

parmelioid lichens are the largest group within parmeliaceae  <cit> , which itself is one of the largest families of lichen-forming fungi and has a worldwide distribution. the parmelioid group comprises common and well-known species, including taxa such as parmelia sulcata, flavoparmelia caperata, and punctelia borreri, which are frequently used in biomonitoring atmospheric pollution  <cit> . the group has approximately  <dig> taxa  <cit> . it includes species which are mainly foliose, mostly rhizinate lichens with laminal apothecia and simple, hyaline ascospores  <cit> . recent phylogenetic studies have shown that a core group of parmelioid lichens is monophyletic  <cit> . within this group, seven well-supported clades were found  <cit> , which show distinct ecological preferences. for example, taxa belonging to the hypotrachyna clade  are mostly tropical extending into temperate regions in moist, oceanic habitats  <cit> . in contrast, species of the xanthoparmelia clade   <cit>  have their center of distribution in semi-arid regions.

lichens are poikilohydric organisms and are able to survive long periods of dry conditions in a dormant stage  <cit> . they lack stomata and any water storage system. water vapor is lost readily from across the whole surface of lichens. in some lichens, alteration between desiccated and hydrated stages is an almost daily occurrence  <cit> . this has an important ecological consequence, since the duration of physiological activity of lichens is directly dependent on the ability of water in a habitat. lichens in dry habitats may be physiologically active only for a few hours a day and dormant most of the day  <cit> , while lichens growing in moist habitats usually have sufficient water content all day long for physiological activity  <cit> .

to further investigate the remarkable differences in branch lengths between species of the hypotrachyna clade  and other clades of parmelioid lichens  <cit>  we obtained sequence data from additional species and/or genes to perform a study focusing on the differences in evolutionary rates within parmelioid lichens and potential causes for rate shifts. sequences of two nuclear  and single mitochondrial ribosomal  dna loci are used to infer phylogenetic relationships. these genes have been successfully used to infer phylogenies in parmelioid lichens  <cit> . here we use a phylogenetically based maximum likelihood procedure to identify shifts in rates of nucleotide substitutions. further we explore the potential links between rates of molecular evolution and ecological parameters by comparing alternative ornstein-uhlenbeck models  <cit> . these models allow us to test the hypothesis that cladogenesis in parmelioid lichens is associated with shifts in habitat that might in turn explain changes in nucleotide substitution rate.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis
phylogenetic analyses of the three gene partitions combined included  <dig> unambiguously aligned nucleotide, of which  <dig> were variable and  <dig> were parsimony informative. the topologies of the bayesian analysis  and mp results were generally similar and all nodes strongly supported by mp bootstrapping  were well supported by bayesian pp . all strongly supported clades are also supported in the relaxed-clock analyses conducted in beast . our results were largely consistent with previous phylogenies  <cit> , but with the addition of several new taxa and/or an additional gene partition. the species were placed within groups expected by their morphological and chemical characters  <cit> . however, the placement of some taxa differed slightly from previous analysis. this includes parmelinella wallichiana, which had an unresolved sister-group relationship to bulbothrix decurtata and a clade including b. meizospora and b. setschwanensis; everniastrum, which was resolved as monophyletic in previous analyses; and a few relationships of terminal sister taxa  <cit> . none of the differences to previous studies involve well supported conflicts. further, the close relationship of karoowia saxeti with xanthoparmelia found in previous studies  <cit>  is confirmed and its placement within that genus is strongly supported for the first time.

significant rate differences
between major clades of parmelioid lichens considerable branch length differences were evident, but also within clades branch lengths differed . likelihood ratio tests comparing null models of rate constancy versus alternative models revealed statistically significant departures from rate constancy across the entire tree . since some of the well supported clades included only a few otus, we restricted our analysis to five clades with sufficient number of taxa . within these five clades selected for the rate difference test, analyses of three of  <dig> single-gene data sets did not return significant results, meaning that a molecular clock cannot be rejected. this includes the its data sets of the melanohalea- and xanthoparmelia clades, and the mtssu data set of the parmotrema clade.

to determine rate differences between clades and to identify particular clades with deviating rates, two-rate and three-rate models were compared for three selected clades in each analysis using the likelihood ratio test statistics. significant rate differences were found between the hypotrachyna clades  <dig> and  <dig> and other clades examined . rate comparisons of the melanohalea clade with the parmotrema and xanthoparmelia clades, respectively, and comparisons of the latter two clades revealed insignificant results.

habitat shifts
the species of the five selected clades live under different ecological conditions . on average, the species in the two hypotrachyna clades occur at higher altitudes. moreover, these and the species of the parmotrema clade occupy habitats with higher precipitation and consequently have the highest emberger index values. in contrast, species in the xanthoparmelia and melanohalea clades occur in habitats with low precipitation and low emberger's index.

the emberger's index is calculated as follows: q =  <dig> × p/tmmax <dig> - tmmin <dig>  where p is average annual precipitation, tmmax is average maximum temperature of warmest month, tmmin is average minimum temperature of coldest month.

there is moderate support for a shift in moisture regime  at the base of hypotrachyna clade  <dig> and the xanthoparmelia clade, and strong support for a shift in minimum temperature at the base of the melanohalea clade. in the local test of alternative ornstein-uhlenbeck models , a shift in precipitation at the base of clade  <dig> is supported with bayes information criterion  weight =  <dig> , and a shift in emberger index is supported at bic weight =  <dig>  . a shift in emberger's index at the base of the xanthoparmelia clade is similarly supported . a shift in minimum temperature is very strongly supported at the base of the melanohalea clade under both the local and global tests and whether measurement error is accounted for or not . these findings argue against a gradual shift in moisture regime in which the covariance among taxa is predicted by time since divergence from their most recent common ancestor. rather, they support a scenario in which transitions in moisture regime are associated with cladogenetic events. in both the global and local tests of maximum temperature and altitude, the brownian motion or single-equilibrium o-u model cannot be rejected .

for each variable,  <dig> models were evaluated: five dual-equilibrium o-u models corresponding to a single change in environment at the base of each of the five indicated clades; the single-equilibrium o-u model, in which all clades are modelled as occurring in a single environment; and the brownian motion  model. values in each cell are bayes information criterion  weights for: the dual-equilibrium o-u model/the single-equilibrium o-u model/the brownian motion model. the first value is interpreted as the posterior probability that the origins of the clade were associated with a shift in environmental parameters. measurement error for the lower portion of the table was estimated as indicated in the text.

for each variable,  <dig> models were evaluated:  <dig> o-u models comprising all 2^ <dig> possible models allowing or disallowing shifts in equilibrium value at the base of the  <dig> focus clades; and the brownian motion  model. values in each cell are bayes information criterion  weights summed over all models allowing a change at the node indicated. this estimates the posterior probability that there was a shift in environmental conditions at the base of the clade estimated integrating over all models evaluated. measurement error for the lower portion of the table was estimated as indicated in the text.

incorporating estimated measurement error decreases the relative support for the two-equilibrium o-u models in the local test . in the global test, incorporating measurement error into analysis has little effect on the evidence for a change in moisture regime at the base of clade  <dig>  which is supported at bic weight =  <dig>  to  <dig>  either with or without measurement error . the model-averaged estimate of α for emberger's index is  <dig>  when measurement error is incorporated,  <dig>  when it is not . this has the effect of almost erasing the phylogenetic effects in the data. when measurement error is disregarded , there is little support for a brownian motion model for any characters except minimum temperature . in the global analyses of precipitation and emberger's index, the 99% confidence interval excludes both the brownian motion model and the single-moisture-regime o-u model . when measurement error is ignored, there is concordance between the local and global tests.

discussion
our extended sampling revealed phylogenetic estimates congruent with previous analyses  <cit>  including several well-supported clades within parmelioid lichens. however, as in these studies, we failed to resolve with confidence the phylogenetic relationships between these strongly supported main clades. further, additional sampling of the hypotrachyna clade supported that it includes two major clades. in contrast to blanco et al.  <cit> , but in agreement with divakar et al.  <cit> , the sister-group relationship between the two hypotrachyna clades is not strongly supported, and in the bayesian analysis using beast, the two clades do not form a monophyletic group. the lack of confidence in the phylogenetic relationships between the clades is consistent with the scenario of an adaptive radiation at the base of parmelioid clade. however, we cannot exclude the possibility of a lack of power of resolution in the gene partitions used in the analyses.

this study provides clear evidence for a general acceleration in rates of molecular evolution in the two hypotrachyna clades in comparison with other clades in parmelioid lichens. although this study presents the first statistical evidence for a significantly accelerated substitution rate in the hypotrachyna clades, a prior study showed its occurrence without discussing this further  <cit> . the increased rates of nucleotide substitution seen could result from different factors, such as positive selection on coding regions of the ribosomal dna, or represent a general acceleration of nucleotide substitutions  <cit> . our analyses point to the latter as the most plausible cause.

positive selection is the process favouring the retention of mutations in a population that are beneficial to the reproductive success of individuals  <cit> . positive selection leading to increased fixation of nonsynonymous substitutions has been demonstrated for some parasites  <cit> . to examine the possibility of this process on coding regions of the ribosomal dna, we examined the rate increase in a conserved part of the its regions  and compared it to the rate increase in the  <dig>  s rdna and nu lsu rdna. if faster substitution rates were caused by differential selection, there should be no association between faster evolutionary rates and affiliation to the hypotrachyna clades. however, we found higher rates in the hypotrachyna clades in all three- gene partitions studied . there were no significant differences between the rate increases between the gene partitions, indicating that positive selection on coding regions is not present.

another possible cause of rate acceleration is an increase in mutation rate  <cit> . our results indicate a general acceleration of nucleotide substitutions in the hypotrachyna clade . causes for such an acceleration could be numerous, including shorter generation time  <cit> , metabolic rate  <cit> , lack of sexuality  <cit> , or demographic factors  <cit> .

a population bottleneck may result from a significant reduction of population size due to extinction of many genetic lineages. since mutations have a higher probability of fixation in populations experiencing genetic bottlenecks, this may result in a long branch leading to a clade  <cit> . in fact, branches leading to hypotrachyna clade  <dig> and  <dig> are long. however, this interpretation fails to account for the general rate acceleration in the hypotrachyna clades. populations of species in these two clades are not smaller and species do not have more restricted distributions than in other clades .

the loss of sexual reproduction has been identified as a cause of accelerated evolution in endosymbiotic bacteria  <cit> . since the ratio of asexual/sexual species in the hypotrachyna clades does not differ from other clades , this explanation is also not likely.

two intrinsic biological variables, generation time and metabolic rate, have been interpreted as causes of rate variations in other organisms  <cit> . since rates of dna damage are proportional to specific metabolic rate, species with higher metabolic rates should have higher substitution rates given there is a relationship between dna damage and mutation rate  <cit> . unfortunately, there are no ecophysiological measurements available for the lichen clades studied. hence, we have no data on metabolic rates in these fungi. however, as mentioned above lichenized fungi are poikilohydric organisms and from studies in other groups of lichens, we can assume that species occurring in arid and semi-arid regions are dormant for large parts of their life  <cit> . for example, teloschistes capensis  occurs in the same habitats along the namibian and north-western coast of south africa as some taxa of the xanthoparmelia clade studied here. this species has been shown to be physiologically active for only very few hours in the mornings after dew fall  <cit> . in contrast, species in moist habitats, such as rainforests were shown to be physiologically active throughout the day  <cit> . growth measurements in lichens from arid and semi-arid regions revealed that these lichens grow very slowly   <cit>  and hence reach an age of several hundred years, while some lichens in moist habitats, such as coastal forests of california can increase their length over 35% per year  <cit>  and have a much shorter generation time. the slow rates of mutations in xanthoparmelia clade may be related with a strategy adapted to a low metabolic activity due to long dormancy periods in dry conditions. again, we have no data from the parmelioid lichens studied here and point out that ecophysiological studies need to be extended to these lichens to confirm their general importance.

given our knowledge of the differences in growth rate and generation time for these poikilohydric lichens in moist vs. arid regions, we hypothesized at the outset of this study that a shift in moisture regime might explain the increased nucleotide substitution rate in hypotrachyna clades  <dig> and  <dig>  this might be due either to decreased generation time or increased mutation rate in environments with generally higher precipitation than in the other three clades. the support for o-u models that specify shifts in moisture regime  at the base of hypotrachyna clade  <dig> and minimum temperature at the base of clade  <dig> , combined with weak support for the brownian motion model and single-environment ornstein-uhlenbeck model for these variables, suggests that these clades originated by colonization of a novel environment, followed by diversification within those environments. the extreme phylogeny-effacing effects of the high inferred rate of evolution toward equilibrium emberger index values particularly suggests that shifts in clade-specific moisture regimes govern the evolution of habitat preferences in these lichens. there is support for a change in moisture regime at the base of hypotrachyna clade  <dig> , which is comparable to the support for a change at the base of hypotrachyna clade  <dig>  these two clades have an accelerated substitution rate. however, the support for a change is also approximately the same for the parmotrema clade , which does not exhibit elevated substitution rate.

the apparently weak link between moisture regime and substitution rate in this study may be due to a lack of causal relationship. however, it might also be due to an alternative adaptative strategy of the parmotrema clade. species in this clade are especially abundant in insular regions  <cit>  with oceanic climate. although no ecophysiological data on parmelioid lichens are available, other lichens occurring in similar moisture conditions, were shown to have metabolic  rates depending on a combination of light intensity and temperature  <cit> . most species in the parmotrema clade may have slow metabolic rates due to ecological conditions related with latitude. in fact, parmotrema clade species are subtropical or temperate  <cit> , living in regions where, comparing to tropics, light intensity is lower. wright et al.  <cit>  showed that evolutionary rates of tropical species are higher than those of subtropical taxa. however, low sample size  or inadequate characterization of the moisture environment cannot be discarded. additionally, in our observation , the moisture available to the lichens in this study is strongly dominated by fog, which is not directly accounted for by either precipitation or emberger's index . in species occurring in areas with extensive fogs, lichens were shown to be able to use this as the main source of water taken up from water vapour  <cit> . future work in the ecology of this group of organisms should focus on characterizing moisture regime more accurately.

CONCLUSIONS
our extended taxon sampling confirmed phylogenetic relationships revealed in previous studies. here we show significant accelerated evolutionary rates in clades of parmelioid lichens that occur in tropical and oceanic habitats as opposed to those in arid habitats. comparison of alternative ornstein-uhlenbeck models gave moderate support for a shift in moisture regime at the base of one tropical clade and a clade occurring in semi-arid regions and a shift in minimum temperature at the base of a boreal-temperate clade. this finding that cladogenesis may be associated with shifts in environment suggests adaptive radiation as a mechanism of speciation in parmelioid lichens, a hypothesis that bears testing using finer-grained ecological data.

