BACKGROUND
direct visualization of blood flow in small  animals remains a major challenge. generally, spatial and temporal resolutions better than  <dig> μm and  <dig>  s are required for studies in insect physiology. current techniques, including x-ray, mri, and ultrasound or visible light probes, suffer from insufficient spatial or temporal resolutions, lack of sensitivity, or inability to penetrate the animal's opaque body. for example, mri has recently been used to visualize the internal dynamics of circulation, respiration, and digestion in tobacco hornworm pupae, but the temporal resolution  and spatial resolution  of mri are insufficient to distinguish fine kinematic details of motion  <cit> . consequently, internal movements in small animals such as insects remain poorly understood. one prominent example is the movement of hemolymph in the insect circulatory system. real-time synchrotron x-ray phase-contrast imaging  <cit>  has recently been demonstrated to be an excellent technique for the study of respiratory and digestive systems in small animals, and it has the necessary resolution to study blood flow as well. this technique is capable of spatial and temporal resolutions of ~ <dig> μm and ~ <dig> ps, respectively, although these parameters have to be weighed against the detrimental effects on the animal because higher temporal resolutions require higher beam intensities. despite the capabilities of synchrotron x-ray imaging, this imaging technique alone cannot distinguish blood from the rest of the soft tissue because density differences are minimal. here, we demonstrate a new method of visualizing blood flow at the micrometer scale in intact small animals using microbubble injection combined with synchrotron x-ray imaging.

for transparent or semi-transparent animals, visible light imaging techniques have been used successfully to study gross patterns of heart activity and blood flow in small animals. movement of hemolymph, the insect 'blood', from the abdomen to the wings of a butterfly has been visualized by introducing a visible-light dye into the hemolymph  <cit> . confocal microscopy has shed new light on the heart activity and blood flow in a zebrafish embryo, showing that pumping is not peristaltic, as was previously thought  <cit> . optical coherence tomography  has been used to image heartbeat in drosophila melanogaster  <cit> , and doppler oct has been used to visualize blood flow in frog embryos  <cit> . although these recent developments are promising, they remain ultimately limited by the transmission of light: many small animals have opaque exteriors and/or the heart is located sufficiently deep that there is insufficient visible light transmission to form an image. more importantly, none of these visible light techniques have demonstrated the ability to measure intra-heart flow patterns in animals with millimeter-centimeter-scale body size.

for animals with opaque bodies, a variety of indirect, non-imaging methods have been devised to deduce heart activity and circulation patterns. to study heart activity, researchers have implanted electrodes near the heart and used the impedance between them as a proxy for heart pulsations  <cit> . this electrocardiogram technique is invasive and requires considerable skill in the implantation of the electrodes; moreover, it is not feasible for millimeter-sized animals. alternatively, visible or infrared light transmission or reflected intensity has been used to detect heart pulsations  <cit> , and by using multiple probes, it is possible to deduce the temporal relationship between different heart segments  <cit> . broad patterns of hemolymph flow have been inferred using 'thermography' in which thermistors are attached to the exterior dorsal surface near the heart  <cit>  and flow is deduced by small temperature fluctuations in the thermistor. indirect techniques have also provided inferential evidence for the relationship between hemolymph flow and co <dig> exchange  <cit> , the retrograde flow through the insect heart  <cit> , and for the function of accessory pulsatile organs that are hypothesized to help circulation  <cit> . although these non-imaging techniques provide evidence of bulk flow, they do not provide quantitative structural information involved in heartbeat  or circulation . furthermore, because they are inferential, these indirect techniques face common challenges involving data interpretation. for example, insects can telescope the abdomen, compress internal air sacs, and contract the gut, and these movements may occur independently from the heartbeat, making it difficult to distinguish the 'true' signal from artifact with certainty . lastly, because these are 'point' techniques, they cannot provide the contextual spatial information provided by direct imaging techniques. for example, using thermography, it is not possible to differentiate between hemolymph flow in an insect's heart versus flow in the surrounding pericardial sinus  <cit> .

the insect circulatory system is profoundly different than its mammalian counterpart. instead of flow occurring in a closed system of tubes and produced by a large central pump, the insect system is open, consisting of a single, open-ended tube  that runs dorsally from the abdomen to the thorax or head  <cit> . the tube contains slit-like incurrent and excurrent valves  that run laterally along the length of the heart. circumferential muscles ring the heart, and fan-like alary muscles connect it laterally to the body wall. insects pump hemolymph through the heart toward the head , and, in some species, reverse the flow toward the abdomen   <cit> . however, the detailed flow patterns that result, both within the heart and body, and how exactly they are produced are almost entirely unknown. thus the detailed mechanics of the circulatory system of perhaps the most speciose and abundant animal group on earth remains largely unknown. the ability to directly visualize the fundamental physiological functions of microfluid flow in situ will be extremely valuable in advancing our understanding of circulatory systems in insects and other small animals.

in this study, we visualized heart flow directly with synchrotron x-ray phase-contrast imaging combined with the use of microbubbles as high-contrast tracer particles. microbubbles are used in clinical environments as contrast agents for ultrasound imaging  <cit> ; however, the spatial resolution for in-vivo ultrasound imaging is wavelength limited to about  <dig> μm  <cit> . our technique allows for direct simultaneous visualization of hemolymph flow and heart and tracheal activity with micrometer-level spatial resolution and excellent image contrast. although mri  <cit>  and oct  <cit>  have been used to study the structural dynamics of internal heart activity in insects, these techniques do not measure actual flow rates. as far as we know, this is the first measurement of intra-heart flow rates, patterns and dynamics with micrometer-level spatial resolution in an insect. although the results presented here are taken with video rate  acquisition, much faster exposure times and frame rates are possible at the cost of increased damage to the animal  <cit> . this technique extends the capability of synchrotron x-ray phase-contrast imaging to study all three essential fluid transport systems in insects: respiration , feeding , and circulation .

RESULTS
microbubbles ranging from 10– <dig> μm in diameter were clearly visualized, as were air sacs and numerous tracheae, including a main longitudinal tracheal trunk that runs adjacent to the heart . the buoyant bubbles accumulated along the ventral edge of the dorsal diaphragm, which partially compartmentalizes the dorsal heart region. within the heart, the buoyant bubbles demarcated the dorsal edge of the heart lumen. the ventral edge of the heart lumen could not be clearly identified, but the paths of microbubbles during flow within the heart suggested its ventral extent. microbubble flow, compression of the pericardial sinus and changes in the tracheal diameters were all clearly visualized .

as seen within the field of view , the flow patterns were complex and dependent on location. at any particular location along the heart, general flow patterns were repetitive, but not strictly time-periodic, over the course of the measurement . for most pulsations , forward flows coincided with local pericardial compressions . interestingly, back flows, when they occurred, began during pericardial compression, and ended at or after the end of the compression. however, this could be due to a phase lag between the hemolymph and the bubble . the amplitude of pericardial sinus compression varied locally . compressions of the longitudinal tracheal trunk were not synchronized with the pericardial sinus compressions ; however, their frequencies were similar . air sac compressions also appeared to be independent of pericardial sinus compressions . flow within the heart was pulsatile, but did not appear to be bolus-like. unlike previously observed peristaltic transport in the gut  <cit>  in which the bolus-like transport of food and gut peristaltic waves were readily apparent, the hemolymph transport mechanism within the heart remains unknown from this preliminary study.

the power of this technique is exemplified in the ability to track small-scale flow patterns. for example, bubbles can apparently be seen to enter the heart by moving through incurrent ostia . however, it was not possible to differentiate if the incurrent ostia were opening actively or passively, nor were we able to positively identify movement of bubbles out of the heart through excurrent ostia  <cit> . the local flow patterns near the ostia, but external to the heart, were complex. in general, bubbles were observed to enter the ostia originating both posteriorly  and anteriorly . in either case, once they entered the heart, the bubbles were swept anteriorly with the heartflow. another example shows the complexity of flow within the heart. in figure  <dig>  four microbubbles are tracked over the course of  <dig> frames  in one section of the heart. this sequence suggests that the bubbles were pulled towards the middle of the image during diaphragm dilation, and upon compression, hemolymph was transported towards the head. the ability to image individual microbubbles allowed us to quantify instantaneous velocities and potentially to map complex flow fields. such detailed flow information cannot be obtained from any other technique.

although the main purpose of this paper is to present this new technique, our measurements allow us to make a few preliminary observations on the hemolymph flow in the heart of the grasshopper schistocerca americana.

 <dig>  in general, flow patterns are complex, and are time and location dependent. furthermore, some flows appear to be three-dimensional. in some observations, there appeared to be no overall transport, but simply a back-and-forth oscillation of the hemolymph . this preliminary study suggests that the origin of hemolymph transport may be more complicated than the commonly assumed peristaltic motion  <cit> .

the maximum speed of bubbles that could be tracked was  <dig>  mm/s; faster moving bubbles were observed but could not be reliably measured due to motion blur . based on this maximum speed, a heart diameter of  <dig>  mm, and using the viscosity of water as an estimate of that of hemolymph, we calculate a reynolds number of  <dig> , suggesting that flows are in the laminar regime.

 <dig>  for two individuals that were imaged for 20– <dig> minutes each, there was no evidence of a sustained retrograde fluid transport. the microbubble motion was either pulsatile with overall forward transport, or oscillatory with no net transport.

 <dig>  respiratory structures  were compressed in patterns both synchronous and asynchronous to the local heartbeat.

 <dig>  no immediate detrimental effects on the animal were observed, either from the x-rays or from the microbubbles. the animals that were injected with microbubbles and under x-ray irradiation of the heart for up to an hour were alive  <dig> hours later. this is consistent with our previous results  <cit>  which showed that there were no observable negative effects in insects at similar x-ray intensities under irradiation of the abdomen. local x-ray damage must have occurred, but effects on heart, tracheal, or abdominal movements and behavior were not apparent within this time frame.

discussion
prior work on grasshopper hearts consists of optical cardiography , electrocardiography and mechanography , and direct observation through live dissection . these studies quantified heart activity, but did not measure hemolymph flow patterns within the heart. one valid comparison that can be made among studies is between mechanography  and our measured pericardial compressions. among studies, measured pulsation frequencies  and waveform shapes are similar. additionally, jahn and colleagues  <cit>  showed that the shapes and frequencies of the optical, electrical and mechano cardiography signals can vary greatly, from individual to individual, and show large dependence on temperature, further reinforcing the need for understanding the link between electrocardiography and actual flow.

more generally, we can compare this x-ray imaging method with other techniques that have recently been used to study small animal circulation. confocal microscopy provides 2d depth-resolved images with micrometer-level spatial resolution, with depth of focus usually no more than a few micrometers, and high speed confocal microscopy has been demonstrated at  <dig> frames per second   <cit> . microscopic flow patterns can be quantified through the use of fluorescent tags, although depth of focus can be a limitation if the flow is not parallel to the focal plane. oct provides cross-sectional images of the sample with spatial resolution in the tens of micrometers  <cit> , and framing rates of  <dig> fps have also been demonstrated  <cit> . doppler oct can provide information on bulk flow, but it is not quantitative  <cit> . both confocal microscopy and oct are visible light techniques and therefore are limited by light transmission. recently, mri has been used to image the cross-sectional structure and flow in the pupae of the tobacco hornworm caterpillar   <cit> . however, the spatial resolutions  are still not comparable to synchrotron x-ray phase contrast imaging or visible light techniques. mri cross-sectional images can be obtained at a frequency of about  <dig> hz  <cit> . in contrast, the x-ray technique described in this paper has spatial resolution that is comparable to visible light techniques , and high-speed x-ray imaging is possible as well. compared to visible light techniques, x-ray imaging has the advantage of high penetration and can be used for opaque samples. x-ray images are 2d transmission projections and therefore depth information is lost, but this has the advantage that one can see through the entire animal without the need to adjust a 'depth of focus'. transverse flow , when imaged with tracer particles, can be quantified at the micrometer-level, which cannot be done with mri or oct. two disadvantages of this technique compared to visible light or mri are that  the x-rays can have a detrimental effect on the animal  <cit>  and  the need for contrast agents or tracer particles.

several challenges and improvements need to be addressed to make this technique more accessible. first, it is necessary to tailor the contrast agent to the animal or species. in particular, it is important to limit the amount of bubbles within the volume of interest; otherwise, the projected overlapping bubbles will overwhelm specific features of interest. second, it is important to generate bubbles of the proper size; obviously, for visualization of internal heart flow, the sizes should be substantially smaller than the cross-sectional heart dimensions. third, different species may require different injection protocols depending on anatomy and physiology. finally, there is the question of bubble buoyancy and differences between bubble and fluid motion, which may be a major limitation on the quantification of flow. in our experiments, we oriented the insect's abdomen horizontally so that any observed posterior-to-anterior bubble flow could be definitively attributed to fluid flow, rather than to buoyancy. the buoyancy issue can be addressed in future studies by using tracer particles that have a more comparable density with hemolymph, such as metal-coated hollow glass spheres. differences between actual fluid motion and bubble/tracer particle motion, and the effects of the bubbles themselves on the fluid motion, are complex questions that are beyond the scope of this paper, especially in the realm of non-uniform pulsating flow that we see here. nonetheless, for the parameters used here, the speed of the bubble should reflect the speed of the fluid, although there may be a phase difference between the two  <cit> . the use of neutrally buoyant and smaller tracer particles should solve this problem. finally, although we were able to quantify representative instances of individual bubble speed, the frame rate  of our camera was not fast enough for a more complete velocity map. planned future work includes the use of a high speed video camera , which should enable us to directly measure peak hemolymph flow velocities; the addition of flow-through respirometry, which would allow further insight into circulation-respiration coupling; and combination of this technique with available indirect techniques  for purposes of verification and for generating complementary data.

CONCLUSIONS
for the first time, detailed fluid flow patterns in small animals can be imaged at the micrometer scale. in addition to insects, this technique should find applications in areas including vertebrate development , and any other field in which the understanding of moving fluids behind opaque anatomy, at small scales, is key to answering outstanding questions of physiology. the potential applications of this technique are very broad.

