BACKGROUND
our recent work applied an automated high-throughput method to classify genes with bimodal expression profiles within the mouse genome based on microarray experiments performed on healthy tissues using the affymetrix mgu74av <dig> microarray platform  <cit> . the identification of genes with bimodal expression is useful to identify the biological variation of genes that are tightly regulated around two discrete levels at the transcript level  <cit> . many of the bimodal genes were expressed in "high" or "low" modes on a tissue-dependent basis. enrichment analysis using kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways  <cit>  and gene ontology  annotation  <cit>  within this set of bimodal genes revealed that they are utilized in cell-cell communication and communication with the extracellular environment. we had also evaluated the expression of the bimodal genes in disease states for diabetes types i and ii to reveal some of these genes with altered modes of expression in the disease state, revealing the roles of these genes in cell communication and immune response. as a natural extension of this work, we have applied the same automated high-throughput method to classify genes with bimodal expression in the human genome and compared the list with human orthologs of mouse bimodal genes. moreover, we looked into the transcript-level regulation of bimodal genes using a variety of bioinformatics databases.

the detection of bimodal genes in human is useful for determining a set of genes tightly controlled around two states at the transcript level. additionally, the identification of these bimodal genes provides an indication of how well the previous methods extend across species and different microarray platforms. while it is expected that many orthologs between human and mouse would share patterns of regulation such as bimodality, the literature has also documented that many gene regulation promoters have changed over the course of evolution between human and mouse  <cit> . genes with bimodal expression profiles in both organisms may indicate conservation of alternative promoters, which have been implicated in tissue-specific expression common among the bimodal genes. alternately, genes with known orthologs that have been identified as bimodal in only one of these species, may illustrate the instability in mammalian promoters  <cit> . investigation of the regulatory mechanisms at play in the expression of bimodal genes should provide insight into the stability of their expression as well as how these genes may lose regulation in the process of disease  <cit> .

there are many factors contributing to the regulation of transcription, having varying impact in the difference in expression level and the time scale over which the expression level may change, either within a cell or over a course of cell divisions. transcription factors may enhance or inhibit expression as they bind to regulatory gene promoters effecting transcription initiation  <cit> . changes in transcription factor activity may account for bimodality in genes within a single tissue over time, such as in circadian rhythm pathways  <cit> . transcript-level regulation may also be achieved through epigenetic modification, such as cpg island methylation, which inhibits transcription either at the promoter region or downstream  <cit> . additional epigenetic mechanisms, including histone modifications such as methylation and acetylation were shown to be associated with transcription initiation and elongation  <cit> . these epigenetic regulatory mechanisms may be linked with bimodality resulting from differentiated tissues, where stable modifications maintain a high mode of expression in a certain number of tissues, and a low mode of expression in others. regulatory mechanisms mentioned above may work in combination to produce a variety of expression profiles, where even in bimodal genes one mechanism may account for expression level changes within a single mode of expression and an alternative regulatory mechanism may account for expression level changes between modes of expression.

in this study, we extend our classification of bimodal genes to the human genome. our results indicate that a sizable number of genes with bimodal expression in mouse are also bimodal in human, with recurring roles of cell-cell communication and communication with the extracellular environment. furthermore, the set of bimodal genes identified by our method shows a strong connection to epigenetic regulation, namely methylation of histone tails in gene promoter regions.

RESULTS
identification of bimodal genes in the human genome
microarray data for tissue types listed in table  <dig>  were used to identify bimodal genes in the human genome. two-component mixture analysis of the  <dig> unique genes represented in both affymetrix hgu133a and hgu133plus <dig> microarrays identified  <dig> genes, or 14%, as bimodal, with p <  <dig> . among these genes with orthologs in mouse, 42% were identified in our previous study on mgu74av <dig> microarrays. the probability of obtaining this overlap from a random selection of genes, estimated from the hypergeometric distribution, is indistinguishable from zero. additional file  <dig> provides the list of bimodal genes accompanied by the mouse ortholog, as well as the p-value and threshold between high and low modes of expression, xt.

the number of tissue samples used in the previous work that identified bimodal genes in mouse are included in parentheses. sample accession numbers from geo and arrayexpress are listed in additional file  <dig> 

functional enrichment analysis highlights themes of cell communication
enrichment of kegg pathways and go terms extended the theme of communication with neighboring cells and the extracellular environment that was also evident from bimodal genes in mouse. enriched kegg pathways are presented in table  <dig>  while enriched go terms are detailed in table  <dig>  including listings for cellular component, biological process, and molecular function terms. a majority of the kegg pathways previously identified as enriched for bimodal genes in mouse were also significantly enriched in humans . the most highly populated pathways common to bimodal human genes and human orthologs for bimodal mouse genes are the calcium signaling, focal adhesion and tight junction pathways. the cell communication pathways ecm-receptor interaction and focal adhesion, which were identified as significant within the last study, again appeared as highly populated with bimodal genes. the kegg ecm-receptor interaction pathway is shown in figure  <dig>  with enriched nodes highlighted in orange, and nodes replicated in the mouse study outlined in bold. the figure shows that integrin subunits a <dig>  b <dig>  and b <dig> and a subset of their receptors including multiple collagen types i, ii, and iv, fibronectin and laminin are bimodal, as would be expected since these proteins contribute to tissue specificity. also identified bimodal are the cell membrane receptors cd <dig>  sv <dig>  cd <dig>  and syndecan. the kegg focal adhesion pathway, which also interacts with the ecm, is depicted in figure  <dig>  the figure shows that the bimodal genes are not only positioned at ecm and cell membrane but also at different stages of cell signaling, indicating the extensive role that bimodal genes play in the processing of crosstalk between cells and the ecm. proteins that are deemed as bimodal in this pathway include egf, elk <dig>  fyn, hgf, vinculin, actinin and cyclins d <dig> and d <dig>  additional file  <dig> presents the list of bimodal genes along the enriched kegg pathways. further enrichment analysis for the sets of bimodal genes expressed in the "high" and "low" modes was performed on three tissue types with the most abundant samples. enrichment of the "high" and "low" mode subsets revealed tissue-specific activation and deactivation, as may be expected for pathways and go terms describing specialized functions such as muscle contraction or synaptic transmission. the kegg pathways listed in table  <dig> and the go terms listed in table  <dig> demonstrate the tissue-specific activation and deactivation of bimodal genes and show consistency between human and mouse for several terms.

kegg pathways enrichment was computed using the set of human bimodal genes as well as previously identified bimodal genes in mouse. pathways enriched with p ≤  <dig>  in both bimodal human genes and the set of bimodal mouse genes are shown in bold. italicized values do not meet the p ≤  <dig>  significance threshold.

go category enrichment was computed using the set of human bimodal genes as well as the previously identified bimodal genes in mouse. go terms enriched with p ≤  <dig>  in both bimodal human genes and the set of bimodal mouse genes are shown in bold. italicized values do not meet the p ≤  <dig>  significance threshold

the mode of expression is indicated for tissue types where pathways are significantly enriched for the set of bimodal genes in the "high" mode or the set of bimodal genes in the "low" mode of expression. significance was determined from a hypergeometric distribution with cutoff p =  <dig> .

the mode of expression is indicated for tissue types where terms are significantly enriched for the set of bimodal genes in the "high" mode or the set of bimodal genes in the "low" mode of expression. significance was determined from a hypergeometric distribution with cutoff p =  <dig> .

promoter analysis reveals bias for tata boxes in bimodal genes
the mammalian promoter database   <cit>  was used to assess the distribution of common promoter types within the set of bimodal genes. mpromdb contained promoters for  <dig> genes represented on the hgu <dig> arrays and promoters for  <dig> genes represented on the mgu74av <dig> array. the frequencies of the common promoter types ap- <dig>  ap- <dig>  sp <dig>  tata and caat are illustrated in figure 3a and 3b for the sets of bimodal and non-bimodal genes in human and mouse. the remaining promoter types seldom appeared and were bundled together into an "other" category. the set of bimodal genes within human and mouse shows a statistically significant bias for tata promoters, with significance of p =  <dig> e- <dig> for human and p =  <dig> e- <dig> for mouse, estimated from a hypergeometric distribution. the remaining promoter types present between bimodal and non-bimodal genes revealed no significant differences that were consistent between human and mouse, suggesting that bimodality in gene expression is largely independent of the regulatory promoter type. the sp <dig> and ap <dig> promoters appeared underrepresented in mouse bimodal genes, but this result is based on only a small subset of genes and was not consistent with the results in human.

alternative promoter sites more common in bimodal genes
the database of transcription start sites   <cit>  was used to evaluate the number of alternative promoters associated with genes in the bimodal and non-bimodal subsets for human and mouse. the distribution of alternative promoters was shifted towards a higher number of promoters per gene for those with bimodal distributions, as shown in figure 3c and 3d, providing evidence for some contribution towards the dynamic range of gene expression required for bimodality. when compared against non-bimodal genes, two or more promoters are more common in bimodal genes for both human and mouse, with a respective significance level of p ≈  <dig> and p =  <dig> e- <dig>  estimated from a hypergeometric distribution. multiple promoters per gene may be prevalent but not required for bimodal expression. alternative promoter sites in human and mouse were tested for tissue-selective usage corresponding to the mode of expression for bimodal genes. alternative promoters for  <dig> bimodal genes in human were identified as corresponding with the mode of expression across within the nineteen tissues. alternative promoter data were not available for skeletal muscle tissue in mouse, but data for the remaining  <dig> tissues identified  <dig> genes with at least one alternative promoter corresponding to the mode of expression. random permutation of the tissue labels was used to estimate a median false discovery rate of 4%. though there was no overlap between these tissue-selective promoter gene sets in human and mouse, there were several pathways in common for this comparison, including the neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, gap junction, and calcium signaling pathway. the alternative promoters identified as corresponding to the mode of expression in both human and mouse were largely brain-specific. for example, the genes gria <dig> in human and gria <dig> in mouse encoding for glutamate receptor proteins in the neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathway were associated with multiple alternative promoters specific to brain. expression box plots across the nineteen tissues having at least one promoter specific to brain, is shown in figure 3e and 3f for human gria <dig> and mouse gria <dig> genes, respectively. these results indicate that multiple alternative promoters may provide redundancy and that a single mode of expression does not necessarily correspond with a unique alternative promoter.

dna methylation shows a negligible contribution to bimodal gene expression
cytosine methylation has been shown to provide a stable mechanism in mammals for altering dna-protein interactions  <cit> . genes can be transcribed from methylation-free promoters even when adjacent transcribed and nontranscribed regions are extensively methylated  <cit> . methylation of cpg-rich promoters prevents transcriptional initiation and ensures the silencing of imprinted genes and genes in the x chromosome  <cit> . recent data given by illingworth et al.  <cit>  allowed us to investigate aspects of epigenetic regulation for their contribution to bimodal gene regulation. these authors surveyed methylation within blood, brain, muscle, and spleen and obtained lists of genes with methylated cpg islands in 5', intragenic, and 3' regions, which mapped to roughly 6–8% of human genes. the genes identified with intragenic dna methylation were more common among the set of bimodal genes, suggesting that the inhibitory effect of dna methylation on transcription elongation  <cit>  may be a regulatory mechanism for bimodal genes. we also used the methylation data from illingworth et al.  <cit>  to test the relationship between dna methylation status and the mode of expression within bimodal genes. the results varied for each tissue type, with the largest differences being decreased dna methylation in bimodal genes with a "high" mode of expression in brain and increased dna methylation in bimodal genes with a "high" mode of expression in muscle. dna methylation is typically considered a gene silencing mechanism, which would correspond to low expression. however, the very small portion of genes represented in the cpg island methylation data for these four tissues may not be an adequate set to observe a consistent trend.

histone methylation provides a switching mechanism for bimodal genes
next, we considered the possible role of epigenetic regulation as a switching mechanism for bimodal genes. a recent dataset that mapped histone modifications across the human genome for three cell types, including human embryonic h <dig> stem cells , liver cells , and b-cell lymphocytes  <cit>  was used to evaluate the enrichment of histone  <dig> lysine  <dig> trimethylation  at the promoters of bimodal genes. the h3k4me <dig> enrichment based on each of these three tissue types did not suggest a role in the regulation of bimodal genes . however, if histone methylation provided a switching mechanism for bimodal gene expression, this would be evident in the differential methylation between tissue types, and not methylation status pertaining to a single tissue type. we used the data from these three tissues to create lists of genes with differentially enriched h3k4me <dig> regions for liver versus h <dig> hes cells and for b-cells versus h <dig> hes cells. these sets of differentially enriched h3k4me <dig> regions appeared with  <dig> to 100% higher frequency in bimodal genes compared to non-bimodal genes, as seen in figure 4a. to further investigate the correlation between histone methylation and bimodal gene expression, we gathered additional microarray samples corresponding to h <dig> stem cells  and evaluated the mode of expression for bimodal genes within those h <dig> stem cell samples as well as liver samples within our dataset. we identified a group of bimodal genes as i) "high" in liver but "low" in stem cells, ii) "low" in liver but "high" in stem cells, and iii) expressed in common modes between these two tissues . these results are plotted in figure 4b. group i  had a corresponding increase in methylation enrichment for liver vs. stem cells for nearly 85% of the genes, while group i  had a corresponding decrease in liver vs. stem cells for 77% of the genes. approximately, 65% of the remaining bimodal genes expressed in common modes between these two tissue types  were within the standard deviation around the line y = x. these results demonstrate a strong association between histone methylation status and the mode of expression for bimodal genes.

discussion
in this study, using a large-scale microarray database, we have annotated  <dig> human genes as having bimodal gene expression profiles. a recent study used again a large human microarray dataset for cancer samples to identify nearly  <dig> bimodal genes with the employment of a model-based clustering algorithm  <cit> . a comparison of their list against our list of bimodal genes resulted in  <dig> common elements, suggesting that bimodal genes in our list may not perform as bimodal in disease states in addition to possible switching of expression state in a disease state from one mode to another. even in healthy tissue comparison, orthology argument did not entirely preserve bimodality in mouse and human data. nearly 40% of the genes in this list corresponded to human orthologs of mouse bimodal genes that were annotated in our previous study  <cit> . bimodality within 40% of human-mouse orthologs can be viewed as substantial overlap when considering that besides measurement noise and slightly different tissue types represented by datasets for each organism, differences exist in transcript sequences and transcript regions targeted by the microarray probes for orthologous genes among the two species. further differences in gene expression between the two species arise from changes in regulatory sequences resulting from evolution  <cit> . this overlap demonstrates some degree of stability of bimodality in these datasets, even though we did not force identical tissue type quantities between the two organisms.

our study shows that bimodal genes make a large contribution to the proteins composing the extracellular matrix as well as external membrane proteins. the enrichment within go cellular component terms may at first appear contradictory, since the results include disparate terms related to the plasma membrane, cytoplasm, and extracellular matrix, while the kegg pathway findings more highlighted extracellular communication. however, go terms do not have a direct correspondence with kegg pathways and gene membership is not exclusive to a single term. mapping kegg pathways to go cellular component reveals that 66% of the bimodal genes in focal adhesion are contained in the cytoplasm; 40% of genes in both ecm-receptor interaction and focal adhesion are contained in the go cellular component "plasma membrane." within the cell membrane side of the ecm-receptor interaction pathway, integrin subunits α <dig>  β <dig>  and β <dig> were identified as bimodal, while several others, including α2–α <dig> and β3–β <dig> were not. this finding suggests that integrin complexes are regulated by an interplay of transcript-level regulation as well as previously shown post-translational modifications  <cit> . in addition, several bimodal genes in the focal adhesion pathway are linked to phosporylation of β-catenin, a key element in the wnt – signaling pathway, which plays a functional role in cell fate, proliferation, and apoptosis  <cit> . the wnt-signaling pathway is active in development and is also a culprit in disease such as colorectal cancer and melanomas  <cit> . as such, bimodal genes upstream from these interactions provide potential markers for tissue-specific signaling as well as metabolic and chronic diseases.

functional enrichment analysis of "high" and "low" expression subsets of the bimodal genes reveals that they play a role of activation and deactivation of tissue-specific pathways  and processes . bimodal gene sets involved in the focal adhesion and ecm-receptor pathways demonstrated consistent modes of expression across human and mouse for brain, heart, and skeletal muscle, the three tissue types with the largest amount of samples in our investigation . go enrichment for "high" and "low" mode gene sets showed consistency between tissue-specific modes of expression in human and mouse, demonstrated by biological processes such as synaptic transmission in brain, and muscle contraction in skeletal muscle . the consistency in expression modes of bimodal genes in the mouse and human is further reinforced by brain-specific expression for the cellular components of synapse, post-synaptic membrane, and muscle-specific expression for structural components of muscle, such as sarcoplasmic reticulum, collagen, and cytoskeleton . taken together, these findings indicate that the mode of expression for bimodal genes plays a role in the stable differentiation of specialized tissues, and pathway-specific usage of these genes is conserved across human and mouse in several cases.

bimodality implies a high degree of transcript-level regulation, and bimodal genes may act as switches for the direction of signals and/or metabolic flow. our study shows that bimodality appears to arise independently from the type of promoter present, even though we estimate the number of tata boxes in bimodal genes is enriched, appearing in over 80% of bimodal genes with documented promoter sites. this may merely reflect a bias in gene annotation, as the involvement of these genes among pathways of interest, such as mapk signaling and ecm-receptor interaction, may draw more focus for experimentation. the number of alternative  transcription start sites appears to have an influence on the bimodality of gene expression. unlike the limited number of experimentally produced promoter binding sites, alternative promoter sites have been assessed by genome-wide mapping of transcript 5' ends  <cit> . while the number of known alternative promoter start sites for bimodal genes is shifted to a higher number than for non-bimodal genes, it is not sufficient to explain the phenomenon of bimodality. additionally, previous studies investigating the usage of alternative promoters by gene ontology cellular component reveal that genes with several alternative promoters play a role in signaling, but do not contribute to the extracellular region, suggesting a difference from the set of bimodal genes  <cit> . this still allows for bimodal genes to include a subset of genes with a higher than average number of alternative promoters that work in concert with other regulatory mechanisms such as dna methylation and histone modification.

we have shown that bimodal gene expression has a bias for multiple alternative promoters, as well as an association with histone methylation , though a complete description of the links between all possible regulatory mechanisms cannot be made with currently available data. a recent study has shown that cpg-specific rna polymerase ii binding, associated with transcription initiation, is conserved among different tissue types  <cit> . a large portion of these may constitute the set of housekeeping genes, while others may appear at high modes of expression in some tissues, while silenced in other tissues via cpg methylation. a link has also been demonstrated between dna methylation and histone methylation, where genes that undergo transcription initiation require h3k <dig> methylation as well as unmethylated dna  <cit> . consistent with our findings in this study, h3k <dig> trimethylation was previously associated with transcriptionally active genes  <cit> . the presence or absence of this modification can achieve switch-like regulation  <cit> . histone methylation, along with dna methylation, is a key player in cell differentiation during development and maintain cell lineage  <cit> . this stable regulation also maintains the balance between cell communication molecules and the extracellular environment  <cit> . aberrant histone methylation patterns are among the epigenetic modifications that give rise to cancer  <cit> . as the mode of expression for bimodal genes is closely related to h3k4me <dig> status, gene expression levels may be used as a surrogate for detecting aberrant patterns of methylation associated with disease. while our knowledge of methylation associated with gene regulation may be incomplete, genes regulated through alternative promoters have an additional layer of complexity, as they can have largely different methylation status at individual promoters from tissue to tissue  <cit> . the regulatory mechanism for bimodal genes may therefore include a complex logic of dna and histone methylation among alternative promoters, in addition to positive and negative regulation through transcription factor binding.

alternative splicing events may present another explanation for bimodality in the expression of genes. alternative-splicing isoforms have been identified as tissue-specific  <cit> . a substantial portion of alternative splicing isoforms are also associated with nonsense-mediated mrna decay  <cit> . three out of five genes identified with muscle-specific alternative splicing in xu et al.  <cit>   were identified as bimodal and expressed in "high" mode in our microarray data for muscle but not other tissues. five out of the twenty-two genes identified as having brain-specific alternative splicing in xu et al.  <cit> , were identified as having bimodal expression, but only one of these  was expressed in a brain-specific manner. this indicates the possibility that stable transcript splice isoforms account for the high mode of expression in specific tissues, while alternative splice isoforms undergo nonsense-mediated decay. the methylation/promoter analysis presented here is a first step towards understanding the complex interplay of various molecular mechanisms affecting transcription in human and mouse genomes.

CONCLUSIONS
this research expanded our representation of "switch-like" gene expression by cataloging the bimodal genes evident in human microarray data for diverse tissue types. results obtained from human data affirm that genes with bimodal, switch-like expression play a large role in cells communication with the extracellular environment. tissue-specific modes of expression among the bimodal genes organized by kegg pathways and go cellular component revealed that they play a role in tissue specialization that is in common between human and mouse. equally as important, our results indicate bimodal genes capture epigenetic aspects of gene regulation, indicative of gene expression levels that are stable across cell divisions. these findings verify that biologically relevant information can be inferred from bimodal distributions, much in the way that housekeeping genes have been used. because the "high" mode of expression modes corresponds well with histone methylation enrichment in promoter regions, bimodal genes may serve as biomarkers for complex diseases such as cancer, where aberrant histone methylation is a known factor in disease progression. through the identification of condition-specific modes of expression within healthy tissue and disease subtypes, the method presented allows for an alternative approach to differential gene expression analysis.

