BACKGROUND
a novel paramyxovirus, feline morbillivirus , has recently been detected in domestic cats . fmopv is genetically most closely related to viruses such as canine distemper virus , measles virus , rinderpest virus , peste-des-petits-ruminants virus , phocine distemper virus  and cetacean morbillivirus , belonging to the genus morbillivirus in the family paramyxoviridae . fmopv showed genetic diversity among isolates , and a natural recombination in the envelope protein region between viruses in different clades was also found  <cit> . in germany, three groups of feline paramyxoviruses  have been detected, and these were associated with feline chronic kidney diseases  including lower urinary tract diseases   <cit> . phylogenetically, the first group of these viruses belongs to the same cluster of fmopv with 99 % homology, whereas the second group represents a new cluster between fmopv and other morbilliviruses. the third group represents a group that is distinct from fmopv and other morbilliviruses. a seroepidemiological survey of cdv infection in asian countries showed that domestic cats were susceptible to cdv infection, but cdv was not virulent in domestic cats  <cit> . at the moment, it is not yet confirmed that fmopv is classified in the genus morbillivirus or in a novel genus separate from the genus morbillivirus.

kidney failure is one of the most important and common diseases in domestic cats. it can be divided into acute kidney disease  and chronic kidney disease , or inherent kidney disease and acquired kidney disease . akd, which could be caused by toxins, trauma, infection, shock, blockage of the blood flow and heart failure  <cit> , is reversible and can affect cats of all ages. ckd affects domestic cats, especially middle-aged or older cats  <cit> , and its prevalence increases according to age, affecting up to half of cats older than 15 years  <cit> . ckd could result from infection, blockages, dental disease, high blood pressure and cancer. in particular, idiopathic ckd such as pyelonephritis, glomerulonephritis and chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis  due to unknown causes has been reported extensively . it is suspected that fmopv is one of the causative agents of ckd  <cit> , such as chronic tin. therefore, it is important to clarify the characteristics or the pathogenicity of fmopv and the pathogenesis in domestic cats as the natural host. in this respect, large-scale epidemiological investigation is considered to be indispensable.

in this study, epidemiological and pathological studies were performed to demonstrate the seroprevalence of fmopv and the relationship between fmopv and ckd in japan. these studies revealed that the infection rate of fmopv was considerable and fmopv might be related to urinary tract diseases.

RESULTS
detection of fmopv by rt-pcr and phylogenetic analysis
cat urine and renal tissues were examined for the presence of fmopv rna by nested rt-pcr  <cit> . seventeen cats  were positive for fmopv rna in urine, and  <dig> cats  were positive in renal tissues . among these cats,  <dig> cats  were both positive in urine and tissues. four cats  were positive in the urine but negative in the tissues, whereas five cats  were negative in the urine but positive in the tissues.table  <dig> detection of fmopv rna by rt-pcr




nucleotide sequences of all the pcr-positive samples were analyzed phylogenetically with those of fmopvs in hong kong and japan , and cdv and nipah virus as outgroups. they were divided into three groups . to determine the groups of fmopv strains in the phylogenetic tree are stable, pairwise distances were compared by histogram by the method described previously  <cit> . statistically significant differences  were obtained in the distribution of the pairwise distances of clusters a, b and c . fmopv strains from hong kong and some strains of japan were grouped into the same clusters, cluster a and c, thus a phylogenetic relationship with geographic distribution of fmopv in two countries was not observed .fig.  <dig> phylogenetic analysis based on partial l protein sequences of fmopv in infected cats in tokyo. phylogenic tree was inferred using the maximum likelihood method in the mega <dig> package. the percentage of replicate tree in which the associated taxa clustered together in the bootstrap test  is shown next to the branches. the tree is drawn to scale, and the scale bar indicates the branch length corresponding to  <dig>  substitutions per site. the strains from hong kong and japan  are represented by blue and green, respectively. nucleotide sequences of cdv and nipah virus are used as outgroups and represented in gray. information about the strain names and accession numbers is listed in table  <dig>  statistically significant differences  were obtained in the distribution of the pairwise distances of clusters a, b and c




detection of antibodies against fmopv-n protein by immunofluorescence  test
to detect fmopv-n antibodies by if test, fmopv-n expressing hela cells were prepared. the specificity of the if test was confirmed by serum from rabbit immunized with the purified fmopv-n and its pre-immune negative control rabbit serum. as shown in fig.  <dig>  fmopv-n immunized rabbit serum reacted to fmopv-n expressing hela, but not to mock-hela cells nor empty plasmid, pks <dig>  transfected hela cells. negative control rabbit serum did not react to any of the hela cells. specificity of the if test was also confirmed using fmopv antibody positive cat serum  . thus, all the cat sera were tested by the if test to detect antibodies against fmopv-n.fig.  <dig> if staining. a fmopv-n immunized rabbit serum strongly reacted to fmopv-n expressing hela cells, but did not react to empty vector, pks <dig>  transfected hela cells , nor to mock hela cells . fmopv antibody positive cat  reacted to fmopv-n expressing hela cells , but did not react to mock hela cells . granular apple green signal was observed in the cytoplasm, represented by fitc




twenty-one percent of cats had ab against fmopv-n protein . ab titers ranged between 1: <dig> to 1: <dig>  or above. the ab titers appeared to be high in middle-aged cats , although not significantly. all the fmopv antibody positive cat sera were tested negative by if test using cdv-n expressing hela cells , indicating there is no serological cross reactivity between cdv-n and fmopv-n at least by if test. there were four patterns: rna+/ab + , rna+/ab-  and rna-/ab +   and rna-/ab- . in total,  <dig> out of  <dig> cats  were positive for ab and/or viral rna, thus they were considered to be fmopv-infected. fourteen out of  <dig> cats were positive for viral rna and ab, indicating that approximately half of the infected cats were persistently infected with fmopv.table  <dig> detection of viral rna, igg and antigen

1a
2a
3a

a ihc-positive in inflammatory lesions

 <dig> positive

 <dig> negative

+ mild

++ moderate

+++ severe

* mild

** moderate

*** extensive


fig.  <dig> the relationship between age of fmopv-infected cats and ab titer. ab titers in if test are represented by black dots. sera showing ab titers of less than 1: <dig> are considered negative 




histopathological examination of fmopv infection in cat renal tissues
histopathological examination was performed to detect fmopv in cat renal tissues and to confirm the relationship between virus infection and tubulointerstitial nephritis by hematoxylin and eosin  staining and immunohistochemistry  . among  <dig> cases that showed fmopv rna+ and/or ab+, moderate to severe chronic interstitial nephritis was observed in  <dig> cases . mild infiltration of inflammatory cells into the renal tissues was observed in  <dig> cases. three cases had no lesions. other lesions including interstitial fibrosis, glomerulosclerosis, tubular microcystic change, proteinaceous casts and calcification were observed in some cases . among  <dig> fmopv non-infected cats, moderate to severe chronic interstitial nephritis was observed in  <dig> cases. no lesions or mild infiltration of inflammatory cells into the renal tissues were observed in  <dig> and  <dig> cases, respectively. no statistically significant relationship could be confirmed between tubulointerstitial nephritis and the infection of fmopv . however, a significant relationship was found between the presence of inflammatory lesions and the infection of fmopv .fig.  <dig> ihc examination of fmopv-infected cases. a fmopv rna+ and ab + positive case . severe infiltration of inflammatory cells into the interstitial tissue or renal tubules is observed . b fmopv rna+ and ab + positive case . fmopv antigens were demonstrated in the cytoplasm of renal tubular cells . c fmopv rna+ and ab- case . d fmopv rna+ and ab- case . transitional cells in the renal pelvis are positive . e fmopv rna+ and ab- case . there are no pathologic lesions in this case . f fmopv rna+ and ab- case . renal tubular cells are positive 



a no lesions


b mild infiltration of inflammatory cells


c moderate to severe tin


d et al





to prepare rabbit antibody against fmopv-n protein for the detection of fmopv antigens, a recombinant fmopv-n protein with his-tag at c terminal was expressed in sf <dig> insect cells using a recombinant baculovirus. the recombinant fmopv-n was purified by ni-nta agarose chromatography and was confirmed by sds-page . two major bands with a molecular weight of  <dig> and 40 kda were observed by sds-page. a large band was consistent with the predicted size of the fmopv-n, while a small one is thought to be n-terminal truncated fmopv-n, since both of them were purified by ni-nta agarose chromatography. since fmopv-positive cat serum reacted to both two bands in immunoblot, n-terminal truncated fmopv-n was considered to be immunogenic. the purified fmopv-n protein was subcutaneously injected into three rabbits five times. when the serum antibody titers by if test reached above 1: <dig> , the rabbits were euthanized and the sera were collected. the rabbit antibodies reacted to the recombinant fmopv-n protein in immunoblot .fig.  <dig> analysis of recombinant fmopv-n protein. a coomassie brilliant blue  staining and immunoblot. two major bands were stained with cbb  . a large band corresponded to the entire fmopv-n with a molecular weight of 59 kda , while other smaller band may correspond to a truncated fmopv-n with a molecular weight of 40 kda . fmopv antibody positive cat serum  reacted to both two bands . fmopv antibody negative cat serum  did not react to mock and fmopv-n protein . b purity of the recombinant fmopv-ab. an image of the stained gel was analyzed using imagej  <dig> i and it was shown that amount of the entire fmopv-n and the truncated protein were approximately  <dig> and 72 %, respectively. the purity was estimated to be 93 %




immunohistochemistry  was performed using the rabbit fmopv-n antibody to detect viral antigens in tissues. among  <dig> fmopv-infected cats,  <dig> cats showed fmopv-n proteins in renal tissues by ihc . however, only four cases out of the  <dig> cats were positive for fmopv-n proteins in,the tubular cells of the renal cortex and the renal medulla . extensive inflammatory cells were infiltrated around the fmopv-n positive renal tubular cells, indicating the cats were suffered from chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis . although other cases also showed mild to severe infiltration of mononuclear cells in the interstitial tissues, the distribution of fmopv-n proteins was limited in renal tubular cells or transitional cells of the renal medulla or pelvis, but not in the inflammatory lesions . in all of the cases, cytoplasms of renal tubular cells were positive for fmopv-n proteins and there were no specific intracytoplasmic or intranuclear inclusion bodies . overall, it seemed likely that fmopv infection might be associated with feline urinary tract diseases including ckd or lutd, although it remained inconclusive whether fmopv causes these diseases per se or acts as a helper or bystander.

discussion
in the present study,  <dig> out of  <dig> cats in japan were shown to be fmopv rna positive in urine and/or kidney. phylogenetic analysis of the fmopv detected in japan showed fmopv was clustered in three groups. however, a phylogenetic relationship with geographic distribution of fmopv in japan and hong kong was not observed. further, a significant relationship between fmopv cluster and renal disease in the cat was not observed . it is, however, necessary to compare the fmopv sequences in cats from other regions in future to confirm this hypothesis. recently, several partial sequences of fmopv detected in cats in germany were reported  <cit> , however, we could not compare our data with them because the region of the sequences were not overlapped.

rnas and proteins of fmopv were detected in cat urine, sera and/or renal tissues. anti-fmopv abs were also demonstrated in cat sera. fmopv-infected cats in the present study were divided into three groups: rna+/ab+, rna+/ab- and rna-/ab+. cats in the rna+/ab- group were considered to be in an acute phase of fmopv infection. cats in the rna+/ab + group were considered to be in either a subacute or a chronic phase of the infection. since it is not confirmed that the nested r-pcr used in the present study detected all the fmopv strains because of the genetic diversity of the viruses, thus it is possible that there are some false negative results in the rt-pcr. since humoral immune response in addition to cellular immune response to the virus are thought to eliminate the virus from animals, cats in the rna-/ab + group were considered to be in a convalescent phase. consequently, it appears that fmopv could establish as an acute, subacute or chronic infection, and could be eliminated. additionally, there were cases in which rna of fmopv was negative in urine but positive in renal tissues. since approximately half of the infected cats  were positive for viral rna and ab, it seems likely that cats are easily chronically or persistently infected with the virus. however, further long-term follow-up studies in fmopv-infected cats are necessary to confirm this hypothesis.

cat samples were collected randomly from healthy cats and sick or wounded cats, including stray cats in tokyo. no relationships among the clinical data, except age and sex, with the infection by fmopv could be found. the infection rate of fmopv was significantly high in unneutered male cats  in this study . these tendencies could be due to differences of behavior patterns, such as more aggressive or active behavior in unneutered male cats than neutered male cats and female cats, and such behavior might result in an increase in opportunity of infection with fmopv from other infected cats. the transmission of fmopv between cats could occur in veterinary hospitals, boarding kennels, breeding facilities, outdoors or at home. given the high positive rate, it seemed that fmopv might be maintained between their transmissible cats for a long time.fig.  <dig> fmopv-infected cats according to sex. the infection rate of fmopv was significantly high in unneutered male cats 




in a pathological examination,  <dig> out of  <dig> infected cats had renal lesions, from mild mononuclear cell infiltration to chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis. half of them were mediate to severe cases. as a result of ihc,  <dig> out of  <dig> cats showed fmopv-n protein in their kidney tissues. four of the  <dig> cats showed severe lesions with fmopv-n protein in the inflammatory lesions. the fmopv-n protein-positive cells were identified to be renal tubular epithelial cells in the renal cortex, medulla and pelvis. fmopv-n protein-positive mononuclear cells could not be found in this study, different from a report in hong kong  <cit> . these cases had rna of fmopv both in urine and renal tissues and relatively high igg titer of 1:  <dig> to  <dig> , except one case, representing the chronic phase. however, the ihc-positive sites were focally located, not distributed widely in the lesions.

in the other  <dig> cases, normal renal tubular cells or transitional cells of the renal medulla or pelvis were ihc-positive. no statistically significant correlations were found between the grades of lesions and the infection of fmopv. however, a statistically significant relationship with the presence of inflammatory lesions and the infection of fmopv was found, regardless of tin. consequently, no meaningful direct relationship between infection by fmopv and chronic tin was confirmed in this study. it might be plausible that fmopv antigens in the lesions were already eliminated by host immune responses in the case of severe chronic tin. a similar phenomenon was reported in other virus infectious diseases such as hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome  caused by hantavirus and severe acute respiratory syndrome  caused by sars coronavirus   <cit> . in these cases, uncontrolled responses in cytokines and chemokines are considered to be responsible for the pathogenesis. in this regard, it would be necessary to analyze innate immune responses in cats with fmopv.

it is well known that many viruses such as feline immunodeficiency virus, feline foamy virus, feline infectious peritonitis virus and feline leukemia virus can affect the kidneys of domestic cats, resulting in severe ckd including glomerulosclerosis, tin, amyloidosis and pyrogranulomatous nephritis . fmopv is a recently identified virus, but it could affect the kidneys in infected cats. thus, the existence or pathogenicity of fmopv could have been underestimated.

in addition, a correlation between lower urinary tract disease  and infection of fmopv has been reported recently  <cit> . lutd including urethral obstruction  and interstitial cystitic  is also an important and common disease in domestic cats . feline calicivirus, feline herpesvirus type ii and feline foamy virus have been detected in some cats with lutd . in this study, lower urinary tract tissues or related clinical symptoms were not examined. however, it could not be excluded that fmopv may also be related to lutd, for two reasons: 1) only four cases had fmopv antigens in inflammatory lesions of the renal cortex, even focal, 2) normal tubular cells of the renal medulla and transitional cells of the renal pelvis in proximity to the lower urinary tract were fmopv antigen-positive.

genetic diversity of fmopv has been described extensively . in hong kong, fmopv seemed to be related to chronic tin  <cit> . in germany, it was detected in a lutd case  <cit> . in addition, they detected fmopv in a lutd case showing 86 ~ 99 % homology compared to reported fmopv  <cit> . at the moment, we could not detect fmopv belonging to genetically diverged group found in germany  <cit>  among cats in japan. we can not rule out the possibility that our rt-pcr and ihc could not detected these fmopv rna and n protein and their antibodies could not be detected using n proteins of fmopv belonging to cluster c. however, it is unlikely since n proteins of paramyxoviruses in the same species are highly conserved and cross-reactive.

in our study, no clear relationship between fmopv and chronic tin or lutd could be clarified although many types of fmopv-infected cases are described.

it was suggested that fmopv infection has a significant relationship with inflammatory reactions in the feline kidney and may be associated with urinary tract diseases. this was the first epidemiological report including seroprevalence and pathological examination of fmopv among domestic cats in japan. considering the high infection rate and the genetic diversity of fmopv, it seemed likely that fmopv has evolved in japan over a long period. further retrospective and larger scale studies, including pathological studies, in other organs of cats are needed to elucidate the pathogenicity of fmopv in cats.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, a high prevalence of fmopv infection in domestic cats in japan was revealed, and a significant relationship between fmopv infection and inflammatory lesions in the kidneys was found. further studies are necessary to elucidate the etiology of fmopv in domestic cats. the serological and pathological examination established in this study might be useful for further surveillance.

