BACKGROUND
high-resolution transcription profiles offer insight into a wide array of biological questions including the identification of genes involved in specific molecular processes, the understanding of cellular fate and organ differentiation, the importance of genic and epigenetic factors, and the complex response to environmental conditions  <cit> . with the rise of sequencing technologies such as rna-seq and supporting methodologies, researchers are now able to obtain gene expression profiles , potentially identifying rare or novel transcript forms that are only present in specific cells and/or at very precise developmental times  <cit> . one such cell population of interest lies within the anterior portions of the drosophila ovary, where mitotic precursor cells begin their development into functional eggs and meiotic recombination occurs.

the drosophila ovary has served as a model for meiosis  <cit> , embryo patterning  <cit> , and stem cell differentiation  <cit> . drosophila females have two ovaries comprised of  <dig> to  <dig> tube-like structures, called ovarioles, clustered together with a spatiotemporal organization of progressively developing oocytes  <cit> . oogenesis in drosophila starts within the anterior compartment of the ovariole, the germarium, where mitotic stem cells produce cystoblasts that undergo further cell division generating a large 16-cell cyst with a single cystocyte becoming the oocyte. before exiting the germarium as a stage- <dig> egg chamber, the primary oocyte will have entered pachytene and undergo meiotic recombination. these anteriormost portions of the drosophila ovariole represent a highly active community of cells, regulated with remarkable fidelity, and yet, constitute only a small fraction of the entire ovary  <cit> . previous whole-genome transcriptome analyses of whole ovaries therefore offer only an amalgamated sight of its developmental and cellular complexity, limiting our understanding of the relevant gene expression activity of the germarium and early meiosis  <cit> .

the process of meiotic recombination in d. melanogaster females occurs with the initiation of double-strand breaks . at a very broad scale, crossover in drosophila is distributed in bell-shaped fashion along chromosomes, with a maximal rate in the center of a chromosomal arm that tapers off near centromeric and telomeric regions  <cit> . this is also the case in many other  but not all  eukaryotes. at finer scales, recombination maps have revealed substantial variation across chromosomes in all species analyzed, including drosophila <cit> . in d. melanogaster, high-resolution mapping of more than  <dig>  recombination events at a scale approaching gene-level resolution showed not only extreme heterogeneity in recombination rates across chromosomes but also that these landscapes of recombination vary significantly among individuals of the same species  <cit> . even within chromosomal regions traditionally assumed to have non-reduced recombination rates, crossover rates vary up to 80-fold when crossing two d. melanogaster strains, and 20-fold after combining genetic maps obtained from eight crosses of different strains  <cit> . beyond the differences across genomes, between species and within species, there is an important additional layer of complexity: recombination rates are plastic and influenced by factors such as temperature, food, or maternal age  <cit> .

the molecular determinants leading to dsb localization across the drosophila genome remain obscure but a number of patterns are beginning to emerge . first, unlike human and mice recombination hotspots that are strongly influenced by the presence of the prdm9-binding dna motif  <cit> , no prdm <dig> motif is detected in drosophila <cit> . second, analyses in drosophila reveal many different dna motifs significantly enriched in sequences surrounding recombination events, suggesting a fundamental qualitative difference between human/mouse and drosophila dsb localization  <cit> . third, recombination events tend to occur within annotated transcript regions thus suggesting a possible association between transcription, chromatin accessibility, and dsbs that are repaired as recombination events  <cit> . this latter observation is in agreement with evidence in the yeast s. cerevisiae where some, but not all, hotspots of recombination increase activity with transcription  <cit> . mapping of chromatin accessibility and nucleosome occupancy in yeast and mice  <cit>  also suggests, albeit more indirectly, that the formation of dsbs could be influenced by transcription based on the known effect of transcription on chromatin remodeling and histone modifications. the impact of active transcription on meiotic dsb localization and recombination landscapes in a multicellular organism remains, however, unexplored.

here, we employ rna-seq to obtain and analyze the whole transcriptome of early meiotic d. melanogaster cells. we isolated germaria-stage  <dig> cells to substantially enrich the fraction of sample that is actively experiencing early meiosis and dsb formation and obtain a first glimpse of the potential influence of transcription on recombination localization across the drosophila genome. our analyses uncover genes with germarium-specific expression patterns and novel transcripts. the study of offspring from reciprocal crosses also reveals distinct parent-of-origin effects that create differences in gene expression among genetically identical individuals.

finally, we identify a positive relationship across the genome between transcription in early meiotic cells and recombination rates. importantly, recombination events are found to target actively transcribed genes relative to genes with no detectable transcription thus allowing us to rule out that the observed association is due to dsb preference for static gene properties at the level of dna sequence . these results provide insight into the molecular determinants of recombination rate variation across the d. melanogaster genome and a clear path for future studies to assess the molecular causes of recombination variation among individuals and its plastic nature.

RESULTS
general patterns of the drosophila early meiotic transcriptome
we isolated mrnas from meiotic portions of the drosophila ovary, dissecting the germarium and stages 1– <dig>  and compared them to later, more developed regions of the ovary, hereafter referred to as ‘early’ and ‘late’, respectively . we performed ultra-deep mrna sequencing  that obtained over  <dig> million  of 120 bp-long reads. approximately 80% of these reads mapped correctly to the d. melanogaster genome reference sequence, with a total average coverage greater than 400× when mapped to annotated transcripts . each of our eight independent samples sequenced  generated between  <dig>  and  <dig>  m mapped reads, with a median mapped read count of  <dig>  m. there was no difference between total mapped read counts between early and late tissues .

*early and late indicate drosophila early- and late-ovarian transcriptome, respectively.

comparisons of early versus late transcript profiles show high similarity, with a strong correlation coefficient . there are  <dig>  genes expressed in early regions compared to  <dig>  genes in late regions. these results suggest that roughly 50% of all genes are actively transcribed, a value similar to the typical percentage in other drosophila tissues, based on mrna seq  <cit>  or array-based comparisons of germarium and testes . the detection of 5% more genes being transcribed  in early relative to late meiosis  is accompanied by a reduced average level of transcription for active genes in early meiosis by more than 13% . similar differences are observed when defining active genes based on fpkm greater than  <dig>  .

the drosophila x chromosome is enriched in genes preferentially or uniquely expressed in females  and deficient in male-biased genes  <cit> . focusing only on the male germline, however, a recent study has shown that differences between x and autosomes are not caused by different gene content but to the lack of sex chromosome dosage compensation in drosophila testes thus reducing transcript levels of x-linked genes  <cit> . in our deep-sequencing study, we see that the early ovarian transcriptome shows the expected “female” bias with actively expressed genes unequally distributed among chromosomes:  <dig> % of genes on the x chromosome are transcribed compared with  <dig> % in autosomes . a more extreme difference is observed when defining active genes based on fpkm >  <dig>  . notably, this overrepresentation of actively transcribed genes on the x chromosome is less apparent in late meiotic stages .

finally, we observe that expressed genes are not distributed randomly across chromosomes, but are instead physically clustered . when defining actively expressed genes as fpkm >  <dig>  clusters contain an average of  <dig>  consecutive genes . these results are in agreement with data from other drosophila tissues and conditions, with small clusters of functionally related, highly co-expressed genes  <cit> .

differentially expressed genes in early meiotic tissues
we observed  <dig>  genes with differences in fpkm between early and late meiotic tissues at nominal p <  <dig> , with  <dig> genes showing a significant difference after correcting for multiple testing . the degree of differential expression ranges from +241-fold to −2060-fold in the early relative to late tissues, with a median difference of  <dig> -fold among genes with significant differences. we observe a bias towards overall down-regulation of genes in early versus late tissues  that cannot be explained by read bias in the respective samples.

the top ten over- and under-expressed genes in the early sample are listed in table  <dig>  the use of david  to classify genes into go categories reveals that the terms ‘proteolysis’ and ‘peptidase’ are significantly enriched within our top-ten up-regulated genes in our early sample . furthermore, all of the known genes  within this group are serine-type endopeptidases involved in proteolysis. why there is such a bias towards genes involved in proteolysis is difficult to explain, but a similar pattern has been noted in the apex of the testis in drosophila <cit> . we suggest that the overrepresentation of serine endopeptidases may be due to the required breakdown of many meiotic proteins following their utilization in meiosis in order to prevent erroneous aggregation of many self-assembling protein complexes that may interact with dna. the analysis of the  <dig> significantly down-regulated genes suggests enrichment in the go terms phosophoproteins, rna splicing, nucleotide binding, phosophate metabolic processes, and ribonucleotide binding. analysis of the top ten most extreme down-regulated genes does not indicate overrepresentation of any go term after correcting for multiple tests.

q 
over-regulated in early
*
*early indicates drosophila early-ovarian transcriptome.

these results indicate an enrichment of serine proteases in early versus late ovarian development and a concurrent down-regulation of the majority of genes in early tissues. interestingly, many of the top ten up-regulated genes were shown to be down-regulated in array experiments based comparisons between the whole ovary and whole fly  <cit> . this result emphasizes that whole-ovary experiments might have lacked sufficient power to detect important genes involved in subregions of the developing ovary.

new genes and isoforms
we applied the cufflinks algorithm to our combined data sets and identified up to  <dig>  transcript forms  that were absent from the d. melanogaster genome annotation . when we conservatively restricted the list to only those items that were detected in two or more samples and further removed items with fpkm <  <dig>  the set still contained  <dig> entries. notably,  <dig> high-confidence items were identified with lengths greater than 300 bp, minimally repetitive sequences and reads that reliably mapped to predicted splice junctions. additionally, a visual inspection shows that a minimum of  <dig> of these new transcripts are independent of other annotated gene entries and have clear exon-intron structures and are thus strong candidates for new genes, while the rest are either novel splicing forms or putative ncrnas.

to validate some of these new transcripts, we designed transcript-specific primers, extracted total rna from ovaries and were able to reliably produce rt-pcr products from seven of ten haphazardly selected novel candidates. we thus, conservatively, estimate a contribution of ~30- <dig> novel items to the existing d. melanogaster genome annotation. notably, a number of putative novel transcribed sequences mapped uniquely to the so-called chromosome u that consists of unordered, unoriented scaffolds not present in the d. melanogaster genome  sequences. these results add to the notion that the actual number of unnotated genes and isoforms is still high in this model organism. ultra-deep sequencing studies focusing on specific cell populations and variable conditions are therefore needed to fill this annotation gap that can have important consequences in genomic and evolutionary analyses.

parent-of-origin effects in the early meiotic tissue
differences in gene expression between genetically identical offspring from reciprocal crosses indicate that maternal and/or paternal effects alter expression. the molecular causes of these parent-of-origin effects include genomic imprinting , cytoplasmic effects of the egg and sperm, or mitochondrial contributions to nuclear transcription. to investigate parent-of-origin effects in the early meiotic tissue in females, we studied two homozygous d. melanogaster parental strains  and the heterozygous offspring from reciprocal crosses. we identify genes with a parent-of-origin transcription pattern as those genes that show differential expression between offspring of reciprocal crosses and focused on the subset of these genes that change in transcript levels between offspring of reciprocal crosses in the same direction as maternal strains differ between them .

the comparison of offspring of reciprocal crosses reveals that there are more genes with parent-of origin effects with maternal-like transcript levels in the early- than in the late-ovarian development tissues .interestingly, there is an excess of genes with parent-of origin effects with maternal-like transcript levels that resemble transcription in the ral- <dig> maternal strain than genes with transcription pattern resembling the ral- <dig> maternal strain . we expanded this study by investigating allele-specific transcript ratios of heterozygous offspring and observed an excess of the ral- <dig> allele in both reciprocal crosses  that is higher when the maternal strain is ral- <dig> . these results not only reveal the presence of variable parent-of-origin effects acting on transcript abundance but also an overrepresentation of dominant effects in ral- <dig> relative to ral- <dig> 

we also identified an enrichment of a common set of go terms associated with genes showing parent-of origin effects with maternal-like transcript levels, many of which are involved in development and differentiation . when the early and late datasets are combined, we recover similar go term hits as were obtained for early tissues alone . we thus interpret this pattern as a clear signal of parent-of-origin effects in the transcriptome of the drosophila ovary, with maternal-like gene expression that is mostly relevant to early-ovary development.

transcription is associated with increased recombination rates
ultra-high resolution mapping of recombination events in drosophila revealed that meiotic dsbs  occur preferentially in annotated transcriptional units  <cit> . we thus hypothesized that gene transcription increases the probability of dsb formation in drosophila and influence the recombination landscapes across chromosomes. alternatively, the preference of dsb for genic units could be associated with other characteristics such nucleotide composition, reduced average nucleotide diversity relative to intergenic regions, presence of specific dna motifs in promoter and intronic regions, etc. although the topography of recombination landscapes in s. cerevisiae and d. melanogaster are dramatically different in terms of hotspot activity and localization, evidence based on some hotspots in yeast suggests promoter and/or transcriptional activity affects recombination activity  <cit> . the effects of transcription on dsb formation could be either direct via reduced nucleosome occupancy and increased chromatin accessibility, or more indirect as consequence of histone modifications.

to evaluate our hypothesis, we now focused on the expression profile during early d. melanogaster meiosis and compared the transcriptional landscape with recombination rate variation across the d. melanogaster genome. note that we anticipate the presence of a fraction of cells other than those where dsb formation occurs in our early-meiosis sample. we argue, however, that our sample is enriched in recombining cells and therefore, even if we may not recover the precise transcriptional profile at the time/cells where dsbs occur, genomic regions with no evidence of transcription will be particularly informative when defining coldspots of transcription during dsb formation.

to this end, we used estimates of recombination rates across the d. melanogaster genome that were experimentally obtained after genotyping  <dig> million informative snps and mapping more than  <dig>  recombination events at a scale approaching gene-level resolution . we then compared measures of transcription in early meiosis with these high-resolution recombination landscapes. the analysis of adjacent 100-kb regions reveals a positive association between recombination rates and both the number of genes transcribed per interval  and the total length of the transcribed regions per interval . to capture the possible effect of transcription levels we also obtained a measure of overall transcriptional activity within a genomic interval , defined as the log10-transformed sum of the product fpkm × transcript length for each gene within a given genomic interval . in our study, ota is positively associated with recombination rates across the genome . multiple regression analysis shows, however, that the number  and total length of transcribed sequences  in a region are more relevant than ota  predicting recombination rates at the 100-kb scale.

notably, the relationship between measures of transcription and recombination  appears to be highly contingent upon regions that lack transcription relative to regions with transcription. there is a significant difference in recombination rates between regions with no transcription and regions with one or more transcribed genes . this result is consistent with the idea that our study preferentially captures the consequences of coldspots for transcription during dsb formation in our early-meiosis sample.

the high-resolution genetic maps of d. melanogaster  also allowed the localization of more than  <dig>  dsbs delimited by 500 bp or less  <cit> . here, we take advantage of these highly localized meiotic dsb events to investigate their distribution at the scale of single genes and intergenic regions. we observe that intergenic sequences have fewer dsbs than expected but, importantly, we detect a difference between genes transcribed and genes not transcribed . there is a significant excess of dsb within transcribed genes relative to random distribution , while no preference/avoidance is observed for genes with no evidence of being transcribed . these results show that the preference of dsb to be located within annotated genic regions in drosophila is not merely a consequence of dna properties of genes such higher g + c content than noncoding sequences or the presence of dna regulatory motifs in promoter regions and introns. this result is also in agreement with the previous analysis of recombination rates and nucleotide composition showing that there is no positive association between recombination rates and g + c content . instead, the detection of recombination events targeting actively transcribed genes relative to genes with no detectable transcription strongly suggests that gene expression during early meiosis has a causal effect on dsb location and formation and, ultimately, genome-wide recombination landscapes.

finally, we investigated the effect of transcription levels on dsb presence. to this end, we divided genes with detectable transcription into three groups for low-, medium- and high-transcription levels. we observe that among genes with detectable transcription, dsbs target genes preferentially lowly transcribed genes , with a negative relationship between transcription levels and recombination. again, these results may evidence the expected heterogeneity of cell populations within our early-meiosis tissue or, alternatively, a more complex interplay between transcription, histone modification and turnover, and chromatin accessibility for dsbs.

CONCLUSIONS
we obtained and compared the transcription profiles of early- and late-meiosis in d. melanogaster females with mrna-seq and ultra-deep coverage. we identified significant differences in gene expression, new genes and exons, and a pattern of parent-of-origin effects with maternal-like expression that is particularly evident in early-meiosis stages. we also described that early-meiosis transcription occurs more often on the x chromosome and that there is physical clustering of actively transcribed genes across chromosomes. in terms of gene categories, we report that many genes involved in proteolysis are highly expressed in early meiosis, which may be a result of the rapid degradation of meiotic proteins following their utilization in order to prevent erroneous, self-assembling aggregates  <cit> . our study and results underscore the limitations of using heterogeneous cellular and tissue samples when searching for biologically relevant features specific to particular developmental times and cell sets. in our case, searching for transcriptional signals present in only meiotic oocytes benefits from not using the whole ovary—as the oocyte transitions to transcriptionally dormant following the entrance into stage  <dig> in d. melanogaster, vastly increasing the influence of supportive nurse cells  <cit> .

work in yeast has shown that chromatin accessibility and nucleosome occupancy contribute to variation in the dsb landscape, although other factors may play a more dominant role in determining the probability of dna cleavage  <cit> . studies of nucleosome occupancy in mice meiotic spermatocytes also suggest that open chromatin structure directs, at least in part, the formation of dsbs  <cit> . indirectly, these studies suggest that recombination landscapes could be influenced by gene expression, as transcription is known to alter chromatin structure. rna-seq has been used as a powerful method to determine transcription patterns for specific tissues, cell populations and/or conditions, but it has heretofore not been exploited as a measure to gather information underlying patterns of variation in recombination rates across whole chromosomes.

based on our previous high-resolution genetic maps in d. melanogaster, here we investigated the specific hypothesis that dsbs preferentially target transcriptionally active genomic regions in drosophila. to our knowledge, our results represent the first evidence in a multicellular organism that gene expression in early meiotic cells is associated with increased likelihood of dsbs. importantly, the preference of dsb targeting annotated transcripts seems to be related to active transcription and therefore supports the model that gene expression in meiotic tissues play a role—albeit clearly not the only one—influencing the landscapes and magnitude of recombination in a particular genomic region. indeed, although the observed association between transcription levels and recombination rates is highly significant in terms of associated probability, it is weak in terms of the variation in recombination rates that can be explained solely by transcription. as such, the proposed influence of transcription on dsb formation and recombination landscapes should be viewed as one of several determinants of dsb localization. the presence of specific dna motifs, the vicinity to telomeres/centromeres and other high-order chromatin structures during early meiosis, are all factors likely to also play a role. transcriptome data of specific cell types, possibly using novel transgenic methods, together with detailed genetic analyses are needed to determine the relative role of gene expression influencing dsb formation and, ultimately, recombination rates across the drosophila genome.

recombination rates are an evolving and variable trait with detectable differences between species as well as within species. this inter-individual and inherited variation has been documented for the total number of recombination events per meiosis or per chromosome as well as in terms of the distribution across chromosomes in a number of species, including d. melanogaster <cit> . further, classic drosophila genetics studies expose clear plasticity in the distribution of recombination rates across the genome as a result of biotic and abiotic factors  <cit>  that would also act upon inherited inter-individual variation. we propose that our model, in which variation in gene expression plays a role altering the likelihood of dsb formation and thus the landscape of recombination across chromosomes, could easily reconcile many of these observations and provide a molecular, heritable and plastic mechanism to a number of observed patterns of recombination, from the high level of intra-specific variation, to the influence of environmental factors and stress conditions. the concept that gene expression may act as a “plastic” and heritable modifier of recombination, directly or epigenetically, is particularly relevant to evolutionary models on the maintenance of recombination. our proposed model would represent a direct and mechanistic link between stressful conditions and increased recombination , the very same circumstances where recombination may be most favorable  <cit> .

