BACKGROUND
the baculovirus autographa califonica multiple nucleopolyhedrosis virus  is routinely used to express proteins in eukaryotic cells for structural, biochemical and vaccine studies  <cit> . the acmnpv genome is circular dsdna  and contains regions of highly repetitive dna elements and genes in both strands  <cit> . this genomic dna can be propagated in escherichia coli as a bacmid, and genes can be inserted by tn <dig> transposase based transposition into the virus dna  <cit> . transfection of the modified bacmid dna into virus susceptible insect cells results in recovery infectious virus expressing the recombinant protein corresponding to the inserted gene  <cit> . alternate approaches in which homologous recombination is carried out in insect cells can also be used to generate recombinant baculoviruses  <cit> .

one of the advantages of the baculovirus system is its utility for the co-expression of multiple genes that encode protein complexes  <cit> . this is important, as many critical functions of living cells are carried out by multi-subunit protein complexes which are naturally present at low abundance. one approach for the baculovirus mediated co-expression of multiple genes is the insertion of expression cassettes as tandem or inverted repeats at the polyhedrin locus in the viral genomic dna  <cit> . this approach ensures that every cell in the culture expresses the genes encoding recombinant proteins in the same ratio and results in consistent yields of recombinant protein complex  <cit> . however, this approach has two major limitations. firstly, there is a practical limit to the number of genes that can be inserted into one transfer vector in terms of vector size. in practice, this means that it is rarely possible to express more than four proteins from a single locus. in addition, baculovirus expresses proteins that promote homologous recombination  <cit> , therefore viruses that contain large amounts of repeated sequences, such as common promoters and terminators, are prone to rearrangement and recombination  <cit> . a potential solution to these problems would be the production of viral genomes in which foreign genes are each expressed from a different genetic locus, removing the need for large transfer vectors with highly repetitive sequences. however, to date, most baculovirus expression experiments have been carried out with one of two loci . there have also been reports of v-cath  <cit>  being used to express heterologous proteins, but the expression of foreign genes from other loci in the genome is largely uncharacterised. therefore, before any multi-locus approach to express genes for larger complexes could be pursued it would be necessary to characterise foreign gene expression at alternative loci within the acmnpv genome.

recently baculovirus research has benefited from use of the lambda red recombination  <cit>  approach for selective knockout of viral genes  <cit> . however, the potential for this technique to engineer high level expression of foreign genes from different genetic loci within the baculovirus genome has not been examined. in this report, we describe high level expression of foreign genes from seven loci within the acmnpv genome not previously characterised for this purpose. furthermore, we demonstrate a functional multi-locus system for the expression of multiple foreign genes from a single baculovirus genome. in this system single protein expression cassettes are inserted efficiently at different loci within the viral genome using lambda red recombination. as single-gene insertions are thus distributed throughout the acmnpv genome, the problems of transfer vector size and highly repetitive inserts are overcome. we demonstrate the utility of this system for the expression of complexes with up to eight subunits using influenza a vlps , bluetongue vlps  and the essential mammalian chaperonin complex cct  as examples.

RESULTS
a bipartite selection system allows significant increase in the efficiency of recombinant bacmid recovery
lambda red recombination  <cit>  has been widely used to introduce knockout mutations in acmnpv  <cit> . in the majority of these experiments a chloramphenicol resistance gene has been used as a selectable marker. in our hands, although this system worked, the speed with which experiments could be completed was hampered by the number of false positive colonies arising due to the low levels of antibiotic used in selection of the low copy bacmid. also, it was not possible to introduce multiple modifications into the virus genome without either accumulating antibiotic resistance genes or performing another round of lambda red recombination and selecting for virus which had lost the selectable marker. to overcome these problems we designed a new bipartite selection cassette based on laczα fragment and zeocin resistance gene flanked by modified loxp recombination sites . using this system, sufficient zeocin was used to reduce, but not eliminate, background colony growth and recombinants were selected based on blue colony phenotype in the presence of iptg and x-gal.

to assess the relative efficiency of recovering recombinants using the chloramphenicol and bipartite selections, recombination competent e. coli containing unmodified acmnpv bacmid were electroporated with  <dig> ng  linear dna containing each selection cassette . the efficiency of recombination using pcr derived and plasmid derived, restriction enzyme released, linear dna was compared. pcr primers were designed such that the ends of the pcr products corresponded to the ends of the restriction enzyme released fragments. the bipartite selection resulted in a  <dig> fold increase in the number of positive colonies for pcr derived dna and an  <dig> fold increase for restriction enzyme released plasmid dna compared to the single antibiotic selection. these differences were significant . to avoid repeated pcr of coding sequences, and to take advantage of the increased efficiency of recombination, linear dna derived by restriction digestion of plasmid dna was used for subsequent experiments.

pcr was carried out on bacmid dna purified from positive colonies from the bipartite selection to confirm correct insertion of the expression construct. primers complementary to the zeocin resistance gene and the acmnpv dna flanking the correct insertion site were used. pcr product was only produced where correctly targeted recombination had occurred. dna for twelve separate bacmids were tested using this method , all were positive for the pcr product, indicating correctly targeted recombination. in contrast, neither bacmid dna alone, nor plasmid dna containing the dna fragment used for recombination was able to act as template to produce the pcr product . to test the viability of recombinant baculovirus, the same twelve pcr positive bacmid clones were transfected into sf <dig> cells and passaged twice, then renilla luciferase activity in cells infected with each of the recombinants was assayed at  <dig> hours post infection. cells infected with each of the twelve recombinant viruses had renilla luciferase activities that were  <dig> fold above background . based on these data the bipartite selection was used for further studies. the genetic locus used for these initial studies was the p <dig> locus, which was modified to remove native p <dig> promoter sequences.

cre mediated removal of the selectable marker allows multiple rounds of recombination with the same bipartite selection
in order to engineer multiple insertions in the acmnpv genome, the bipartite selection cassette was flanked by modified loxp sites. these sites incorporated both the lox <dig> and lox <dig> mutations that limit cre mediated recombination to a single round  <cit> , and a mutation in the spacer reducing homology to the wildtype loxp site. cre mediated recombination would thus result in the removal of the bipartite selectable marker and inactivation of the lox recombination sites but leave behind the baculovirus expression cassette . to confirm this strategy could be used successfully to engineer multiple insertions in the bacmid dna, cre recombination was used to remove the bipartite marker from bacmid in which the renilla luciferase reporter had been inserted. bacmid dna was purified from four putative recombinants and recombination confirmed by pcr using primers flanking the selectable marker . all four pcr products were consistent with the size expected for successful cre recombination. this was further confirmed by sequencing across the modified loxp site of the recombinants . to confirm that cre mediated bacmid recombinants remained viable in insect cells, bacmid dna was transfected into insect cells and luciferase activity assayed after two passages as before. all recombinants had renilla luciferase activity that was equivalent to the parental baculovirus before cre recombination .

identification of genetic loci in the baculovirus genome suitable for high level expression of heterologous genes
to test whether the new selection could be used efficiently at different baculovirus genetic loci a second round of recombination was carried out using one of the bacmids already containing the renilla luciferase gene. a second reporter, firefly luciferase, under control of the polyhedrin promoter was inserted at a total of thirteen different genetic loci , in each case generating a dual expression baculovirus for renilla and firefly luciferase . additional changes were made at certain loci to specifically inactivate the expression of the endogenous viral gene . recombinant viruses were passaged twice in sf <dig> insect cells and on the third passage cells were harvested at  <dig> hours post infection, lysed and assayed for both firefly and renilla luciferase activities. renilla luciferase activity was used as a reference for virus replication and protein expression as all the recombinants had the same p <dig> promoter driven renilla luciferase cassette in the p <dig> locus. expression of firefly luciferase at each locus was compared to a virus carrying firefly luciferase gene at the polyhedrin locus. of the thirteen loci tested, nine had renilla luciferase activities which were at least  <dig> fold above background, and of these eight  had renilla luciferase activity which was equivalent to that of the parental renilla luciferase only control . thus there was no evidence of a general impairment in virus replication or gene expression for these viruses. in contrast, four insertions  resulted in virus infections where renilla luciferase activity was within  <dig> fold of the background and were exluded from further analysis.

renilla luciferase activity was used as a reference to normalise firefly luciferase activity and obtain a measure of relative expression of the firefly luciferase from each locus . seven loci  had firefly luciferase activity which was at least  <dig> fold higher than background and similar to polyhedrin locus expression of the gene . two viruses  had high levels of renilla luciferase but relatively poor firefly luciferase activity suggesting that although these viruses were capable of replication, expression of the polyhedrin promoter driven reporter at this locus was impaired.

there was no clear correlation between the position of a locus within the virus genome and its ability to allow successful high level expression of the foreign reporter gene . nor was there any correlation between the level of expression observed for the reporter and that documented for the native gene at the same locus  <cit> .

simultaneous co-expression of two and four genes to recover virus-like particles
to confirm that the system could successfully express and correctly assemble protein complexes, two well defined virus-like particle  systems were used as models. vlps were produced for influenza a virus by co-expressing the m <dig> and ha proteins of the sc35m strain of influenza  <cit> . m <dig> was first inserted at the egt locus and then, following removal of the bipartite cassette, the ha gene was inserted into the p <dig> locus . expression of both proteins was confirmed by sds-page and immunoblot analysis  using antibody specific for influenza a . furthermore, it was possible to purify influenza vlps from the culture medium of sf <dig> cells infected with the recombinant baculovirus. the surface of these vlps had the characteristic spike appearance of an enveloped virus  and it was possible to label these spike structures using immunogold labelling with anti-influenza  antibody.

the other vlp made was for the non-enveloped orbivirus, bluetongue virus. vlps for this virus require the coassembly of four proteins . expression of recombinant protein was confirmed by sds-page analysis  and vlps with the characteristic morphology of mature btv particles could be purified from insect cells infected with recombinant baculovirus .

coexpression of eight genes to recover the mouse cct complex
to extend our observations further, and to demonstrate the utility of the muli-locus expression system to the production of large mammalian protein complexes, the eight subunits of the mouse cct chaperonin complex  were each expressed from a different locus within the baculovirus genome . all eight subunits were expressed and accumulated in insect cells to detectable levels, although there was a variation in the steady-state levels of protein between subunits. expressed protein was detected with a polyclonal antibody against a conserved motif of the atp-binding site of all cct subunits . there was cross reaction between the antibody and some of the subunits of the endogenous insect cct complex, and it was impossible to confirm the presence of cct <dig>  to confirm mouse cct <dig> was expressed, a duplicate immunoblot was probed with a monospecific antibody to the cct <dig> protein . these data confirmed all eight cct subunits were expressed using the multi-locus expression approach.

the native cct chaperone complex consists of a hexadecamer arranged as two stacked rings of  <dig> subunits  <cit> . to confirm formation of a complex for the recombinant mouse cct subunits, we performed rate-zonal centrifugation in 10-40%  sucrose gradients. the characteristic protein profile for the cct complex was detected as a peak following centrifugation . the identity of these proteins as cct subunits was confirmed by immunoblotting . the averaged migration of this complex in the gradient over  <dig> experiments was consistent with a sedimentation coefficient of  <dig>  +/-  <dig> s and was similar to that reported for the native mouse cct complex <cit> . finally, fractions corresponding with the  <dig> s recombinant mouse cct complex were visualised by negative staining and electron microscopy . it was possible to visualise ring-like structures consistent with those reported with the mouse cct <cit> .

discussion
this report demonstrates that lambda red recombination can be used to efficiently engineer high level expression of recombinant protein and protein complexes from the acmnpv genome. using a new bipartite selection system up to  <dig> fold improvement  in recovery of recombinants was achieved. all putative recombinants recovered using the bipartite selection were subsequently confirmed to be correctly modified. this is a substantial improvement over the single antibiotic selection  <cit>  which in our hands produced a high level of false positive recombinants . furthermore, there was no requirement to use pcr generated linear dna for recombination, which avoids potential problems associated with mutations introduced by repeated pcr of coding regions. to our knowledge the bipartite selection in this report has not previously been applied to recombination in baculovirus, although there have been reports of the zeocin resistance gene alone being used for knock out of baculovirus genes by lambda red recombination <cit> .

by flanking the zeor-laczα selection with self inactivating loxp sites it was possible to re-use the selectable markers and carry out iterative selection at multiple loci within the baculovirus genome . this iterative process itself allows the potential for combining several different subunits into the same baculovirus genome in different combinations without having to generate a new multi-gene transfer vector for every combination of proteins that is to be expressed.

despite the extensive protein expression work that has been undertaken in the baculovirus system most expression has focussed on replacement of the polyhedrin or p <dig> genes. relatively little literature describes the use of alternative loci for the expression of recombinant protein  <cit> . this study identifies seven genetic loci , in addition to polyhedrin and p <dig>  suitable for high level expression of foreign genes.

for the loci that did not give good expression, four  also resulted in a reduced expression of a separate marker protein present in all recombinants. this suggests that these insertions resulted in impairment of functions essential for virus replication or gene expression. the low level expression of firefly luciferase expression in the chia and odv-e <dig> insertion viruses was unexpected for different reasons. other reports have recorded insertion of recombinant protein expression cassettes into the chia locus  <cit> . it is possible that the reduced level of firefly luciferase expression from this locus in our experiments was due to effects on genes flanking the insertion. for odv-e <dig>  recent reports based on deletion within the coding sequence of odv-e <dig> and the upstream flanking gene have suggested that this protein is essential for budded virus production and cell to cell movement  <cit> . in our experiments, where odv-e <dig> was inactivated by specific mutation of the start codon and by insertion of the firefly luciferase cassette, there was no evidence from renilla luciferase expression of impairment of the ability of this mutant virus to replicate or spread cell to cell. however, given the ~ <dig> log reduction in firefly luciferase levels compared to virus without this insertion, we cannot rule out the possibility that a small population of virus in which the mutation had reverted was complementing the virus expressing the reporter gene.

to confirm the utility of the system for the expression of recombinant protein complexes two-protein and four-protein virus like particles  were produced to influenza a and bluetongue virus, respectively. vlps for both these viruses are effective immunogens against the respective pathogen  <cit>  and thus represent potential biotechnological applications of the multi-locus expression approach. both vlps were formed normally and could be purified from the culture medium , or cells , of baculovirus infected cultures. to extend these observations further and to demonstrate the usefulness of the approach to low abundance mammalian protein complexes we expressed all eight subunits of the mouse cct complex. this complex is usually purified from testes or by large scale fermentation culture of yeast  <cit> . however a reliable source of large quantities of correctly folded recombinant mammalian cct complex was not previously available. it was possible to recover between  <dig> and  <dig> mg/l culture of  <dig> s cct complex. to our knowledge this is the first report of the successful expression of mammalian cct chaperone from a heterologous system, and offers for the first time the possibility of mutational analysis of this essential machinery involved in cytoskeletal protein folding and cell cycle control.

in addition to providing the opportunity for assembly of multiprotein complexes, the multilocus system also offers the opportunity to test and manipulate relative expression of each subunit of a complex independently, without any need for recloning into different transfer vectors, and for swapping subunits between complexes, also without need for recloning. thus, in terms of flexibility, it offers substantial improvement over the current approaches for baculovirus multi-protein complex expression.

CONCLUSIONS
 <dig>  use of bipartite selections can significantly improve selection of modified bacterial artificial chromosomes carrying baculovirus dna. furthermore this approach is sufficiently robust to allow routine modification of the virus genome.  <dig>  in addition to the commonly used p <dig> and polyhedrin loci, the ctx, egt, 39k, orf <dig>  gp <dig>  iap <dig> and odv-e <dig> loci in acmnpv are all suitable for the high level expression of heterologous genes.  <dig>  two protein, four protein and eight protein complexes including virus-like particles and cellular chaperone complexes can be produced using the new approach.

