BACKGROUND
the gut epithelium and its associated microorganisms provide an important barrier that protects animals from the external environment. this barrier serves both to prevent invasion by potential pathogens and limit the elicitation of host responses to the resident microbiota  <cit> . dysfunction of this barrier, which can occur as a result of alterations of the normal gut ecology, impairment of host immune defenses, or physical disruption of intestinal epithelia, may lead to pathological states  <cit> .

to breach the gut barrier, many enteric pathogens have evolved specific strategies such as production of toxins that physically disrupt cells of the gut epithelium  <cit> . b. thuringiensis kills insects through the production of such toxins, designated insecticidal crystal proteins. following ingestion of b. thuringiensis by susceptible larvae, these toxins initiate killing of insects through a multi-step process that includes the formation of pores and lysis of midgut epithelial cells  <cit> . despite a detailed understanding of the mechanisms of toxin binding and disruption of the midgut epithelium, we know less about the subsequent events that cause larval mortality. three mechanisms, which account for differences among host responses, have been suggested as the ultimate cause of larval death. the first, in which larvae die from toxin ingestion within hours or a day, is attributed to direct toxemia  <cit> . the second, in which prolonged feeding on b. thuringiensis leads to developmental arrest and eventual death is thought to occur by starvation  <cit> . the third, and most commonly cited mechanism is sepsis due to the growth of b. thuringiensis in the hemocoel following translocation of spores from the toxin-damaged gut into the hemolymph  <cit> . however, despite numerous reports of growth of b. thuringiensis in dead or moribund larvae  <cit> , there is little evidence of b. thuringiensis proliferation in insect hemolymph prior to death. in addition, the proposed mechanism of death by b. thuringiensis bacteremia is not supported by the ability of cell-free preparations of toxin  <cit> , direct injection of some activated toxins into the hemocoel  <cit> , or transgenic plant tissue producing the toxin  <cit>  to kill larvae without the b. thuringiensis bacterium itself.

previously, we demonstrated that b. thuringiensis toxin had substantially reduced ability to kill gypsy moth and three other species of lepidopteran larvae that had been treated with antibiotics, and that ingestion of an enteric-derived bacterium significantly increased lethality of subsequent ingestion of b. thuringiensis  <cit> . we observed that the enteric bacterium, enterobacter sp. nab <dig>  grew to high population densities in vitro in hemolymph extracted from live gypsy moth larvae, whereas b. thuringiensis was rapidly cleared, which is inconsistent with the model of b. thuringiensis bacteremia as a cause of larval death. however, these results did not distinguish between the possibilities that gut bacteria contribute to b. thuringiensis-induced lethality by bacteremia or by another mechanism.

there is increasing recognition that an important feature of gut microbiota of both invertebrates and vertebrates is their ability to shape and modulate the host immune response  <cit> . in certain circumstances this effect can become deleterious to the host. for instance, uncontrolled activation of the immune response by enteric bacteria leads to chronic infection and pathogenesis in both invertebrates and vertebrates  <cit> . interestingly, some recent studies have also linked activation of the immune response of lepidoptera to ingestion of non-lethal doses of b. thuringiensis. for example, ingestion of low doses of b. thuringiensis by galleria mellonella larvae increased both oxidative stress levels in the gut  <cit>  and the phagocytic activity of hemocytes  <cit> . in trichoplusia ni larvae, exposure to b. thuringiensis reduced both the numbers of hemocytes and components of the humoral immune response   <cit> . it remains unclear what effectors trigger this immune modulation, and the contribution of enteric bacteria to this response is not known. modulation of the host immune response could be an indirect mechanism by which gut microbiota alter susceptibility to b. thuringiensis.

as an initial step to distinguish between a direct or host-mediated role of gut microbiota in larval death following the ingestion of b. thuringiensis, we examined the possible association between the host immune response and larval susceptibility to b. thuringiensis.

RESULTS
effects of intra-hemocoelic injection of b. thuringiensis and enterobacter sp. nab <dig> on larval hemolymph
injections of greater than  <dig> cells of an over-night culture of either b. thuringiensis or enterobacter sp. nab <dig> into the hemocoel of gypsy moth larvae led to a pronounced cellular and humoral immune response . in hemolymph sampled from larvae  <dig> h after injection of enterobacter sp. nab <dig>  melanization of plasma and aggregation of hemocytes  <cit>  were evident . hemocyte aggregation was also observed in hemolymph samples from larvae injected with b. thuringiensis , though these aggregates appeared smaller than aggregates from larvae injected with enterobacter sp. nab <dig>  hemocyte aggregation was not observed in hemolymph sampled from control larvae .

effects of ingestion of b. thuringiensis on larval hemolymph and mortality
we examined hemocytes and hemolymph in larvae containing enteric bacteria following oral ingestion of b. thuringiensis cells and toxin . microscopic examination of larval hemolymph revealed that the number of hemocytes declined following ingestion of b. thuringiensis. defects in larval hemocytes were commonly observed within  <dig> h of ingestion of b. thuringiensis. this decrease in hemocyte abundance and appearance of defects occurred in advance of larval mortality. at  <dig> h post-ingestion of b. thuringiensis, larval mortality remained below 10%, even though 75% of samples contained fewer hemocytes and hemocytes with abnormalities . hemocytes from control larvae displayed no abnormalities and no larval mortality was observed . the hemolymph of uninfected larvae contained hemocytes, predominantly plasmatocytes and granulocytes, which displayed no abnormal characteristics. moreover, these plasmatocytes retained the ability to adhere to a glass surface and form pseudopodia . the plasma of control larvae remained free of debris or discoloration in samples taken over the course of the assay period, and no bacteria were observed over the course of the assay. in contrast, hemocytes from larvae fed b. thuringiensis were greatly reduced in number, lacked adhesive properties, and contained refractive inclusions and signs of membrane disruption . as the number of hemocytes decreased, the plasma darkened and granular material or debris accumulated in samples . the loss of nearly all hemocytes corresponded with the onset of larval death  and the appearance of b. thuringiensis cells in hemolymph samples .

a n =  <dig> for each treatment.

b rating scale:

+++: hemocytes entire, adhesive properties

++: some hemocytes, inclusions present

+: very few hemocytes, ruptured cells

-: no hemocytes

effects of bacterial components capable of eliciting immune responses on larval susceptibility to b. thuringiensis toxin
our observation that b. thuringiensis ingestion affected cellular immunity suggested the hypothesis that gut bacteria exert their effect on larval susceptibility to b. thuringiensis in part through stimulation of the host immune response. to determine whether bacterial cell components mediated b. thuringiensis-induced killing, we examined the effect of cell extracts known to trigger immune reactions in many invertebrate and vertebrate hosts, including lepidoptera,  <cit>  on gypsy moth susceptibility to b. thuringiensis. we examined the effect of commercial and purified lipopolysaccharide preparations and various peptidoglycan-derived compounds on larval mortality when co-administered with b. thuringiensis. as shown previously  <cit> , rearing larvae on antibiotics reduced their susceptibility to b. thuringiensis , and enterobacter sp. nab <dig> accelerated mortality of larvae fed b. thuringiensis plus antibiotics in assays using either b. thuringiensis cry1ac toxin  or viable b. thuringiensis cells and toxins  . feeding peptidoglycan from gram-negative bacteria, solubilized by pre-treatment with lysozyme, in combination with b. thuringiensis reduced time to death of antibiotic-reared larvae . regardless of the b. thuringiensis formulation, the lysozyme-treated peptidoglycan accelerated mortality of antibiotic-treated larvae, and the effect of the lysozyme-treated peptidoglycan was not significantly different from enterobacter sp. nab <dig> . restoration of killing by peptidoglycan was not affected by the addition of lipopolysaccharide to either b. thuringiensis formulation. there was no effect of either crude  or purified lipopolysaccharide or non-lysozyme treated-polymeric peptidoglycan on larval mortality with b. thuringiensis in antibiotic-treated larvae. ingestion of monomeric peptidoglycan  significantly accelerated mortality of larvae reared on antibiotics and treated with the live cell formulation of b. thuringiensis , but not with b. thuringiensis toxin alone .

two formulations of b. thuringiensis, dipel  <dig> iu  and mvpii  <dig> μg , were assayed. the significance  of the log-rank test comparing larval mortality of each experimental treatment group to bt alone or bt alone when reared with antibiotics is shown.

in the absence of antibiotics, larvae were highly susceptible to the live cell formulation of b. thuringiensis and the addition of bacterial compounds had no effect on larval survival rates . however, the addition of enterobacter sp. nab <dig> and peptidoglycan fragments derived from bacteria accelerated mortality caused by b. thuringiensis toxin alone . neither preparation of lipopolysaccharide nor peptidoglycan that had not been treated with lysozyme affected mortality induced by the cell-free formulation of b. thuringiensis toxin .

effect of eicosanoid inhibitors and antioxidants on larval mortality associated with ingestion of b. thuringiensis toxin
to further test the hypothesis that larval susceptibility to b. thuringiensis toxin is modified by the host immune response to components of enteric bacteria, we fed larvae compounds previously demonstrated to inhibit the humoral and cellular immune responses of insects. specifically, inhibitors of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, phenoloxidase, and eicosanoid biosynthesis were fed to larvae to assess their effect on larval susceptibility to b. thuringiensis toxin. five compounds, acetylsalicylic acid, indomethacin, glutathione, n-acetyl cysteine, and s-methyl-l-thiocitrulline, delayed mortality compared to larvae fed b. thuringiensis toxin alone. none of the compounds significantly affected final mortality and six had no effect on either the final mortality or survival time of larvae fed b. thuringiensis .

compound added to
 of
the value n refers to the total number of larvae tested per treatment. there were no effects by these compounds without b. thuringiensis. log-rank analysis was used to compare larval survival for each concentration of inhibitor, treatments with a p-value <  <dig>  were considered significantly different from bt toxin alone. mean mortality values followed by the same letter do not differ significantly from each other.

dose-response assays with acetylsalicylic acid, glutathione, piroxicam, and indomethacin demonstrated complex relationships between inhibitor concentration and larval survival . acetylsalicylic acid extended larval survival in the presence of b. thuringiensis toxin, but only at the high concentration ; the survival time of larvae treated with lower concentrations did not differ significantly from toxin alone. most of the concentrations of indomethacin and glutathione that we tested increased larval survival time following ingestion of a lethal dose of b. thuringiensis toxin . survival times of larvae treated with the highest concentrations of indomethacin and glutathione  did not differ significantly from those treated with toxin alone.

discussion
four lines of evidence indicate that the innate immune response is involved in b. thuringiensis-induced mortality of l. dispar. first, injections of b. thuringiensis and enterobacter sp. nab <dig> into the insect hemocoel were accompanied by melanization and hemocyte aggregation, both of which are indicators of an activated innate immune response. second, as demonstrated here and reported by ericsson et al.  <cit> , depletion of hemocytes, the key actors of the cellular immune response of insects, was observed following b. thuringiensis ingestion in the absence of bacteremia. third, fragments of peptidoglycan, an inducer of innate immunity, substituted for enterobacter in accelerating killing of antibiotic-treated larvae with b. thuringiensis. fourth, antioxidants and compounds that inhibit eicosanoid biosynthesis, and thereby suppress the innate immune response, delayed b. thuringiensis-induced mortality.

based on these results, we propose the hypothesis that b. thuringiensis incites an overblown innate immune response, in cooperation with other factors, which in turn contributes to host death. this immune induction either requires the normal gut microbiota or is directly suppressed by antibiotic treatment, and is restored to antibiotic-treated larvae by addition of bacteria or immunostimulatory cell fragments. this model is derived, in part, from the mechanism of mammalian sepsis in which gut-derived microbiota serve as both sources of infectious bacteria and modulators of the innate immune system  <cit> . germ-free mammals are less susceptible to sepsis, just as gypsy moth larvae lacking enteric bacteria are less susceptible to b. thuringiensis  <cit> . further support for our model can be derived from recent work demonstrating that ingestion of non-pathogenic bacteria can induce the immune response of lepidopteran larvae  <cit> . this suggests that the microbiota are capable of altering the immune status of larvae without crossing the gut epithelium and could thus influence the host response to pathogenic bacteria. additionally, ericsson et al.  <cit>  reported that reductions in the larval immune response following ingestion of a low dose of b. thuringiensis correlated with lower susceptibility to subsequent ingestion of b. thuringiensis. taken together, these data provide support for the hypothesis that the host innate immune response contributes to pathogenesis and killing by b. thuringiensis.

we cannot rule out other factors that might co-vary with innate immunity. many pharmaceutical inhibitors have non-specific effects on animals that may confound interpretation of the results  <cit> . while eicosanoids mediate various cellular reactions responsible for clearing bacterial infections from hemolymph circulation and are induced in lepidoptera in response to bacterial challenge  <cit> , they also have other physiological functions including ion transport and reproduction  <cit> . thus, it is possible that the compounds we used have a direct effect on the health of the insect gut or affect another cellular process that, in turn, influences larval susceptibility to b. thuringiensis. nevertheless, it is notable that we observed significantly delayed mortality with the antioxidant glutathione and in the presence of diverse compounds that suppress the synthesis of eicosanoids. the immune-suppressive compounds inhibit a variety of enzymes in eicosanoid biosynthesis, and all delay killing by b. thuringiensis, reducing the probability that the biological effects are due to a secondary activity of the pharmaceuticals. moreover, peptidoglycan fragments, which induce the innate immune response, caused more rapid mortality in insects that had been treated with antibiotics.

similarly, there is growing evidence that diverse classes of antibiotics, including the four used in this study, have immunomodulatory effects in addition to their antimicrobial activity  <cit> . while the immunomodulatory mechanisms of antibiotics are not fully understood, there is evidence that some directly reduce the host immune response, whereas others limit the release of immune-inducing bacterial components  <cit> . further experiments are needed to fully differentiate the extents to which the reduction in susceptibility to b. thuringiensis when larvae are reared on antibiotics is due to the absence of gut bacteria or an immuno-suppressive effect of antibiotics. in the latter case, the re-introduction of bacteria, such as enterobacter sp. nab <dig>  would likely stimulate the host immune response, and thus our current results do not permit us to separate these two possibilities. in either case, an immunomodulatory effect of antibiotics would further support a contribution of the host immune response in larval susceptibility to b. thuringiensis.

this is the third study, each with a different lepidopteran species, to report that ingestion of b. thuringiensis leads to alterations in hemocytes  <cit> . it remains unclear, however, whether the observed changes in hemocytes directly contribute to larval mortality or if they merely reflect changes in immune status. interestingly, ericsson et al.  <cit>  reported that t. ni larvae resistant to b. thuringiensis had significantly fewer hemocytes than did susceptible larvae. further experiments are needed to determine whether hemocytes are functionally required in susceptibility. such experiments should include a comparison of the effect of ingestion of b. thuringiensis on hemocytes between larvae with and without enteric bacteria. in addition, while our work shows that immunogenic peptidoglycan fragments can restore b. thuringiensis susceptibility in larvae lacking gut bacteria, we do not know whether co-ingestion of peptidoglycan and b. thuringiensis leads to changes in hemocytes, nor have we identified the final immune effectors of b. thuringiensis-induced killing. however, the delayed mortality of larvae fed b. thuringiensis in combination with some antioxidants and eicosanoid inhibitors suggests that production of reactive oxygen species could be involved. interestingly, hemocytes have been shown to be key regulators of the oxidative burst upon infection, particularly by promoting activation of the phenoloxidase cascade  <cit> , which might be caused by hemocyte rupture  <cit> .

the parallels between the progression of disease and mortality caused by b. thuringiensis with that in mammalian sepsis are noteworthy. disease and death associated with mammalian sepsis are believed to be caused by uncontrolled host production of local immune mediators leading to local and systemic inflammatory responses  <cit> . peptidoglycan induces the innate immune system of both invertebrates and vertebrates  <cit>  and contributes to both sepsis and b. thuringiensis-induced killing in gypsy moth larvae. eicosanoids and reactive oxygen and nitrogen species are critical in the innate immune response in mammals and treatments for sepsis often target these compounds  <cit> . in gypsy moth larvae, inhibitors of eicosanoid biosynthesis and antioxidants prevent or slow disease progress, suggesting a role of innate immunity.

there is increasing evidence that diseases of animals are frequently caused by multiple microbial species. these polymicrobial infections often include members of the indigenous microbiota and lead to complex interactions with the host immune system  <cit> . using drosophila as a model of cystic fibrosis, sibley et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that pathogenicity depends on synergy between pseudomonas aeruginosa and members of the oropharyngeal microbiota. even in the absence of infection changes in the gut immune response can lead to pathogenic states associated with an imbalance in composition of the gut microbiota  <cit> .

our results are consistent with the hypothesis that the effect of gut bacteria on host killing following ingestion of b. thuringiensis in antibiotic-treated larvae is mediated by the innate immune response. further experiments, including direct monitoring of the immune response of larvae, are needed to identify the specific defense responses induced following ingestion of b. thuringiensis and the impact of antibiotic treatment and enteric bacteria on these events.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that larvae fed b. thuringiensis die prior to observable growth of bacteria in the hemolymph. an immuno-stimulatory compound, fragments of gram-negative peptidoglycan, confers b. thuringiensis toxin-induced killing in the absence of indigenous enteric bacteria. conversely, inhibitors of the innate immune response delay mortality of larvae following ingestion of b. thuringiensis toxin. we propose the hypothesis that the resident gut bacteria in gypsy moth larvae induce an innate immune response that contributes to b. thuringiensis toxin-induced killing, suggesting a parallel with mammalian sepsis in which gut bacteria contribute to an overblown innate immune response that is ultimately lethal to the host.

