BACKGROUND
articular cartilage serves as a bearing surface for joints and is routinely exposed to mechanical loading. the mechanical properties of the tissue are due to its extracellular matrix particular composition. on the one hand, the load-bearing function is based on the high osmotic pressure created by the negatively charged glycosaminoglycans. these polyanions attract an excess of sodium ions into the tissue, resulting in an influx of water. on the other hand, the fibrillar collagen network, with type ii collagen representing the major protein of cartilage, provides the tissue with its tensile strength. thus, cartilage is a highly specialized tissue with relatively few cells, the chondrocytes, embedded in it. in this context, mechanical forces are thought to play an important role in regulating chondrocyte physiology. several studies using cartilage explants or chondrocytes seeded in three-dimensional  scaffolds have shown that mechanical compressive loading affects the chondrocyte metabolic activity  <cit> . however little is currently known regarding the biochemical pathways involved in mechanotransduction signalling in cartilage.

numerous previous studies have examined the phenotypic responsiveness of chondrocytes to mechanical stress using the well-characterized experimental system consisting of isolated chondrocytes embedded within agarose hydrogels  <cit> . the ability of this 3d model system to maintain or re-establish the differentiation state of chondrocytes over extended culture periods has been extensively studied  <cit> . also, of the 3d matrices, hydrogels may prove most suitable for analysis of mechanical response as they are homogeneous from the outset and fully surround cells embedded within. additionally, the cell-agarose model could be used to examine the interactions of growth factors, such as bone morphogenetic proteins, and mechanical stimuli on chondrogenic activity. furthermore, it has been suggested that mechanical conditioning may be useful in cartilage-engineering context to stimulate in vitro biosynthesis by chondrocytes within 3d scaffolds prior to implantation. considering that agarose or agarose/alginate hydrogels are clinically potential scaffolds for autologous chondrocyte implantation  <cit> , the chondrocyte/agarose construct under compression is a model that could also provide insight into mechanotransduction within cartilage-engineered constructs.

since the most recent studies indicate that the molecular mechanisms by which chondrocytes sense and respond to mechanical stimuli lead to changes at the levels of transcription, translation, post-translational modification, and matrix synthesis or degradation, there is a need to develop protocols to extract from agarose gels high quality rna and proteins. we provide here general protocols for preparing and characterizing constructs of murine chondrocytes and agarose, and analyzing the influence of cell compression on the steady-state level of mrna, gene transcription using reporter promoter construct, and signalling molecules phosphorylation state. the mouse model is of particular interest because of the availability of a large choice of bio-molecular tools suitable to study it, as well as genetically modified mice.

RESULTS
preparation of chondrocyte/agarose constructs
embryonic mouse chondrocytes were isolated from the ventral parts of the rib cages of  <dig>  dpc mice, as described  <cit> . immediately after isolation, cells were embedded in agarose hydrogels with a cell density of  <dig> ×  <dig> cells/ml of agarose gel. the final agarose concentration of chondrocyte/agarose constructs was 2%. after gelling, the cell/agarose constructs were punched into cylindrical gels to suit the  <dig> mm diameter foam ring of biopress™ culture plates . cells were maintained in culture for one week before compression. since the presence of serum may hamper subsequent protein analysis, a progressive deprivation of serum was performed as detailed in table  <dig>  besides, ascorbic acid was progressively added during this first week of culture to allow extracellular matrix deposition . in these conditions, chondrocytes maintained their round morphology over one week as shown in figure 1a. signs of cell division were also observed, attesting the healthy behaviour of the cells in this culture system . moreover, pericellular matrix deposition was observed by immunostaining with an anti-type ii collagen antibody after  <dig> days of culture . therefore, chondrocytes embedded in agarose hydrogel were surrounded by a newly synthesized extracellular matrix, prior to compression experiments. this observation indicates that this model system is suitable to study the role of matrix molecules and trans-membrane receptors in cellular responsiveness to mechanical stress. regarding the potential involvement of cell deformation in mechanotransduction it should be added that elaboration of the pericellular matrix should be timely controlled and adapted to each cell type, agarose concentration and compression system that are used. for instance, previous studies have shown that elaboration of the pericellular matrix around bovine articular chondrocytes compressed within agarose gels protects the cells from morphological deformation  <cit> .

timetable of progressive substitution of its for serum in the culture medium of the chondrocyte/agarose constructs, over the 6-day culture period preceding compression. the concentrations of ascorbic acid and hepes were progressively increased to allow recovery of the cells after their extraction.

choice of compression system
the mechanical stress that is applied on articular cartilage comprises a complex combination of strain, shear stress and compressive forces, the latter being more prevalent. regarding investigation of chondrocyte mechanotransduction with the use of cell-scaffolds model systems, both static and dynamic compressions have been reported to influence chondrocyte differentiation or physiology. it should be kept in mind that the method of application, as well as the duration, frequency, and duty cycle of loading could modify biosynthetic response. in the method presented here, chondrocyte/agarose constructs were placed into individual wells of biopress™ compression plates  and we applied intermittent compression on these constructs by using the fx-4000c™ flexercell® compression plus™ system previously described  <cit>  . the control samples were kept in unloaded conditions. mechanical strain consisted of cyclical compression with pulses of  <dig> kpa  superimposed on  <dig> kpa static offset pressure for  <dig> min . this strain regimen was chosen here because it preserves agarose gel integrity needed to achieve correct transmission of the mechanical stress to the isolated cells embedded in it. nevertheless, other types of compression devices can be used to study the effect of mechanical loading of chondrocytes embedded in agarose gels. with a more general view, the loading regimen should be adapted to agarose concentration.

protein extraction and analysis: mechanical loading triggers mapk activation
at the different time points studied the chondrocyte/agarose constructs were frozen in liquid nitrogen and were then freeze-dried to concentrate proteins. laemmli extraction buffer was added to freeze-dried gels and the samples were immediately boiled. to clear proteins off agarose, lysates were allowed to gel at room temperature, then transferred on paper filter to mini-spin columns and centrifuged. the exudates obtained were analyzed by western blotting. by using such a protocol, we were able to detect transient activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases  in response to dynamic compression. for instance, transient phosphorylation of erk1/ <dig> and p <dig> were detected after dynamic loading . this result is in accordance with previous studies using cartilage explants and showing that static or dynamic compression can induce the phosphorylation of erk1/ <dig> and p <dig>  <cit> .

rna extraction and gene expression analysis: mechanical loading stimulates cfos and cjun expression
total rnas from cell/agarose constructs were extracted using the rneasy-mini kit . to facilitate agarose dissolution, qg buffer  was added to the classical rlt lysis buffer, and agarose was diluted in large volumes, as described in "methods". according to the manufacturer's protocol, a dnase treatment was included to remove any contaminating genomic dna. after assessment of the quality of rna by capillary electrophoresis , steady-state levels of mrna expression was measured by real time pcr. we observed an up-regulation of cfos and cjun mrna levels as an immediate response to compression . interestingly, it has already been shown that gene expression levels of cfos and cjun increase within  <dig> h of a variety of intact cartilage loading regimen  <cit> . it has also been shown that the binding of activating protein- <dig>  the heterodimer of cfos and cjun, increases in response to dynamic compression of a tissue engineered construct  <cit> . thus, the up-regulation of cfos and cjun mrnas observed here in the chondrocyte/agarose constructs that have been submitted to compression is in agreement with the mechanosensitive character of these two genes.

analysis of human col2a <dig> gene promoter activity in response to compression
to our knowledge, only two studies have attempted to monitor cartilaginous extracellular matrix gene transcription by chondrocytes in 3d culture in response to compression  <cit> . to explore further the biological response of embryonic mouse chondrocytes to the dynamic compression at the transcriptional level, we developed here an approach for monitoring changes in gene transcription in agarose culture by using reporter promoter constructs.

specifically, we used chimeric plasmid "p3"  to monitor promoter activity of the human col2a <dig> gene, which codes for type ii procollagen  <cit> . "pgl2c" is a plasmid control carrying sv <dig> promoter instead of a fragment of col2a <dig> promoter. these two plasmids are luciferase reporter vectors. we also used a plasmid encoding β-galactosidase under the control of rous sarcoma virus  promoter to monitor transfection efficiency.

after dissection, rib chondrocytes were first expanded on plastic during one week. this step of cell amplification was needed because nucleofection kills a high proportion of cells , particularly freshly isolated chondrocytes. the cells were then trypsinized and nucleofected with the plasmids of interest. the transfected chondrocytes were embedded in agarose gels as described above and the cell/agarose constructs were placed in an incubator at 37°c in the presence of 5% co <dig> overnight. in this case we did not allow the cells to build a pericellular matrix during a long pre-culture period in agarose since col2a <dig> promoter activity is reduced after  <dig> h following transfection. the next day, the constructs were submitted to intermittent compression of  <dig> kpa using a sinusoid waveform at  <dig>  hz for  <dig> min. in the case presented here, the analysis of the activity of the col2a <dig> gene promoter was performed immediately at the end of the compression regimen . a significant  decrease in col2a <dig> promoter activity in response to dynamic loading was observed in comparison with the control constructs that remained uncompressed . in the same vein, another study using bovine chondrocytes embedded in agarose gel has shown that dynamic loading decreases type ii collagen promoter activity when measured  <dig> h after the end of the compression regimen  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study integrates protocols that allow analysis of the effects of compression on mouse chondrocytes embedded in agarose gels at the cellular, protein, and gene levels. figure  <dig> summarizes the loading protocols we used for pcr, western-blotting and gene promoter activity analyses but other types of loading regimen could be used for such analyses. the techniques presented here have been optimized so that the studies can be performed with chondrocytes isolated from a limited number of mouse embryos or new-borns and this point is important in regard of genetically modified mice. besides, it is possible to apply these protocols to other types of chondrocytes, including human chondrocytes.

