BACKGROUND
assigning function to new genes and understanding the potential unknown biological roles of annotated genes are among the main goals in current biology  <cit> . microarray technology allows thousands of transcripts to be measured simultaneously on a single slide <cit> . genes coding the same function are likely regulated in the manner of coordination. predictive classification on the base of gene expression profiles appeared recently as an attractive strategy for identifying the biological functions of genes  <cit> . while the major part of dna microarray datasets were not purposely generated for this objective, they can be useful in generating hypotheses about the functional involvement of genes, especially for those with significant expression patterns across the experimental conditions or over a time span.

gene ontology  is a well-known database and a standard terminology for describing functions of gene and gene products across species  <cit> . it provides a valuable resource of knowledge for model training and validation in generating the hypotheses about the functional involvement of unknown genes. in the database, each annotated gene is associated with one or multiple terms of biological processes, molecular functions, and/or cellular components. it is very useful to classify genes based on go terms for extracting useful information from high throughput gene expression analysis. recently, a rule-based supervised learning method for the prediction of go biological processes from temporal gene expression data was developed and validated with a data set describing the transcript levels of genes during the first  <dig> h of the serum response in serum-starved human fibroblasts  <cit> .

in this paper, we used temporal and spatial transcriptional profiles to predict go biological processes in drosophila melanogaster  <cit> . the gene expression datasets were generated from seven tissues representing nervous, muscular, digestive, renal, reproductive, and storage systems, and measured at five age points. we proposed the concept of term-tissue specific models indicating the fact that the major part of the optimized prediction models was trained from individual tissue data.

RESULTS
predictable biological processes
for each go biological process  containing at least  <dig> annotated genes , eight classification models were trained using support vector machines  with the seven datasets of the individual tissues or the combined dataset. ten-fold cross validation was implemented to evaluate the prediction. following, one-tail fisher's exact test was conducted on each cross validation and multiple testing was addressed using bh fdr procedure  <cit> . the results showed that, of the  <dig> pursued go biological processes, fifteen terms each had at least one model with fdr-adjusted p-value  < <dig>  and six had the values between  <dig>  and  <dig> . furthermore, all these models had prediction sensitivity  over 30% and specificity  over 80%. the enrichment of functional connections was quite apparent among these  <dig> terms. for clarity and conveniences, they were grouped by the functional connections  and called as "predictable terms", hereafter. the first group included electronic transport  and its  <dig> children terms on mitochondrial electron transport . the second group consisted of lipid metabolic process  and one of its major children terms, fatty acid acyl-coa metabolic process . the third group contained three transport terms, namely extracellular transport , carbohydrates transport , and lipid transport . furthermore, the broad term carbohydrate metabolic process  and one of its direct children terms, tricarboxylic acid cycle , had low adjusted p-values. other main predictable terms included chitin metabolic process , mitosis , and transcription . among the numerous terms related to cellular protein metabolism, only two highly specific terms, namely, ubiquitin-deoendent protein catabolic process  and protein deubiquitination , were among the list.

a the tissues  generating the data used for model training and validation where mt and dtm represent malpighian tubule, and dorsal thoracic muscle, respectively, and cm represents combined data. b sn and sp represent sensitivity and specificity, respectively. c fdr-adjusted p-value.

genes with different functions can share the similar expression pattern across the aging process, especially when the time points of measurement are relatively sparse such as in the case of our data. as the results, a meaningful prediction needs a high proportion of true positives among the predicted positives. therefore, in selecting predictable go terms, we set a relatively higher limit for sp, but this was on the cost of decreasing the criterion for sn. the most terms listed in table  <dig> have sn at the levels from 30–75%. another reason for the lower sn was that, even for these predictable biological processes, only partial member genes were regulated in the manner of coordination . one exception was go:  <dig>  of which all the member genes had the similar expression pattern in testis  and, consequently, the sn was 100%.

term-tissue specific models
the prediction of gene function is based on the common pattern shared by the member genes in a specific biological process. it is well known that the regulation of gene expression varies extensively among tissues  <cit> . in this study, we found that the ageing-related co-regulation patterns of genes involved in a biological process may be tissue-specific. that is, the coordination models for the same biological process may be spatially inconsistent. as indicated in table  <dig>  the data sources generating the top prediction models varied with the different go biological processes. this means that, for predicting the potential involvement of an uncharacterized gene in a specific biological process, we need to use the data sourced from an appropriate tissue, although it is possible that the combined dataset will lead to better classification such as in the cases of the terms on mitochondrial electron transport . for example, acyl-coa metabolic process had its model from gut representing digestive system, and protein deubiquitination had its model from testis representing reproductive system. the results for these two go terms were listed in table  <dig>  the first two processes are children terms under lipid metabolic processes. their two top favorite models could be trained from the data of fat tissue and gut, or from the data of gut and fat tissue, respectively. the difference was that the data from brain and muscle could generate prediction models for fatty acid metabolic but not for the parent term, lipid metabolic process. the third, protein deubiquitination, is a highly-specific go term under cellular protein metabolic process. for this term, models from muscle and testis had the same sn but different sps.

a model, sn and sp are sensitivity and specificity, respectively.

term-tissue specific models were also characterized by the fact that, even the membership of genes in a go term may be individually predicted from the datasets of two or more tissues, the expression profiling of these genes varied with the tissues, in general . for example, the function of genes in go:  <dig> could be predicted both from the expression in brain and testis, but the temporal patterns over ages were largely different. that is, the genes involved in the biological process were seemly regulated with different coordination models in different tissues. at present, we do not know if these different tissue-specified coordination models could be complementary in increasing the prediction accuracy. the current study showed that the simple combination of the data from the  <dig> tissues had limited advantages. our further work will be focused on developing more effective algorithm on data integration.

hidden gene expression pattern of aging
the microarray experiments generating the data analyzed in this study adopted a reference design with the reference samples made from the flies of  <dig> days old. certainly, with the measures between  <dig> and  <dig> days, the potential transcriptional patterns of aging formed during 3– <dig> days could not be detected by significant tests using a linear models  <cit>  or non-parameter methods  <cit>  if the inference about the intercept  was ignored. however, these hidden patterns may represent a valuable information source for the functional prediction of new genes. as shown in figure  <dig>  the profiles of the member genes of many predictable go terms were distinguished from others with the deviation off the zero line rather than the patterns across the time span of 15– <dig> days. for example, peroxisome organization and biogenesis  was characterized with a nearly flat expression profile approximately at the levels of  <dig> .

in order to show the importance of the hidden patterns formed during 3– <dig> days in establishing prediction models, we conducted a statistical analysis of all  <dig> genes with a linear model containing age and tissue as the fixed factors on the measures between  <dig> and  <dig> days. listed in table  <dig> are the p-values of the fixed effects and the interaction for the member genes of two predictable biological processes. go:  <dig> had all its six genes correctly predicted in the cross validation  with the classification models trained from the data of testis or the combined dataset, but only two genes had significant age effect at p <  <dig>  and no age-tissue interaction was found for the  <dig> genes. similarly, go:  <dig> had  <dig> of the  <dig> member genes predicted correctly with a model trained with the data of testis but neither age effect nor age-tissue interaction were significant  for these genes. this demonstrated that the overall gene expression levels during 15– <dig> days, in other words, the hidden patterns during 3– <dig> days, played a critical role in the model training and validation for these go terms.

a listed in 3–5th columns are the p-values.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
genome sequencing has led to the discovery of tens of thousands of potential new genes. determining their functions seems far from a trivial task. one crucial constraint is the difficult in generating useful hypotheses about protein function  <cit> . temporal microarray gene expression data is a valuable source for generating hypotheses about protein function. in this study, we predicted the go biological processes based on multiple-tissues transcriptional profiles of aging in flies. compared with lagreid et al   <cit> , our work included more go terms, especially those highly specific biological processes which were not represented in the literature. more important, the prediction was based on the transcriptional profiles of aging rather than of the response to an artificial treatment, thus can provide insight into the genetic base of aging. in addition to  <dig> term-tissue specific models that had middle to high accuracy and will be helpful in detecting the genes involved in the corresponding biological processed, another three results from this study may be important.

firstly, we proposed the concept of term-tissue specific prediction models. that is, given a biological process, the favorite prediction models may be trained on the base of the gene expression data sourced from a special tissue although it is possible that the combined data will lead to better classification. a little extension of the concept is "term-condition specific model." based on the verification, this extension would be instructional for developing special dna microarray experiments with the prediction of gene function as the main objective. the reason is that, in one condition or natural process of aging, only a small part of expressed genes have significant patterns, thus the number of predictable biological processes are very limited as shown in lagreid et al  and the current work. but the integration of data generated in multiple conditions will represent a richer information source.

the second finding was that the memberships of the genes involved in all the three children biological processes  on mitochondrial electron transport can be predicted from the transcriptional profiles of aging. this is interesting because the genes of mitochondria play a critical role in the longevity of c. elegans and d. melanogaster  <cit> . another reason is that the genes involved in these biological processed also are members of some go cellular components and go molecular function related with mitochondria. for examples, the six genes in go:  <dig> also are in go terms mitochondrial respiratory chain complex iii  and ubiquinol-cytocgrrome-c reductase activity .

the third finding was the hidden gene expression pattern of aging, which sourced from the design of the microarray experiments generating the analyzed data and represented a valuable information source for the functional prediction of new genes. it may be a pitfall in significant test and should be given severe attention.

although genes that constitute a go term are biologically related, their corresponding temporal expression profiles can be very different including, for instance, inverse co-regulation or co-regulation with a time lag or a combination of both. in this context, lagreid et al's  rule-based methods should be more effective than the currently used svm method. but the former method does not fit our datasets because the small number of time points. on the other hand, our future effort will be focused on developing a hybridized algorithm based on unsupervised clustering algorithms and svm to address the problems from inverse co-regulation or co-regulation with a time lag and integrate the data sourced from multiple tissues.

as described in the last section of result part, a go term may be predicted using the transcriptional profiles even when the time effect was not significant for the member genes. but this was not the only case fitting all go terms. for some predictable terms, the time effects were highly significant. time series data is necessary for go predictions, even for the terms in table  <dig>  the prediction power mainly sourced from the difference between the individual term and the others. suppose the genes in term a do not have significant time effects and the average expression level across the time frame is x. again, suppose the genes of other terms with the average expression levels close to  x have significant time effects. in this case, term a will have a different pattern from others and, therefore, can be predictable.

it is worthy to be noted that although the major part of the pursued go biological processes had very low sensitivity or/and specificity in this paper, it does not means they can not be predicted. it is possible that some of them can be predicted by using the gene expression data of other tissues beyond those used in this study. furthermore, we can expect to have better results if there were more time points or more replicates in the data. on the other hand, some downstream go terms had few genes in our list so that we could not get significant prediction models for them even they may be predictable in fact. this means that more term-tissue specific models are possible if a better data set containing more annotated genes will be available.

