BACKGROUND
in order to better understand different aspects of metabolism it is important to study the underlying transcriptional profile. a key factor to assemble such profiles is the ability to obtain good gene expression data. for that purpose, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction   <cit>  became the method of choice more than a decade ago  <cit> .

rt-pcr allows exponential amplification of even a very low copy number mrna. because of its high sensitivity, the process is very vulnerable to dna contamination.

unfortunately, no rna extraction method can guarantee the absolute absence of dna in any given sample, ultimately leading to amplification, during pcr, of both cdna and contaminating genomic dna  <cit> .

the effects of dna contamination can be overcome using techniques like oligo d selection, intron spanning primer design, dnase i treatment or restriction endonuclease digestion  <cit> . however, these procedures can be time consuming, expensive and contribute to rna degradation. moreover, in the particular case of prokaryotes, oligo d selection and intron spanning primer design are not applicable solutions.

one proposed strategy leading to the specific amplification of cdna involves the use of anchors/tags  <cit> . as illustrated in figure  <dig>  during reverse transcription of mrna, a unique tag positioned at the 5'end of the gene specific primer is included in the cdna. this tag will later be used as primer targeting the second cdna strand. application of this strategy, like in the cases of rs-pcr  <cit>  and  rt-pcr  <cit> , results in rna-specific amplification without loss of sensitivity.

due to the constant growth in available genomic data, tags that were before considered adequate, or are even part of commercially available kits, produce significant alignments for many microorganisms when blasted . tagenerator  <cit>  was our first effort to give the molecular biologist the possibility to associate to the potential of the above described methods with the use of genome-absent tags. the tool proved useful, but the software requirements  and the long runtime for bigger genomes made it somewhat unpractical for some users. in order to improve the ease of use we decided to create webtag – a web based tool that, while having the same goal as tagenerator, would be based on improved algorithms for tag/anchor generation, much faster runtime and the possibility to handle batch runs.

implementation
basic components of the webtag tool
the web tool consists of two components: 1) a mysql relational database and 2) a web interface implemented in php, running on an apache web server and using perl scripts for batch processing. prior to building the database, perl scripts were also used in the generation of tag sequences, genome adequacy evaluation   <cit> , melting temperature calculation and likelihood of secondary structure formation  <cit> .

generation of genome adequate tags
since specific, high yield, pcr can only be achieved using carefully designed primers, the following tag construction parameters were considered and implemented: tag length, melting temperature, gc content, absence of repeats and absence of secondary structures.

the tags in the webtag relational database were constructed as shown in figure  <dig>  initially, all combinations of  <dig> bases long sequences containing the  <dig> bases a, t, c and g were filtered in order to select adequate "3'end regions". briefly, this region should contain: a) a terminal g or c , b) between  <dig> and  <dig> g's or c's  and c) never more than  <dig> g's or c's in a row . the generation proceeded by adding more bases to selected 3'regions. during the construction of the "central region" di-nucleotide repeats and long runs of a single base were avoided. finally, the "5'end region" was added. just like for the "3'end region" the length is  <dig> bases, but the selection parameters were more relaxed .

after full assembly, all sequences were analyzed for gc content , correct melting temperature   <cit>  and secondary structure formation   <cit> . this process resulted in the generation of more than half a million unique tags.

all tags are then tested for genome adequacy, against each prokaryotic genomic sequence found at the ncbi ftp server  <cit> . for this purpose blast settings are defined as length  <dig> and e value  <dig>  with such settings, even statistically poor hits resulted in tag rejection.

finally, suitable tags were then integrated in the relational database.

using webtag
in the web interface , a specific genome must be selected and a sense primer entered. optionally, a gene specific primer may also be specified. using the information supplied, the web interface program first calculates the melting temperature of the sense primer and then queries the database. tags for the selected genome, having adequate melting temperatures, are extracted from the database. this output is then filtered so that the selected tag is guaranteed not to form secondary structures with either the sense primer or the gene specific primer, if one was specified.

if needed, it is possible to submit batch jobs to webtag. when using this feature a group of sense primers must be supplied by the user . three types of batch jobs can be run, depending on the user's needs:

type  <dig> – returns one tag for each submitted sense primer or a pair consisting of sense primer and reverse transcription gene specific primer.

type  <dig> – after returning one tag for a sense primer , webtag checks whether the tag may be compatible with other submitted queries. in this way, the number of needed tags is reduced.

type  <dig> – only one tag will be returned, compatible with a list of sense primers submitted by the user . the average melting temperature is calculated and used to select a set of compatible tags. these tags are then checked for secondary structure formation against all sense primers, and the first tag to have all dimerization free energies above - <dig> kcal/mol is output as a suitable tag.

RESULTS
molecular biology methods
rna extractions from nostoc pcc <dig> were carried-out using tri reagent , based on protocol given by the supplier. all rt-pcr reactions were performed in a two-step fashion using the revertaid first strand cdna synthesis kit  and 2× pcr master mix , according to manufacturer's instructions. between these two steps cdna was cleaned using msb spin pcrapace kit , following manufacturers' protocol.

validation of new tag generation algorithm
the new method to generate tags resulted in higher sequence variation, since it does not limit the 3' and 5' ends to a pre-defined list  <cit> . as a consequence, more than half a million unique sequences were found possessing good priming.

in order to test the new tag generation algorithm,  <dig> bases long tags were generated. this longer tag size was used to underline the possibility of performing pcr without generating products when using gdna as template. as seen in figure  <dig>  using tags alongside sense primers with gdna did not result in the synthesis of any products, while products were obtained when cdna was the reaction template .

webtag database content and output
at the moment, the database holds tags suitable for  <dig> prokaryotic strains, downloaded from the ncbi ftp server  <cit> . the database will be frequently revised to include additions to ncbi.

as shown in figure  <dig>  the final results are returned in a simple format that facilitates primer ordering and experimental procedure planning.

CONCLUSIONS
webtag is a unique web service allowing the user to rapidly obtain tags that are: 1) suitable for a specific organism, and 2) compatible with other oligonucleotides to be used in the experimental procedures.

availability and requirements
project name: webtag

project web page: 

operating system: platform independent

other requirements: web browser and internet connection

license: free for academic use

restrictions to use by non-academics: license needed

list of abbreviations used
blast – basic local alignment search tool.

cdna – complementary deoxyribonucleic acid.

dna – deoxyribonucleic acid.

gdna – genomic deoxyribonucleic acid.

mrna – messenger ribonucleic acid.

ncbi – national center for biotechnology information.

pcr – polymerase chain reaction.

rna – ribonucleic acid.

rt-pcr – reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.

competing interests
the author declares that there are no competing interests.

authors' contributions
flp proposed the building of webtag. he actively participated in building perl scripts for: generation of tag sequences, evaluation of tag quality as a primer and genome adequacy filtering. he also participated in manuscript writing and revising. read and approved the final manuscript.

hs had the main role in the design of webtag web service, including all php coding and mysql database building and integration. he actively participated in manuscript writing and revising. read and approved the final manuscript.

pl was the main person responsible for the establishing of strategies to test and prove the usefulness of webtag. he actively participated in: the planning of molecular experiments, result analysis, and manuscript revising. all the funding, critical evaluation and approval for this project were his exclusive responsibility. read and approved the final manuscript.

