BACKGROUND
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction  has become an invaluable tool for monitoring gene expression changes, combining the sensitivity of the pcr technique with the ability to quantify transcriptional changes with high accuracy  <cit> . several different methods exist in respect to hardware  or fluorescence chemistry and design. using the dna intercalating dye sybr green i is one of most widely applied systems, as the fluorescence readout can be obtained from any pcr amplicon irrespective of its sequence. this way qpcr experiments can be conducted fast and with many different sequences, as is the case in screening and evaluating differential gene expression obtained from microarray experiments  <cit> .

when investigating differential gene expression, qpcr data of two or more different conditions  are compared by using the fluorescence data acquired by the hardware. one approach is the comparison of the threshold cycles, when the fluorescence of the qpcr reaction rises significantly above the background level, commonly done by the ΔΔct methods. originally developed with the tenet that the pcr efficiency is  <dig>  <cit> , this was soon extended by the long known observation that pcr efficiency can have smaller values and be very different between two different amplicons, as is the case when normalizing a gene of interest against a 'housekeeping' gene. this necessitates the calculation of the efficiency in order to derive a realistic estimate of the expression changes. various algorithms have been developed such as estimation from the slope of a calibration curve  <cit>  or from a linear fit of the logarithmized data within the exponential region either defined by the 'midpoint'  <cit>  or the region with highest linearity  <cit> .

in contrast to the above described linear quantitation methods, sigmoidal models have been developed for non-linear fitting of the pcr data, most commonly the boltzmann or logistic sigmoidal function  <cit> . the advantage of non-linear fitting is the paradigm that pcr efficiency is not a constant but a variable that changes during pcr, having a maximum in the exponential phase of the reaction and declining in later cycles of the reaction when reagents get depleted, thus leading to the sigmoidal curvature. non-linear fitting can then be used to calculate threshold fluorescence, cycle-dependent efficiency  and estimation of the starting template amount . the described sigmoidal qpcr models are four-parameter models that define by their fitted function the parameters ground asymptote, slope, point of inflection and maximum asymptote. the fitted parameters of logistic curves describe the qpcr data usually well and supersede other models like gompertz and chapman  <cit> .

although pcr data can be fitted with the four-parameter approach, this model implies symmetry of the lower and upper part of the curve, which results in the same curvature on either side of the inflection point. we found that this poses some essential problems that needed to be solved. firstly, it is not evident that qpcr curves can be assumed to be symmetric. that this is indeed not the fact will be shown in this work. secondly, and most important for the quantification aspect, is that fitting four-parameter models with symmetry as an inherent constraint onto asymmetric data will consequently lead to suboptimal fits and estimation of parameters  <cit> .

we investigated the effect of applying logistic and also log-logistic five-parameter models to qpcr data, in which the fifth parameter takes a possible asymmetrical structure of the data into account. five-parameter models have only just recently found their way into the dose-response analysis of immunological data  <cit> .

furthermore, we tested the significance of this approach with various statistical measures by comparing to fits of models with less parameters. the here described algorithms are implemented  in the qpcr library  <cit>  extension for the open source statistical programming environment r  <cit> .

RESULTS
the f-parameter in different pcr regimes
asymmetry of the lower and upper part of the sigmoidal curve  is the main feature that discriminates the five-parameter models from the four-parameter models. the asymmetry is governed by the fifth parameter which we will denote f in the sequel. the f-parameter has a strong effect on the general fit which is exemplified by altering the f-parameter of a perfect five-parameter sigmoidal fit while keeping all other parameters constant . changing the f-parameter also influences to a high degree the parameters b  and e, which is a consequence of all parameters being in the denominator of the five-parameter function . as a consequence of this, the non-linear fitting procedure does not only add a fifth parameter to the four-parameter model, but also adjusts all other parameters to minimize the sum of squared residuals, such that the two models are not directly comparable from the resulting parameter values; for example the parameter e is no longer the inflection point of the sigmoidal curve when f ≠  <dig> 

the estimation of the f-parameter in two different classical qpcr scenarios was investigated. the first experiment , obtained from  <dig> qpcr runs with slightly differing starting template amounts, resulted in raw fluorescence data with similar curvature but different threshold cycles . although these varied within a window of  <dig> cycles , the f-parameter stayed constant at a value of  <dig>  ±  <dig> %. a different dataset  from two qpcr runs with slightly differing amounts of taq polymerase, featuring exactly the same threshold cycles  but different curvature, showed very different f-parameters. an effect of the f-parameter on the e-parameter  is also evident. the values for e do not define the point of inflection as is the case in four-parameter models. thus, one must be cautious to compare the two models in respect to the obtained parameters.

model selection for the best fit and statistical analysis
in order to compare the five-parameter models with their according four- or three-parameter versions, a proper statistical measure for the goodness-of-fit of two different models has to be established. the most common method for comparing models that are nested is the f-test based on the residual variance from the fit  <cit> , which is also the method we applied in our context and is the basis of analysis within the qpcr package. this gives rise to comparison of models within a nested regime, i.e. the same basic formula but with an added parameter. the f-test was used for the investigation of optimized fits in the analysis of pcr data, comparing either the five-parameter logistic function with its four-parameter counterpart , or the according log-logistic functions . the best model is selected when the f-test between two successive models results in p <  <dig> . a typical outcome of the model selection process with a serial dilution experiment  is depicted in figure  <dig>  with the tendency to show significantly better fits for the 'b4' model than the 'b3' model in pcr data with higher threshold cycles, i.e. higher dilutions. the asymmetric five-parameter log-logistic model  performs best irrespective of the threshold cycle and throughout all curves. to validate the performance of the model selection process on a different platform, four independent serial dilution data sets were considered. the datasets differed in the number of replicates, platform and enzymatic chemistry . significantly better fits of the five-parameter model over the four-parameter model, as measured by nested f-test, occurred in  <dig> of  <dig> replicates ,  <dig> of  <dig> ,  <dig> of  <dig>  and  <dig> of  <dig> .

the application of the model selection process is based on the f-test significance from the fit of the complete  of the amplification curve. as the pcr efficiency and second derivative maximum are derived mainly within the exponential region, it was necessary to evaluate the performance of the five-parameter model with a measure for the goodness-of-fit solely within this important part of the amplification curve. we identified the exponential region by two different methods:  the studentized residuals method as described in  <cit>  and  by fitting an exponential model with a window of seven points along the complete amplification curve and identifying the region with the smallest residual variance of the fit. the outcome from both methods was nearly always identical.

the performance of the 'l5' model in comparison to the 'l4' model and the exponential model is shown in figure  <dig> . the best fit is exhibited by the exponential model, while the five-parameter log-logistic model clearly outperforms its four-parameter counterpart. to confirm this observation, we calculated the residual value  for each of the seven points within the exponential phase for  <dig> different pcr runs in different dilutions . corroborating the findings above, the exponential fit has the best performance , followed by the five-parameter model. by focussing only on the goodness of fit within the exponential region of the qpcr data, increased performance for the five-parameter model over its four-parameter counterpart was observed in  <dig> of  <dig> cases ,  <dig> of  <dig> ,  <dig> of  <dig>  and  <dig> of  <dig> . interestingly, for some replicates of dataset  <dig> &  <dig> the five-parameter model outperformed even the exponential model in respect to the root-mean-squared-error .

estimation of essential qpcr parameters from the five-parameter model compared to previously established quantification models
for relative quantification of qpcr data, the estimates of the pcr efficiency have to be combined with the results from the threshold cycle analysis. thus, it was necessary to derive the five-parameter equivalent of the threshold cycle, which is implemented in the qpcr package as the second derivative maximum . the efficiency is then estimated at this point . the calculation of the parameters follow the model selection step, such that they are based on the best performing sigmoidal model.

the estimation of the second derivative maximum was found to be more reproducible with the five-parameter model in two of four datasets . in respect to the pcr efficiency, datasets 1– <dig> showed a higher reproducibility with the five-parameter method that was also prominent within the efficiency estimates obtained from other methods . the calibration curve method has the highest reproducibility, which underlines its status of being the 'gold standard' but the reproducibility of efficiency estimates based on the five-parameter model comes close. an additional observation is that within the different serial dilution steps, the efficiency estimates are spread more evenly around a fixed value, i.e. the variation of efficiency values within a dilution regime is much smaller.

accuracy and precision of ratio estimates obtained from Δct methods and initial template fluorescence 
in general, two methods exist for relative quantification of qpcr data. ratios based on threshold cycles and efficiency estimates are most commonly applied when using single curve methods such as the four-parameter model, the exponential model and the 'window-of linearity' method. furthermore, these methods can estimate the initial template fluorescence at the beginning of the curve, often termed f <dig>  although it has been repeatedly claimed that a fair estimate of f <dig> can be obtained by setting x =  <dig> in the sigmoidal function  <cit> , we failed in getting reproducible data from this approach with all datasets . instead, we calculated f <dig> by using an exponential model with the parameters estimated from the five-parameter fit . we evaluated the four dilution datasets using the Δct and f <dig> values for the five methods, where applicable, and calculated the accuracy and precision of the estimated dilution ratios .

five commonly used quantification methods in conjunction with threshold cycles estimated from four- and five-parameter sigmoidal models were applied for the analysis. four different datasets differing in the number of replicates, enzymatic chemistry and platform were analyzed in respect to accuracy  and precision . threshold cycles estimated from the second derivatives maximum of four- and five-parameter sigmoidal models  were used in combination with the following methods: sigmoidal model with Δct method , exponential model with Δct method , window-of-linearity method with Δct method  and calibration curve with Δct method . methods for calculation of ratios based on the initial template fluorescence  were: four-parametric sigmoidal model , five-parameter sigmoidal model , exponential model  and the 'window-of-linearity' method .

numbers in bold are combinations in which the five-parameter model performs best. n.v. : no realistic estimation values due to problematic fits.

the performance of using the Δct method with efficiency and threshold cycles estimated from the five-parameter model is increased in three datasets but is found within different methods. in contrast to this observation, ratios estimated by initial fluorescence from the five-parameter sigmoidal fit  presented higher accuracy and precision throughout all datasets.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
by fitting four-parameter sigmoidal models onto many datasets, we observed that the fitted curves were often not optimal at the ground asymptote, top asymptote  and even more important at the log-linear region that is used for the estimation of pcr efficiencies or threshold cycles. as an asymmetrical structure of the data would be a proper explanation for this phenomenon, we analyzed the performance of fitting five-parameter models onto qpcr data.

the fifth parameter  has profound impact on the sigmoidal curvature of the fit. when equal to  <dig>  the five-parameter fit is reduced to its four-parameter equivalent. we rarely observed values very near to  <dig> after non-linear fitting. this is the reason why we emphasize the use of the five-parameter models, since asymmetry of qpcr data seems to be an inherent characteristic and absolutely symmetric qpcr data seldom  occur. as shown on different qpcr scenarios, the asymmetry parameter is unique to every curve and due to its interaction with other parameters of the fit  the results of the fit are often similar but not directly comparable to four-parameter models.

to base our new proposed model on solid statistical ground, we conducted a nested f-test of the new five-parameter models versus the four-parameter versions in order to validate the increased performance. this is common practice for selecting the best model in non-linear fitting regimes  <cit>  and delivers the essential p-value for choosing the fit with the smallest residual variance. statistical significance in the region of p = 10- <dig> to p = 10- <dig> of five-parameter logistic or log-logistic models over their four-parameter counterparts were seen in almost all qpcr curves we examined. the log-logistic model 'l5' has the highest occurrence within the model selection, but we also observed fits with the logistic 'b5' model performing best, especially when the raw fluorescence data has low values. we believe that the advantage of the log-logistic model over the logistic model is in a reduced effect of the plateau cycles on the fit as a consequence of the logarithmized x-values .

by using the rmse and statistics based on the residual values, it could be shown that the five-parameter models clearly outperform their four-parameter counterparts in fitting the model solely to the exponential region. in most of the cases the performance of the exponential fit, which exhibited very low rmse values and highly accurate fitting characteristics, was superior. this was not the observation for the dataset from rutledge et al.  <cit>  and another dataset from our group, where the five-parameter log-logistic model surpassed the exponential model. these two datasets exhibit lower raw fluorescence values in general, such that the reason for the different performances is likely to be based on the underlying platform or enzymatic system. the exponential model does not fit optimal on this kind of data and the fitting procedure was often problematic and yielded unsatisfactory estimates.

the reproducibility of the efficiency estimation with the five-parameter models was not only significantly better than with the four-parameter models, but also often surpassed the reproducibility of the exponential model and the 'window-of-linearity' method. this characteristic was found for the same datasets with low exponential fitting performance as described above.

in the aforementioned work from authors utilizing four-parameter models, the feasibility of using these were corroborated by using the r2-value as the figure-of-merit, demonstrating very high values . as we have seen, the r2-value is not a sensitive measure for model comparison: dramatic improvement  is hardly being reflected in the r2-value. there is considerable controversy about the use of this measure in non-linear fitting  <cit> . consequently, we would like to advocate that this measure should not be reported or trusted solely for demonstrating the validity of a fit in sigmoidal qpcr data.

the introduction of the five-parameter model is in our opinion another leap in the direction of automatic qpcr data analysis. this intention, introduced in  <cit>  is a project to be still reached. it is unfortunately a fact that different methods in qpcr analysis can yield very different values in respect to pcr efficiency, threshold cycle or estimation of the exponential phase  <cit> . yet, when focusing the attention on sigmoidal models, we believe that the additional aspect of asymmetry is an important feature to take into consideration, since the performance of the fit in each part of the curve  is nearly always improved by using five-parameter models.

