BACKGROUND
enzymes of the cite-like superfamily are widely distributed among bacteria, but can also be found in archaea and eukaryota. however, only very few of these enzymes have been biochemically characterized. the true cite is the β-subunit of the atp-independent citrate lyase, which consists of three different subunits  <cit>  and the corresponding genes are part of the citcdefg operon  <cit> . the atp-independent citrate lyase is only found in prokaryotes and is important for the anaerobic fermentation of citrate  <cit> . its γ-subunit  functions as an acyl-carrier-protein  and contains a coa derivative as prosthetic group  <cit> . the α-subunit  functions as an acyl-transferase and is responsible for the formation of a citryl-acp intermediate  <cit> . cite, the β-subunit, cleaves the citryl-moiety into oxaloacetate and acetyl-acp   <cit> . other cite-like enzymes are encoded by “stand alone” genes or genes that are part of clusters unrelated to the citrate lyase operon  <cit> . examples of cite-like enzymes that have been biochemically characterized use free acyl-coa thioesters instead of acps as substrates, including the malyl-coa lyases  <cit> , a malyl-coa thioesterase  <cit> , and haloarchaeal forms of a malate synthases  <cit> . all of these enzymes require divalent metal ions, mg2+ or mn2+, for catalysis.

malyl-coa lyases are promiscuous enzymes that accept a variety of substrates and can catalyze the reversible aldol condensation of coa thioesters like acetyl-coa or propionyl-coa with 2-oxoacids like glyoxylate or pyruvate  <cit> . mcls are known to function in different pathways of central carbon metabolism in bacteria and haloarchaea. the very first mcls were described in methylobacterium extorquens am <dig>   <cit>  and aminobacter aminovorans   <cit> . in methylobacterium an mcl takes part in the serine cycle, which allows the assimilation of c <dig> compounds such as methanol, formate, and formaldehyde into biomass  <cit> . in this case, mcl is responsible for the cleavage of -malyl-coa into glyoxylate and acetyl-coa  <cit> .

subsequently it was discovered that in c. aurantiacus an mcl  catalyzes three different steps in the 3-hydroxypropionate bi-cycle for autotrophic co <dig> fixation  <cit> . this tri-functional enzyme cleaves -malyl-coa into acetyl-coa and glyoxylate, combines glyoxylate with propionyl-coa to β-methylmalyl-coa, and finally also cleaves -citramalyl-coa into acetyl-coa and pyruvate . this pathway is garnering considerable attention for biotechnological applications  <cit>  because it is unique among the known co <dig> fixing pathways in that the constituent enzymes are insensitive to oxygen  <cit> . moreover, the whole bi-cyclic co <dig> fixation strategy is metabolically streamlined; it comprises  <dig> chemical reaction steps but involves only  <dig> enzymes because several multifunctional enzymes are employed  <cit> . the tri-functionality of the mclc underscores its key role for this pathway.

an mcl was also functionally characterized in rhodobacter capsulatus and r. sphaeroides <cit> , which belong to a group of organisms that lack isocitrate lyase. therefore, they are unable to use the glyoxylate bypass to assimilate acetyl-coa or other substrates that enter central carbon metabolism at the level of acetyl-coa. instead, they use the ethylmalonyl-coa pathway  <cit>  for the assimilation of acetyl-coa. in the ethylmalonyl-coa pathway, characterized in the r. sphaeroides, the mcl  is bifunctional; it catalyzes the cleavage of β-methylmalyl-coa and the synthesis of malyl-coa  <cit> . interestingly, both mclr and mclc essentially catalyze the same reactions, but function in opposite directions in the ethylmalonyl-coa pathway and the 3-hydroxypropionate bi-cycle, respectively .

furthermore, mcl-like enzymes were found in haloarchaea like haloarcula marismortui, which lacks isocitrate lyase as well as enzymes that are required to establish the ethylmalonyl-coa pathway. nevertheless, it is still able to grow on acetate as the sole carbon source. it was recently demonstrated that these organisms employ yet another unique pathway for acetyl-coa assimilation, the so called methylaspartate cycle  <cit> . this cyclic pathway makes use of two mcl-like enzymes, one of which seems to be optimized for the cleavage of β-methylmalyl-coa into propionyl-coa and glyoxylate , whereas the other one acts like a malate synthase. the crystal structure of the homologous haloarchaeal malate synthase  from haloferax volcanii was solved recently  <cit> . although haloms shows only very low amino acid sequence identity  to other malate synthases  <cit> , all key catalytic residues in the active site are conserved.

while several different members of the cite-like superfamily of enzymes and the related malate synthases have been structurally characterized , until now, no structures were available for enzymes of the phylogenetic subgroups that harbor malyl-coa lyases. we determined the crystal structures of the phylogenetically distinct mcls  of c. aurantiacus and r. sphaeroides, with and without bound substrates/ligands. the two mcls share the common fold of a central tim-barrel with small elaborations, as well as an additional c-terminal domain. in both cases the oligomeric state constitutes a dimer of trimers. the mclc, however, is more compact than the mclr, with a larger buried surface area between the two trimers. the trimeric assembly itself is a prerequisite for the catalytic activity of the mcls as well as other cite-like enzymes. this is due to a domain swap of the c-terminal domain that functions as a lid over the active site of the respective neighboring subunit. we observed different conformational states of this lid domain for both mcls concomitant with substrate binding. structural comparison of the mcls with malate synthases provides hints as to what governs their substrate specificities and whether previously postulated reaction mechanisms for malate synthases also apply to mcls.

RESULTS
structure determination of mclc
the recombinant mclc was purified from e. coli cell extracts. during gel filtration mclc eluted at a molecular weight of 228 ± 15 kda. this is consistent with a previously reported hexameric oligomerization state  <cit> , because one monomer of the recombinant enzyme has a calculated molecular weight of  <dig>  kda. activity of the purified enzyme was routinely confirmed by a spectrophotometric assay monitoring the formation of β-methylmalyl-coa from propionyl-coa and glyoxylate .

in the absence of substrates recombinant mclc crystallized in the orthorhombic space group p  <dig>  <dig>  <dig> with one hexamer per asymmetric unit . the crystals diffracted to a resolution of  <dig>  Å and the structure was solved using the molecular replacement method. the resulting model  comprised nearly the full length of all six polypeptide chains, starting at arg <dig> and ending with leu <dig> . only  <dig> to  <dig> residues were not built in a loop region  of each chain due to the lack of sufficient electron density. as with other members of the cite-like superfamily  <cit>  and malate synthases  <cit> , the core of the mclc monomer constitutes a β8/α <dig> tim-barrel . in addition to the central tim-barrel there is a c-terminal domain  that comprises three α-helices of which two are connected by a β-hairpin  . this c-terminal domain extends to the neighboring subunit .

soaking attempts with the mclc substrate propionyl-coa resulted in rapid dissolution of the crystals. therefore, attempts were made to crystallize mclc in the presence of substrates. using different crystallization buffers  we were able to obtain crystals in the tetragonal space group p <dig>  when propionyl-coa, oxalate and magnesium ions were present. oxalate was chosen instead of glyoxylate because of the structural similarity between the two compounds, and because oxalate also acts as an inhibitor of malyl-coa lyase. the crystals contained one hexamer per au and diffracted to  <dig>  Å. the resulting structure  comprised the complete peptide chains for all six subunits with the exception of residues 211– <dig> in two of the six chains, as well as the two c-terminal residues  from a third chain. interestingly, the c-terminal domain in this structure was shifted about 16 Å at its extremity  resulting in the closure of the putative active site of the neighboring subunit . therefore the c-terminal domain appears to serve as a flexible lid. moreover, in all  <dig> of these putative active sites electron density was observed that allowed modeling of propionyl-coa, oxalate and mg2+. notably, the conformational change of the c-terminal lid domain may explain why the native crystals dissolved upon soaking with substrate. statistics for the two different crystal structures are given in table  <dig> 
c. aurantiacus


2+
p
 <dig> 2
1
2
1
p
4
3
structure determination of mclr
the recombinant mclr was also initially crystallized in the absence of substrates. the crystals grew in space group p  <dig>  <dig>  <dig> with one hexamer per au. during gel filtration the his10-tagged mclr eluted with a molecular weight of 220 ± 15 kda, consistent with a hexameric assembly , as was previously reported  <cit> . activity of the purified mclr was also routinely confirmed using the spectrophotometric assay. we also verified mclr’s ability to catalyze the reversible formation of citramalyl-coa from acetyl-coa and pyruvate, because that has not been tested before  <cit> . mclr was incubated with acetyl-coa in the presence of  pyruvate. the formation of citramalyl-coa was confirmed by reversed phase hplc analysis of the reaction mixture;the reaction reached an equilibrium of about  <dig> :  <dig>  . for comparison, it was reported for mclc that this reaction reaches an equilibrium of about  <dig> when pyruvate was used in only 10-fold excess over acetyl-coa  <cit> .

diffraction of the crystals reached a resolution of  <dig>  Å and the structure was solved by molecular replacement. in the final model  each chain begins at ser <dig>  whereas varying numbers of residues had to be excluded from the c-termini. three of the six chains lacked electron density for the entire c-terminal lid domains and were modeled only to pro <dig> or ser <dig>  for the other  <dig> chains it was possible to model the lid domains with the exception of only the terminal  <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> residues.

despite repeated attempts, we were not able to obtain crystals of an apo-enzyme with electron density simultaneously present for all  <dig> of the c-terminal lid domains. notably, of the three lid domains that could be modeled only two were in the closed conformation. in the other one the β-hairpin structure that is depicted in figure  <dig> was not developed, and the domain was shifted about 8 Å at its extremity . the shift of the c-terminal lid domain is similar to what was observed for the mclc structures with and without bound substrates. interestingly, in the two subunits where the lid domains were in the closed conformation, the active sites contained electron density that allowed modeling of glyoxylate molecules together with magnesium ions. nevertheless, mg2+ could also be fitted into the  <dig> open active sites, whereas glyoxylate was replaced by water molecules in these subunits. although glyoxylate was not intentionally present, it was likely carried over from e. coli cell extracts during enzyme purification.

soaking of these crystals with propionyl-coa resulted in the additional occupancy of one of the two closed active sites with the coa thioester. additional soaking attempts resulted either in dissolving crystals or only very weak electron density for the ligands. hence, crystals were grown in the presence of propionyl-coa, oxalate and magnesium ions. the new buffer conditions typically resulted in crystals of the rhombohedral space group r  <dig>  <dig> with one monomer per au. these crystals diffracted to a resolution of  <dig>  Å. although the c-terminal lid domain could be completely resolved and was in the closed conformation, the electron density for bound substrates was scant. however, the same crystallization conditions occasionally yielded a second type of crystals in the hexagonal space group p  <dig>  with one hexamer per au. these crystals diffracted to a resolution of  <dig>  Å. all six c-terminal lid domains were resolved and all of the active sites were in the closed conformation. each active site was occupied by mg2+, oxalate, and free coa instead of propionyl-coa. the polypeptide chains in the resulting model  comprised all residues from ser <dig> or phe <dig> through met <dig> with only the c-terminal three residues missing. electron density for the n-terminal his10-tags was also missing for each chain. the statistics for the two different mclr crystal structures are given in table  <dig> 
r. sphaeroides


2+
, cl
-
2+
p
 <dig> 2
1
p
6
1
primary and tertiary structure comparison between the monomers of mclr and mclc
although the amino acid sequence identity between mclc and mclr is relatively low , their tertiary structures are strongly conserved . the subunits of both enzymes comprise a central β8/α <dig> tim-barrel with some insertions of small secondary structure elements. both mcls have mostly unordered n-termini , leading to the first β-strand of the tim-barrel . however, the orientation and length of the n-termini differs between mclc and mclr. mclr has n-terminal his10-tag, which could not be modeled due to the lack of electron density. we cannot discount the possibility that the his-tags may have had an influence on the orientation of the n-termini in mclr.

another elaboration of the tim-barrel core common to both mcl structures is found after the sixth β-strand . this insertion  comprises an additional α-helix leading into an unordered loop that connects to a β-hairpin loop structure. the corresponding β-strands in mclc are connected by a larger hairpin loop that consists of  <dig> residues , whereas the corresponding turn in mclr only comprises asp <dig> and gly <dig>  these insertion domains appear to be present in all of the enzymes that cluster together with mclc or mclr in the phylogenetic tree , respectively .

in addition to the core tim-barrel structure there is a c-terminal lid domain in both mcls. these lid domains differ slightly in mclc  and mclr , but both comprise two α-helices that are connected by a β-hairpin . in mclr the first of the two helices is slightly longer in comparison to mclc, whereas mclc possesses one additional short helix at the very end of the lid domain.

mclr and mclc oligomeric state
both types of mcls are hexameric, composed of dimers of trimers . the average interface areas between adjacent subunits in the trimers of mclc and mclr  are similar, 2037 Å <dig> and 2154 Å <dig>  respectively. the mclc hexamer appears to be more compact than the mclr  with a calculated buried surface area at the dimer interface between two trimers of 4594 Å <dig> in mclc but only 3173 Å <dig> in mclr. the dimer interface between the trimers is expanded in mclc mostly due its longer n-termini, which are in a different orientation than in the mclr structures. the shorter n-termini in the mclr hexamer also allow access to a central cavity between the trimers. a similar cavity is present in mclc as well, but it is only accessible through very narrow pores that seem just wide enough to allow diffusion of water molecules. it is not clear if the central cavities in either enzyme serve a particular function.

the n-terminal amino acid sequence is highly conserved among the enzymes that cluster together with mclc in the phylogenetic tree . in contrast, the n-terminus is not well conserved among enzymes of the mclr cluster. however, the n-termini of both enzymes seem to limit the movement of the c-terminal lid domains in the hexameric assemblies .

a second distinctive structural feature of the closed form of both mcls is that the β-hairpin  of the c-terminal lid domain provides a number of residues to close the active site. one of these residues  is presumed to take part in the first step of catalysis as proposed for the reaction mechanism of malate synthases  <cit> , discussed below.

ligand binding
by crystallizing both types of mcls in the presence of propionyl-coa, oxalate, and mg2+, we obtained structures in which all six active sites were closed off by the c-terminal lid domains of the respective neighboring subunits. moreover, the electron density was sufficient to fit ligands into each active site. the mg2+ ion was coordinated by glutamate and aspartate residues , as well as two oxygen atoms from oxalate and the oxygen atoms of two water molecules . the resulting octahedral shell around the bound magnesium ion resembles the ion binding observed in other cite-like enzymes and different malate synthases  <cit> . the binding of the coa-moiety is also very similar for mclc, mclr and the malate synthases. the adenosine moiety of coa is fixed in a largely hydrophobic pocket on the surface of the tim-barrel with only one or two hydrogen bonds formed between the adenine ring and carbonyl oxygen atoms of the protein backbone. in mclc there is an additional hydrogen bond formed with the side chain of his <dig>  a residue conserved only among mclc related enzymes. due to the bent j-like conformation of the coa-moiety  an intramolecular hydrogen bond between the adenosine ring and the hydroxyl-group of the pantheteine is formed in both mcls that is also reported for malate synthases  <cit> . the phosphate groups are coordinated by arginine, lysine, or histidine residues and the pantheteine tail is inserted  into the quite narrow and deep active site cavity  formed in the closed conformation.

in the mclr crystal structure with all six c-terminal lid domains modeled, only free coa  was found instead of propionyl-coa. it is known that coa thioesters are more stable under acidic conditions and become hydrolyzed over time under alkaline conditions. the ph of the crystallization condition was  <dig> , in contrast to ph  <dig>  used to grow the mclc crystals. although we have also grown crystals in the presence of propionyl-coa in different, slightly acidic conditions, we were not able to obtain other structures with bound propionyl-coa. however, propionyl-coa soaking attempts with the first type of mclr crystals, which only allowed the modeling of three of the six c-terminal domains, were partly successful. these crystals already had magnesium and glyoxylate present in the two active sites that were in the closed conformation. after the additional soaking step, one of these closed active sites was also occupied by propionyl-coa .

in both mclc structures  additional electron density was observed at the 3-fold rotation axis in each trimer and was modeled as tris molecules. these form hydrogen bonds with the side chain amide oxygens of gln <dig> in each subunit of the trimer, as well as with backbone oxygen atoms of asp <dig>  the tris molecules are buried within the protein and do not appear to be solvent accessible, which may indicate that the additional insertion domain  found after the sixth β-strand of the tim-barrel is able to undergo a conformational change.

discussion
the structures of mclc and mclr and comparison to structures of malate synthases and cite-like family enzymes
the malyl-coa lyase structures reported here provide the first structures of two subgroups of the cite-like superfamily of enzymes . both mclc and mclr constitute dimers of trimers as their oligomeric state. the structures suggest that monomers of mclc and mclr cannot be catalytically active, because the c-terminal lid domain of each subunit in the trimer stretches out to the neighboring one and contributes active site residues. this is in contrast to the malate synthases of type a and g, which are structurally and functionally monomeric. interestingly, the haloms was reported to have a trimeric or hexameric  assembly  <cit>  as well. therefore the haloms may be evolutionarily more closely related to the malyl-coa lyases and other enzymes of the cite-like superfamily, which have also been reported to be trimers  <cit> , including the malyl-coa thioesterase of r. sphaeroides <cit> .

although the tim-barrel is conserved in malate synthases, mcls , and other cite-like enzymes, both malate synthase a  and malate synthase g  also possess an additional n-terminal domain  <cit>  of about  <dig> and  <dig> residues, respectively, that folds around the tim-barrel. furthermore msg has a rather large  domain insertion between tim-barrel secondary structure elements. in contrast, mclc and mclr both have a smaller insertion of ~ <dig> and ~ <dig> residues after the sixth β-strand of the tim-barrel, which appears to be specific to the mcls, judging from structure and sequence comparisons with malate synthases and cite-like enzymes. these additional domains are arranged around the three-fold axes on top of the trimers and are in contact with one another. however, there are also differences in the c-terminal domains of the mcls in comparison to msa, msg, and haloms  <cit> . in msa and msg the domain consists of  <dig> α-helices and the β-hairpin. the β-hairpin is structurally conserved in all of the aforementioned enzymes, whereas the number of α-helices differs . in contrast to the canonical malate synthases, this lid domain in the mcls closes off the active site of the neighboring subunit in the trimers and not of its own tim-barrel. this is probably also the case in the haloms, because a region of more than  <dig> residues is missing from its crystal structures  that would connect the tim-barrel with the c-terminal domain. although this domain was modeled as if it were covering the active site of the same subunit, it is possible that it actually extends to the neighboring subunit as explained by bracken et al. <cit> .

movement of the c-terminal lid domain
rotations of the c-terminal lid domains of ~30° in mclc  and ~18° in mclr relative to their tim-barrel cores were observed. in both structures the bending region is located in a short linker that connects the last helix of the tim-barrel with the first helix of the lid domain. in both cases the linkers start with a phenylalanine residue . the bending of the chains progresses through residues ser <dig> and pro <dig> in mclc and through thr <dig> and pro <dig> in mclr . the phenylalanine and proline in these linkers appear to be well conserved within the cite-like superfamily of enzymes. it is therefore likely that a similar conformational change can occur in these enzymes as well.

interestingly, there is much less interaction of each tim-barrel with the neighboring c-terminal domains in the open conformation assembly; the reduction in surface area is ~500 Å <dig> in both mclc and mclr. the reduced interaction of the lid domain with the tim-barrel in the open conformation probably leads to increased flexibility and multiple conformations. this may be the reason why the electron density for the lid domain beyond the bending region was weak or non-existent for three of the subunits in the mclr structure that was soaked with propionyl-coa. furthermore, the average temperature factors of residues in the lid domains are about two times higher than those of the tim-barrel residues in both mcls, underscoring their flexibility. this is also consistent with the previously reported structures of ripc of y. pestis  and another cite-like enzyme of m. tuberculosis . both of these enzymes belong to the type  <dig> subgroup in the phylogentic tree of the cite-like superfamily . in both these cases the lid domains could not be modeled due to the lack of electron density  <cit> .

the mobility of the c-terminal domain may have an effect on substrate binding. as mentioned above, for mclr crystals grown in the absence of added substrates, electron density  was only observed in the two subunits with completely closed active sites. after an additional soaking step with propionyl-coa, electron density for the coa thioester was found in one of these two sites.

the only other observed conformational changes in the mclc and mclr structures upon substrate binding are associated with the movement of the c-terminal domains. the changes occur in a loop consisting of residues 192– <dig> in mclc and residues 174– <dig> in mclr. this loop belongs to the additional mcl-specific small insertions mentioned earlier. the loop interacts, predominantly through hydrogen bonds and bridging waters, with the c-terminal domains of the neighboring subunits in the closed conformation. in enzymes that cluster together with mclc in the phylogenetic tree  the corresponding loop region is extremely well conserved. however, the same loop region in the mclr is only conserved in more closely related enzymes and not throughout the whole cluster of mclr-like lyases. however, this cluster comprises enzymes that share less than 40% amino acid sequence identity with mclr. in contrast, enzymes that cluster together with the mcl of c. aurantiacus are much more closely related to one another, with amino acid identities of at least 57% in pairwise alignments.

mobility of the c-terminal lid domain was also proposed for malate synthases   <cit> , but not observed in crystal structures. the c-terminal domain is much larger in msa and msg than in cite-like enzymes, which include the haloarchaeal malate synthase . however, small angle x-ray scattering and circular dichroism experiments with malate synthases from baker’s yeast and maize  <cit>  suggested a conformational change within the enzymes upon substrate binding.

active sites and substrate binding
the c-terminal lid domains seem to play crucial roles in the interaction with the substrates. most of the active site residues contributed by the lid domains appear to be involved in the binding of the pantetheine moiety of the coa thioester substrate. moreover, an aspartate residue  located in the c-terminal domain structurally aligns with a putative catalytic aspartate in the structures of haloms, msa and msg . despite the low amino acid sequence identity between both mclc and mclr, most of the residues involved in the formation of the active site and substrate binding are conserved, including all of the putative catalytic residues . the residues arg <dig> and asp <dig> in mclc correspond to arg <dig> and asp <dig> in mclr; they are conserved in the entire cite-like superfamily as well as in the malate synthases. the only exception was found in the enzymes that cluster together with the malyl-coa thioesterase of r. sphaeroides in the phylogenetic tree . a conserved glutamate residue is present instead of aspartate in these enzymes. the glutamate and aspartate residues that coordinate the mg2+ ion  are also absolutely conserved among cite-like superfamily enzymes and the malate synthases. the same is true for the residues glu <dig> and asp <dig> in mclc , which form hydrogen bonds with the two water molecules that also coordinate the mg2+ ion. the remaining two sites of the octahedral mg2+ coordination sphere are occupied by oxygen atoms of the respective bound carbonic acid, which is oxalate or glyoxylate in the structures of the mcls. this mg2+ coordination is consistent with available structures of malate synthases .

only a minor difference can be observed between the active sites of mclc and mclr. the conserved arginine residue in mclc  forms a hydrogen bond with a neighboring asparagine . this asparagine residue is 100% conserved among the lyases that cluster together with mclc in the phylogenetic tree . in mclr this residue is replaced by an aspartate , which also forms hydrogen bonds with the corresponding arg <dig> . the aspartate residue, however, is absolutely conserved for the cite-like superfamily enzymes, as well as among malate synthases. the positioning of the arginine residue, however, does not seem to be affected by the asp/asn substitution in the mclc. however, it appears that the hydrogen bonding is generally important for the correct orientation of the arginine and therefore the binding of the substrates. this is also evident from mutational studies on the msg from e. coil, where the positionally conserved arginine residue was replaced by lysine; this resulted in a substantially reduced catalytic activity  as well as in a 10-fold increase of the km value for acetyl-coa  <cit> .

comparison of reaction mechanisms and substrate specificities of mclr, mclc and malate synthases
a reaction mechanism for malate synthase  was proposed by howard et al.  <cit>  for the e. coli msg . asp <dig> acts as a base and abstracts a proton from the α-carbon of acetyl-coa  <cit> . the importance of this aspartate residue was demonstrated by mutation to asparagine, which led to the complete loss of enzymatic activity  <cit> . the negative charge of the enolate that is created upon proton abstraction from acetyl-coa is stabilized by arg <dig>  which also interacts with the carbonyl oxygen of glyoxylate. after rotation of the enolate intermediate, a nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon of glyoxylate leads to the formation of a new carbon-carbon bond and an oxyanion . the oxyanion is stabilized by the positive charges of mg2+ and arg <dig>  unfortunately, it is not quite clear how the coa thioester hydrolysis proceeds. it was proposed that one of the two water molecules coordinating the mg2+ ion may be responsible  <cit> . however, the removal of this water from the octahedral coordination sphere of the magnesium ion is energetically unfavorable  <cit> . furthermore, these two water molecules are also present in the structures of the malyl-coa lyases, which do not exhibit any detectable thioester hydrolysis activity. therefore, another water molecule may be responsible for the coa thioester hydrolysis step. although the active sites of malate synthases and mcls appear to be highly conserved, their respective reaction and substrate specificities differ . both types of enzymes catalyze aldol reactions, which is completely reversible in the mcls, but not in the malate synthases due to the additional coa thioester hydrolysis step. however, the aldol reaction and the thioester hydrolysis have to occur independently of one another if a product like malyl-coa is to be released from the active site. it is safe to assume that the aldol reaction in the mcls also proceeds via the formation of an enolate intermediate , as was proposed for malate synthases. however, in order for this reaction to be reversible, as it is in the mcls , a proton has to be abstracted from the hydroxyl group of the respective coa thioester substrates like malyl-coa, β-methylmalyl-coa, or -citramalyl-coa. because this hydroxyl group is coordinating the mg2+ ion its pka value would be considerably lowered. the hydrogen of the hydroxyl group would point away from the magnesium ion towards the conserved arginine residue , which seems to form a hydrogen bond with this hydroxyl group. this makes the arginine residue a likely candidate for the proton abstraction from the hydroxyl group of malyl-coa and similar substrates, despite its usually high pka value. although it is fairly rare that an arginine residue acts as a base in proton abstraction reactions, examples are known  <cit> . after the carbon-carbon bond cleavage, the enolate intermediate has to be neutralized by proton donation from the conserved aspartate residue . therefore, both the arg and asp residues must be available in deprotonated and protonated forms to allow the aldol reaction to proceed in either direction. unfortunately, it is not clear from the mcl crystal structures and comparisons to malate synthases  why mcls do not also act as thioesterases. as mentioned above, the coa thioester hydrolysis may depend on another solvent water molecule, which could be present at the malyl-coa intermediate step  during catalysis in malate synthases, but not in malyl-coa lyases. unfortunately, there are no structures available that have captured the malyl-coa intermediate or a bound analog; there are only structures containing either acetyl-coa or free coa.

nevertheless, within the two mcl clusters in the phylogenetic tree  an alanine residue  is 100% conserved , whereas it is replaced by leu <dig> in msge  and trp <dig> in msa of e. coli. these larger side chains likely prevent the efficient binding of propionyl-coa or β-methylmalyl-coa by the malate synthases. in the overlay of the active sites  the distances between leu <dig> of msge and the terminal carbons of the propionyl-coa molecules in mclc and mclr are  <dig>  Å and  <dig>  Å, respectively. interestingly, these residues correspond to a val <dig> in the haloms, which is conserved among haloarchaeal malate synthases and haloarchaeal mcls. valine is just small enough to allow propionyl-coa binding, which may explain why haloms is still able to catalyze the formation of β-methylmalyl-coa  <cit> . why the coa thioester bond in β-methylmalyl-coa is not hydrolyzed by haloms cannot be explained at this point.

furthermore, mclc is known to efficiently catalyze the cleavage of -citramalyl-coa into acetyl-coa and pyruvate, whereas the reverse reaction of citramalyl-coa synthesis was only reported in high excess concentrations of pyruvate  <cit> . malate synthases are obviously able to bind pyruvate together with acetyl-coa, as observed in the crystal structures of msge  and haloms . however, in the haloms structure the methyl group of pyruvate forms close contacts with pro <dig> and trp <dig>  <cit> . an expansion of the active site was observed in the haloms structure with bound pyruvate and acetyl-coa  <cit> , compared to the structure that only had glyoxylate bound . this may be the reason why addition of pyruvate to acetyl-coa is unfavorable in haloms as well as in the mcls, where both the proline and the tryptophan residues are conserved . on the other hand, the geometry at the carbonyl-carbon of pyruvate is planar, whereas the geometry at the corresponding carbon in citramalyl-coa is tetrahedral. therefore, the methyl group of citramalyl-coa would assume a different position further away from the proline and tryptophan residues, which may favor binding of citramalyl-coa over binding of pyruvate and acetyl-coa. interestingly, a close contact  between the α-carbon of acetyl-coa and the keto-carbon of pyruvate was reported for haloms  <cit> . pyruvate and acetyl-coa are actually substrates for the homologous malate synthase of h. marismortui ; the enzyme is able to catalyze the formation of -citramalyl-coa, but not the hydrolysis of its coa thioester bond  <cit> . although the km-value for pyruvate was high  for the h. marismotui malate synthase, the pyruvate concentration during soaking of the h. volcanii crystals was even higher, 70 mm  <cit> . we used the deposited structure factors for the haloms structure with bound pyruvate and acetyl-coa  to re-examine the electron density. interestingly, in the original maps there was still some additional positive density  between pyruvate and acetyl-coa  <cit> , indicating that there may be a connection of the carbon backbones of both substrates. hence, we tried modeling in -citramalyl-coa. superposition of the refined -citramalyl-coa  shows that it fits slightly better into a simulated annealing omit map. this suggests that the carbon-carbon bond formation can still be catalyzed in these crystals and that there was probably a mixture of different reaction states present.

it should also be noted that both haloms as well as halomcl can act as malyl-coa thioesterases, meaning that they are able to use malyl-coa as substrate, in contrast to the canonical malate synthases  <cit> . moreover, both haloarchaeal enzymes also release malyl-coa as the product of acetyl-coa and glyoxylate condensation during catalysis  <cit> . this is not the case with conventional malate synthases; they do not release malyl-coa as an intermediate. both the haloms and halomcl represent interesting chimeric enzymes combining mcl and malate synthase functions. both are able to catalyze the same reactions as other mcls, namely the formation and cleavage of malyl-coa, β-methylmalyl-coa, and -citramalyl-coa. however, they can also catalyze the hydrolysis of the malyl-coa thioester bond like the other malate synthases, but they do not hydrolyze the coa thioester bonds of β-methylmalyl-coa or -citramalyl-coa. although, haloms and halomcl have very similar substrate spectra and reaction specificities, the km values for the respective substrates differ significantly, defining their distinct functions in the methylaspartate cycle  <cit>  as malate synthase or β-methylmalyl-coa lyase, respectively.

similarly, genome analysis revealed that there are two different types of mcls present in m. extorquens that are regulated differentially, depending on the mode of growth  <cit> . one of the mcls is phylogenetically related to the enzyme of r. sphaeroides, the other to the c. auranticus enzyme . it was found that m. extorquens also uses the ethylmalonly-coa pathway to assimilate the acetyl-coa that derives from its serine cycle  <cit>  and it is also able to grow on acetate as the sole carbon source instead of c <dig> substrates by using the ethylmalonyl-coa pathway. it is tempting to speculate that one of the mcls in m. extorquens is specifically used for the cleavage of malyl-coa in the serine cycle, whereas the primary functions of the second mcl are the cleavage of β-methylmalyl-coa and the synthesis of malyl-coa in the ethylmalonyl-coa pathway. both these enzymes may be optimized to work in one or the other direction under physiological substrate concentrations.

two other distinct groups of the cite-like superfamily of enzymes  may be carbon-carbon bond lyases as well. it was suggested that the cite-like enzymes of mycobacterium tuberculosis and yersinia pestis, which belongs to the type i enzymes in figure  <dig>  also use free coa thioesters as substrates  <cit> . several more crystal structures of cite-like superfamily enzymes are available although their physiological functions are unknown. some of these structures were claimed to be the cite subunit of citrate lyase, but that may not be correct, judging by amino acid sequence and phylogenetic analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
despite the relatively low amino acid sequence identity between mclc and mclr, their tertiary and quaternary structures are almost identical. the only prominent differences were found in the n-termini, which differ in size and orientation. these n-termini influence the strength of the interaction at the dimer interface between trimers in the hexameric assemblies. furthermore, the comparison of the two mcl structures to the structures of haloms, msg, and msa does not explain why the mcls are not able to hydrolyze coa thioester bonds. very few differences were observed between the active sites. nevertheless, some hints emerge to explain the different substrate specificities of the mcls compared to the different kinds of malate synthases. the structures and the previously proposed reaction mechanism for malate synthases suggest that malyl-coa lyases should be able to hydrolyze coa thioester bonds too. this however, has not been observed.

collectively, these structures and the comparative analyses of the catalytic mechanism proposed for malate synthases lay the foundation for further studies including site directed mutagenesis to gain insights into the specific determinants of the different reaction specificities. expanding the biochemical and structural knowledge about other cite-like enzymes may also help to understand why mcls are not hydrolyzing coa-thioester bonds, especially since the structures of several cite-like enzymes have been solved already but without knowledge of their respective functions, substrate spectra, and catalyzed reactions.

