BACKGROUND
genes that are highly conserved between different types of organisms code for important biological functions and are therefore usually well studied and described. one group of conserved genes whose function has remained enigmatic until recently is the kae1/ygjd family. genes from this family occur in almost all bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic genomes. the gene family consists of two groups: one group, gcp1/osgepl/qri <dig>  is of bacterial origin, the other, gcp2/osgep/kae, is supposed to originate from archaea  <cit> . in escherichia coli, kae1/ygjd is essential for viability  <cit> ; in arabidopsis thaliana and saccharomyces cerevisia, deletion mutants exhibit deleterious phenotypes  <cit> .

a biochemical activity for ygjd has recently been described: as already suggested by  <cit> , srinivasan and colleagues  <cit>  showed that kae1/ygjd protein  is required to add a threonyl carbamoyl adenosine  modification to a subset of tranfer-rnas that recognize codons with an adenin at the first position. transfer-rnas undergo complex modifications and maturation steps  <cit>  required for translational fidelity  <cit> . mutations in these modification pathways can be lethal or cause severe defects  <cit> , and the involved genes are highly conserved in different organisms  <cit> .

because ygjd is essential, it is not possible to delete the gene and study the phenotypic consequences. as an alternative, one can put the gene under control of an inducible promoter, and investigate the consequence of turning off its expression, and thereby depleting the ygjd protein. our aim here is to get insights into the morphological changes that come about when the ygjd protein is depleted from growing escherichia coli cells. in two studies , the authors have noticed an effect on cell size in ygjd depletion strains, suggesting a role of ygjd for cell division and/or cellular elongation. however, while katz et al. observed shorter cells under ygjd depletion conditions, handford et al. observed a mixed population of elongated and short cells. the reason for this discrepancy remained unclear but could be based on the different genetic background of the e. coli strains . altered cell size upon ygjd depletion could be based on changes in cell division timing or the cellular elongation rate, or on a combination of these two effects. to distinguish between these possibilities and to clarify the role of ygjd for cell size we used single cell resolution time-lapse microscopy of growing microcolonies.

we constructed a conditional lethal ygjd mutant, and investigated the consequences of depletion of the ygjd protein with high temporal resolution at the single-cell level. similarly to  we put the expression of ygjd under control of a promoter that is inducible by the sugar l-arabinose. the resulting strain can be grown normally in presence of l-arabinose, but ceases to grow in absence of l-arabinose and presence of glucose. then, single bacterial cells are placed on a nutritious agar surface lacking the inducer and are observed with time lapse microscopy.

we used the cell tracking software "schnitzcell" <cit>  to analyze images from the time-lapse microscopy experiments. this software identifies cells and tracks them across images from consecutive time points. it keeps track of cell division events and of relatedness of cells . the software also extracts information about cell size and fluorescence intensity. the resulting dataset can be used to reconstruct the lineage of the clonal microcolony, and to plot phenotypic information like cell size and fluorescence intensity on this lineage. we used derivatives of these parameters  to describe and analyze the effects of ygjd depletion.

we find that depletion of ygjd changes the balance between cell growth and cell division, indicating a disturbance in cell size homeostasis. experiments with escherichia coli and salmonella thyphimurium have shown a high degree of cell size homeostasis, or balanced growth  <cit> : under steady state conditions, cells have a constant cell size, indicating that the rate by which cells elongate and the interdivision intervals are coupled - cells that grow slower will initiate cell division later, and thus reach a goal cell size despite their slower growth. under conditions of ygjd depletion, cell elongation slowed down while the interval between cell divisions remained constant. as a consequence, cell size steadily decreased over consecutive divisions, until a minimal size was reached and cell division stopped. these cellular changes are specific: they differ from the consequences of the depletion of three other essential genes we analyzed, and of the exposure to two antibiotics that inhibit translation.

using a statistical approach, we show that this growth transition occurs in a controlled manner: cell elongation rates and interdivision times were negatively correlated on the level of single cells, suggesting that these two physiological parameters remain coupled during the growth transition. genetic experiments indicated that this change in cell size homeostasis involves production of the alarmone ppgpp , a signaling compound that is a key player of a cellular response to amino acid starvation known as stringent response.

RESULTS
our rationale here is that we can get insights into the biological role of ygjd by following the cellular response of its depletion on the single cell level and with high temporal resolution. we diluted cultures of the conditional lethal para-ygjd mutant tb <dig> onto pads of solid lb medium that either contained l-arabinose  or d-glucose  and used time-lapse microscopy to follow single cells growing into microcolonies, taking an image every  <dig> or  <dig> minutes. the images were analyzed with the software "schnitzcell"  <cit> . the growth rate and cellular morphology of the para-ygjd strain grown in the presence of l-arabinose was similar to the wild type grown under the same conditions .

a shift of the para-ygjd strain to glucose lead to the depletion of ygjd. this depletion is based on two effects. first, transcription of ygjd stops after the shift to glucose. residual l-arabinose that remains in the cells from growth under permissive conditions is rapidly metabolized. lack of l-arabinose turns the transcriptional activator  of the para promoter into a transcription repressor. in addition, glucose metabolism causes depletion of the cellular co-inducer cyclic amp. together these effects lead to effective repression of ygjd transcription in tb <dig>  after termination of de novo ygjd mrna synthesis the amount of ygjd in each cell declines, because the mrna and the protein are diluted through cell division, and degraded by cellular nucleases and proteases, respectively  <cit> . the rapid cessation of transcription from para after the shift to glucose was evident in control experiments with a strain that expressed the green fluorescent protein  from the arabinose promoter 

ygjd depletion leads to a change in cell size homeostasis
time-lapse microscopy revealed that ygjd depletion lead to a gradual phenotypic transition in division and growth. single cells that were transferred from permissive conditions to solid pads of lb medium with glucose first continued to divide regularly, forming microcolonies in which the number of cells initially increased exponentially. then, after about four divisions, cell division slowed down and stopped . analysis of the time-lapse images  showed that, during this transition, cells size decreased . this indicates a disturbance in of cell size homeostasis  <cit>  - that cells divide before their cell size doubled.

we used elongation rates of single cells and the time interval between two divisions to analyze the change in cell size homeostasis during ygjd depletion. since we were interested in how these parameters changed during depletion, we separated data from different cell generations of the depletion process. the first cell that is founding a microcolony is generation 0; this cell divides into two cells of generation  <dig>  which divide into four cells of generation  <dig>  and so on . to avoid comparisons between cells that are in different phases of their cell cycle, we only used cell size measurements  of cells immediately before division. also, to avoid incomplete and biased sampling, we removed data from above generation  <dig> 

this analysis revealed that the small size of cells depleted for ygjd was a consequence of two effects: first, the rate of elongation  decreased . second, cells did not respond to the decrease in elongation rate by adjusting the frequency at which they divided; the interval between two cell divisions remained initially constant. as a direct consequence, cell length at division decreased continuously .

the phenotype induced by ygjd depletion was specific, and depletions of other essential genes lead to different cellular morphologies. we analyzed time-lapse images of the depletion of three other essential genes . depletion of each protein resulted in cellular phenotypes that were different from each other and from ygjd when depleted . also, the effects of ygjd depletion were different from the consequences of exposure to two antibiotics that we tested: we followed wildtype e. coli cells exposed to the translational inhibitors kanamycin and chloramphenicol at minimum inhibitory concentration , and observed no decrease in cell size .

for reference, we also analyzed images of growing microcolonies of wildtype e. coli mg <dig> cells on lb medium supplemented with glucose. this experiments confirmed cell size homeostasis, as expected from normally growing cell: cells divided close to the moment when they had doubled their size, and small fluctuations in cell elongation rates were compensated for by adjustments in the time of cell division .

the transition towards smaller cell size is controlled
what kind of disturbance of cell size homeostasis is induced by depletion of ygjd? we considered two possibilities. first, it is possible that the control that couples cell division to cell size is lost, so that cells divide in an uncontrolled way, irrespective of their size. second, it is conceivable that cell division remains coupled to cell size, but the target size that a cell needs to reach before initiating division decreases over time.

if the decrease in cell size is the result of a controlled transition towards smaller cells, one would expect that, during the transition, the cell elongation rate and the timing of cell division would still be linked, but that this link would change quantitatively over time. in fact this is what we observed when we analyzed each generation of cells during the depletion process separately . within a given generation the time interval between divisions and the rate by which a cell elongated was negatively correlated: cells that grew faster than the average of their generation tended to initiate division more quickly; cells that grew more slowly initiated division later. this suggests that cell growth and the timing of cell division are still linked within each generation in the depletion process, but that this link changes quantitatively over successive generations.

this analysis has, however, an important limitation: cells within a given generation are not independent from each other. some of these cells are more closely related, because they derive from the same mother or grandmother. this can lead to spurious correlations between traits; in our case, this effect could lead to artificial correlations between cell elongation rates and interdivision intervals. this problem of relatedness in lineage trees is known from phylogenetic studies, where it is referred to as phylogenetic dependence  <cit> . in the context of phylogenetic studies, these dependencies can be resolved by analyzing differences between independent pairs of species, rather than calculating correlations on the basis of the whole phylogenetic lineage  <cit> .

we used a variation of this approach to get an unbiased view on the relationship between cell growth and the timing of cell division: for each generation, we analyzed pairs of cells emerging from the same cell division, and calculated the difference in growth rates and in the time to division for each pair. we refer to two cells emerging from the same division as 'sisters' . the differences for all sister pairs represent independent data points, and we can use them to calculate the correlation between cell growth and time to division in an unbiased way.

the independent contrast analysis confirmed our earlier conclusions: comparing each cell to its sister cell, we found that cells that grew slower than their sisters also displayed a longer interval between cell divisions, while faster growing cells divided earlier. this manifests as a negative correlation between the difference in cell elongation rate and the difference in interdivision intervals between two sisters . this is consistent with the interpretation that, during ygjd depletion, the timing of cell division remained coupled to a given cell size - and that the target cell size declined.

the transition to decreased cell size is reminiscent of morphological changes that occur during the 'stringent response'  <cit> , a stress adaptation program that is elicited when cells encounter amino-acid or carbon-starvation  <cit> . the stringent response is induced by accumulation of the 'alarmone' guanosine tetra/penta phosphate ppgpp), e.g. in response to low concentrations of amino-acylated trnas  <cit> . we thus wanted to investigate this possible link to ppgpp signaling more closely, and asked whether the changes in cell homeostastis upon ygjd depletion are mediated through ppgpp.

changes in cell size homeostastis are mediated through ppgpp
we constructed a strain, tb <dig>  that is deficient in ppgpp synthesis pgpp0), due to deletions of rela and spot  <cit> , and in which expression of ygjd was again under control of para. we followed growing microcolonies of tb <dig> as described above and found that the consequences of ygjd depletion were profoundly different: cell elongation rate decreased during the ygjd depletion process as for the rela+ spot+ strain tb <dig> . in contrast to what we observed with this ppgpp+ strain, the decrease in elongation rate was compensated for by an increase in the time interval between two divisions . as a consequence, cell size at division was not reduced, and the final cell length of depleted ppgpp <dig> cells  was on average twice that of depleted ppgpp+ cells  . this is reminiscent of the elongated cells found in populations of cells depleted for ygjd by handford and colleagues  <cit> .

this suggests that the changes in cell size in response to ygjd depletion are mediated through the alarmone ppgpp; an alternative explanation is that the absence of ppgpp leads to cell elongation , and that this elongation compensates indirectly for reductive fission upon ygjd depletion. importantly, tb <dig> cells still ceased cell division . thus, ygjd is still essential even in the absence of ppgpp, and termination of cell division is not solely a consequence of a diminished cellular growth rate.

to further test the idea that ygjd depletion triggers ppgpp synthesis we measured, on a single cell level during ygjd depletion, the activity of two promoters known to respond to the intracellular level of ppgpp: papt is repressed by ppgpp, while prsd is induced by ppgpp  <cit> . we transformed tb <dig> with plasmids carrying transcriptional promoter-gfp fusions  <cit>  encoding papt-gfp and prsd-gfp, and measured gene expression from these promoters as fluorescence intensity over consecutive cell divisions. the level of gfp expression steadily decreased in the strains where gfp was controlled by papt , and steadily increased when controlled by prsd . furthermore, this change in fluorescence was tightly linked to the rate by which cells elongated . when the same strains were grown on l-arabinose containing medium no consistent changes of fluorescence could be observed . these observations are consistent with the scenario that ygjd depletion induces ppgpp synthesis, and thus influences promoters whose expression depends on the levels of ppgpp.

single cell analysis indicated that, in the cells depleted for ygjd, there is a link between decreased cell elongation rate and ppgpp levels. using independent comparisons between sister cells in the microcolonies undergoing yjgd depletion, we found that if a cell had a lower elongation rate than its sister, it also tended to have lower levels of gfp expressed from papt . these data support the idea that the link between ppgpp levels and the cell elongation rate is direct; for example, it is possible that high levels of ppgpp cause low elongation rates  <cit> .

our results suggest further that ygjd depletion has two  effects: first, depletion triggers ppgpp synthesis. second, it leads to termination of cell division. to gain insights in which phase of the cell cycle ygjd-depleted cells are arrested we visualized the dna-content of individual cells with dna-staining and subsequent fluorescence microscopy . after ygjd depletion in ppgpp+ cells , dna was localized at midcell and filled large areas of the cell , possibly indicating that cells were unable to carry out additional cell divisions due to "nucleoid occlusion"  <cit> . this mechanism prevents premature cell division before chromosomes have been distributed to opposite cell halves. however, termination of cell division also manifests in a ppgpp <dig> strain : depleted cells were elongated, and only a small fraction of the cell volume was filled with dna. thus, in the ppgpp <dig> background, nucleoid occlusion alone cannot be responsible for termination of cell division. the elongated phenotype of ygjd depleted ppgpp <dig> cells resembles filamentous cells blocked in cell division. however, since abrogating cell division is not inhibiting dna replication or dna segregation  <cit>  it appears unlikely that ygjd directly affects cell division.

CONCLUSIONS
our results show that single cell experiments coupled with statistical analysis can uncover phenotypic transitions that come about when an essential gene is depleted. we captured phenotypic changes with high temporal resolution across several cell generations. cell tracking techniques allowed us to build lineages of cells, and to analyze correlations between phenotypic traits at the level of sister cells emerging from the same division. this information can be used to describe growth transitions on the cellular level.

we found that ygjd depletion has two, possibly linked, effects: a decrease in cell size that is accompanied by accumulation of ppgpp, and the arrest of cell division. the involvement of ppgpp in the alteration of cell size homeostasis under ygjd depletion conditions might explain the discrepancies between two studies  that observed opposite effects on cell size upon ygjd depletion. katz et al.  <cit>  used a rela+ spot+ strain that is very similar to the ppgpp+ strain tb <dig> used here, and - consistent with our findings - observed shorter cells upon ygjd depletion. in contrast the mc <dig> derivative that was used by handford and colleagues  <cit>  carries a rela <dig> allele. this allele is known to cause reduced cellular ppgpp levels under certain growth conditions  <cit> . thus, their finding of elongated cells upon ygjd depletion might be similar to what we observed with the ppgpp <dig> strain tb <dig> 

our observations seem consistent with the finding that ygjd is involved in forming transfer-rna base modifications  <cit> . thus, depletion of ygjd protein leads to a pool of un- or undermodified transfer-rnas , possibly resulting in non-optimal interactions between transfer-rnas and mrna inside the ribosome. this could potentially elicit a stringent-response like program ppgpp release) and explain the phenotypic consequences of ygjd depletion that we observed. non-optimal interactions between non-modified trnas and mrna could be similar to the effects caused by ribosomes that are stalled on "hungry" codons: these codons are unsuccessfully trying to pair with either rare transfer-rnas or transfer-rnas that are non-aminoacylated due to amino-acid limitation. hungry codons can provoke the production of aberrant proteins by frame shifts, slides of the translational machinery or incorporation of noncognate transfer-rnas  <cit> . this might also explain the slow onset of the consequences of ygjd depletion: accumulation of aberrant proteins would slowly increase over time and reach a level where several cellular processes might be affected simultaneously.

although the biochemical activity of ygjd has been described  <cit> , the cellular functions of ygjd are not completely resolved. it will be interesting to ask how the proteins in the ygjd/yeaz/yjee complex  <cit>  of escherichia coli are interacting to fulfill their functions, and to ask whether ygjd is involved in other cellular processes or responding to environmental cues. single-cell observations of ygjd depletion experiments might be helpful to generate and test hypotheses about the essential role of this protein, and to help explain why it is so widely conserved.

