BACKGROUND
the maintenance of a normal colonic mucosa and its transition to adenocarcinoma is an important practical problem. such a system has multiple levels that are interdependent through a reciprocal influence of stem cells and their niche microenvironment, and between the epithelial tissue and the colon as a whole. while interdependent, these levels are also at the same time non-interacting within their respective domains of autonomy. using the colon as an example, we present here a mathematical analysis of a cross-level principle, linking the stemness of lineages in colonic crypts to the fate of the epithelial tissue. we present a study of cross-level principles in stem cell driven tissue organization and proof that the fate of the tissue is necessarily determined by a single lineage. our analysis, rooted in mathematical general systems theory  <cit> , provides a theoretical basis for the concepts of nice succession and monoclonal conversion.

the intestinal crypt serves as an example for a complex biological system in which the behavior of the whole  is considered to "emerge" from the functioning and interactions of the parts . but without specifying how the emergence takes place, the concept has almost a mystical character; it is an observation rather than a contribution to understanding the phenomenon. for understanding it is necessary to identify how the tissue level relates to the cell level. understanding such cross-level relations in complex systems is key to "demystifying" the concept of emergence. the present paper provides one example of an organizing principle that is formulated and proven as a mathematical theorem.

the adult tissue of an organism includes stem cells that generate cell lineages, which maintain not only the pool of stem cells but through cell division cycles also maintain and regenerate the functional tissue through differentiation and maturation. the analysis of these inherently dynamic processes is of fundamental importance for modern medicine. for example, within the intestinal crypts, the interplay between the tissue's structural and functional organization is particularly instructive. the intestinal tract is also one of the most common sites of carcinogenesis due to the mechanical and chemotoxic stress it is subjected to. the colon is organized into about  <dig> crypts, each of which contains about  <dig> to  <dig> thousand cells  <cit> . at the bottom of the crypt a small number of stem cells divide slowly in an environment referred to as the niche. the existence of a stem cell niche in colonic crypts has been demonstrated through methylation tags  <cit> . the emerging daughter cells proliferate rapidly before differentiating and maturing into functional tissue cells. the cells of the crypt walls migrate towards the top where they undergo apoptosis  and/or are shed into the gut lumen. homeostasis in the colonic crypt therefore, over a period of a few days, involves the renewal of the epithelial cell layer that lines the crypt  <cit> . the normal functioning of a crypt  is driven by a small number of stem cells in a self-referential manner, i.e.: the cells not only influence their environment but also respond to cues from their environment. if a complex system, such as the crypt, is developed and maintained by a very small number of cells, any externally forced alterations or malfunctioning could compromise the fate of the entire organ and even that of the whole organism. for example, the number of stem cells, or more precisely an overproduction of stem cells, can be linked to hyperplastic tissue structures; a situation that may represent a high risk for further carcinogenic transformation  <cit> .

in the intestinal crypt, there is an interaction between the crypt as a whole and the stem cells, between stem cells of the niche and their surrounding tissue. these relations emerge from an intricate combination of several dynamic processes through which cells divide, differentiate and mature. a whole-part relationship thus relates the lower level of stem cell divisions  with the higher level of the tissue . although the tissue may appear stable with respect to total cell numbers and types, the underlying parts or cell lineages may in fact be quite dynamic or unstable in order to maintain macroscopic homeostasis. what we will be focusing on here is the relation between the stem cells lineages  and the future development  of the tissue. in particular, we shall study the balance of cell divisions that maintain, reduce, or expand the pool of those cells that can generate lineages , transient cells and cells committed to differentiation and maturation to maintain the normal functioning of the tissue.

at every level, from dna replication to tissue regeneration, living systems have developed incredibly sophisticated protection mechanisms to ensure a healthy functioning of the body, which is astoundingly robust against external perturbations and injury. central to maintenance, renewal and repair is the concept of stem cells. these are most of the time assumed to asymmetrically divide into a new stem cell and a non-stem cell daughter. this situation is stable, but not robust because there is no mechanism to compensate for accidental death of the original stem cell. for deviations from steady state, stem cells can also divide symmetrically, either to produce two stem cell daughters  or two differentiated daughters . the ability of stem cells to divide both asymmetrically and symmetrically allows for robust tissue homeostasis because the crypt will always approximately have the "right" number of stem cells. in light of the robustness of a healthy tissue with multiple stem cells per crypt, could it be plausible that a single stem cell and its lineage becomes dominant for the functioning of a tissue? the astounding result of our analysis is - yes - a single lineage dominates the fate of the tissue, not as a random or rare event but as the only logically feasible outcome of a robust system.

processes of dominance in colorectal cancer
gastrointestinal stem cells and their environment have the capacity to give rise to epithelial cell lineages through a regulation of different types and rates of cell divisions. this phenomenon is accompanied by mechanisms that allow for the regulation of cell differentiation and apoptosis, and that consequently ensure tissue homeostasis. however, stem cells are also key elements in the earliest stages of gastric and colonic cancer, as they form a target for mutations that may eventually lead to the development of the malignant phenotype. due to a lack of reliable markers, adult gastrointestinal stem cells are difficult to define and characterize at the molecular level. this limits the knowledge about them and is a reason why events of early gastrointestinal carcinoma formation and expansion continue to puzzle us.

the "unitarian hypothesis" of cheng and leblond  <cit>  was one of the first arguments for the dominance of single cells in the context of intestinal cancer. they suggested that all of the differentiated cell lineages within the intestinal epithelium are derived from a single stem cell lineage. although this idea has been contested on the basis that there is no experimental confirmation  <cit> , the idea that all the gastrointestinal epithelial cells emanate from a single progenitor stem cell is widely accepted. with the exception of the villous epithelium in the small intestine, in which the tissue a mixture derived from stem cell lineages of more than one crypt, all epithelial cell lineages within a single crypt in the small intestine and colon are clonally derived. turning our attention from healthy functioning tissue to its malfunction, a well-established and generally accepted model of tumor progression in the colon is the adenoma-carcinoma sequence. in this framework, the morphological changes progress from aberrant crypt foci , through adenoma, and finally to carcinoma. the earliest recognizable lesions are the acfs, which are probably monoclonal pre-neoplastic lesions involved in colon tumorigenesis in both humans and rodents . morphologically, these lesions appear as crypts with a thickened epithelium elevated above the mucosa and while the non-dysplastic type shows little genetic change, acfs with associated dysplasia contain important genetic lesions. the monoclonal origin of cancer has been suggested on the basis of observations according to which neoplasms generally arise from a single cell of origin  <cit> . similarly, while of course more than one cell can pass the threshold for malfunction at the same time, most of a tumor can usually be identified as the progeny of a single cell, or very few cells  <cit> . for the hematopoietic system, glauche et al.  <cit>  developed a stochastic model of lineage specification as a progressive restriction of lineage potential due to a competition between different interacting lineage propensities. the competition is governed by environmental stimuli promoting a drift from a multipotent coexpression to the dominance of one lineage. a review of the literature leads us to consider three processes that are examples of "dominance" by individual cells and their lineages.

niche succession is a process of "dominance" by which the progeny of a single stem cell replace other stem cells in the niche  <cit> . recent studies using methylation changes as stem cell fate markers revealed that niche succession appears to occur in human colonic crypts  <cit> . dominance or succession occurs with symmetrical divisions where both daughter cells adopt the same fate. with symmetric stem cell division, a lineage may become extinct if both daughter cells leave the niche. this extinction can be compensated by another symmetric division in which both daughter cells remain as stem cells in the niche, resulting in no net change in stem cell numbers. eventually all stem cell lineages within a crypt except for one become extinct, leading to niche succession or monoclonal conversion  <cit> . this dominance process recurs such that niche succession occurs multiple times during a lifetime  <cit> . niche succession is a way by which a single stem cell line can expand to dominate a single crypt, while crypt fission is the process by which progeny can expand laterally by crypt duplication. in humans, mucosal growth involves the reduplication of crypts by crypt fission. likewise, after mucosal damage in ulcerative colitis, crypt fission is an important regenerative mechanism. the concept of crypt fission is supported by clonality experiments in both mice and humans . through a model of clonal evolution in the intestinal crypt, which was, based on a simultaneous activity of several coexisting tissue stem cells, and that generate several clones at any time , loeffler and roeder  <cit>  showed how fluctuations in the long run prevent coexistence and, lead to monoclonality. subsequently, the descendents from one clone will eventually generate all active stem cells in the crypt tissue.

the system of colonic crypts consists of two levels - stem cells and the tissue generated from their lineages. the dominance theorem, introduced and proven in this paper, establishes monoclonal conversion and niche succession as bottom-up cross-level relations. crypt fission will be postulated to realize a top-down process.

a stemness process model
in potten and loeffler's  <cit>  "screw-model" for adult tissue stem cells, proliferation and differentiation/maturation are independent processes and we furthermore allow for de-differentiation of transit cells. in order to illustrate our analysis, but without loss of generality to the results, we simplify the picture by distinguishing only three kinds of cells : stem cells, from which lineages originate, and that are capable of generating a succession of stem cells, transit cells and mature cells; transit cells, which have not yet reached their full functional competence and which can potentially de-differentiate and proliferate; and mature cells that are committed to differentiation and/or have matured into functional tissue cells. in our example, we shall distinguish between three tissue fates: .

human aging is linked to an overall decline in tissue regenerative potential, thus pointing to adult stem cell functionality  <cit> . while it remains an open question how stem cells lose their functionality over time, and despite suggestions that the lifespan of any species is not determined by a limited supply of its stem cell population  <cit> , it does not seem implausible to link niche depletion with aging. for the present paper, we shall link clonal expansion to aberrant tissue  as a predecessor to tumor formation  <cit> . we do note however that this particular choice and simplified picture of tissue fates does not affect the generality of the formal analysis developed further below. in our formal analysis we made an effort to ensure that the results do not depend on this particular choice.

by 'stem cell', we mean a cell that is the starting point for a lineage and we shall put more emphasis on the process of lineage formation  than on the stem cells. in fact, we feel increasingly uncomfortable with the notion of 'a' stem cell and instead prefer to speak of the stemness of a lineage, defined by the lineages' potential or capacity to contribute to a tissue fate. in the following section, we define stemness therefore not as a property of a cell but as an emergent phenomenon of the lineage that generates, maintains and regenerates a tissue. this point has also been argued by lander  <cit>  recently. that is, in the context of tissue organization, the concepts of self-renewal and potency have long been seen as key characteristic features of stem cells but all attempts to link these concepts to molecular characteristics of the cell have, so far, been unsuccessful. our analysis demonstrates the usefulness of a definition of stemness as a property linked to a process with emergent properties  <cit> .

our mathematical framework relies on order relations, specifically adopting ideas from consensus theory  <cit> , and is thus strikingly simple compared to the sophisticated mathematical models that have been developed to simulate intestinal crypts. this type of analysis is not restricted by the example chosen, or sensitive to the precise assumptions made about possible cell or tissue fates. in other words, the results should apply to any number of stem cells  and should be valid even if many aspects of crypt biology are uncertain, as long as stem cells have three or more alternative fates. furthermore, we require that the results of the analysis should not be sensitive to alternative sets of potential fates , nor should it depend on changes to the set of actually considered fates .

we formulate a theorem which shows that if dominance of a single cell lineage is not permitted, then there exist no other logically feasible explanation for how individual cell fates are aggregated into the collective fate of the tissue. this result can be formulated in another way, stating that dominance of a single stem cell lineage is the only outcome which satisfies the theorem, given requirements and conditions set out before. many intuitively appealing rules, like the majority principle, fail to provide a rational explanation. the analysis supports experimental evidence for the dominance of single stem cells and their progeny in tissue maintenance and carcinogenesis. we also sketch a proof for the dominance theorem and provide intuitive graphical illustrations to support the mathematical analysis. full details of the mathematical framework and proof are provided in the methods section. finally, we discuss the interpretation of the result and its consequences.

RESULTS
a definition of stemness
there is little doubt that stem cell lineages are uniquely capable of developing, maintaining and regenerating tissue, and yet the concept of stem cells itself still causes confusion and concern  <cit> . in an attempt to resolve some difficulties associated with this concept, mikkers and frisen  <cit>  described the development of a cell along a certain lineage as a linear process with a gradual specialization through determination, commitment and final differentiation. besides, most cells in the mature body are at the very end of the differentiation line, while some cells - stem cells - halt the differentiation process, divide and can give rise to more cells of their own type. in this view, stem cells differ from transit amplifying progenitor cells, which may be multipotent and are capable of self-renewal, but are not halted at an intermediate position, hence inevitably progressing towards terminal differentiation.

following lander  <cit> , we consider stemness an emergent property of cell lineages within their specific environment. properties or attributes of stem cells can only be assessed in terms of the cells' future potential or of the retrospect, that is, by looking at the lineage they generated. more specifically, we shall define stemness as the lineage's contribution towards a tissue fate. we shall thus assume that at any point in time one can assess the lineages for their stemness. while it may not be possible to do this quantitatively, the least we can do is assess this in a qualitative manner using order relations, thus assessing the lineages' stemness with respect to:

: the capacity to produce functional, mature tissue cells

to regenerate tissue 

to maintain tissue homeostasis.

: the capacity to expand the pool of stem cells

by self-replication 

by differentiation.

: the potential to reduce the pool of stem cells

by self-reduction  and maturation

by apoptosis.

stem cells usually divide asymmetrically to produce one stem and one non-stem daughter. if this was the only choice, the system or tissue would not be robust because there would be no way to compensate for accidental death or injury. so each crypt contains at least two stem cells. but for a more robust system, stem cells, through the development of lineages, have choices - asymmetric renewal, symmetric expansion, and symmetric extinction. the notion of "choice"  will lead us to a dominance theorem, introduced and proven further below. it demonstrates that a robust  system always ends up with dominance.

since we wish to investigate what is 'in principle' possible, we shall explore all logically feasible possibilities, and thus will not be required to consider numbers or actual order relationships between different cell lineages. although this may sound contradictory, it is the striking simplicity of the maths involved here that will enable us to analyze very complex systems. a consequence of the kind of analysis pursued here is that it does not provide an explanation about what causal mechanisms are relevant but what logically plausible explanations, if any, are available.

lineage-tissue cross-level-relations
to help the reader with the formal aspects of the manuscript, table  <dig> in the methods section summarizes the notation and definitions used throughout. we formulate and analyze cross-level principles, by which the individual rankings of propensities for n ≥  <dig> lineages li, i =  <dig> ..., n, are aggregated into a single ranking of fates for the tissue. the ranking of propensities defines formally an order relation, where ri and pi are the propensity ranking of cell lineage i. for example, h ri d ri e, which could also be written as ri = , denotes the assessment that for the lineage of cell i, the propensity for h is greater than, or equal to, the propensity for d, and the propensity for d is greater than, or equal to the propensity for e. it is thus assumed that it would be - in principle - possible to assess the propensities by a "greater than" , respectively "greater than or equal"  relation, where hpid denotes that h is more feasible than d, that is, the propensity of h is greater than that of d w.r.t. lineage i. hrd denotes a "more feasible or indifferent" relation, for which the propensity of h is greater or equal to that of d. in the formal analysis the fates h , e , d  are possible values for general variables x, y, z. the ranking of propensities, with respect to alternative tissue fates, is then interpreted in terms of the feasibility of those fates. an instantiation of a particular cross-level principle will be referred to as a lineage-tissue mapping. this function maps the individual cell lineage's rankings  into a ranking of fates for the tissue .

more generally, the problem considered here is the following. given a set of alternatives a and n rankings over a, we wish to identify an appropriate rule/principle that when presented with the n-tuple of rankings of alternatives, returns from a a unique consensus object that in some sense best represents the information/consequences of the individual rankings. although the approach may seem to be abstract and technical, it is practical and concrete because it enables us to distinguish between what is logically feasible and what is not  <cit> . we consider x to be the set of potential fates; fates that are potentially relevant to our study. let k denote the set of all non-empty finite subsets of x. in order to ensure that our analysis is general , we will distinguish between x, the set of potential fates, and a set a ∈ k of actual fates; fates that are actually considered in a particular context. given a set of actual fates a, the n-tuple  of rankings is called a profile, where each ri is a propensity profile for the individual cell lineages l = {l <dig>  ..., ln} over a. a cross-level principle will be encoded by a lineage-tissue mapping, merging the individual propensity rankings into a single ranked profile of propensities for the tissue. given x, the set of alternative fates, which may potentially be relevant to our analysis, and the set a of actually considered fates for the cell lineages , the lineage-tissue mapping f maps elements from k × d into k such that for all a ∈ k and all  ∈ d: f) ⊆ a, where with d we denote the set of logically possible profiles.

an intuitive example of a cross-level principle is the majority rule: the fate of the tissue corresponds to the one with the greatest number of first places in the lineages propensity rankings. . another example is dominance: the fate of the tissue always corresponds to the profile of a particular cell lineage. while the concept of dominance will play a greater role later, without further formal analysis one can already show that the majority rule fails to provide a contradiction-free analysis. this is illustrated in figure  <dig>  rather than proceeding with various examples, and testing their validity, we seek here an analysis of what is possible "in principle". to this end, we will specify  requirements that lineage-tissue mappings should satisfy; and  requirements which ensure that the results of our analysis are universal, general or "law-like".

with respect to the lineage-tissue mapping we identify a minimal set of requirements so as to ensure that the widest possible class of cross-level principles is covered. specifically, we require for the lineage-tissue mappings no more than to respect unanimity: for all x and y, if xriy for all lineages li, then xry for the tissue. in other words, if for every cell lineage the propensity for x is higher than for y, then for the tissue, the propensity of the tissue fate related to x should be greater than that of y.

note that for different sets of potential fates x, the same rule for a cross-level principle would define a different lineage-tissue mapping. this is due to the fact that a mathematical function  is strictly defined in combination with its domain. a cross-level principle therefore defines a lineage-tissue mapping for each set x of alternatives  and each set l of cell lineages . in what follows we will therefore distinguish between alternative sets xs and as and discuss the consequences on lineage-tissue mappings as well as the validity of our analysis of cross-level principles in general. changes to x will be dealt with in a requirement for regularity, while changes in a will be considered with a condition on consistency. if x is thus some set of potential candidate fates, whereas a ∈ k is a possible set of actually considered fates, our analysis will also have to consider the elements of x\a, which are the potential-but-not-actually-considered fates. this is to ensure that if something is missed, this does not make any difference to the result of our analysis.

regularity means, that for a given cross-level principle, a set of actually considered fates, a set of cell lineages at time t, and a profile  defined over them, if there exists another reduced set of potential-but-not-actually-considered fates, then in the analysis, the lineages' propensities over the remaining potential fates  and the ranking from the set of actually considered fates should not change. in other words, we require our analysis to be independent of any other possible "universes of fates" that one may assume. take the example above, where we consider three abstract fates - clonal expansion, homeostasis, and niche depletion. one might argue that at this level of abstraction "everything" is possible and that the approach time lacks specificity. it is for that reason that we here explicitly define requirements, like regularity, to ensure that any kind of universe of potential fates is covered by the analysis. in other words, while the definition of x may depend on the context and could seem to be a subjective choice, regularity ensures that the result of our analysis would not be influenced by the context or choice.

following on from regularity, bordes and tideman  <cit>  showed that regularity implies another condition referred to as independence of irrelevant alternatives . iia means that the analysis of rankings among the actually considered fates should be robust in the sense that ranking of tissue fates and the lineages' propensity rankings over the actually considered fates should be the same if propensities over potential-but-not-considered candidate fates change. iia ensures that the analysis of a subsystem of actually considered fates is not influenced by something we do not know of. in other words, if one would study a particular system and analyze the stemness of cell lineages, one can only consider as an argument to the lineage-tissue mapping of what we can have knowledge of. the methods section gives full details related to iia.

the situation described here is similar to that of pathway modeling in systems biology. modeling a particular pathway, is, in most cases, the study of a subsystem, whose function contributes to a larger whole . the implicit assumption for these projects is usually that the subsystem  can be analyzed in isolation. although this is not often done, before conducting an analysis of a subsystem that is embedded into a larger whole, one ought to specify criteria that ensure the analysis of the subsystem will allow inferences of greater generality.

to require a cross-level principle to be regular, or a lineage-tissue mapping to satisfy iia, means that for any fixed context, that is, any given set of actually considered fates, the ranking of tissue fates should be independent of the very existence of alternatives outside the context, that is, independent of whether potential-but-actually-not-considered fates exist. if such potential-but-not-actual fates do exist, the analysis should be independent of who they are and of what the lineages' propensity rankings over them are.

regularity is about the possibility of alternative sets of potentially relevant cell fates, the differences of which however do not affect the set of actually considered fates. similar, iia is concerned with what happens to the ranking of tissue propensities when the set of actually considered fates being given, the profile of lineage propensities changes somehow. furthermore, we add a requirement for consistency to our analysis to ensure that tissue fates can actually be determined for a given set of alternative lineage fates. in other words, for any two fates we require that it is possible to assess the order of propensities , that there is some relation between the two. the condition for consistency is concerned with what happens to the ranking of tissue propensities when the profile of lineage propensities being given, the set of actually considered fates changes in a certain way. consistency implies another condition referred to as c', and which is fully justified in the methods section. with c' we ensure that a function exists which relates lineage propensities to a tissue fate. there is some similarity between regularity and the consistency condition . in both cases, the profile of lineage propensities is assumed given, and a set of fates is reduced . however, for regularity it is the set of potential fates that is reduced in such a way that the original set of actually considered fates is still included in the set of potential fates after the reduction. for c' the set of actual candidates, is reduced in such a way that the set of tissue fates is still included in the set of actually considered fates.

at this point, let us consider another intuitively appealing example for an aggregation rule, called rank-order principle. for each cell lineage all fates are ranked and weights  be given in the opposite order of the ranking - the highest weighting for the fate with the largest propensity. for example, if there are three fates, the highest weighting is  <dig>  with respect to the conceptual difference between x and a, we can proceed with our analysis in two ways  <cit> : the global interpretation of the rank-order principle would assume that it is possible to know the propensities for the whole of x. after weights have been assigned, the relevant tissue fates are identified and ranked by picking those that are in the subset a of actual fates. the tissue fate with the highest propensity corresponds to the fate with the highest weighting. the second interpretation is referred to as a local rank-order aggregation rule and proceeds by determining the fates' weighting from the restrictions of the lineages' propensities to a subset a of actual fates, the choice from a being the fate with the highest of the weightings. because for each given profile the global interpretation of the rank-order method generates a complete weak ordering over the whole of x, which will be used to determine the tissue fate over the set of actual fates, the corresponding lineage-tissue mapping satisfies the consistency condition but fails to satisfy iia and regularity. the local interpretation of the rank-order method does satisfy regularity and iia but fails to satisfy the consistency condition because to determine the ranking over a set of actual fates a, only the lineages' propensities restricted to a are taken into account . both, the intuitive majority principle and the rank-order principle fail to provide a contradiction-free analysis: are there any other rules that could provide an explanation for cross-level relationships? the answer is given by the dominance theorem, introduced in the next section.

in summary, to ensure the most general analysis, we require the cross-level principle and the lineage-tissue mapping to satisfy requirements for regularity, iia, consistency , and unanimity. we can now state our main result about the relationship between the stemness of cell lineages making up a tissue and the future development  of that tissue.

a theorem about cellular cross-level relationships
a cross-level relationship describes how the behavior of stem cell lineages relates to the fate of the tissue. following on from the considerations in the previous section, we can now ask the following question: are there any reasonable cross-level principles that satisfy our requirements? the answer is yes, but surprisingly only one, and one in which a single cell lineage is dominant. this can be formulated as a theorem:

theorem : for any tissue with two or more cell lineages, where the capacities of each cell lineage are related to three or more tissue fates, the only cross-level principle  that satisfies the conditions of unanimity, regularity, independence of irrelevant fates, and consistency is the dominance relationship. there are no other principles satisfying these conditions.

the surprising result is thus that despite many intuitively appealing rules that come to mind, none of them would allow for a contradiction-free and consistent analysis.

sketch of a graphical proof for the dominance theorem: a lineage is said to be dominant if the tissue profile always matches this individual lineage's profile. we define pi, ri and ii to be the "more feasible than", "more feasible or indifferent" and "indifferent" relations for lineage li. when we write p, r or i, without a subscript, this indicates a relation for the tissue. our diagrammatic proof of the dominance theorem follows the proof of arrow's possibility theorem in  <cit> .

without loss of generality, we consider two cell lineages and use the example in figure  <dig> where the propensity profiles are translated from a table into the euclidean plane. the dots in the plane summarize the cell level propensity profiles, from which we wish to infer an order of potential tissue fates. the diagram is interpreted by comparing the positions of the points h, e, d, relative to each other and with respect to a reference point r*, which divides the plane into four regions. from figure  <dig> we have for both lineages hp1d and hp2d and hence unanimity, from which we infer that for the tissue we should have hpd. by unanimity we can also see that all points in region i are more feasible than r* and that r* is more feasible than all points in region iii.

next we establish that all points in region ii  must be ranked in the same way against r*. that is, for all points r in region ii, for the tissue we have either rpr*, rir*, or r*pr. consider the two fates d and h and suppose for the tissue hpr*. by using an increasing monotone transformation, one could map r* into itself and h onto d, while preserving the individual rankings.

since hpr*, we must therefore also have dpr* as well. in other words, the whole of region ii  is ranked in the same way with respect to r* . because the lineage-tissue mapping will imply an ordering, there can be three ways by which region ii  is ranked with respect to r*: indifferences, more feasible, or less feasible. figure  <dig> shows that indifference can be ruled out because it leads to a contradiction; for we have hir* and dir*, which would imply  hid for the tissue, contradicting the unanimity inference hpd from figure  <dig> 

in the next step it is shown that the ranking given to region ii must be the opposite from the ranking given to region iv. suppose region ii is more feasible than r*, one can transform h onto r* and r* onto e. since h was assumed to be more feasible than r*, this relationship must be preserved by the transformation and thus r* is more feasible than e, and hence region iv is less feasible than r*. note that the assumption of region ii to be more feasible, is arbitrary; if region ii is less feasible than r*, this would imply that region iv is more feasible.

remembering our initial conclusions about regions i and iii, we notice that we can merge adjacent that are both ranked in the same way with respect to r*. finally, reminding ourselves that the tissue order relation implied by the lineage-tissue map, is one of dominance if and only if there is an individual lineage li such that for all r* in the euclidean space ℝn, if for the lineages ri* >ri, then for the tissue r*pr. what we have shown in figure  <dig> and  <dig> is that with respect to r*, the tissue order relation implied by the lineage-tissue mapping must lead to one of two rankings - one in which lineage  <dig> dominates  or one in which lineage  <dig> dominates . dominance for the tissue is inevitable, the only plausible explanation .

it is worth again emphasizing that the theorem is saying that weakly reasonable lineage-tissue mappings other than dominance simply do not exist - no need to try find one - they will never be found. for further details of a diagrammatic proof, including a demonstration that the result holds for any number of lineages, we refer to  <cit> .

the main objective of the present paper was to investigate dominance in cross-level  relationships of stem cell lineages and their tissue. to this end, we established a theoretical basis for the concepts of niche succession and monoclonal conversion. a key element of our approach is that we turned requirements on the cross-level principles  into requirements for the analysis, not the biophysical process, thereby ensuring the universality of our result. this gives the analysis an epistemological character - allowing a result about what we can know about the cell-tissue link, in addition to a description of what the nature of this cross-level relationship is.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the formal analysis presented here is based on a definition of stemness that is derived from an analysis of a lineage's capacity to contribute towards the future development of a tissue and hence its fate. based on this definition we asked how one could explain the relation between stem cell lineages and tissue fates? considering mild conditions that cross-level principles should satisfy and by posing requirements to ensure that the results are most general and that the analysis is robust, we find that dominance by an individual lineage is the only logically feasible explanation to formulate a cross-level principle. the theoretical finding does therefore confirms, or is confirmed by experimental evidence for niche succession and monoclonal conversion.

our conceptual framework is simple and yet comprehensive when exploring all logical possibilities. the mathematical framework is quantitative  but the analysis is also qualitative . the level of modeling in our analysis has one consequence in that it is not just about "what is", i.e., an ontological question, but the analysis is also about "what we can know", i.e., an epistemological result. in other words, our analysis is not a description of causal mechanisms underlying carcinogenesis; instead the analysis demonstrates that dominance is the only logical explanation that can be given. in our context, this means that the goal is not so much prediction than understanding. prediction - in the sense of knowing how the future evolves is, of course, a desirable objective - but in biology predictions are not synonymous with understanding. generating predictions is one way to test whether this understanding is consistent with the behavior of the system of interest.

the derivation of the relation of tissue fates as an aggregation  of individual lineage propensities is without consideration for the mechanisms of how the propensities for individual stem cell lineages arise. one could describe the result as a bottom-up organization principle, formalizing an example of emergence. just as the fate of the tissue is based on individual stem cell lineages, the latter will depend on the state of the tissue as a whole. it is this self-referential or circular causality of the tissue environment that influences the behavior of stem cells, which in turn constructs this environment that makes a detailed biophysical analysis so difficult and motivates the level and type of mathematical analysis chosen here. in complex systems, such as the intestinal tissue or a single crypt, in which multilevelness is a defining characteristic, cross-level relations are in general bi-directional, i.e., bottom-up as well as top-down. in the colon, stem cells reside within a niche, formed by epithelial and mesenchymal cells. the tissue level regulates stem cell behavior through paracrine secretion of growth factors and cytokines. while our analysis established niche succession and monoclonal conversion as bottom-up principles, the concept of crypt fission suggests itself as a natural candidate for a top-down coordination process. clonality experiments have shown clustering of mutated, phenotypically similar crypts together in patches. parks et al.  <cit>  showed that in the small intestine and colon, administration of mutagens leads to the emergence of crypts populated by cells with a different, mutated phenotype. this is preceded by a transient rise in the frequency of crypts with a partially mutated phenotype, and the disappearance of these partially mutated crypts occurs contemporaneously with the attainment of a plateau value of the wholly mutated crypts. crypt fission, which occurs rarely in normal colons, can explain the clustering of apparently related crypts through a process in which crypts undergo a bifurcation, eventually leading to the formation of two daughter crypts. this process is believed to play a central role in the massive increase in crypt numbers in the postnatal period and the regenerative phase following radiation . the majority of adenomas greater than one crypt in size appear to be polyclonal  <cit> .

the formal framework and proof requires a minimum of two stem cells and three or more alternative fates. for intestinal crypts, our analysis thus rules out a model of tissue homeostasis in which lost cells are replenished by a single dominant cell that divides only assymetrical. recent, combined experimental and theoretical findings  <cit>  suggest a stochastic picture in which stem cells can divide symmetrically, with the cell fate being determined after division, possibly by competition for available niche space at the crypt base. in this setting, homeostasis is obtained by competition of cells with respect to properties of the tissue level  <cit> . both sets of works also showed that crypts gradually become monoclonal.

