BACKGROUND
phenotypic plasticity describes the ability of a genotype to express different phenotypes in response to varying environmental conditions  <cit> . given that phenotypic plasticity is an important adaptation to face heterogeneous environments it is a fundamental aspect of the ecology and evolution of a broad range of organisms  <cit> .

one frequently changing biotic condition, which strongly influences organisms’ fitness and abundance in an ecological community context, is predation  <cit> . phenotypic plasticity in defensive traits, so called inducible defences, occur in many species throughout invertebrate, vertebrate and plant taxa  <cit> . they are especially common in aquatic environments, where prey species can easily detect chemical cues  released by predators  <cit> .

important key stone species of fresh water environments are waterfleas . the biology of these animals was studied over the past  <dig> years  <cit> , resulting in a large amount of literature documenting their ecological diversity. with the help of the daphnia genomics consortium , daphnia is now one of the leading model organisms in evolutionary and ecological functional genomics. with the published genome sequence of daphnia pulex <cit>  and the available pre-release of the daphnia magna genome sequence , the american national institutes of health  has added daphnia to their list of model organisms for biomedical research .

daphnia shows a multitude of inducible defences in response to changing predator regimes and hence serves as textbook example for phenotypic plasticity in defensive traits . these defences include life history shifts like altered size or age at maturity  <cit> , modifications of behaviour, e.g. diel vertical migration  <cit>  and morphological changes including the formation of spine-like structures and helmets  <cit> . also so called hidden morphological defences, which increase the stability of the carapace, were found  <cit> .

the description of the d. pulex genome unravelled large arrays of environmental specific genes  <cit> , which may be the key players in the formation of phenotypic plastic traits  <cit> . these genes often reside within the elevated number of tandem duplications, a striking feature of the d. pulex genome  <cit> . the same seems to be true for the genome of d. magna . however, as molecular tools and genomic resources for daphnia have only recently become available, the analysis of molecular mechanisms underlying inducible defences in daphnia exposed to predator kairomones is still in its infancy . up to date, only few studies have been conducted using either candidate gene/protein approaches  <cit>  or a microarray approach based on stress and life stage specific cdna libraries  <cit>  in d. magna.

in these studies, genes involved in protein biosynthesis, protein catabolism and protein folding  <cit>  showed different rna expression patterns between d. magna defended against fish or chaoborus and a control group. also heat shock proteins, confirmed by western blot analysis, were found to be involved in the anti-predator defence of d. magna, being more abundant after short-term exposure  <cit>  but less abundant after long-term exposure to fish kairomones  <cit> . furthermore, two proteins of the cytoskeleton, actin and alpha tubulin, were affected  <cit> .

the availability of enhanced genomic resources for daphnia not only facilitates candidate gene approaches but also enables holistic approaches. in contrast to candidate approaches, holistic experiments may elucidate unpredicted key players involved in trait formation and regulation of inducible defences in daphnia. holistic proteomic analysis is especially suitable, as proteins are the typical effectors of biological functions and protein abundance is not necessarily well correlated with the corresponding mrna level .

in the present study, we used the predator-prey system of triops cancriformis and daphnia magna for analysis of proteins involved in the formation of inducible defences. d. magna is a common species found in temporary and permanent ponds spreading from temperate regions to arid areas in the holarctic and africa  <cit> . this species shows inducible morphological defences in response to kairomones released by t. cancriformis. these morphological changes result in an increased bulkiness  and are known to serve as an effective defence against triops predation  <cit> . in addition, d. magna develops hidden morphological defences when exposed to triops kairomones, which consist of a harder and thicker cuticle and an increased diameter of cuticle pillars, and therefore enhance carapace stability  <cit> .

RESULTS
we have studied differentially abundant proteins in d. magna exposed to kairomones of the predator t. cancriformis, which is known to induce phenotypic plastic defensive structures in this species  <cit> , and a control group not exposed to predator kairomones. performing proteomic analysis of adult daphnia is a challenging task due to very strong proteolytic activity  <cit> , which most likely results from proteases expressed in the digestive tract  <cit> . to avoid proteolytic degradation of protein lysates, we sampled late stage d. magna embryos featuring reduced protease activity. the sensitive period in daphnia for perceiving chemical cues released by predators and for the formation of defensive traits is known to happen during embryonic development  <cit> . preliminary experiments proved the same for d. magna exposed to triops rendering late embryonic stages perfectly suitable for proteomic analysis.

proteomic 2d-dige analysis and mass spectrometric analysis of abundance altered spots resulted in identification of  <dig> protein spots with  <dig> being more intense in kairomone exposed animals and  <dig> less intense. mass spectrometric data, summarised spot data and further details are provided in the supplementary files .

in detail, three biological replicates of triops kairomone exposed animals and three biological replicates of a control group were compared using three 2d-dige gels. the gel images were of high-quality  with all three gels showing highly reproducible spot patterns . in an unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis, spot patterns clustered in two distinct groups, each containing solely gels from triops kairomone exposed animals and controls, respectively .
daphnia 
in 2d dige analysis 

spots were identified with lc-ms/ms and annotated using blastp algorithm against ncbi nr database. spots related to vitellogenin were not shown.
daphnia 
in 2d dige analysis 

spots were identified with lc-ms/ms and annotated using blastp algorithm against ncbi nr database. spots related to vitellogenin were not shown.

by software assisted image analysis of 2d-dige gels,  <dig> spots could be matched, i.e., corresponding spots of the three replicates were assigned in a supervised manner, and the intensity of all matched spots was quantified.  <dig> spots were found with different intensities between triops exposed and control daphnia . out of these spots,  <dig> showed increased intensity in gels from triops exposed animals whereas  <dig> showed decreased intensity.

 <dig> spots were successfully identified using nano-lc ms/ms. unambiguous identification of one single protein per spot was possible for  <dig> spots, while the majority of remaining spots contained contaminating fragments of the yolk protein precursor vitellogenin. the latter spots composed of peptides referring to more than one protein were only included in the bioinformatic analyses, if the total number of assigned peptides for one protein was at least three times higher than the number of all other assigned peptides. the corresponding protein was then regarded to represent the major component.

with respect to these classifications, we identified  <dig> protein spots in total. out of this,  <dig> spots were more abundant in triops exposed d. magna with  <dig> spots not containing vitellogenin . of the remaining  <dig> spots, which were less abundant in triops exposed d. magna, only  <dig> spots contained other proteins than vitellogenin . for vitellogenin-related spots, see the additional file  <dig> 

more abundant proteins of animals exposed to triops kairomones  include proteins related to the cuticle , proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism , proteins related to the muscular system , phosphorylation , glycosylation  and a regulatory 14-3- <dig> ζ protein .

less abundant proteins of animals exposed to triops kairomones  include a protein responsible for larval development called prohibitin, a transcription activator  and a heat shock protein .

to find grouped protein annotation terms and to visualise their relationships, cluego network analysis  <cit>  was conducted using the gene ontology and kegg databases of d. melanogaster . four functional groups could be separated, which were related to either glycolysis, actin cytoskeleton, chitin deacetylase activity or nucleoside triphosphate biosynthetic processes.

comparison of protein data to known tandem duplicated genes in d. pulex with three or more duplications resulted in matching of three proteins. one cuticle protein , actin  and vitellogenin  were found to be tandem duplicated in the d. pulex genome.

discussion
predation is a key factor driving natural selection and therefore important for evolution of prey species and dynamics of prey communities  <cit> . as predator quantity and quality usually show heterogeneous patterns  <cit> , prey species develop a variety of plastic defences in response to changing predator regimes  <cit> . predator characteristics, e.g. prey-preference, feeding mechanism, predation strategy and habitat use, play an important role in shaping these plastic defences  <cit> .

particularly, daphnia has to cope with a variety of size-selective predators  <cit> . vertebrate predators like visually hunting fish are usually limited in the process of detecting the prey, whereas invertebrate predator like chaoborus or triops are often limited at the capturing, handling or ingestion step. therefore, daphnia coexisting with fish usually are smaller and more transparent  <cit>  and show avoidance behaviour such as diel vertical migration  <cit> . in response to invertebrate predators, daphnia often develops morphological defences , which impede capturing, handling or ingestion by the predator.

we studied the defensive responses of d. magna exposed to t. cancriformis, which consist of morphological changes resulting in an increased bulkiness .

proteins more abundant in kairomone exposed daphnia were similar to proteins connected to regulation, carbohydrate metabolism, biosynthetic processes, muscular system or the cuticle . the majority of less abundant proteins was identified as different isoformes of the yolk protein precursor vitellogenin. three proteins of this data-set  are known to be tandem-duplicated in the genome of d. pulex. tandem-duplicated genes are thought to play an important role in the formation of phenotypic plastic traits  <cit> .

proteins involved in the formation of inducible defences regulate cell proliferation, participate in signalling pathways and facilitate protein folding
two proteins with regulatory function, 14-3- <dig> ζ and phosphomannomutase, were of higher abundance in d. magna embryos exposed to triops kairomones in our study. 14-3- <dig> proteins belong to a family of proteins well conserved among eukaryotes. two of these isoformes, ε and ζ, have also been identified in d. melanogaster <cit>  and the silkworm bombyx mori <cit>  and were expressed throughout a variety of life stages and in various tissues. 14-3- <dig> ζ binds to a large number of partners by recognition of a phosphoserine or phosphothreonine motif and is known to modulate their activity. phosphomannomutase is an enzyme converting mannose-1-phosphate to mannose-6-phosphate and vice versa. it is therefore important for gdp-mannose synthesis, a molecule involved in glycosylation of proteins. the most similar protein in drosophila, cg <dig>  is known to be involved in hypoxia-induced inhibition of protein translation  <cit> . in kairomone exposed d. magna, phosphomannomutase may therefore provide substrates important for signalling pathways involved in the formation of inducible defences.

additionally, three proteins with regulatory characteristics, heat shock protein  <dig> kda, prohibitin and a transcription activator , were less abundant in d. magna embryos exposed to triops kairomones.

heat shock proteins  act as chaperones facilitating protein folding and unfolding and play an important role in both, normal cellular homoeostasis and stress response  <cit> . pijanowska and kloc  <cit>  found a decrease in the levels of hsp <dig>  hsp <dig> and hsp <dig> when exposing d. magna from birth until first reproduction to either fish or chaoborus kairomones. these findings corresponds to our findings, we also found a strong decrease in a  <dig> kda hsp in daphnia long-term exposed to triops kairomones. reducing hsp expression may save resources under long-term stressful conditions  <cit> . in addition, another study using d. magna shows that animals with a high tolerance against cadmium exposure display lower levels of hsp <dig> than animals having a lower tolerance  <cit> . the same may hold true for d. magna experiencing constant predation stress exerted by triops.

prohibitin is a ubiquitously expressed and well conserved protein, which is thought to be a negative regulator of cell proliferation in mammalian cells  <cit> . the similar protein in drosophila, lethal  37cc, is most strongly expressed during late embryogenesis and may play a role in cuticle synthesis because of its presence during molts  <cit> . therefore it seems possible, that the lower abundance of this protein may reflect changes of cuticle synthesis during the formation of morphological defences in d. magna.

the sequence of signal transducer and activator of transcription  protein is most similar to stat92e in drosophila. stat92e is a signal protein and transcription factor in the well characterised jak/stat signalling pathway important for processes such as cellular proliferation, especially during embryonic development, immune response and stem cell maintenance  <cit> . interestingly, stat92e shows opposing influence on cell proliferation depending on developmental stage. during early development, stat92e promotes cell proliferation whereas in later larval stages it reduces proliferation  <cit> . the under representation of this protein in late-stage d. magna embryos exposed to triops kairomones may reflect a changed cell proliferation pattern during the formation of inducible defences.

proteomic evidence for enhanced energy demand and biosynthetic activity as a consequence of kairomone exposure
the more abundant proteins glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , fructose-bisphosphate aldolase , atp synthase subunit beta  and nucleoside diphosphate kinase  are related to energy metabolism and biosynthetic processes . both, gapdh and ald are key enzymes of the glycolytic degradation of glucose. in addition, gapdh provides nadph for biosynthesis of fatty acids, amino acids and nucleic acids. atp-syn-beta is a subunit of atp-synthase, which catalyses atp synthesis within the respiratory chain. ndk provides nucleoside triphosphates for a variety of biosynthetic pathways.

enhanced biosynthesis has already been reported in d. magna exposed to chaoborus or fish kairomones  <cit> . d. magna showed a decreased body length when exposed to the vertebrate predator and an increase in body length when exposed to the invertebrate predator. rna levels of protein biosynthesis related genes were increased for both treatments with higher levels in the fish kairomone treatment indicating a higher energy demand in predator exposed animals.

another protein related to energy metabolism is vitellogenin, the precursor of the major yolk protein vitellin. yolk proteins serve as an energy supply as well as organic building blocks throughout embryonic development of oviparous animals  <cit> . they are usually synthesised in extra ovarian tissues like the insect fat body  <cit>  or non-mammalian vertebrate liver  <cit>  and are taken up by the developing oocyte. during this process, usually referred to as vitellogenesis, vitellogenin is modified through cleavage, phosphorylation, glycosylation and lipidation  <cit> . at the time of embryogenesis, yolk proteins are further processed and degraded for embryo nutrition  <cit> .

due to the various processing steps during vitellogenesis and embryogenesis, the frequent occurrence of different vitellogenin related protein spots in 2d-gels of d. magna embryos found in our study is not surprising. most of the spots were protein fragments with strong isoelectric point  shifts and much smaller molecular weight  compared to theoretical mw . of the  <dig> vitellogenin-related protein spots found in our proteomic analysis, only  <dig> proteins were more abundant in triops exposed d. magna whereas  <dig> were less abundant. therefore, predator exposure seems to influence either the total amount of vitellogenin per egg provided by the mother or the yolk utilisation through the embryo because of higher energy demands.

other studies also found yolk protein dynamics influenced by predator-released kairomones d. magna exposed to fish or chaoborus. the proportion of total yolk used for egg production remained constant  <cit> . in presence of fish kairomones, d. magna reproduced not only earlier and at a smaller body size, but also had a higher number of offspring and this offspring had a smaller body size when compared to a control group  <cit> . in the presence of chaoborus, d. magna reached maturity later at an increased body size and had a smaller number of offspring with larger body size  <cit> . triops kairomones seems to increase both, the number and the size of offspring in d. magna <cit> . therefore, less yolk may be distributed to a single egg. however, the under representation of vitellogenin spots in kairomone exposed d. magna embryos found in this study may also indicate a higher energy demand. in addition, the higher abundance of other proteins related to energy metabolism and biosynthetic processes mentioned previously supports an increased energy demand of the embryo while building up triops-induced defensive structures.

kairomone exposure of daphnia increases levels of proteins necessary for reinforcement of the muscular system
the muscle related proteins actin, troponin and paramyosin were all more abundant in triops exposed d. magna embryos . actin was found in four different protein spots with molecular weight  higher than the theoretical value and acidic pi shifts, indicating posttranslational modifications. additionally, one protein spot had a considerably smaller mw indicating a cleaved fragment . actin is a major component of the cytoskeleton as well as of muscle fibres and is now one of the most abundant and highly conserved proteins in eukaryotes usually encoded in multiple genes  <cit> .

comparing the actin sequences using blastp algorithm, the most similar sequence in d. melanogaster for daphmag3mtv7094t <dig> is act87e , whereas daphmag3mtv3l15317t <dig> was most similar to act5c . act87e is known to be expressed in the body wall muscles during embryonic, pupal and adult stages while act5c is a ubiquitous cytoplasmic actin, being expressed throughout all life stages  <cit> . however, röper et al.  <cit>  showed that muscle-specific actin is incorporated into cytoplasmic structures, and cytoskeletal actin is incorporated into muscles for all actin paralogues of d. melanogaster. therefore, it is not possible to deduce the function of actin only from its protein sequence.

actin was connected to the formation of inducible defence in d. magna with contradictory results so far. pijanowska and kloc  <cit>  reported a strong decrease of actin protein level in d. magna exposed to either chaoborus or fish predation using western blot analysis. on the contrary, schwarzenberger et al.  <cit>  found a moderate increase of actin mrna expression in d. magna exposed to fish and only a slight decrease in d. magna exposed to chaoborus using real-time qpcr. these inconsistent results may be a consequence of the different classes of molecules addressed in these studies, since rna expression is not a reliable surrogate marker for protein expression.

in our proteomic analysis, strong evidence for a higher abundance of one muscle-specific actin and one cytoplasmic actin was found. in addition, two other muscle-specific proteins, troponin and paramyosin were more abundant in d. magna exposed to triops kairomones. troponin is an actin-binding protein found in thin filament of vertebrate and invertebrate muscle where it regulates actomyosin activity in a ca2+ dependant manner  <cit> . paramyosin is part of the thick filament of invertebrate muscle and a central player in regulating its diameter, with filaments of increased diameter showing an increased paramyosin:myosin ratio  <cit> . predator-induced increase of muscle size has been found in other organisms, e.g. in the blue mussel mytilus edulis <cit>  and in tadpoles of rana lessonae, in the latter case it improved swimming performance. this may also be the case for defended daphnia, as d. magna exposed to chaoborus or fish kairomones show increased escape response time and higher behavioural alertness  <cit> . in addition, increasing muscular mass may also compensate for the consequences of carapace fortification or altered hydrodynamics resulting from a changed carapace morphology.

cuticle proteins and chitin-modifying enzymes may cause carapace fortification in kairomone exposed daphnia
in t. cancriformis exposed d. magna embryos, five proteins related to exoskeleton show a higher abundance. out of this, three proteins were similar to cuticle proteins and two proteins were similar to chitin-modifying enzymes .

the carapace of d. magna consists of a chitinous integument folded back on itself with a small haemocoelic space in between. inner and outer integument are connected by pillars as supporting structures  <cit> . this integument can be separated in the extracellular cuticle and the cellular epidermis. the cuticle consists of the two layers, epi- and procuticle  <cit> . in arthropods, epicuticle is mainly built out of proteins and lipids and procuticle is made of chitin filaments embedded in a proteinaceous matrix  <cit> . the properties of cuticle depend highly on the amount and combination of included proteins  <cit>  and also on the degree of acetylation, which may influence cross-linking between protein matrix and chitin filaments  <cit> .

searching the sequences of the three cuticle proteins more abundant in kairomone exposed d. magna embryos against the prosite database for protein domains  revealed chitin-binding domains in all three sequences. consensus sequences were of the so called r&r type  <cit> , with all proteins containing one or two rr- <dig> subgroups, usually associated with hard cuticles  <cit> . in addition, daphmag3mtv3l7285t <dig> also has a short consensus sequence of the rr- <dig> type, usually found in soft cuticles.

as further chitin modifying enzymes, we found chitin deacetylase type  <dig> and 2a in three different spots at around  <dig> kda. these two proteins have a very similar molecular weight and pi and were therefore not well discriminated on the 2d-gel. molecular weight of these two proteins was  <dig> kda higher than expected and pi was slightly smaller than computed pi , which indicates different states of post-translational modifications within the three different spots. chitin deacetylase is a chitin modifying enzyme, which catalyses n-deacetylation of chitin and therefore changes protein binding affinity of chitin filaments. in tribolium castaneum, several types of chitin deacetylase have been identified, with type  <dig> and  <dig> mainly expressed in the exoskeletal epidermis  <cit> . rnai experiments revealed lethal phenotypes when using dsrna corresponding to this chitin deacetylases. here, animals failed to shed their old cuticles because the new synthesised cuticle lacked mechanical strength  <cit> . these findings support that these chitin modifying enzymes are involved in forming a harder cuticle in predator exposed d. magna.

fortification of the exoskeleton in response to predator kairomones is known to play a role in inducible defences of some daphnia species. d. middendorffiana exposed to the predatory copepod heterocope septentrionalis shows increased cuticle thickness and cuticle strength  <cit> . furthermore, d. pulex and d. cucullata exposed to chaoborus larvae increase cuticle hardness and d. cucullata shows increased cuticle thickness and increased diameter of the cuticular pillars  <cit> . recently, similar hidden defences were also found in d. magna exposed to triops kairomones, revealing increased cuticle hardness, thickness and pillar diameter  <cit> . carapace fortification is thought to act as protection against invertebrate predation, e.g. by increasing the escape efficiency of prey when being caught by the predator  <cit> . cuticle related proteins with a higher abundance in d. magna exposed to triops, i.e. r & r cuticle proteins as well as chitin deacetylases, may be involved in the necessary changes of chitin cross-linking with matrix proteins already in late stage d. magna embryos, causing increased carapace stability.

CONCLUSIONS
in our proteomic analysis, we found evidence that proteins related to cuticle, muscular system, energy metabolism and regulatory proteins are involved in the phenotypic plastic changes induced by triops kairomones in d. magna. cuticle proteins and the cuticle modifying enzymes chitin deacetylases  <dig> and 2a seem to be directly involved in the formation of morphological changes of the carapace, possibly altering chitin cross-linking with matrix proteins and therefore strengthen carapace stability. the same holds true for changes in abundance of muscle proteins , which may adjust the muscular system to altered carapace morphology and enabling behavioural changes. furthermore, proteins not directly involved in building up morphological traits were either involved in energy metabolism and biosynthetic processes or had regulatory functions. these proteins may reflect necessary changes in metabolism needed for the formation of inducible defences. the altered levels of regulatory proteins provide first evidence on signalling pathways possibly involved in the formation of inducible defences i.e. the ras-mediated signalling pathways , glycosylation , protein folding , regulation of cuticle synthesis  and translation regulation .

our holistic proteomic analysis revealed promising candidate proteins involved in phenotypic plastic response of daphnia magna exposed to kairomones of the predator triops cancriformis. proteins altered in abundance were either directly involved in the formation of defensive traits or reflect involved regulatory or metabolic pathways. most interestingly, three proteins connected to this inducible defence  belong to known tandem duplicated genes in d. pulex, a genetical design occurring in elevated numbers in the d. pulex and possibly also in the d. magna genome  <cit>  which is predicted to play an important role in phenotypic plasticity  <cit> .

hence, our study fosters the knowledge on the molecular mechanisms of defensive trait formation, i.e. carapace fortification and – even more important – on the costs affiliated with the formation of the defence, since costs are thought to be a crucial premise for the plastic expression of a trait, and therefore a prerequisite for the evolution of phenotypic plasticity.

