BACKGROUND
transposons are ancient and ubiquitous inhabitants of genomes that have played a significant role in genome evolution across kingdoms  <cit> . their activity has played a notable role in genome expansions  and has contributed in a variety of ways to the generation of variation within genomes that subsequently has been subjected to natural selection during evolution  <cit> . whole-genome sequence analysis has contributed greatly to revealing how the domestication of transposons has contributed to genome expansion and complexity  <cit> . these studies have shown that transposons belonging to the hat, piggybac, mariner-tc <dig> and harbinger superfamilies have persisted in eukaryote genomes not only as mobile dna but as genes with new functions  <cit> . indeed domestication of transposons is now seen, along with low frequency mobility of active transposons, as a viable strategy for the long-term persistence of these sequences in genomes. a notable example of domesticated transposable elements contributing to genome evolution is the somatic gene rearrangement system j recombination) that leads to the generation of b- and t-cell antigen receptors in the adaptive immune system of vertebrates. vj recombination is mediated by the transposase-like proteins rag1/rag <dig> and dna recombination signal sequences  flanking different gene segments that serve the same function as the terminal inverted repeats of transposable elements  <cit> . the ancestral transposable elements from which the rag/rss system evolved have been proposed to be either transibs  <cit>  or hat transposons  <cit> . the hypothesis that the vj system has evolved from transibs is based on structural similarities between rag recombinases and transibs transposases along with the fact that both systems result in  <dig> bp duplications following sequence integration  <cit> . the idea that the vj recombination system and extant hat transposons evolved from a common ancient recombination system is also based on structural similarities between the rag recombinases and hat transposases as well as mechanistic similarities between the corresponding recombination reactions. the most striking similarity is the formation of terminal hairpin structures on the dna ends flanking the gap created following transposon and rss excision.

vj recombination involves the excision of rss-flanked sequences resulting in the fusion of the terminal rsses and the formation of covalently closed circular dna . originally it was thought that signal joints were safe, inert byproducts of recombination in which the reactive 3' hydroxyls at the ends of the excised rss were prevented from participating in subsequent recombination and eventually degraded  <cit> . it is now clear that this is not the inevitable fate of these episomal molecules. signal joints have been shown to be capable of reintegrating both in vitro and in vivo and recent studies have shown that they can contribute to genome instability and result in pathologies  <cit> .

hat element excision as well as the excision of transposable elements belonging to other classes and families of transposons can also lead to creation of covalently closed episomes  <cit> . while such forms of transposable elements have been recognized, their significance, if any, has been unclear. although thought by some to be potential transposition intermediates, it is clear that for the hermes transposon and probably all hat elements, this is not the case  <cit> . nonetheless, as recognized by arca et al. "the widespread occurrence of extrachromosomal circles suggests that they may have a functional role in transposition, rather than being inactive byproducts" <cit> . kempken and kück suggested that episomal forms of the hat element restless in the fungus tolypocladium inflatum might facilitate horizontal transfer between nuclei in heterokaryons that form occasionally as a result of anastomoses of fungal hyphae  <cit> . however, this would require that episomal forms of transposable elements be capable of undergoing transposition and reintegratioin but, unfortunately, this has been rarely tested. yang et al. reported data suggesting that reintegration of an episomal ds element had occurred in arabidopsis, however this appeared to have occurred via an illegitimate recombination event and not via canonical transposase/inverted-terminal repeat-mediated transposition  <cit> . the only report of an effort to empirically assess the transposition potential of an episomal eukaryote transposable element failed to find any evidence of episomal ac/ds reintegration in nicotiana tabacum  <cit> . while gorbunova and levy concluded that episomal hat elements are merely abortive excision products, the recent findings of vj signal joint recombination activity  <cit>  and the results reported here indicate that these elements are likely to have biological significance.

we describe here the biology of the episomal forms of the closely related and functionally interactive hat elements hobo and hermes. hobo was originally isolated from d. melanogaster  <cit>  and hermes was isolated from the housefly, musca domestica  <cit> . the amino acid sequences of the transposases of these elements are 55% identical and the terminal inverted repeat sequences are also highly similar  <cit> . because of these similarities, these elements are capable of interacting, resulting in cross-mobilization  <cit> .

we show that the creation of episomal hobo/hermes elements occurs frequently during element excision relative to the overall element excision rate. a large proportion of the episomal forms of these elements contained all of the molecular information required for transposition. episomal hat elements did not only arise during element excision in experimental systems but also in natural systems in which elements are normally undergoing transposition. episomal forms of hermes elements were detected in somatic tissue as well as unfertilized eggs of musca domestica and transgenic drosophila melanogaster. the detection and recovery of episomes from the somatic tissue of m. domestica, the natural host of hermes, indicates that this element is active in this species. the presence of episomal hermes in unfertilized eggs indicates that they can be transmitted maternally. we describe the reintegration of various forms of episomal hermes elements in vitro and in vivo demonstrating that, like vj signal joints, these molecules are recombinogenic and possibly able to contribute to the dynamics of transposable element transmission in nature. finally, we show that the presence of episomal hermes elements can influence the transposition of canonical hermes elements suggesting that episomal elements may play a role in the regulation of element movement.

RESULTS
hobo and hermes episomes
hobo episomes were recovered during in vivo hobo mobility assays performed in developing d. melanogaster embryos. they were obtained following the simultaneous introduction into developing d. melanogaster of 'donor' plasmids containing a hobo element carrying a kanamycin resistance gene, an origin of replication and the e. coli lacz alpha peptide coding region and 'helper' plasmids containing the hobo transposase open reading frame under the control of a heat-inducible promoter. following recovery from developed embryos approximately  <dig> hours post-injection, recovered dna was digested with restriction endonucleases kpni and xbai. hobo episomes did not contain kpni and xbai restriction sites and were resistant to digestion by these restriction endonucleases while donor and helper plasmids were cleaved multiple times. introduction of the digested dna into e. coli permitted the recovery of only episomal forms of hobo. hobo episomes were readily recovered under these conditions and for approximately every  <dig> donor plasmids recovered from injected embryos six hobo episomes were isolated ). hobo excision products consisting of donor plasmids with an empty hobo integration site were also recovered during the same experiments at a rate of approximately three in every  <dig> recovered donor plasmids . analysis of variance indicated that there was no significant statistical difference between the frequency of recovery of hobo episomes and empty hobo donor sites .

a variety of specific forms of hobo episomes were recovered from plasmid-based mobility assays, differing in the sequence of the junction between the left and right terminal sequences . of the  <dig> episomes recovered from plasmid-injected embryos and whose sequence was determined,  <dig>  contained intact left and right inverted terminal repeats and contained all of the information necessary for transposition. three of these  <dig> 'intact' episomes were perfect end-to-end joints of the left and right terminal inverted repeats. the remaining  <dig> 'intact' episomes contained from  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides between the inverted terminal repeats. three of these episomes had intercalary dna with sequences related to the inverted terminal repeats of hobo . the remaining  <dig>  'defective' hobo episomes were missing one  or both  of the inverted terminal repeats and had variable amounts of their sub-terminal sequences deleted. these deletion-containing episomes are not expected to be transpositionally competent.

aarrows represent intact itrs and their orientation. the size of deletions is indicated by negative numbers.

bnumber recovered.

csequences related to hobo itr 

hermes episomes were recovered from two transgenic d. melanogaster containing integrated, self-mobilizable hermes elements  . episomes in insects containing hermes <dig> were detected using a nested pcr strategy using two pairs of hermes terminus-specific primers oriented so that pcr products will only arise when the termini are joined end-to-end . the dna sequence was determined for a sample of the cloned products arising from this pcr reaction . thirty-five percent  of the episomes recovered using this method had intact inverted repeats and all of the sequence information necessary for transposition. only two of the recovered episomes were perfect end-to-end joins. thirty-one percent  had only intact left inverted terminal repeats with variable amounts of the right end being deleted while 19%  had a reciprocal structure with intact right inverted terminal repeats and variable amounts of the left end being deleted. fifteen percent of the recovered episomes were missing both inverted terminal repeats and adjacent sub-terminal sequences.

aarrows represent intact itrs and their orientation. the size of deletions is indicated by negative numbers.

bnumber recovered

hermes episomes were also recovered from transgenic d. melanogaster using a plasmid rescue strategy. autonomous hermes elements containing a kanamycin resistance gene and an origin of replication permitted hermes episomes to function as replicons in e. coli. sixty hermes episomes were recovered from adults and larvae of four independent 'lines' of transgenic d. melanogaster . approximately 50%  contained 'intact' hermes elements with complete inverted terminal repeats. only three  were perfect end-to-end joins of the inverted terminal repeats while the remaining  <dig> contained variable amounts of intervening nucleotide information ranging from  <dig> bp to  <dig> kb. all other episomes contained 'defective' hermes elements lacking either one or both inverted terminal repeats with variable amounts of sub-terminal sequences deleted; 20% had intact left inverted terminal repeats and 25% had intact right inverted terminal repeats. hermes episomes were also detected in unfertilized d. melanogaster eggs by pcr . the structure of episomes found in unfertilized eggs was generally similar to those found in other life stages although episomes with only the right inverted repeat  were recovered more frequently in unfertilized eggs than from adults and larvae . approximately half  of the episomes contained complete elements including perfect end-to-end joints and those with a small number of nucleotides between the inverted terminal repeats.

aarrows represent intact itrs and their orientation. the size of deletions is indicated by negative numbers.

bnumber recovered from adults of lines a,b,c,d, larvae  and unfertilized eggs .

hermes episomes were also detected by pcr and recovered by plasmid rescue from transgenic aedes aegypti containing the same autonomous hermes element as was in the transgenic d. melanogaster described above . episomes were recovered from developing embryos, larvae and from adult ovarial tissue and resembled those recovered from d. melanogaster in their sequence .

aarrows represent intact itrs and their orientation. the sizes of deletions are indicated by a negative number.

bfrom plasmid rescue.

cfrom pcr.

do, ovaries; l, larvae; em, embryos.

hermes is a natural inhabitant of the genome of m. domestica and has been detected in all individuals  sampled from  <dig> populations from four continents  <cit> . because the hermes element in these populations did not naturally contain a functional origin of replication, episomes could not be recovered by plasmid rescue and could only be detected using a pcr-based method that relied on the use of pcr primers specific to the right and left terminal sequences of the element that would result in pcr products only when the termini were joined end to end. total genomic dna isolated from individual m. domestica from three populations had evidence of episomal hermes elements as indicated by the recovery of pcr products using end-specific primers . the most abundant forms were perfect  or near perfect  end-to-end joints containing all of the information necessary for transposition . as in transgenic d. melanogaster, 'defective' forms were also recovered with variable amounts of terminal sequences deleted from pcr products less than  <dig> bp . all 'defective' forms recovered were missing the right inverted terminal repeat and, in one case, both termini were absent . finally, episomal hermes elements were detected in unfertilized eggs of m. domestica .

aarrows represent intact itrs and their orientation. the size of deletions is indicated by negative numbers. roman numbers refer to bands in figure 2b.

re-integration of hermes episomes in vitro
the recombination potential of a variety of hermes episomes was tested directly using a cell free hermes transposition assay with purified hermes transposase, episomal hermes elements and a target plasmid. hermes episomes with n nucleotides of intercalary dna between the inverted repeats were tested where n was  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> nucleotides. all episomal forms of hermes tested were capable of transposition resulting in canonical  <dig> bp target site duplications with the sequence ntnnnnan . the distribution of integration events within the target indicated that certain sites were preferred as we have previously described  although the apparent hot spots of integration in vitro are not the same as reported in vivo   <cit> . integrations at nucleotide  <dig> of the target plasmid were recovered frequently however it is not known whether the primary nucleotide sequence of this target site  is the major determinant of this site's preferred status.

1"site" of integration; nucleotide number of the first base of the target sequence.

2number of occurrences observed.

3"+" refers to <left-hermes-right> relative to target sequence; "-" is <right-left>

4"target" is the first  <dig> bp following the right itr and is written 5'-3'

 <dig> number of nucleotides separating the left and right itrs of hermes.

re-integration of hermes episomes in vivo
efforts to create transgenic d. melanogaster using hermes gene vectors constructed from episomal forms of the element  resulted in the successful creation of transgenic insects in some cases. germ-line transformation experiments were performed using well-established protocols  involving the co-injection of vector and transposase-expressing helper plasmids into preblastoderm embryos followed by screening for expression of the dominant visible genetic marker present on the vector in the next generation. episomal hermes gene vectors containing  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> bp of intercalary dna separating the inverted terminal repeats did not result in the recovery of germ-line transformation events . on the other hand, identical episomal hermes gene vectors with  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp of intercalary dna separating the inverted terminal repeats did result in germ-line transformation in 22%  and 28%  of the germ-lines tested . integrated hermes elements from these transgenic insects were analyzed and in all cases  the hermes element was found precisely inserted into d. melanogaster genomic dna . the  <dig> bp immediately flanking the left inverted terminal inverted repeat of the integrated hermes elements conformed to the known target site consensus sequence of this element   <cit> . while we were unable to detect integration of episomal hermes gene vectors with  <dig> bp or  <dig> bp of intercalary dna, we discovered that these forms of the element actually inhibited transposition of canonical hermes elements, i.e. elements with typical spacing of the inverted terminal repeats. germ-line transformation experiments involving the co-injection of episomal hermes gene vectors with  <dig> bp or  <dig> bp of intercalary dna and canonical hermes gene vectors  failed to produce any transgenic insects . identical experiments using only the canonical hermes gene vectors confirmed their functionality and transformation was observed at a frequency of approximately 10% .

episomal
producing
aindividual plasmids were each at  <dig>  mg/ml during injection

ainput vector was used for transformation; numbers refer elements from transgenic lines.

b <dig> bp immediately flanking the left inverted terminal repeat of hermes.

cbp of dna recovered from integrate element

discussion
episomal forms of eukaryote transposable elements are somewhat of a conundrum in that they are characteristically associated with many transposable element systems but are of unknown biological significance  <cit> . reports of vj signal joints being recombinogenic and capable of reintegrating into the genome of the host suggest that perhaps episomal forms of transposable elements were also capable of reintegration  <cit> .

hermes and hobo episomes were detected and recovered in this study under a variety of conditions using both bacterial replicon recovery methods  and pcr-based methods. pcr detection of episomal elements depended upon the juxtaposition of the left and right inverted terminal repeats. integrated hat elements arranged in tandem could also yield pcr products with a structure and sequence similar to episomes. it is unlikely, however, that such elements were responsible for the pcr products recovered in this study because of the diversity of products recovered. two elements arranged in tandem are expected to yield an invariant pcr amplification product but such was not the case in this study where episomal forms of the elements were recovered that had varying numbers of nucleotides between the inverted terminal repeats. in m. domestica and transgenic d. melanogaster,  <dig> and  <dig> distinct episomal forms of hermes were detected by pcr, respectively. the copy number of hermes in each of these species was estimated to be less than ten making it unlikely that chromosomal elements arrayed in tandem were the templates yielding the pcr products recovered in this study  <cit> . finally, plasmid rescue experiments that did not involve pcr resulted in the recovery of hermes episomes with structures identical to those recovered by pcr analysis. therefore, we found no evidence to support a conclusion other than that the dna molecules described here were episomes of hobo and hermes.

hermes and hobo episomes appear to be abundant products of hat element excision/transposition reactions under some conditions. hat elements transpose by a cut-and-paste type mechanism that is initiated by excision of the element from a donor site  <cit> . the excised element and associated transposase form a synaptic complex that associates with a target molecule and integrates  <cit> . in interplasmid hobo mobility assays performed in insect embryos, element excision products  and episomal forms of the element were recovered from the same reactions at frequencies that were not significantly different. under the conditions used here episome formation occurred readily during hobo movement.

while episomal forms of hat elements are prevalent, their structures are very diverse. very few of the episomal forms of hermes and hobo were precise end-to-end joints of the inverted terminal repeats although 40%-50% of the episomes recovered in this study contained both copies of the element's terminal sequences. the intercalary dna between the element's inverted terminal repeats varied in both quantity and sequence with no single form being dominant. while the origin of intercalary dna in most cases was unknown, in three of the hobo episomes recovered the intercalary dna appeared clearly related to the inverted terminal repeat sequences of hobo . these sequences appear to have arisen following the resolution of terminal hairpin structures prior to the formation of the episome. this is unexpected because hairpin structures are not usually formed at the termini of excised hat elements but on the ends of the donor sequences instead  <cit> . these unexpected and unusual intercalary sequences associated with hobo episomes are not explained by our current models of hat element transposition  <cit> .

the most significant finding of this study is that episomal hat elements can reintegrate into target dna molecules resulting in canonical integration events both in vitro and in vivo. hermes episomes with  <dig> -  <dig> bp of intercalary dna between the terminal inverted repeats could integrate into dna target molecules in vitro. in these studies precise quantitation of integration activity was not performed however recovery of the events analyzed in this study required extensive screening of target molecules recovered from multiple in vitro transposition reactions. in vivo, the integration of hermes episomes with 0- <dig> bp of intercalary dna separating the terminal inverted repeats was undetectable under the conditions used in these experiments and screening the progeny of a combined  <dig> fertile g0s. when the amount of intercalary dna separating the terminal inverted repeats was  <dig> bp or greater the frequency of integration, in vivo, was comparable to canonical hermes gene vectors. these data demonstrate that some forms of episomal hermes elements can efficiently reintegrate. the in vitro integration results with episomal hermes elements are similar to those reported by neiditch et al. who reported that rag recombinase could cleave and transpose signal joints in vitro leading to the integration of signal joint episomes  <cit> . overall these data further support the idea that vj recombination and hat elements may have evolved from a common ancestral transposable element.

signal joints are no longer considered inert segments of dna resulting from vj recombination but are recognized as potential contributors to genome instability and disease in vertebrates  <cit> . episomal forms of hat may also contribute to a number of important aspects of the biology and natural history of these elements. hat elements, like many other class ii transposable elements, have periodically undergone horizontal transfer <cit> . while the exact mechanisms by which dna is exchanged between species remain unknown, episomal forms of excised elements may provide a stable but integration-competent form of the element that can be more readily transferred between organisms. interestingly, hermes episomes were readily recovered from adult houseflies, a natural host of hermes, indicating for the first time that these elements are actively transposing in this species and that they are likely to be active in somatic tissue. these conditions seem to be favorable for interspecies transfer and the data reported here show that some of these episomal forms of hermes can undergo transposition. the presence of hat episomes in unfertilized eggs suggests that these elements may also be maternally transmitted, a mechanism of transmission that has never been described for class ii transposable elements. this novel transmission mechanism might influence the transmission and population dynamics of these elements under certain conditions.

finally, in addition to episomal hat elements being transpositionally competent they also appeared to influence canonical element movement. the presence of episomal hermes elements with  <dig> or  <dig> bp of intercalary dna separating the terminal inverted repeats resulted in the reduced recovery of canonical hermes transposition events in vivo. it is not clear at this time whether the effect is caused by repression or interference or some other mechanism. in germ-line transformation experiments involving the co-injection of canonical and episomal forms of hermes elements the overall concentration of hermes elements was comparable to that used in many insect transformation studies, suggesting that a simple titration effect was not responsible  <cit> . if, however, hermes transposase binding to episomal forms of hermes elements is different from binding to canonical forms then perhaps transposase titration is a possible mechanism. more experimentation is required to explore these interesting possibilities. nonetheless, these data point to another possible biological role of episomal hat elements, namely the regulation of element transposition.

CONCLUSIONS
episomal forms of the hat elements hobo and hermes are readily recovered under a variety of conditions. the recovery of episomal forms of hermes from m. domestica, transgenic d. melanogaster and a. aegypti demonstrates the somatic activity of this element in these species. episomal forms of hermes are capable of participating in transposition/integration reactions in vitro and in vivo. they can also be transmitted maternally and under some conditions reduce the amount of canonical hermes element transposition. these studies begin to reveal the potential biological significance of these widespread forms of extrachromosomal dna.

