BACKGROUND
the antagonistic arms race between hosts and parasites is one of the most evolutionarily significant biotic interaction  <cit> . parasite species might represent more than half of the known biodiversity  <cit>  and this ubiquity paired with detrimental fitness effects, can affect host population dynamics  <cit> , genetic diversity  <cit> , biodiversity, ecosystem functioning and community structure  <cit> . consequently, parasites play a key role in various evolutionary and ecological theories, and are thought to be a major factor explaining the existence of male display in birds  <cit> , polyandry  <cit> , and the evolution of sex  <cit> , despite the evolutionary costs that are associated with these phenomena.

generally speaking, it is assumed that parasites have a larger evolutionary potential, due to their larger population size, shorter generation time, and higher mutation rates  <cit> . yet, sexual hosts with complex genetic architecture underlying resistance can prevent adaptation of  parasites by producing more heterogeneous offspring, which in turn could lead to the evolution of generalist parasites  <cit> . indeed, studies reporting experimental evolution using  sexual hosts have shown parasite maladaptation  <cit>  or a mosaic of patterns, with "no adaptation" being the most common finding  <cit> . this suggests that sexual hosts might stay ahead in the coevolutionary game by producing genetically diverse offspring, especially when genetic architecture of resistance traits are complex.

in spatially structured populations, sub-populations may experience different and asynchronous coevolutionary trajectories, which could lead to rapid between-population divergence  <cit> . given a genetic basis of infectivity and resistance  <cit>  the dynamic nature of coevolutionary interactions should temporarily lead to local adaptation of one or both antagonists  <cit> . as a consequence of local adaptation of one antagonist, local maladaptation of the other  is also commonly observed  <cit>  and is indeed predicted by the geographic mosaic theory of coevolution  <cit> . few studies using multicellular hosts have been able to separate the two  <cit> , as ideally, identical but naive host and/or parasite populations are needed to unequivocally interpret results obtained with cross infection studies .

the numbered entries refer to the interpretation for each possible combination of outcomes a. a matching combination refers to hosts and parasite being from the same experimental coevolution replicate; non-matching otherwise.

a differentiating between parasite adaptation and host maladaptation can be facilitated if parasite fitness is assayed on replicate host populations of identical genetic background as their coevolving antagonists. in this table we have used host mortality as a measure of both parasite and host performance, as these traits are very closely linked to fitness in both antagonists in our study system  <cit> . for other study systems, relevant traits may differ. this experimental approach has, to our knowledge, never been used, but could most readily be performed in a laboratory setting.

one requirement for local adaptation in such cross-infection studies is that the outcome of exposure relies on strong host genotype  × parasite genotype  interactions . these interactions are typically suggestive of only a few underlying genes and low genetic diversity in infecting inocula  <cit> . however, evidence for a more complex genetic architecture underlying resistance is accumulating  <cit>  and in natural populations, multiple infections seem to be the rule rather than the exception  <cit> . both processes are expected to lead to less noticeable gh × gp interactions. the importance of genetic architecture is clearly illustrated by genome-wide association studies which repeatedly demonstrate that seemingly highly heritable human diseases can insufficiently be explained by genetic markers, even when taking into account the joint effects of many tens of loci  <cit> . as theory predicts that the extent to which antagonists are able to adapt decreases with increasing number of loci involved in the interaction  <cit> , this added complexity could explain why a substantial proportion of studies fail to demonstrate clear-cut patterns of local adaptation  <cit> . consequently theory predicts that in a population where host genetic variation in resistance is large, parasites may be trapped in the middle of the host phenotypic distribution, thereby leading to a reduction in parasite variance, and a generalist strategy  <cit> .

we have already tested several predictions of the coevolutionary theory using experimental coevolution of tribolium castaneum and its natural, obligately killing parasite, nosema whitei  <cit>  demonstrating coevolutionary change of both parties within local demes by time shift experiments  <cit> , which represents a crucial prerequisite for local adaptation. here, by using hosts and parasites from the same long-term study as described in references  <cit> , we now tried to assess in more detail whether the reciprocal phenotypic changes led to local adaptation/specificity of either antagonist. in detail we had the following objectives: first of all, we determined whether coevolution actually leads to global and/or population-specific local adaptation patterns by performing a fully reciprocal cross infection experiment. then, to determine the influence of trait specific genetic architecture we focused on two fitness measures with different degrees of complexity in genetic architecture  <cit> :  host mortality  is a proxy both for host fitness and parasite fitness, as parasite transmission is only possible after host death  <cit> , and shows a complex genetic architecture; and  spore load, which is a measure of both transmission potential of the parasite and host resistance  <cit>  and shows a rather simple genetic architecture. by cross-infecting replicate host lines from both the coevolved treatment and their paired control lines from the same genetic background kept under parasite free conditions, we increase the power to discriminate between adaptive responses of the parasite and the host, respectively. for example, if adaptation of a parasite to its own host line is neutralized by counter-adaptation of its matched coevolved host line, the parasite's adaptive response could still be detected when exposed to their matched naïve host lines, which were kept in identical but parasite-free conditions .

if selection on parasite infectivity leads to the evolution of generality in host use, similarity in performance between parasite isolates should reflect the respective selective background and correlate with similarity in resistance between matching host lines, because resistant host lines should select for more infective/virulent parasites. this would be compatible with a form of coevolution where genetic variance of sexually reproducing hosts in combination with the complexity of host genetic architecture can prevent specific adaptation of the parasite. complementing the longitudinal trajectory of host-parasite coevolution in this system  <cit>  with the spatial dimension of local adaptation will provide a better understanding of the evolution of specificity as well as the selective landscape of host-parasite coevolution.

RESULTS
during the experiment, larvae raised in medium with parasites had significantly higher mortality rates than those raised in control  medium , regardless of their selection regime . furthermore, mortality induced by parasites that had coevolved with any of the host lines  was lower than mortality induced by ancestral parasites . similarly, ancestral parasites achieved higher spore loads than evolved parasites .

main effects, ghost x gparasite interactions and the response to selection
analyzing the cross-infection experiment for contemporary combinations  separately, strong main effects of host line and parasite isolate on host mortality were found . coevolved host lines were more resistant to n. whitei, but evolved resistance depended on the parasite isolate used . host × parasite interactions differed between coevolved and control selection regime, which is an expected result of antagonistic coevolution , but no significant overall host × parasite interactions were found .

levels of significance for the glm-model fits were tested using analysis of deviance with chi-square distribution. post hoc test results for contrasts between sympatric and allopatric combinations are shown below. positive z values indicate combinations where local antagonists show higher mortality than foreign antagonists.

mortality of the beetles collected  for measuring spore loads correlated with mortality in the survival experiment . not surprisingly, both mortality in the experiment and sampled mortality correlated with spore load of the randomly collected subsample .

when analyzing the experiment using the coevolved parasites only, spore load differed mainly between beetles that had already died or were still alive at time of collection . additionally, spore load differed between host lines and parasite isolates, and was generally lower in coevolved hosts, but there was also a significant host line × parasite isolate interaction . the difference in spore load between coevolved and control host lines depended on the parasite isolate, but also on different host line × parasite isolate interactions under each selection regime .

levels of significance of glm model fits were tested using analysis of deviance with chi-square distribution. post hoc test results for contrasts between sympatric and allopatric combinations are shown below. positive z values indicate combinations where were local antagonists show higher spore load than foreign antagonists.

any evidence for local adaptation?
when analyzing mortality, no global local parasite adaptation  was observed in either the coevolved  or control regime . when testing for population-specific host or parasite adaptation, the majority of cases revealed no significant adaptation . within-parasite line tests for adaptation revealed no significant adaptation while within-host line tests revealed that  <dig> out of  <dig> combinations showed significant adaptation or maladaptation . both parasite adaptation  and maladaptation  were observed when assayed on host lines from either selection regime .

although sporeload measurements suggested local adaptation of the parasite , we found no overall significant difference between own and foreign combinations in either the coevolved  or control treatment . however, unlike host mortality, parasite adaptation with respect to spore load was only observed when parasites were exposed to control host lines . of the nine possible scenarios of local adaptation , we found evidence for scenario  <dig>  in line  <dig> when looking at mortality and spore load , scenario  <dig>  in line  <dig> when looking at mortality, and scenario  <dig>  in line  <dig> for mortality. in the remaining parasite and host lines no form of local adaptation could be detected.

correlation between host susceptibility and matching parasite virulence
phenotypic differences in virulence  between parasite isolates correlated with differentiation in resistance of its matching coevolved hosts in the coevolved hosts . such a correlation was absent when parasites were assayed on the control host lines . parasite population differentiation in spore load did not correlate with host population differentiation in spore load , possibly reflecting the stronger underlying host × parasite interactions.

variation in mortality among host lines upon exposure to parasite isolates did not differ significantly between control and coevolution treatment . similarly, variation in induced host mortality among parasite isolates did not differ between selection regimes . nevertheless, host and parasite population differentiation in performance were smaller in the coevolved selection regime than under control conditions  indicating a flattening of the fitness landscape during coevolution.

discussion
a general lack of local adaptation after experimental coevolution
as proposed by schulte et al.  <cit>  a distinction needs to be made between "mosaic adaptation"  and "local adaptation" . our results provide evidence for mosaic adaptation, indicating that adaptation and coevolution occurs, but we currently have no evidence for local adaptation in our experimental lines. note that while parasite maladaptation can often be ascribed to host  adaptation, our experimental set up provides the means to separate these two explanatory mechanisms. based on the predicted possible scenarios, one case where local combinations showed lower mortality could be ascribed to local parasite maladaptation, and one case of higher local mortality could be ascribed to host maladaptation . one parasite isolate showed consistent adaptation to its host genetic background for both measured traits, which was not observed when looking at the coevolved combinations separately . in summary, our results are in concordance with the geographic mosaic theory of coevolution  <cit>  which predicts that local adaptation may vary between demes, both spatially and temporarily, leading to a lack of an overall pattern of local adaptation. additionally, in two out of five populations, no adaptation was detected, suggesting that these populations may be so-called "cold spots"  <cit> .

the effect of complexity of genetic architecture on ghost x gparasite interactions
a substantial body of theoretical and empirical coevolutionary work is based on either the implicit or explicit assumption of high specificity in host-parasite interactions, which should "ideally" lead to negative frequency-dependent selection and spatio-temporal adaptation of antagonists  <cit> . typically host × parasite  interactions occur in systems where only a few major genes and low genetic diversity in infecting inocula are involved in the compatibility  <cit> . however, more complex genetic architecture with epistatic interactions between many genes do not necessarily lead to such easily interpretable outcomes  <cit> . despite the strong positive correlation between mortality and spore load, significant ghost x gparasite interactions were indeed found for spore load but no such interactions were detected for mortality . as genetic architecture underlying mortality is more complex than that of spore load,  this can potentially explain the difference in gh × gp interactions between our fitness measures.

relative importance of specific and unspecific adaptation
our results support other laboratory-based coevolutionary experiments that demonstrate very little evidence of specific local adaptation  <cit> . pouillan et al  <cit>  showed that if phage Φ <dig> was allowed to adapt to pseudomonas fluorescens sbw <dig> specific adaptation to host genetic background was observed, while coevolution did not lead to adaptation, but rather to a broader infectivity range. this may indicate that the increased genotypic variance created by rapid reciprocal coevolutionary changes may preclude adaptation, and that local adaptation detected by field observations may be the result of directional selection for generality rather than evidence of underlying coevolution  <cit> .

there are four additional factors that may explain the absence of local adaptation in this experiment. first, it has been shown that an increase in the number of sympatric units dramatically decreases the chance to detect local adaptation, but increases the probability to find host or parasite main effects  <cit> . and indeed, a substantial amount of variation in outcome of exposure to n. whitei was explained by such main effects in both parties . second, temporal oscillations in parasite infectivity potentially mask local adaptation, especially when these oscillations are not synchronized between populations  <cit> . although such oscillations initially occur in this system, they dampened rapidly over time  <cit> . therefore this seems not a crucial factor explaining the lack of local adaptation at the time point when this experiment was carried out. third, a recent meta-analyses  <cit>  showed that forces generating diversity such as mutation, migration are essential for local adaptation to occur. in the absence of such forces, erosion of standing genetic variation can decrease evolutionary potential of antagonists. in our experiment, the sexual and recombining hosts may be at an advantage compared with the asexual parasites. as no migration was allowed in our experiment, lineage sorting could have led to depletion of clonal diversity, thus precluding parasite adaptation. finally, and most importantly, theoretical work suggests that if resistance is polygenic, such as the case for the t.castaneum - n. whitei interaction  <cit> , selection may favour generalist parasites. under such a scenario, within-host genetic variance is expected to increase during coevolution, while within-parasite genetic variance decreases, due to its dependency on the mean of the host phenotype distribution  <cit> .

a loss of parasite performance due to relaxed selection?
the predominant lack of  local adaptation cannot be interpreted as a lack of coevolutionary responses of the parasites. even though at the start of the experiment all lines were inoculated with the same spore cocktail  <cit> , parasites rapidly differentiated in performance, while on average inducing lower host mortality upon exposure than the ancestral parasites. the null hypothesis is that diversification can be a result of genetic drift due to repeated bottlenecking. but diversification seems to be driven by the selective environment of their coevolving host genetic background, as parasite performance correlated strongly with host resistance  meaning that coevolution on a low resistance background may be equal to relaxed selection. our results thus demonstrate that susceptibility of a given host line can select for general attenuation of the parasite, a pattern that differs from parasite maladaptation  <cit> . therefore we can show that coevolution may lead to adaptive changes and divergence between parasite isolates without leading to a pattern of general local adaptation. this leads to two important evolutionary implications. first, the genetic background of the host and its evolutionary potential seems crucial in determining the evolutionary trajectory of the host-parasite system. it also shows the importance of a directional selection component for generality during antagonistic coevolution giving support to previous studies in other systems  <cit> . second, the observed loss of virulence under relaxed selection  indicates that virulence may be costly in this system, and thus can be selected against if selection on growth rate is higher than selection on killing rate  <cit> . that differences in resistance can affect the evolution of virulence, additionally, confirms both theoretical and empirical work  <cit> . however, the correlation between resistance and virulence only manifested in parasites infecting the coevolved host lines. this different pattern of mortality caused by parasite exposure in the two selection regimes is likely a result of the weaker host × parasite interactions in coevolved hosts .

CONCLUSIONS
we presented evidence for rapid differentiation in infection profiles between parasite populations during antagonistic coevolution, which is likely to be driven by differences in selection coefficients imposed by differing resistance levels of coevolving host lines. at the same time, coevolution has led to increased host resistance and smaller differences in resistance profile between host lines. we did, however, not find general local adaptation in either host or parasite. by comparing parasite performance on coevolved and paired control populations we could nevertheless differentiate between adaptation and maladaptation of the antagonist and could observe likely cases of parasite adaptation, parasite maladaptation, and host maladaptation. our results may suggest that, in this system, evolution towards generalist exploitation of hosts with complex genetic architectures is more likely than the evolution towards increased specificity, thereby explaining the lack of clear-cut patterns of local adaptation.

