BACKGROUND
13c isotope tracing, aimed in the evaluation of metabolic fluxes in living cells has been developing during last decades  <cit> . this experimental technique required a specific mathematical analysis, and it was created  <cit> . currently, the stable isotope tracing of metabolites has been refined and is used to identify the adaptive changes of fluxes in man in normal and diseased states  <cit> , in isolated cells  <cit> , cancer cell cultures  <cit> , and organisms such as fungi  <cit> , yeast  <cit> , etc. 13c tracer fluxomics can be combined with the analysis of gene and protein expressions to provide insight into multilevel regulation of cellular processes  <cit> .

however, the rapidly developing experimental 13c tracer metabolomics surpasses the theoretical analysis of measured data. for a long time the detailed analysis of isotopomer distribution was possible only for isotopic steady state  <cit> . the tools applicable for analysis of non-steady state conditions appeared relatively recently  <cit> , and the methodology of rule-based modeling used in some of these tools expanded to different areas of analysis of complex biological systems  <cit> . although the analysis of 13c tracer data could result in the discovery of unknown metabolic pathways  <cit> , the existing tools were designed mainly for the evaluation of metabolic fluxes assuming certain established topology of reaction network. however, ignoring the specificity of topology of particular reaction network, or in other words its compartmental structure, can compromise the results of metabolic flux analysis  <cit> .

the topology of metabolic network could be complicated by substrate channeling  <cit> , which could be seen as metabolite compartmentation. the latter follows from the definition, which says that a pathway intermediate is 'channeled' when, a product just produced in the pathway has a higher probability of being a substrate for the next enzyme in the same pathway, compared to a molecule of the same species produced in a different place  <cit> .

usually, studies designed for the analysis of channeling require invasive experiments, such as permeabilization of cells and determination of diffusion of labeled metabolites from or into the presumable channel  <cit> . however, it can be expected that experimental procedures destroy some kinds of channeling that occur in intact cells. moreover, one cannot exclude the possibility that the metabolic channeling and compartmentation differ between various tissues and this could increase indefinitely the number of experiments necessary for defining the structure of metabolism in cells. here, we propose a solution for such a problem: to determine the metabolic compartmentation by analyzing 13c isotopic isomer distributions in products of metabolism of labeled substrates; i.e. in the same study, which is designed for the evaluation of metabolic flux profile, thereby, not recruiting additional experiments.

thus, the objective of the presented work is to create and implement a tool assessing the compartmentation based on 13c distribution. the challenge here is that, although the same compound, located in different subcellular spaces, likely possesses compartment-specific 13c signatures, the measurements average out the compartment-specificity  <cit> . the tool must help decipher the compartment-specific distribution of metabolic fluxes, consistent with the measured average labeling. such deciphering is based on a simple idea that the compartment-specific simulation better fit 13c data, if the really existing compartments are taken into account. to estimate the goodness of data fit by various schemes of metabolic compartmentation we implement model discrimination analysis.

two out of three experiments analyzed were described elsewhere  <cit> , and metabolic fluxes were evaluated based on the application of simple formulas directly to experimental data. such simple analysis  does not account for all possible exchange of isotopes and their recycling. moreover, these formulas imply that the network topology is known and can only give a formal ratio of main fluxes without its verification. whereas the simulation of isotopic isomer distribution using the predicted fluxes can be compared with experiments and thus verify the predictions. here, we describe the use of such simulations for the analysis of network topology, which is absolutely impossible by using simple formulas. the new analytical tool provides the opportunity to re-evaluate previously generated experimental data gaining new insights into the topology of the studied metabolic network, and assessing metabolic flux profile in detail in various physiological and pathological conditions.

RESULTS
accounting for channeling in the reaction scheme of model
the dynamics of all possible isotopic isomers in glucose, lactate and glutamate from the incubation medium and glucose from glycogen in cell pellets, accumulated by two hours of incubation of liver cells with d-glucose  <cit> , were simulated with isodyn using two different schemes that included either one or two pools of hexose phosphates, as shown in figure  <dig>  the conditions of incubation do not assume to reach steady state for the labeling of measured external metabolites, and the dynamic simulations correspond to non-steady state conditions of the experiment. the model, which does not consider channeling , accounts for a single, well-mixed, common hexose 6-phosphate pool . in accordance with the definition given in introduction, channeling assumes the existence of metabolite compartments, which could have had a different isotopomer  composition and does not freely mix by diffusion with a pool of the same metabolite outside the channel. the presence of two compartments with different isotopomer compositions indicates metabolite channeling , and the respective model is referred to as model b.

fitting the measured isotopologue distribution
the same stochastic algorithm of minimization of normalized deviations between the measured and computed data  in the global space of parameters  was applied to each model for data fitting. the fractions of isotopologues measured in glucose, lactate, fragments of glutamate and glycogen, and their best fit using the two models are shown in table  <dig>  χ <dig> is shown for each metabolite separately and Σ1χ <dig> sums all the individual χ <dig> 

isotopologues  produced by isolated hepatocytes from glucose as the only substrate contained 50% of d-glucose were measured in glucose from medium, glucose from glycogen and its fragments, lactate, and fragments of glutamate after two hours of incubation. the measurements are presented as mean ± standard deviation. the data were simulated using two models that either accounted for channeling or suggested a single "mixed" pool of hexose phosphates in accordance with the schemes presented in figure  <dig>  the fitting was performed using a stochastic algorithm described in methods. the difference between the best fit and experimental data  are shown for each metabolite and summarized for the whole set of data.

model a that does not assume metabolite channeling in glycogen synthesis fitted the experimental isotopologue distribution with Σ1χ <dig> =  <dig>  .  <dig> experimental points and  <dig> essential parameters, calculated as described in methods, defined the number of degrees of freedom, f =  <dig>  the given values of Σ1χ <dig> and the number of degrees of freedom defining an extremely low value of incomplete gamma function q =  <dig> ·10- <dig> unambiguously indicates that the model which does not account for channeling should be rejected  <cit> .

conversely, model b that assumes channeling fits the measured isotopologue distribution much better, with Σ1χ <dig> =  <dig>  . this model has four degrees of freedom, deduced from the same number of experimental points, and  <dig> essential parameters. these values defined q =  <dig> , which allowed the acceptance of the model.

thus, the comparative study of two schemes based on the goodness of fit of the experimental data allowed rejection of the model that assumes a single common pool of hexose phosphates and acceptance of the alternative model, which accounts for channeling of intermediates in glucose metabolism.

model validation
electron impact ionization used in mass spectrometry often splits molecules into fragments. since the localization of such fragments in the molecule is known, the fact that a 13c atom belongs to a given fragment restricts the possible positions of this isotope in the molecule. this information can further restrict the possible set of solutions. the fractions of isotopologues from glycogen were measured not only in whole glucose molecules, but also in their fragments containing carbon atoms either 1- <dig>  <cit>  or 3- <dig>  for model b, the best fit described above fits also the whole set of data including the fragments of glucose from glycogen as table  <dig> shows, giving Σtχ <dig> =  <dig> . this value and  <dig> degrees of freedom deduced for this model from  <dig> experimental points and  <dig> essential parameters define the value q =  <dig> . this value indicates that the model is acceptable, thus confirming the conclusion based on the simulation of 13c distribution in the whole molecule of glucose from glycogen without accounting for the fragments.

as table  <dig> shows, model a fits the whole set of data with Σtχ <dig> =  <dig> . with number of degrees of freedom of  <dig> , the value of q was  <dig> ·10- <dig>  this value further indicates that the model of a homogeneous pool of hexose phosphates should be rejected.

another validation of the channeling came from a series of two experiments where hepatocytes were incubated in the presence of glucose and lactate . the conditions in the two experiments were virtually identical with the exception that glucose was labeled in one of these experiments  <cit>  and lactate in the other. cells consumed lactate, and the label from lactate ascended up to extracellular glucose as shown in table  <dig>  in these two experiments, the incubations with liver cells resulted in different isotopic isomer distribution since different substrates were labeled at the beginning. however, the same conditions for cell metabolism suggest that the same set of metabolic fluxes must fit the isotopologue distribution measured in both the experiments. respectively, the algorithm subsequently performed the simulations of two experiments for the same set of model parameters and summed χ <dig> for both simulations. the algorithm for parameter optimization had searched for the set of parameters that minimized Σχ <dig> and table  <dig> shows the best fit of the two experiments performed using each of the two models.

before incubation the medium contained either 50% of d-glucose and unlabeled lactate  or 50% uniformly 13c-labeled lactate and unlabeled glucose . the measurements are presented as mean ± standard deviation. the data were fit by two models . the conditions of incubation and measurements, and data fitting are described in methods. the difference between the best fit and experimental data  are shown for each metabolite and summarized for the whole set of data.

model b fits both the experiments with Σχ <dig> =  <dig>  . both the experiments together provided  <dig> points. with  <dig> essential parameters, this problem has  <dig> degrees of freedom that corresponds to q =  <dig> , thus indicating that the model is acceptable. if this set of parameters which gives the best fit for model b is used for model a , Σχ <dig> increases up to  <dig>  where glycogen gave the greatest Σχ <dig>  the fitting procedure reduced Σχ <dig> for model a down to  <dig>   with the isotopologue distribution shown in table  <dig>  for this best fit, the same number of experimental points , and  <dig> essential parameters  give q =  <dig> ·10- <dig>  which indicates that model a is incorrect.

metabolic flux distribution
if model discrimination analysis indicates that a model should be rejected, as in the case of model a, the distribution of metabolic fluxes obtained with such a model cannot be reliable. in contrary, if the analysis suggests accepting a model, as in the case of model b, there is much more confidence that it evaluates true metabolic fluxes. therefore we analyzed the distribution of metabolite fluxes computed with model b. table  <dig> shows metabolic fluxes corresponding to the best fit of the measured data by model b, together with their 99% confidence intervals. the metabolic fluxes of the two experiments, performed in the presence of lactate using two different substrate labelings, were the same . thus, table  <dig> shows two sets of fluxes with their confidence intervals evaluated by model b. one of the sets corresponds to the best fit of isotopologue distribution measured only in the presence of glucose , and the other in the presence of glucose and lactate .

the names of fluxes are given in the list of abbreviations in the text.

at first glance, a notable difference is seen between metabolic fluxes under the two different conditions. the fluxes for the best fit indicate that the presence of lactate had perturbed the entire central carbohydrate metabolism of hepatocytes. without lactate, almost half of the glucose consumed was used to replenish the glycogen store  that was exhausted during starvation, and the rest was mainly converted to lactate except a small part that was burned in tca cycle. although net consumption of glucose did not change much by the addition of lactate, the fluxes of glucose input  and output  taken separately are increased by almost two orders of magnitude. thus, recycling of metabolites increased without affecting the net influx of glucose. the addition of lactate increased recycling in many other points downstream of glucose entrance. this refers to the flux through fructose bisphosphatase , which forms a futile cycle with phosphofructokinase . the increase of flux transforming glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate into phosphoenolpyruvate  is accompanied by the increase of reactions in the reverse direction . essentially there is an increased futile recycling through pyruvate kinase , pyruvate carboxylase  and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase . this recycling is accompanied by an increase of flux through the tca cycle  linked with enhancing of energy production. some changes took place in the pentose phosphate pathway, but they were not as impressive as in glycolysis and tca cycle.

the confidence intervals for some of the fluxes  were large. however, many intervals for the two studied conditions do not overlap, and so the changes described above for the best fit remain qualitatively the same for the whole intervals.

for each fit  the ratio of the two inputs is different for the two hexose phosphate pools. the hkii is less than hki, and, in contrary, the contribution of fbpaseii is higher than fbpasei. this results in a different isotopomer distribution in glycogen relative to the glucose in the medium. moreover, the reactions of the pentose phosphate pathway that interchange various sugar phosphates with fructose phosphates introduce additional differences to the isotopomer content between glycogen and hexose phosphates fueling glycolysis.

among the fluxes of pentose phosphate pathway, the most essential are the exchange between triose and pentose phosphates, and fructose and sedoheptulose phosphates. these exchanges also contribute to the difference between isotopomer content of glycogen and hexose phosphates fueling glycolysis.

although model a was rejected, the fluxes corresponding to the best fit in the presence of lactate are shown in the last column of table  <dig>  they are different from those computed with model b. this difference shows the possible error in the results if the applied model does not properly account for the compartmentation of metabolites.

discussion
possible sources of errors and the implemented way of avoiding them
stable isotope tracing is a promising sensitive technique for the study of metabolism in living cells. however, it is sensitive to various flaws and incompleteness in the data analysis. that is why tools for tracer data analysis must take into account the possible sources of errors. in particular, omitting some isotope exchange reactions may lead to significant errors in the calculated flux distributions  <cit> . the model used here simplifies some sequential reactions of the pentose phosphate pathways, tca cycle, and glycolysis, which are grouped together. however, all the possible splitting and re-formations of carbon skeleton in the considered pathways are taken into account  <cit> . this gives a confidence in avoiding potential errors related with the simulation of incomplete set of fluxes.

not accounting for compartmentation due to metabolic channeling is another pitfall that can result in incorrect estimation of metabolic fluxes  <cit> . table  <dig> shows that model a, which does not account for channeling, gives remarkably different results. however, based on the current state of the art in fluxomics, it is difficult to include into consideration all the possible microcompartments a priori. although there are studies that confirm the associations of enzymes and channeling  <cit> , it is not clear how general the studied cases are with regard to various organisms and tissues, and whether the metabolite compartmentation studied in vitro still persist in vivo. in modeling the metabolic networks, considering a single well mixed pool for each metabolite still remains commonly accepted . the method proposed here to determine metabolite compartmentation from 13c distribution in metabolites does not require specific experiments. instead, it requires a specific analysis related with the implementation of various schemes and application of model discrimination analysis to define the compatibility of the schemes with the data.

experimental design facilitating the analysis
to restrict the possible ways of label propagation, the experimental system was simplified to a maximum by excluding the other sources of carbon except glucose or lactate. this permitted us to find that measured isotopologue distribution even in a small number of metabolites limits the possible solutions sufficiently to reject the hypothesis about unique well mixed pool of hexose phosphates.

the more metabolites analyzed, the more information about the topology of metabolic network they can potentially bring. to extract such information much more various hypothetic topologies must be analyzed. as an introduction to the isotopomer-based analysis of network topology, we presented a simple case of a few metabolites. however, the commencement from small dataset facilitates further extension of this method to larger datasets, including those obtained with nmr or ms  <cit> .

channeling from the point of view of limited diffusion
although it is known that from the point of view of 13c distribution channeling can be simulated as an additional compartment  <cit> , this particular channeling in glycogen synthesis was never considered before and the presented work verified its consistency with experimental data. the analysis of channeling was based on the comparison of the models accounting for well-mixed versus a compartmentalized pool of hexose phosphates. the result of analysis was the rejection of hypothesis suggesting well-mixed in favor of compartmentalized pool of hexose phosphates. to form a separate pool of hexose phosphates and use it specifically for glycogen synthesis, all the three enzymes, hexokinase, phosphoglucomutase, and fructose bisphosphatase, must have access to it. this indicates that these enzymes are spatially co-localized within the intracellular compartment secluded from the rest of the cytosol by diffusion barriers. the indications that diffusion in biological structures can be essentially limited appear in various studies of cell physiology. the diffusion of camp is possibly extremely restricted in the vicinity of cyclic nucleotide-gated channels  <cit> . there are various indications that the diffusion of atp is restricted in the proximity of katp channels  <cit>  and in myofibrils  <cit> . probably, the kind of compartmentation revealed here indicates the general situation in the cell: diffusion is highly limited by the bodies of macromolecules, which serve as borders of microcompartments for small metabolites.

matching schemes to the types of isotopomer distribution
the acceptance of model b does not mean that the set of parameters and respective fluxes can be defined unambiguously. the large confidence intervals for some fluxes  specify an ensemble of sets of metabolic fluxes that are consistent with the data. such a situation is quite normal in biological data analysis  <cit> , when models can make robust predictions with regards to the behavior of the studied system , but such prediction remains valid for various sets of parameters . in such cases, either the topology of the model that is consistent with the data, or the prediction of system behavior for the accepted ensemble of parameter sets  can be the main result of the use of the model. in this way the analysis consists in mapping between the schemes of metabolism and specific distributions of isotopomers.

change of hepatocyte metabolism in the presence of lactate
despite the large confidence intervals, the change of metabolic state in the presence of lactate is evident. most of the metabolic fluxes increased so much that confidence intervals for them do not overlap with those found for glucose as the only substrate. lactate induced the substantial increase of metabolite recycling. this result of modeling, in principle, agrees with the direct observation, that an essential amount of label from lactate ascends up to medium glucose, and an essential amount of label from glucose descends down to lactate. it is in accordance with the function of the liver, which can utilize lactate to synthesize glucose.

however, quantitatively, some of the results are not so evident. table  <dig> shows that the recycling in upper glycolysis  increases several orders of magnitude in the presence of lactate. this recycling brings isotope composition of hexose-6-phosphates formed by gluconeogenesis into the pool of glucose, and vice versa, provides glucose isotopomer composition for the pool of hexose-6-phosphates, which are further split to trioses. indeed, χ <dig> criterion is very sensitive to the value of such recycling: its two-fold decrease leads to the χ <dig> increase from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , which indicates that the flux that decreased twice was out of  <dig> % confidence interval for this recycling. the high velocity of this futile cycle results in the high rate of atp consumption. however, it agrees in the order of magnitude with atp production, taking into account that the flux through tca cycle produces five folds more nadh .

the net glucose consumed as well as lactate produced are burned through the tca cycle thus producing energy necessary for the recycling. thus, in the presence of only glucose, its essential part is used to replenish glycogen, whereas in the presence of both glucose and lactate the cultured liver cells apparently burns these substrates .

the presented analysis of the entire set of experiments characterized the capacity of hepatocytes to modify metabolic state under extreme conditions. the characterization of metabolism of hepatocytes is inseparable from the detection of the real compartmentation of considered pathways. application of this methodology to larger datasets will reveal new information about the network topology. it opens a perspective to examine the compartmentation and metabolic flux profile in various cells under physiological and patho-physiological conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
compartmentation of intracellular metabolism, appeared as a general phenomenon, results that the analysis of metabolic flux distribution should be inseparable from the analysis of compartmental structure of studied pathways. here we proposed a methodology implemented in our software to reveal compartmental structure and metabolic flux distribution from the distribution of 13c isotopomers measured in the products of cells incubated with 13c labeled substrates. this methodology is based on varying the schemes for simulation of measured data and applying the model discrimination analysis. the application of this methodology to the analysis of 13c isotopomer distributions measured in metabolites of isolated liver cells revealed a separate compartment of hexose phosphates related with substrate channeling in glycogen metabolism. this analysis provided the distribution of metabolic fluxes in central carbohydrate metabolism of the cells incubated with 13c labeled glucose, and revealed the changes of fluxes that were induced by addition of lactate in the incubation media.

