BACKGROUND
in behavioral sciences, many studies have been conducted to investigate how animals select actions between multiple options with uncertain outcomes  <cit> . in a situation where two or more response options  provide different rates of reinforcement, an animal’s relative response rates on the different options generally conform closely to the relative rates of reinforcement delivered by the options  <cit> . this assignment of response rate is known as matching behavior. trained animals, with considerable previous experience in the different reinforcement rates of the options, are quick to adapt to unpredictable changes in relative reinforcement rates  <cit> . however, few attempts have been made to explore the patterns of acquisition of matching behavior in experimentally naïve animals  <cit> .

the nucleus accumbens core  is known to participate in behavioral tasks requiring an assessment of possible actions that differ in outcome value, such as risk-based decision-making  <cit> , temporal discounting  <cit> , and effort-based decision-making  <cit> . in addition, cardinal and cheung  <cit>  reported that well-trained rats with excitotoxic lesions of the acbc exhibited better matching behavior, potentially as a result of increased sensitivity to reinforcer magnitude. however, it is unknown how the acbc is involved in the development of matching behavior.

in the present study, we examined the influence of bilateral excitotoxic acbc lesions on the development of matching behavior. lesioned rats were exposed to daily sessions with concurrent variable-interval  schedules on two levers. during the vi schedule for a given lever, a reinforcer  was delivered if the lever was depressed after a specific time interval following the previous reinforcer. the time interval varied randomly around an average for each lever. the allocation of the two vi schedules to the levers was randomly alternated between sessions. the deviation from matching  <cit>  was measured for each daily session as an index of the development of matching behavior. these data were averaged for each two consecutive sessions  before analysis.

RESULTS
histological assessment of acbc lesions
verification of the lesion was made on brain sections that were immunostained for the neuronal nuclear protein neun. ibotenic acid injection to the acbc induced a marked neuronal loss around the injection site, observable as an unstained region . the sham-operated rats showed no signs of cell loss . the lesioned area extended anteroposteriorly from approximately  <dig>  mm to  <dig>  mm anterior to bregma, and did not extend ventrally or caudally into the olfactory tubercle or ventral pallidum .

acbc-lesioned rats show altered matching behavior
deviation from matching behavior  <cit>  was used as the performance index for the behavior. there was a clear decrease in the deviation across session blocks in both groups . a three-way mixed analysis of variance  indicated a significant main effect of block , with a significant block × group interaction . post-hoc analyses of the group effect over session blocks revealed a significant simple main effect in the third session block , in which the acbc-lesioned rats exhibited closer conformity to the matching law than the sham-operated rats. further, simple effects analyses revealed a significant effect of block in both the acbc-lesioned  and the sham-operated  groups, confirming the development of matching behavior across session blocks in both groups.

we analyzed whether matching behavior would be improved within a session. the improvement of matching behavior across 10-min bins in the first session block was less evident than that on the second session block . the overall anova showed a significant main effect of time  with a significant time × block interaction , reflecting the differential improvement across session blocks. there were no significant interactions between time and any terms involving group in the same anova . post-hoc analyses conducted over each session block revealed that a simple main effect of time was significant in the first session block , as well as in the second session block onwards . these results indicate that matching behavior improves across 10-min bins over all session blocks in both groups.

the closer conformity to the matching law in the acbc-lesioned rats of the third session block suggests that the acbc may inhibit the improvement of matching behavior. in this study, the locations of the more frequently reinforced  lever and the alternative  lever were randomly alternated between sessions. the improvement of matching behavior is known to be delayed when the locations of the rich and lean levers are exchanged  <cit> . to test whether the acbc lesions affected the responses to the change in lever location, the data were categorized into two conditions: one in which the locations of the rich and lean levers were the same as those in the preceding session , and one in which the locations of the two levers were switched . in the same condition, both the sham- and the acbc-lesioned rats developed matching behavior as they experienced more sessions, and the acbc-lesioned rats showed closer conformity to the matching law than the sham-operated rats . a factorial 2 × 2 ×  <dig> anova with condition , group  and session block  revealed a significant condition × group interaction , while there was no interaction involving the block variable. further analyses revealed that a simple main effect of group was significant under the same condition , but not under the different condition . these results showed that the acbc-lesioned rats exhibited closer conformity to the matching law than the sham-operated rats under the same condition but not under the different condition. additionally, the statistical analysis revealed a simple main effect of condition in the acbc-lesioned animals , as well as sham-operated controls . this suggests that matching was better within either group in the same condition than in the different condition.

acbc-lesioned rats show altered switching behavior
to gain further insight into the underlying reason for improved matching behavior in the acbc-lesioned rats, we analyzed switching probabilities. subjects can switch their responses from one option to another under concurrent schedules, and probabilities of switching are known to be reduced by acbc lesion  <cit> . we compared switching probabilities between the acbc-lesioned group and the sham-operated group across sessions. acbc-lesioned rats exhibited a smaller probability of switching than shams on session block  <dig> . a three-way mixed anova  revealed a significant effect of block  and a significant group × block × time interaction , while a main effect of group was not reliable . further analyses confirmed the inspection of figure 3a through a significant simple main effect of group  in session block  <dig>  from these results, we conclude that switching behavior is impaired by acbc lesion in the third session block. we also carried out a three-way factorial anova using factors of condition, separating the two lever locations by means of whether they were the same as or different to those in the preceding session, of block, and of group. the analysis revealed a significant main effect of group , of block , and of condition . no interactions including any variables were significant in the analysis. thus the statistical analysis provided no evidence for a lesion effect on the switching behavior between the same and the different condition .

acbc-lesioned rats do not show alterations in performance and pausing
we compared the number of responses, as well as rewards, between the acbc- and sham-lesioned groups. figure 3c shows averaged numbers of lever presses on both levers in each session block. the number increased as the experiment progressed in both groups. a three-way mixed anova  revealed a significant main effect of block . there was no significant main effect or interaction involving the group variable. this result suggests that the acbc lesions did not influence the overall performance of lever pressing. the number of rewards also increased in both groups across session blocks . a three-way mixed anova  revealed a significant main effect of block . there was no effect of group, and none of the interactions involving groups approached significance. this result indicates that the number of earned pellets was not affected by the acbc lesions.

the improvement in conforming to the matching law in the acbc-lesioned rats may suggest an exaggerated perception of reinforcer magnitude in these animals  <cit> . post-reinforcement pausing  is defined as the time interval from the last delivery of the reinforcer to the next response emitted by a subject, and is jointly determined by past reinforcer magnitude and stimuli correlated with upcoming magnitude  <cit> . dopaminergic innervation to the nucleus accumbens is known to be involved in the behavioral control of prp  <cit> . to test whether the acbc-lesioned rats display altered perception of the past and the upcoming reinforcer magnitude, we compared prps between the acbc-lesioned rats and the sham-operated animals. prps declined across session blocks in both the acbc-lesioned and the sham-operated animals . an anova using a between-subjects factor of group and a within-subject factor of session block showed a significant main effect of session block  with a significant group × session block interaction . simple effects analyses showed a significant effect of session block in both the acbc-lesioned  and the sham-lesioned  rats. these results indicate that the acbc-lesioned rats, as well as the sham-lesioned controls, can shorten prps by repetition of sessions. post hoc comparisons of prps between the acbc rats and shams failed to show any significant difference in all session blocks . these results suggest that perceptions of the past and the upcoming reinforcer magnitude do not differ between the acbc-lesioned rats and the sham-lesioned rats.

discussion
the present study demonstrates that the acbc-lesioned rats develop matching behavior faster than the sham-operated rats, because acbc-lesioned group in the third session block displayed closer conformity to the matching law than the sham group. more detailed analysis reveals that the acbc rats exhibit the closer conformity to the matching law than shams when the location of the rich/lean levers remains the same between two successive sessions , but not when the levers are switched between sessions . as well as the deviation from matching behavior, switching probabilities are also contracted in the acbc-lesioned rats. in contrast, the acbc-lesioned rats do not show altered lever-press performance and post-reinforcement pausing . these results provide suggestions for possible roles of the acbc on the development of matching behavior.

we found better matching in the acbc-lesioned rats by means of manipulations of reinforcer frequencies. cardinal and cheung  <cit>  report similar results through manipulations of reinforcer magnitudes. these studies demonstrate that the acbc-lesioned rats are more sensitive than shams for comparative differences in the magnitude and frequency of reinforcers between alternatives. in the present study, however, the acbc rats failed to show alteration of prp. this finding suggests unaltered perception of the past and the upcoming reinforcer magnitude in these animals. in addition, the acbc lesions influenced neither the number of lever presses nor the number of pellets earned. these results indicate that the perceptions of the absolute reinforcer magnitude are not different between the acbc group and shams. thus, we conclude that better matching of the acbc-lesioned rats does not result from the exaggerated perception of reinforcer magnitude in these animals.

both our study and a previous study  <cit>  showed lower switching probabilities in acbc-lesioned rats. these results raise a possibility that the reduced switching in the acbc-lesioned rats leads their behavior choice to closer conformity to the matching law faster than shams. reduction of switching rates generally represents an increase of the mean stay durations for levers. in the present study, however, the rich lever produced more frequent reinforcers than the lean lever. in this condition, we can speculate that the stay durations for the rich lever increased more than those for the lean lever in the acbc-lesioned rats, resulting in the biased increment of stay durations for the rich lever in these rats. we suggest that this probably greater contrast of stay durations between levers in the acbc-lesioned rats promotes faster development of matching behavior in acbc-lesioned rats than shams in the present study.

this tendency of the acbc-lesioned rats must be further strengthened in the same condition by an effect known as spontaneous recovery  <cit> . this means reversion to a previously reinforced choice proportion at the beginning of the session, for example, if the right lever is the rich lever in the current session, the rat will prefer pressing on the right lever at the start of the next session. thus we speculate a reason for the better matching shown by acbc-lesioned rats in the same condition, as both the lowered switching and the spontaneous recovery are additive for the development of matching behavior in this condition. conversely, spontaneous recovery potentially interferes with the development of matching behavior in the different condition because the locations of scheduled levers  are exchanged between the current and the preceding session, and the percentage of responses at the beginning of the current session will be biased for the lever of the vi  <dig> schedule in this condition. thus we speculate in the different condition that the spontaneous recovery cancels out the effect of reduced switching for faster development of matching behavior in the acbc rats.

there are at least two possible mechanisms that may reduce the switching rate of the acbc rats. first, the acbc may be involved in the neural mechanism for the perception of changeover delay , as previously suggested  <cit> . cod is a period of time following lever-press alternation during which reinforcement of responding on the lever cannot occur  <cit> , and is set to be effective for 3 s in the present study. switching rate in rats is known to be reduced when cod is increased  <cit> , and the acbc-lesioned rats are known to be sensitive for the delayed reinforcement  <cit> . thus the potentially exaggerated perception of cod in the acbc rats may reduce the changeover rate in these animals. another possibility is impaired neural encoding for behavioral switching in the acbc rats. integrity of the nucleus accumbens is known to be necessary for both the acquisition and performance of cue-directed behavioral switching tasks  <cit> . the evidence for neural encoding for behavioral switching in the nucleus accumbens is provided by using neurophysiological recordings of well-trained rats during the cue-directed behavioral switching task  <cit> , showing that nearly one third of the recorded neural responses were outcome-predictive with additional modulation by the presence or absence of a subsequent behavioral switching. from these reports, it is possible that some neurons in the acbc encode switching information, and the loss of these neural responses might cause reduction of behavioral switching in the present study. the lower switching probability and better matching behavior in the acbc-lesioned rats are due to both of the frequency  and the magnitude  in reinforcers. these observations suggest that the rate of behavioral switching is a mutual module of matching behavior to both of the frequency and the magnitude of reinforcers. thus, the mechanism of acbc-induced switching and its potential role on the development of choice should be further investigated.

CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that acbc lesions promote an improvement in conforming to the matching law and that the acbc regulates the development of choice behavior. switching behavior potentially mediates conformity to the matching law, and the reduced switching in the acbc-lesioned rats suggests an effect of a primary change in switching behavior on the better matching of the acbc-lesioned rats. matching behavior of the acbc-lesioned rats is also affected by the sequence of the left/right allocations of the more frequently reinforced lever in two successive session  and is better than shams in the same condition but not in the different condition, suggesting influence of the spontaneous recovery on the development of matching behavior that is induced by the reduced switching in the acbc-lesioned rats.

