BACKGROUND
remarkable advances in the high throughput technologies enable researchers to broaden their research focuses from a single gene/protein to global gene/protein expression profiles. the daunting challenge is how to turn these overwhelmingly data into real information and gain meaningful insights of how the information is processed in a living system. the goal of systems biology is to integrate these high throughput data sets through mathematical models that can computationally simulate the complexity of a biological network, explore the design principles during the evolution of a biological circuit to insure its robustness and thereby generate novel, experimentally testable hypotheses. it is the mission in the post-genomic era to understand how all the parts of cells – genes, proteins, and many other molecules – work in concert to create complex living organisms and analyze how entire biological systems function, both in health and in sickness.

the main challenge for systems biologists is to develop a mathematical modeling technique suitable for modeling the complexity of biological systems. the "enzyme-centric" mechanistic modeling approach has been developed in order to integrate expert knowledge in the mechanistic understanding of enzyme catalytic and regulatory mechanisms  <cit> . various enzyme models can be assembled into a pathway such that the combination of various pathways is automatically extended into a larger biological network. the modularity of the model and the feature of automatic model generation enables flexible updates. this approach incorporates non-linear biological properties which are essential for simulating the network level regulation and predicting responses to perturbations.

in contrast, commonly seen modeling approaches either ignore the dynamic properties of enzymes by assuming they are constant or, without considering regulation, simply assign probability linkage among components through training sets. the term "non-linear" here refers to the biological nonlinearity of enzymes that are variables in the equations . the amino acid biosynthetic network and the interaction of transcription and rna splicing are presented here to show the advantages of using the non-linear enzyme-centric approach vs. a linear conversion model. these examples reveal the value of enzyme-centric modeling to help understand how a living system maintains homeostasis and continues to function  while facing environmental stresses or genetic mutations.

RESULTS
the modularity of non-linear enzyme-centric modeling of the amino acid biosynthetic network
the validated enzyme-centric models for the branched chain amino acids   <cit>  and its upstream threonine biosynthetic pathways  <cit>  in escherichia coli  k <dig> strain were integrated together to demonstrate the modularity and expandability of this approach  . this network includes seventeen enzymes , eight feedback regulation loops, three sets of isozymes and several multi-functional enzymes of multi-functional pathways. this integrated model represents the first example of modeling "network level regulatory patterns" of multifunctional pathways. the non-linear, dynamic responses of intermediate metabolites due to the feedback regulations were observed. there are only three simple enzyme  models  in the network which emphasize the importance of modeling the complex enzyme model. although there are only four allosteric enzymes , they are located at the upstream of each pathway. it is important to model them correctly  <cit>  in order to simulate the regulation of the metabolic flux entering the individual pathway.

in fig  <dig> with simple feedback loops, a sharp rise in the concentrations of asp-p, asa, hse and hse-p at the beginning was followed by a sharp rise in the concentration of threonine . these initial increases in the concentrations of metabolites are feedback-inhibited by accumulation of threonine on aki, hdhi and hsk. after connecting the downstream pathway, threonine levels are also controlled by its downstream enzyme  . tda enzyme activity is feedback inhibited by isoleucine  and feedback activated by valine . the ripple effect  is due to the balance between different regulatory mechanisms. at the end, all metabolites reach homeostasis  dynamically. we demonstrate here that, using the enzyme-centric approach, each individual pathway model can be built and validated independently and then added into a larger network model.

non-linear network level regulation vs. linear conversion model: prediction of isoleucine production over pyruvate perturbation
it is important to demonstrate the difference between the non-linear, enzyme-centric model and linear conversion model. the easiest way is to do this is by introducing perturbation into both models. in fig 3a and 3b, we introduce pyruvate  perturbation. changes in the levels of threonine  and isoleucine  are simulated. when perturbing pyr in the linear model , isoleucine reaches the max flux and remains constant while threonine stays in constant since it is upstream of pyr and assumed independent from pyr in the linear model. in contrast, with the enzyme-centric model , products  are decreased as substrate  increases.

to illustrate what happens in the non-linear model, in fig 3b, ahas, ir, dad and tb are multi-functional enzymes shared by valine and isoleucine biosynthetic pathways. excess pyr disturbs the balance of enzyme partition and shifts most of enzymes to the valine biosynthesis. decreased enzymes for the isoleucine pathway produce less isoleucine and the feedback inhibition of threonine deaminase  is relieved. tda is more active to consume and decrease threonine level. to validate the response of the feedback regulation, the product of tda, αkb, is a toxic metabolite that blocks glucose transport and cell growth. when tda is activated, αkb accumulates, and ahas enzymes become a rate limit step due to the shift of enzyme partition between two pathways. using a simple growth assay, we validated that excess pyr inhibits e. coli k <dig> growth . this phenomenon cannot be explained by the simple linear conversion model.

it is essential to realize that under the network regulation, increasing substrate alone can not guarantee increased product amount. this is especially important for metabolic engineering. what we demonstrated here is the effect of multi-functional enzyme partition under increasing substrate condition on preventing over-production and maintaining homeostasis of an amino acid.

non-linear network level regulation vs. linear conversion model: prediction of valine production over pyruvate perturbation
while excess pyr shifts enzymes to the valine biosynthesis, an interesting question is whether this affects valine production. given more substrates and enzymes, the obvious answer is valine will increase, which is true if the reaction is in a test tube with purified enzymes. however, the simulated valine response pattern  tells a different story. initially, valine increases in concert with pyr level until saturation occurs. while pyr keeps increasing and passes a certain threshold, an isozyme  reaction is turned on . tc converts valine reversibly back to its intermediate, αkiv. once turned on, the tc reaction becomes a dominant reaction over the major transamination of transaminase b , so that valine decreases as pyr continues to increase.

this biological circuit is designed to automatically switch the direction of the metabolic flux to prevent over-producing and thus maintain homeostasis of valine. while the substrate levels increase, the outcome could be increasing, unchanged or decreasing, depending upon the given condition. although the difference may not be obvious within the physiological levels of pyr in both models , under the extreme perturbation , the enzyme-centric model clearly shows a distinct response pattern.

flexibility and compatibility of mechanistic model within close species: prediction of drug sensitivity in salmonella lt2
the ability to reuse models within close species or cell lines is another advantage of the mechanistic modeling over statistic modeling. the model can be reused by changing a few parameters that are known to be different among species and validated without rebuilding the model. in contrast, statistical models require an entirely new training data set to train a new model.

we demonstrate here that escherichia coli  k <dig> and salmonella typhimurium  lt <dig> are two closely related model organisms. however, several enzyme kinetic properties are known to be different:  e. coli k <dig> has non-functional, mutated ahas isozyme ii; s. typh. lt <dig> has normal ahas ii, but does not express ahas iii;  lt <dig> has much higher tda enzyme activity  than k12; and,  although the allosteric tda is a tetramer in lt <dig> the same as in k <dig>  it has only two functional catalytic sites. the allosteric parameters  were refitted to the kinetic data from lt <dig> as described in  <cit>  . the following are values of parameters in the models to reflect this knowledge: lt2:  =  <dig> um,  =  <dig> um, c =  <dig>  l =  <dig>  vs. k12:  =  <dig> um,  =  <dig> um, c =  <dig> , l =  <dig> .

the lt <dig> model was validated with the known drug toxicity effect on sulfometuron methyl , which is an herbicide that specifically blocks ahas ii activity. the enzyme concentration of ahas ii was turned down to simulate the sm effect. the ile feedback resistant mutant of tda was simulated by increasing ki of tda to ile to a large number. again, using αkb as a growth indicator, when treated with sm + val, sm inhibits ahas ii. val inhibits ahas i , but activates tda . ahas iii is null in lt <dig> . threonine is rapidly converted to αkb which blocks glucose transport. cell growth was suppressed in both strains . tda is an allosteric enzyme that is activated by val and inhibited by ile. ile can rescue the wild type strain  by competing with val to inhibit tda activity and eliminate αkb accumulation , but not in the tda_ile feedback mutant  . the results demonstrate that, with mechanistic modeling, we are able to switch the metabolic network model of e. coli to s. typh by changing a few parameter values. the simulations of drug sensitivity agree with known experimental results.

enzyme-centric modeling of the coupling effect of spliceosome and rna polymerase
in eukaryotic cells, proper rna processing is essential for producing proteins with normal functionality. the protein factory hypothesis suggests that the protein-protein interaction of rna polymerase ii  and spliceosome protects the functional splice sites within nascent pre-mrna from the rnase degradation and results in the efficient mature mrna production . in contrast, other rna polymerases  do not provide similar protection resulting in excess mature mrna degradation   <cit> . the enzyme-centric interactome model of spliceosome and rna polymerase was constructed, and after systematic perturbing, the key controlling factor that was identified is the affinity  of spliceosome to pre-mrna related to the affinity of rnase to pre-mrna. the former needs to be much less  than the latter . computer simulations support the protein factory hypothesis that the gene expression machinery in eukaryotic cells is closely interacted with each other to form an assembly line. we demonstrate that this circuit design guarantees an extended half-life for the proper processing of nascent pre-mrnas and ensures that the quality and steady production of mature mrna production  vs. viral polymerase dose not warrant this functionality . furthermore, the deterministic pol ii model can be adapted to the stochastic simulation by adding normally distributed noise terms  to the rate constants. the probabilistic perturbations of reaction rates for transcription and splicing also demonstrate that these two rate constants are the key factors to simulate the observed experimental variations .

discussion
in this paper, we demonstrate the application of complex enzyme catalytic and regulatory modules to simulate nonlinear network regulatory patterns. in order to simulate the non-linear biological complexities, it is essential to incorporate prior knowledge of enzyme mechanism from the literature. simulation/perturbation of the integrated mathematical model from each individual enzyme models will help us to understand the network level regulation and the purpose of the circuit design. the model expandability is demonstrated; each individual amino acid metabolic pathway is simulated/validated independently and then adds into a larger network model to form a complex amino acid biosynthetic network with layers of multi-regulations. these regulatory mechanisms, including multi-functional enzyme partition and reversible isozyme reaction, contribute to prevent over-production and maintain homeostasis of amino acids under environmental changes. the purposes of these metabolic circuit designs are never realized by investigators when the focus is on studying the mechanism of a single enzyme. simulations using the integrated, non-linear enzyme-centric model uncover the purposes of these designs. to simulate and understand these properties are especially important for metabolic engineers to design mutant strains that remove these regulatory mechanisms that protect microorganism from over-production to increase yield of amino acid production.

we also demonstrated the flexibility of mechanistic models within close species by changing a few parameter values. the model can easily be re-used from one species to the other. furthermore, the eukaryotic protein factory model for ensuring steady mrna production is simulated and the coupling of rna transcription and splicing is validated by both mathematical simulation and experimental analysis. this circuit design guarantees an extended half-life for the proper processing of nascent pre-mrnas and ensures the quality and steady production of mature mrna production, which does not occur in viral rna polymerase.

comparison of non-linear enzyme-centric approach to other models: the key for modeling the biological non-linearity is "enzyme is a variable"
traditional enzyme modeling approaches use the michaelis-menten kinetic equation for one substrate/one product reactions while the king-altman method is used to derive equations for more complex multiple reactant reactions. these types of equations are called steady-state velocity equations since the derivatives of the concentration over time for each reactant in the model are set to zero to simplify a set of nonlinear differential equations to linear algebra equations. this type of approach may be suitable for single enzyme or unifunctional pathway modeling . michaelis-menten equation is mathematically non-linear but biologically linear, since the vm  in the equation is a constant and vm = kcat × total. kcat is a constant, therefore total is a constant. this assumption is valid if the model only concerns the reactions inside a test tube, but not for multifunctional pathways and network-level regulation. in the field of metabolic engineering, the most widely used modeling framework is metabolic control analysis . the major limitation of the traditional mca is its assumption that a system is always in a steady state, i.e. the assumption of linearity and independency . therefore, the traditional mca approach is not suitable for modeling the transient phenomena from perturbations of metabolic parameters. several improvements have tried to remove these limitations, including the power-law approximation   <cit> , the linear refinement of the mca model  <cit>  and lin-log kinetics  <cit>  which have been developed to consider enzyme concentrations, feedback regulators and reversible enzyme reactions in the models.

the network level regulation involving multiple regulatory mechanisms is beyond the concept of a simple feedback loop, linear conversion  <cit>  or statistic model. regulatory proteins which are critical for the robustness and integrity of the system can be identified using numerical perturbations as shown above. in general, such regulatory proteins are located at the upstream branch points of a network. usually, multiple regulators or isoforms control the direction or partition of metabolic flux . nevertheless, downstream regulators are also observed  under certain conditions. computers can generate spectra of dynamic responses over biological perturbations to facilitate the identification of regulatory proteins and thereby explicate the design principles of nature-occurring biological circuits.

unfortunately, biology is more complicated than those models can realistically reflect without the introduction of numerous extra dynamic variables. for example, in the metabolic network model below, to model the isozymes  that are controlled by different modes of regulation, the mca models must allow multiple fluxes for the conversion of the same substrate to the same product. to model the bi-functional enzyme , the fluxes of these two enzyme reactions must be "dependent" on each other. also, several enzymes are involved in multi-pathways and their fluxes depend on the enzyme partition between these pathways in a given condition. these facts point out the fundamental drawback of the mca approach in considering metabolic networks as a collection of "independent" chemical conversions. with enzymes remaining as variables, the enzyme-centric approach allows the temporal patterns of enzyme state/partition and network-specific regulatory patterns to be identified and is able to incorporate non-linear properties of a biological network, such as positive/negative feedback regulation, allosteric regulation  <cit> , reversible enzyme reaction, post-translational modification , biological redundancy , multifunctional enzyme and its partition between the multifunctional pathways  <cit> . in contrast, commonly seen modeling approaches mainly focus on discovering correlations or probability linkages between molecular species using specific training sets. regulation is not considered to simplify the complexity of their models . nevertheless, simulations presented here demonstrate these non-linear regulatory properties are essential for modeling the network level regulation that maintains the robustness of a biological system.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we recognize biological complexity and develop a novel modeling tool to integrate prior mechanistic knowledge into a mathematical model. with perturbing the parameters in the model systematically, regulatory factors critical to maintaining the functional integrity of the system were found. we demonstrated the importance of modeling complex enzyme catalytic and regulatory mechanisms to further understand the nonlinear network regulatory patterns and circuit design for preventing of over-production and thereby maintaining homeostasis. the simulations presented in this paper reveal how a living system maintains homeostasis and robustness to continue functioning while facing environmental stresses and also strengthen the idea of bringing knowledge and regulatory mechanisms into computer simulation  <cit>  to make a model smart enough, and, as such, become an engine of discovery and prediction.

