BACKGROUND
the higher-level phylogeny of placental mammals has long been one of the most intensively studied problems in systematics , because a robust placental phylogeny is crucial to understanding mammalian evolution and biogeography. until relatively recently, most comprehensive studies have relied purely on morphological data. such studies largely upheld the monophyly of all  <dig>  <cit>  traditionally recognised orders but were rather less successful in resolving the relationships between the orders .

recent sophisticated analyses of molecular sequence data have significantly revised and refined the view from morphology, resulting in a well-resolved 'molecular consensus' view of placental phylogeny  <cit>  that is broadly supported by many genes and gene combinations . this consensus rejects the monophyly of two traditional placental orders: artiodactyla  is paraphyletic with respect to cetacea  and lipotyphla  is diphyletic  <cit> , being split into afrosoricida and eulipotyphla. at the interordinal level, molecular data consistently resolve extant placental groups into four 'superorders': afrotheria, xenarthra, laurasiatheria and euarchontoglires . despite this recent progress, regions of the topology are still uncertain, as different data types  and methods of analysis  often support conflicting relationships. notably, the location of the root of the placental tree remains unresolved  <cit> , and the precise relationships within each superorder are also somewhat unclear. perhaps more importantly, taxonomic coverage remains far from complete: the taxonomically most inclusive higher-level single-matrix analysis of mammals so far, that of murphy et al.  <cit> , included representatives of only  <dig> of the  <dig> extant placental families recognised by wilson and reeder  <cit> . studies directly combining molecular and morphological data have been even more taxonomically limited, tending to focus on specific areas of contention, such as afrotherian monophyly  <cit> , or relationships within cetartiodactyla  <cit> . this is because comprehensiveness in such analyses is difficult to achieve, given the typically patchy taxonomic distribution of available data  <cit>  that can be analysed in a single matrix.

orders follow  <cit>  except that xenarthra is divided into cingulata and pilosa, lipotyphla  is split between afrosoricida and eulipotyphla, and cetacea  and artiodactyla  are combined as cetartiodactyla. higher-level names are taken from  <cit> .

supertree analysis provides an alternative route to comprehensive estimates of phylogeny  <cit> . this approach combines existing phylogenetic tree topologies , rather than their underlying data, by any of a number of methods – most commonly matrix representation with parsimony . this procedure produces a composite phylogeny, or 'supertree', that can be taxonomically more comprehensive than any source tree. because supertree analyses sample at the level of tree topologies  <cit> , source trees based on any data , can be used. as a result, supertrees can be based on the broadest sampling of both data and taxa, and so are often taxonomically more comprehensive than phylogenies of the same clades produced by more direct approaches . supertrees of many clades have now been published, almost exclusively using mrp .

liu et al.  used a supertree approach to infer the relationships among placental mammal families from a combination of morphological and molecular source trees. their combined supertree, based on  <dig> source trees from  <dig> references published before march  <dig>  still remains by far the most comprehensive higher-level phylogeny of placentals published.

overall, the lea combined supertree  seemed a reasonable compromise between the morphological and molecular phylogenies then available  <cit> . however, it conflicted with the majority of more recent data in parts of its topology, supporting instead 'outdated' views of placental phylogeny . most notably, artiodactyla was monophyletic, contradicting a wealth of evidence already then available  for a cetacea + hippopotamidae  clade . furthermore, interfamilial relationships within artiodactyla appeared anomalous  <cit> . monophyly of lipotyphla was also strongly supported, contradicting the association between afrosoricida and the other taxa  now considered to comprise afrotheria  <cit> . this was despite considerable molecular evidence for both lipotyphlan polyphyly and afrotherian monophyly prior to march  <dig> , both of which were actually reflected in the molecular-only supertree of lea .

gatesy et al.  <cit>  argued in detail that the 'outdated' features of the lea supertree stemmed from any or all of: 1) uncritical selection of source trees that represent poor and duplicated data; 2) assumptions of ordinal monophyly without basis in the underlying data ; and 3) inherent, methodological shortcomings in the mrp method, if not the supertree approach as a whole . concentrating on the relationship between artiodactyla and cetacea, gatesy et al.  <cit>  claimed that all of the  <dig> mrp pseudocharacters supporting the monophyly of artiodactyla in the combined supertree derived from low quality source trees that represented 'appeals to authority, duplications of data, miscodings, or derivatives of poorly justified trees'  <cit> .

motivated by concerns about source tree quality and duplication in supertree analyses, bininda-emonds et al.  proposed a set of guidelines for identifying suitable source trees, filtering out trees representing duplicated or poor data, and minimizing assumptions of higher-taxon monophyly. the underlying principle of the guidelines is that only those source trees that can be considered to represent 'independent phylogenetic hypotheses' should be included in a supertree. bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>  proposed that source trees produced from independent character sets, such as different genes or different morphological character sets, all represent such independent phylogenetic hypotheses. they also contended that different combinations of genes and/or morphological characters likewise comprise independent phylogenetic hypotheses, because of the possibility of signal enhancement . to minimise data duplication, they suggested that, where no clear cut choice for a single tree presents itself for a given independent character set , mrp 'mini-supertrees' of all non-independent source trees based on that character set should be created. thus, each dataset adjudged to be independent according the protocol is ultimately represented  by a single, taxonomically inclusive tree – either an original source tree or a 'mini-supertree' – in the final supertree analysis. this protocol has already been followed in the construction of species-level supertrees of extant marsupials  <cit>  and cetartiodactyls  <cit> .

here, we apply the bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>  guidelines to a large set of source trees, including all those used by lea but also those from references published between march  <dig>  and september  <dig>  to investigate higher-level placental phylogeny. we include all  <dig> extant placental families, plus two recently extinct and enigmatic groups – nesophontidae  and plesiorycteropodidae  – the relationships of which may be crucial to a better understanding of both the biogeographical history and patterns of character evolution within placentals  <cit> . we use a modified, 'semi-rooted' version of mrp that can compensate for source trees that are not robustly rooted  <cit> . we assess the degree of support for nodes in the supertree using a supertree-specific support measure, reduced qualitative support ; this varies from - <dig>  to + <dig> , and is described in methods.

as a subsidiary analysis, we apply the guidelines of bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>  to the same  <dig> references used by lea in their combined supertree. by reproducing their methodology as far as possible , except where these conflict with the recommendations of the protocol, we aim to assess the specific impact of the protocol on the overall supertree topology. specifically, we focus on whether monophyly of both artiodactyla and lipotyphla are affected in terms of changes in topology, or in support values as measured by the decay index . we also examine whether other changes in topology and support are in better or worse agreement with contemporary evidence. this will help determine whether the criticized aspects of the original lea topology reflect an inherent, unavoidable, weakness of supertree analysis per se, or avoidable weaknesses in the source dataset that was originally used and that can be remedied using a suitable protocol for source tree collection.

RESULTS
the search of the final mrp supertree matrix from the full analysis recovered  <dig> most parsimonious trees of length  <dig>  . the strict consensus of the  <dig> trees is highly resolved, with the only conflict occurring within the hystricognath rodents. the 50% majority rule consensus is illustrated here , with those branches that collapse in the strict consensus identified by asterisks. there are no unsupported novel clades . repeating the analysis with the extinct nesophontidae and plesiorycteropodidae deleted from the original source trees has no effect on the higher-level relationships among the extant taxa.

the supertree presented here is highly congruent with most recent estimates of placental phylogeny at both the inter- and intraordinal levels  <cit> . however, because the primary goal of our analyses was to investigate ordinal composition and interordinal relationships, we did not include single order source trees in our dataset. as such, the intraordinal relationships presented here are not based on the maximum amount of data available. although even this amount of data has yielded relationships that are largely congruent with current phylogenetic opinion, we would recommend the use of relevant supertrees  or other similarly comprehensive phylogenies for intraordinal relationships.

four principal clades, or 'superorders', are present: afrotheria , xenarthra , laurasiatheria  and euarchontoglires . in upholding the monophyly of these superorders, this supertree supports the hypothesis that plate tectonics have been crucial in the early evolution of modern placentals  <cit> . the superorders may have undergone their initial divergences in biogeographical areas that were separate throughout much of the cretaceous and cenozoic: afrotheria in afro-arabia, xenarthra in south america, and both euarchontoglires and laurasiatheria in laurasia  <cit> . however, recent studies suggest that a number of fossil 'condylarths' from laurasia are afrotherian  <cit> , conflicting with a strict tectonic-based interpretation of placental phylogeny. regardless, these four superorders indicate that morphological convergence has been more pervasive than previously thought  <cit> .

in agreement with most recent phylogenetic analyses of placental mammals, the supertree upholds the monophyly of  <dig> of the  <dig> extant orders recognised in wilson and reeder  <cit> . although a 'seed tree' that assumes monophyly of all  <dig> of these orders  was included as a source tree , the  <dig> that are monophyletic in the supertree are supported by between  <dig>  and  <dig>  other source trees. lipotyphla is polyphyletic, with afrosoricida in afrotheria and eulipotyphla  in laurasiatheria, and artiodactyla is paraphyletic with respect to cetacea.

the supertree supports afrotheria as the sister to the remaining superorders, in agreement with most nuclear and nuclear + mitochondrial trees . a recent analysis of retroposon integrations  <cit>  supported a xenarthran root, congruent with morphological evidence for a split between xenarthra and all other extant placentals   <cit> , although alternatives could not be statistically rejected. within afrotheria, the first split is between paenungulata  and afroinsectiphilia . within paenungulata, procaviidae  and dugongidae + trichechidae  are sister taxa , in agreement with some sequence data  and retroposons  <cit> . within afroinsectiphilia, the supertree recovers both afrosoricida  and afroinsectivora , with orycteropodidae  as the sister to afroinsectivora; this is again congruent with most sequence data , although chromosome-painting supports monophyly of   <cit>  and retroposons support monophyly of   <cit> . based on source trees from macphee  <cit>  and asher et al.  <cit> , plesiorycteropodidae is recovered as the sister to orycteropodidae, indicating that the extinct bibymalagasy is afrotherian, as might be suspected from its known distribution  and from features of its astragalus that are shared with a number of extant afrotherians  <cit> . relationships within xenarthra, the only superorder that is currently also supported by morphology, are congruent with both morphological  <cit>  and molecular  <cit>  evidence.

euarchonta  and glires  are both monophyletic, together forming the clade euarchontoglires. the low rqs value for glires probably reflects the inclusion of source trees that support rodent polyphyly or paraphyly , although morphological  <cit>  and most recent molecular phylogenies  <cit>  support rodent monophyly, as recovered here. tupaiidae  form the sister group to a cynocephalidae  + primates clade. the supertree topology within euarchontoglires, at both the inter- and intra-ordinal levels, is highly congruent with most recent, mainly molecular evidence  <cit> .

within laurasiatheria, a monophyletic eulipotyphla  is the sister to the remaining taxa. this contradicts the hypothesis that erinaceidae  are basal placentals, as has been suggested by mitochondrial trees ,. a solenodontidae + nesophontidae  clade is congruent with biogeographic evidence, as both taxa are known only from the west indies, but compelling evidence for the true affinities of nesophontidae is still lacking  <cit> ; the position advocated for it here is based on only three source trees. a sister-group relationship between erinaceidae and soricidae  to the exclusion of talpidae  agrees with most molecular estimates , but is only relatively weakly supported here . within the remaining taxa, chiroptera  are the sister group to fereuungulata . carnivora and manidae  together form ferae , with cetartiodactyla and perissodactyla as sister taxa . different molecular data continue to yield incompatible topologies within fereuungulata ; the topology favoured here is arguably more congruent with morphological data because the sister relationship between cetartiodactyls and perissodactyls requires only a single origin of 'ungulate' features within laurasiatheria. however, a recent transposon analysis  <cit>  recovered a clade comprising carnivorans, perissodactyls and bats , which has been named pegasoferae. artiodactyla is paraphyletic, with whippomorpha  as the sister to the ruminants, forming cetruminantia ; suidae + tayassuidae  and camelidae  comprise successive sister groups. the cetartiodactylan topology is congruent with both molecular  <cit>  and combined morphological and molecular  <cit>  data.

overall, our supertree topology is in much better agreement with the current consensus view of placental phylogeny than is that of lea. why? the three main possibilities are  that the lea topology resulted from either poor and/or duplicated data, or assumptions of monophyly, which the bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>  guidelines have largely removed;  that other, minor, differences in the technical details of the two studies are responsible, or  that phylogenies published after march  <dig>  are more in agreement with the molecular consensus, and that these studies are now in a majority. our subsidiary analysis – in effect, repeating the lea analysis using the bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>  guidelines – can help discriminate between these three possibilities.

the subsidiary analysis found  <dig> trees of length  <dig> , using the same 4: <dig> weighting scheme of lea . a strict consensus is fully resolved at the interordinal level , and there are no novel unsupported clades. again, although a 'seed tree' that assumes monophyly of the orders recognised by wilson and reeder  <cit>  was included as a source tree , those that are monophyletic in the supertree are supported by between six  and  <dig>  other source trees. figure  <dig> is a 50% majority rule consensus, with branches that collapse in the strict consensus indicated by asterisks. the equally weighted analysis  recovers largely identical unrooted relationships, with neither artiodactyla nor lipotyphla recovered as monophyletic.

artiodactyla is paraphyletic, with cetacea and hippopotamidae forming whippomorpha. support values  indicate that this clade is relatively well-supported, and are similar to those for ruminantia . whippomorpha and ruminantia are sisters, forming cetruminantia, which also has reasonable support .

lipotyphla is polyphyletic, with separate eulipotyphlan  and afrosoricid  clades. significantly, afrosoricida is part of a monophyletic afrotheria , the existence of which was controversial in  <dig>  afrotheria was not recovered in the combined supertree of lea, although it was present in their molecular-only supertree .

the two major changes from the lea topology – cetacea nesting within a paraphyletic artiodactyla, and diphyly of lipotyphla  – seen in this reanalysis are both in better accord with the state of phylogenetic knowledge in  <dig>  and are in agreement with our full supertree . they indicate that the potential problem of 'time-lag' in supertrees, where inclusion of older studies biases the supertree topology towards outdated views of relationships, is not an inherent limitation of the method.

notably, the di support values in this reanalysis are almost always lower, and in many cases greatly so, than their equivalents in the original combined lea supertree. for example, di support for the monophyly of the order chiroptera, drops from  <dig> to  <dig>  and similarly large drops are seen for lagomorpha , perissodactyla  and rodentia . some interordinal groupings also show reduced di values . these declines probably reflect the exclusion of some duplicate trees and, particularly, the avoidance of a priori assumptions of monophyly. as such, the di values in this analysis are probably a more accurate indication of the actual support for each group.

'lea' = combined morphological and molecular supertree of liu et al. ; 'lea+p 1:1' = 1: <dig> equally weighted supertree following application of protocol to the lea references ; 'lea+p 4:1' = 4:  <dig> upweighted supertree following application of protocol to the lea references ; 'full st' = extended analysis supertree, based on an updated set of references ; 'mea' = molecular topology of murphy et al. ; 'gea' = morphological and molecular topology of gatesy et al. .

CONCLUSIONS
the supertree from our main analysis is a well-resolved, comprehensive, and reasonably robust higher-level phylogeny of placental mammals. it agrees strongly with the weight of current data , suggesting that mrp supertrees can accurately reflect available phylogenetic evidence . to our knowledge, it is the first placental phylogeny of any kind to include all extant families, and has over two times the taxonomic coverage of the most comprehensive non-supertree analysis so far  <cit> .

the supertree is based on a large set of stringently-selected source trees derived from analyses of a very wide range of characters and character types  analysed using improved coding  <cit> , searching  <cit>  and robustness-checking  <cit>  methods from those used in the previous supertree assessment of placental phylogeny by lea. it appears from our subsidiary analysis that at least some of the key differences between our supertree and the original lea study lie with the selection of independent source trees and in the avoidance of a priori assumptions of monophyly. this finding confirms that the inclusion of poor or duplicated data is not inherent to supertree construction , although, as in all areas of science, it remains an issue of which researchers need to be mindful.

the supertree hopefully provides a valuable, comprehensive framework for research into the evolution and biogeography of placental mammals. we suggest that this topology is suitable for use in comparative studies that require a higher-level phylogeny of placentals. supertrees, if carefully constructed, can combine apparent accuracy  with comprehensiveness, suggesting that they may play an important role in phylogenetics for some time to come.

