BACKGROUND
since decades, characterization of transcriptomes by random sequencing of cdna has been practiced to decipher the gene repertoire for a large number of organisms . the resulting compilation of mrna sequences, a so-called transcript catalog, is an important fraction of the functional genetic information and serves as a basis for multiple downstream analyses including gene expression studies, using either microarray techniques or tag sequencing, as well as comparative sequence analyses  <cit> . particularly, the full-length protein-coding sequence  represents a crucial entity forming a knowledge base in genetics research  <cit> . fragmentary information will lead to incomplete, ambiguous, or even mislead conclusions in downstream analyses. while in principle, a genome-wide catalog of cdss can also be derived from a genome sequence using gene prediction programs, it is nowadays a standard to support gene predictions with mrna sequence evidence . transcriptome sequencing is also able to characterize untranslated regions   <cit> , which cannot be predicted from the genome ab initio. utrs include the landing platforms for potential regulatory interactions with micro-rnas and, in combination with genomic sequence, also allow definition of promoter regions, both of which are important for functional gene analysis.

while the introduction of second-generation sequencing of rna  made the characterization of transcriptomes very affordable, the short-read rna-seq data cannot display mrna molecules in their entirety. therefore, assembly programs were designed to reconstruct, as good as possible, full-length mrna sequences from short rna-seq reads  <cit> . while these assembly programs have reached an accepted level of quality, they still face severe difficulties. the sequence depth of rna-seq may be sufficient to detect rare mrnas but, often, is still too low to allow reconstruction of their entire structure, which results in fragmented transcript contigs. in addition, eukaryotic transcriptomes are very complex by showing several alternative splice variants per gene, multiple gene copies, single nucleotide polymorphisms and transcribed pseudogenes. it is noteworthy that, for protein-coding genes, even the most highly expressed transcript is not necessarily protein-coding  <cit> .

functionally relevant signatures of non-model organisms in comparison to related organisms, such as gene content and transcript structures, can be read out most conveniently using a low redundancy subset of the transcript assembly. identification of this representative assembly subset is possible by orthologous inference. in the past, complex algorithms have been developed for genome-wide identification of orthologous and homologous groups between different species  <cit> . nevertheless, best available contigs may still show peculiarities, such as incompleteness, retained introns or splicing variants with premature stop codons. additionally, overlapping genes may result in fusion contigs  <cit> . thus, starting from de novo transcriptome assembly, strategies are required to scaffold fragmented contigs, to isolate single transcripts from fusion contigs, and to select or correct contigs in order to show the likely protein-coding transcript variant. several of these illustrated tasks have been previously addressed in the course of project-specific assembly/annotation projects , but were not yet incorporated into re-useable software concepts.

here, we present a genome-independent software tool  that specifically addresses post transcript assembly tasks for eukaryote transcriptomes. these tasks include reduction of assembly redundancy, ortholog-based gene symbol assignment, correction of fusion transcript contigs and scaffolding of fragmented transcript contigs, cds identification and clipping of weakly supported sequence termini. we applied this pipeline to de novo assembly and annotation of the transcriptome of the naked mole-rat , the longest-living rodent known and a promising non-model organism in ageing research  <cit> . two independent nmr genome assemblies and associated gene annotations are available  <cit>  and were used for a validation of our pipeline results. the comparison of the different approaches for gene model construction indicates that frama is competitive and fulfills accepted quality standards.

implementation
frama is a novel software suite that calls components written in perl and external software , applicable on unix/linux and macos computer systems. mandatory required input are rna-seq read data, either paired-end or single-end, strand-specific or non strand-specific, and a comprehensively annotated transcriptome of a related species. frama executes in  <dig> successive steps:  assembly,  primary processing,  gene symbol assignment,  fusion detection,  scaffolding,  identification of cds,  identification of mrna boundaries, and  descriptive assembly statistics . software parameters for each step can easily be edited in a parameter file. frama produces a representative compilation of transcripts, a so-called transcript catalog, with cdss and mrna boundaries annotated. in the transcript catalog, each transcript will have a one-to-one relationship to an orthologous transcript in the reference transcriptome.fig.  <dig> stages of the frama procedure. black arrows show the flow of data, red arrows indicate which stages make use of input data, and light red arrows indicate optional use of input data



assembly and primary processing
a variety of de novo transcriptome assembly tools are available, which perform differently well on separate subsets of transcripts  <cit> . frama currently utilizes trinity, an allrounder that performs well across different species and library properties  <cit> . trinity starts with a greedy assembly of linear contigs based on the most frequent k-mers to reconstruct one full-length isoform per locus and additional unique regions partially. then, overlapping contigs are clustered and connected into a de bruijn graph, which represents different alternative splice variants for one locus or highly similar homologs. finally, trinity reports contig sequences that represent probable paths through each graph  <cit> .

ncbi recommends scanning of transcript assembly data for adapter, vector and other cross-project contaminations that might occur. accordingly, frama examines the final scaffolded and annotated transcriptome for vector contamination using ncbis vecscreen criteria  <cit> , and match regions are annotated with match score and topological category.

redundancy among transcript contigs can arise from shorter transcript contigs which are fully embedded in longer contigs or from local differences arising from sequencing errors or allelic variations. in order to reduce redundancy, in an optional step, transcript contigs are clustered using cd-hit-est. the cluster will then be replaced by the longest representative contig. additionally or alternatively, tgicl can be used to combine overlapping transcript contigs into single longer contigs. order of execution of both software programs can be chosen arbitrarily.

assignment of gene symbols
gene symbol assignment to transcript contigs is performed on the nucleotide level, based on best bidirectional blastn hits  against cdss of an orthologous reference transcriptome. this enables the most sensitive differentiation of paralogous proteins. for example, the genes calm <dig>  calm <dig> and calm <dig> express identical proteins, in the nmr and other mammals, but differ in their cds . as an additional advantage of the nucleotide-level search, the identification of cds for blastp or more time-consuming blastx searches are not necessary. following the gene symbol assignment based on bbhs, remaining unassigned transcript contigs that show a single best hit  to an unassigned reference transcript are labeled and added to the transcript catalog. annotated transcript contigs become oriented according to its assigned ortholog, which is essential if unoriented read data are used for assembly.

finally, all annotated transcript contigs are examined for further blast hits, which may overlap with the initially identified orthologous region. this identifies “misassembled” contigs, which presumably originate from chimeric cdna as well as neighboring or overlapping genes. the contigs that contain multiple genes are copied to represent each gene separately, which allows independent processing of the genes in subsequent processing steps.

scaffolding
frama performs an ortholog-based scaffolding of fragmented transcript contigs . to achieve this, frama uses transcript contigs without an assigned gene symbol, but with blastn hits to previously identified orthologous counterparts. these candidate transcript contigs are then aligned to the orthologous counterpart using mafft. next, the minimum number of fragments spanning most of the reference transcript is determined using a greedy algorithm. finally, the core contig sequence is extended by the series of winning candidates. any gap between non-overlapping contigs is filled with an n stretch, whose size corresponds to the size of the orthologous transcript region.fig.  <dig> schematic illustration of complex processing stages in frama: a inference of cds using orthologous transcripts from related species; b ortholog-based detection of fusion contigs; c scaffolding; d clipping of transcript 3’ termini by the use of weighted scores for indicative features. horizontal bars indicate contigs and mrnas, thicker regions indicate cds. colors code the origin of sequence data: trinity contig , orthologous transcript , final frama transcript 



identification of cds
in order to identify the cds, each frama transcript is aligned with orthologous cdss from the reference transcriptome and, optionally, other species as provided by an ortholog table . coordinates of each cds are transferred to the transcript contig and examined for a valid cds among all reading frames . in the first course, a candidate reading frame should fit this orthologous window without premature stop codon or, in case of selenoproteins, without non-uga stop codons. in the presence of multiple valid coding regions, the most complete one in respect to its corresponding ortholog is chosen. if the described approach fails, the cds prediction  that is most similar to that of the assigned ortholog is annotated. as a last resort, the longest orf computed by emboss getorf is assigned.

identification of mrna boundaries
as mentioned above, neighboring or overlapping genes could result in a single long contig and consequently need to be shortened to obtain one transcript contig corresponding to the assigned gene only. furthermore, trinity has difficulties determining the precise end of 3’ ends, in particular due to the imprecise cellular mechanism of 3’ end cleavage, alternative poly sites or possible genomic contamination. fortunately, mrna 3’ termini share significant sequence conservation between species, e.g., human and mouse  <cit> , and further evidence like poly signal motifs and poly-containing reads are used to infer more precise 3’ ends. specifically, frama scores potential 3’ ends according to the occurrence of poly signals. additionally, informative drops in read coverage as well as reads that contain protruding poly sequence are identified via re-alignment of the rna-seq data. finally, a local alignment with 50 bp of the orthologous mrna terminus is computed with emboss needle. each contig position is assigned a weighted score based on all four features using fuzzy logics, and clipping is applied at the most reliable position, using an empirically validated threshold. if genscan predicts a promoter sequence, 5’ ends are clipped as well. in case of extra cds regions that are predicted by genscan and supported by a blast hit, clipping is always applied, either according to the scoring scheme or, if no reliable position was identified, at the center of intercoding regions.

RESULTS
sequencing
a limited overview of a tissue’s mrna content could be obtained from assembly of  <dig> million rna-seq reads preferably 100 nt or longer  <cit> . for a near-complete picture of a multi-cellular eukaryote, well over  <dig> million rna-seq reads and a diversified tissue sampling are desirable, in order to recover tissue-specific genes and genes which are generally low in expression. for an application of frama, we chose the latter concept and obtained strand-specific illumina rna-seq data from ten different tissues of the nmr . after quality filtering and joining of overlapping paired-end reads, the data consisted of  <dig>  million single-end fragments with an average length of 194 bp . for quality control, reads were aligned to the nmr genome sequence, resulting in  <dig> – <dig>  % mapped reads per sample. mapping rates above 90 % are comparably high and indicate good base quality of the rna-seq data and good correspondence between rna-seq data and the genome sequence  <cit> . taking a curated set of nmr transcripts , we could further validate that the dutp protocol for rna-seq is highly strand-specific. at least  <dig>  % of mapped reads had the correct orientation.

assembly and primary processing
read data from the ten tissue samples were used as pooled input to trinity/frama. the use of pooled samples was shown to improve the completeness of transcript contigs in contrast to merging of sample-specific assemblies  <cit> . the resulting raw assembly comprised  <dig>  individual graphs, which, theoretically, reflect the number of assembled gene loci, and  <dig> , <dig> transcript contigs. the length of contigs ranged from 200 bp, the default threshold of trinity, up to  <dig>  bp, with an n <dig> of 2687 bp .

trials on meta-assembly indicate that both, cd-hit-est and tgicl do minor reductions  of the transcript contig set while an impact on the final transcript catalog is undetectable. intending most conservative processing of the nmr data, we chose to continue with the primary trinity assembly and in order to avoid false assemblies, e.g., collapsing of paralogs or joining of neighboring genes.

one step of sequence post-processing is the clipping of putative sequencing adapters from contig ends, which may show up even if adapter clipping was performed on the input rna-seq data . moreover, frama scans transcript contigs for putative vector contamination, as recommended by the ncbi. as might be expected for the in vitro-cloned rna-seq libraries, the sequence data is free of cloning vectors. however, ncbi vecscreen indicated  <dig> strong and  <dig> moderate vector hits, which we all classified as false positives upon thorough inspection. for example, vector psos  contains a fragment of human sos <dig> which produces a strong hit to the sos <dig> transcript of the nmr. unfortunately, masking of these regions is required for submission to the ncbi transcript shotgun assembly archive.

assignment of gene symbols
we chose human as the reference organism since the human gene annotation has superior quality and, in terms of sequence similarity, it is closer to the naked mole-rat than mouse, which has a gene annotation of similar quality . using  <dig>  human protein-coding reference transcripts , frama was able to identify  <dig>  nmr counterparts, corresponding to  <dig>  genes in total . the longest nmr transcript contig  corresponds to the longest human gene, titin.

in general, transcripts that could not be identified in the nmr have much lower expression levels in human tissues, compared to those which could be identified . for example, reconstructed versus non-reconstructed genes show 1301-fold higher median expression in human liver, and 396-fold higher expression in human kidney . on the other hand, some highly expressed genes in human liver lack orthologs in the nmr. however, several of these were identified as primate-specific genes. for example, the top-expressed orphan human genes comprise three metallothionein genes  which are part of the primate-specific expansion of the metallothionein- <dig> and - <dig> family  <cit> ; four cytochrome p <dig> genes  which are primate-specific paralogs at multiple branches of the large family tree  <cit> ; and factors of the major histocompatibility complex, hla-b and hla-e, which underwent fast evolution in primate populations  <cit> .

scaffolding
scaffolding was applied to  <dig> frama transcripts  and added  <dig>  mb sequence, resulting in a median information increase of  <dig> -fold. we manually inspected  <dig> scaffolded frama transcripts comprising  <dig> fragments in comparison to a curated set of nmr transcripts  and determined errors in  <dig> scaffold fragments . further, of all scaffolded frama transcripts we identified only  <dig>  that show non-overlapping hits to multiple genome contigs in both genome assemblies. these failure rates likely represent the upper bound of errors since some of the non-validated scaffolds may result from fragmented genome data.

following a series of physical processing steps from the initial trinity assembly to pre-final transcript sequences, we sought to assess the completeness of the transcript catalog produced by frama. for this we used cegma , a tool that identifies  <dig> eukaryotic core protein-coding genes and diagnoses their completeness. since  <dig> genes scored “cds complete” , the transcript sequence set produced by frama appeared almost complete, within the performance range of other, genome-based transcript catalogs . interestingly, the initial trinity transcriptome assembly contained even slightly less cegma genes  than that of frama, indicating that the final frama output essentially encompasses all relevant genes contained in the initial assembly, and that subsequent processing steps even improved the recovery of the core gene set.

identification of cds
the majority of coding regions  were assigned with evidence from orthologous sequences. genscan additionally identified cds of  <dig> genes, of which  <dig>  % contained introns with canonical splice sites. taken together, most resulting nmr genes had a full-length orf including start and stop codon . this is further supported by  <dig>  genes  that had their cds reconstructed over >90 % of the orthologous length . correctness of the inferred cds and the assigned gene symbol was validated by blastp searches against the human proteome, revealing  <dig>  % of transcript contigs that hit proteins with the correct gene symbol, plus  <dig>  % that gave hits to the same gene family.fig.  <dig> completeness of cds regions a classified according to orf status, where “full length” refers to existing start and stop codons; b histogram of correspondence between  recovered cds and orthologous cds



identification of mrna boundaries
during gene symbol assignment, frama identified  <dig> fusion transcript contigs that arose mostly from neighboring genes . this does not reflect the total number of misassembled transcript contigs, because different misassembled variants have been assigned to different orthologous genes by the bbh/sbh strategy. in total, genscan predicted multiple cds for  <dig> frama nmr transcripts . this is a higher proportion than seen on human and mouse refseq transcripts , which we consider as the background level of false positive genscan predictions. consistently,  <dig>  % of the nmr transcripts with extra cds predictions are supported by cross-species blast hits  and thus likely result from correct cds predictions. the remaining proportion of spurious predictions is comparable to the level in human and mouse transcripts. in total, summing the effect of all clipping procedures, frama removed  <dig>  mb sequence from  <dig> transcripts .fig.  <dig> a genome-based transcript map showing misassembled trinity contigs  and improvements made by frama’s mrna boundary clipping . human refseq counterparts to frama transcripts are shown in green. trinity provides a plethora of  transcript isoforms  for the hyal1-nat6-hyal <dig> locus, many of them being read-through variants that join neighboring genes . although frama is not able to resolve the shared first exon of the nat6-hyal <dig> locus correctly, mrna boundary clipping improved the raw assembly substantially by separating the gene loci. genome-based methods  struggle in predicting the correct gene loci, too: tkim shows the best performance, separating each gene locus correctly. genscan correctly separates hyal <dig>  nat <dig> and hyal <dig> loci, but joins neighboring loci . gnomon correctly provides several different hyal <dig> variants, but misses nat <dig> completely. throughout the figure, thick bars represent coding regions, thin bars untranslated regions and lines introns. arrows on lines or bars indicate the direction of transcription. accession numbers of external gene models are listed in additional file 1: table s11



genome-based validation of transcript catalog
a recurring problem in the validation of de novo assemblies is the absence of a reference or gold standard. we chose to compare transcripts computed by frama  with publicly available nmr transcripts and gene annotations . we considered in-house curated transcripts  that were reconstructed using a genome-independent approach as the gold standard in this comparison of nmr sequences. two previous efforts provided nmr transcript catalogs based on a combination of ab-initio gene prediction, orthologous matching and rna-seq evidence - one by kim et al. reported transcript models   <cit>  based on genome assembly hetgla <dig>  and one computed refseq transcripts using ncbi’s gnomon pipeline  based on both available genome assemblies . further, our validation included transcripts obtained only from ab initio prediction .

in transcript-genome alignments  <dig>  % of tframa could be aligned , but only  <dig>  % of these transcripts were aligned over their entire length . since a realignment of tgenscan to its source genome gives  <dig>  % of transcripts matching over their entire length , the technical error rate appears negligible. interestingly, tcur showed non-matching and mismatching regions with a rate depending on the genome sequence,  <dig>  % exons on hetgla <dig>   <dig>  % on hetgla <dig> . however,  <dig>  % of conflicting regions were validated by one genome version, which indicates that missing or discontinuous genome sequence are the source of conflicts with tcur transcript models. we reject the possibility that genetic differences of the underlying nmr material explain the genome-transcriptome differences since well-aligned regions have very high sequence similarity,  <dig>  % between tcur and both genome versions and  <dig>  % between tframa and hetgla <dig>  in conclusion, tframa consistently fills missing and weak genome sequence. effectively, tframa-genome alignments spanned  <dig> sequence gaps within scaffolds of hetgla <dig> and added  <dig>  bp novel sequence.

we also validated the consistency of transcript sets, using the rna-seq data produced in this study, by calculating the proportion of transcript-genome alignments covered by reads . as expected, the majority of tframa  is completely supported by rna-seq reads . in contrast, only  <dig>  % of tgenscan are completely supported by reads, while  <dig>  % are sparsely covered . evidence-based methods show better agreement with our experimental data .

we compared the transcript-genome alignments of tgnomon, tkim, tgenscan and tframa with those of our gold standard data set, tcur . all methods achieved a similar recovery rate of tcur gene loci . the assigned gene symbols, if present, were consistent with the tcur annotation .table  <dig> results of structural agreement of overlapping loci in the hetgla <dig> genome sequence

each orthologous set of transcripts was compared to tcur and tgnomon, after filtering of alignments with perfectly aligned cds . cdss are considered overlapping if they share nucleotides on the same strand. cds overlap cases were classified to the following categories: identical , matching , or ‘other’ 


anumber of overlapping loci and their proportion of the loci in reference


bnumber of identical, matching and other transcript models and their proportion of the loci in overlap



next, we investigated the structural agreement between transcripts of the different transcript cataloging methods. overlapping transcripts from different sources were classified based on the number and type of shared exons :  identical transcripts have all exons exactly corresponding,  matching transcripts share all exons, but not necessarily all exon boundaries, and  others. application of this classification scheme on tcur loci showed that the proportion of identical and matching transcript models differed largely between genome-dependent methods . tframa showed results close to tgnomon  and outperformed tkim and tgenscan. given that these primary results indicated superior quality of tgnomon in respect to curated transcripts, we used it as a reference for a second, genome-wide quality assessment. according to this, tframa resembles tgnomon transcript models by showing the highest number of identical and matching loci , in contrast to tkim  and tgenscan . more specifically, tframa also shows more transcript models identical to a tgnomon counterpart  than tkim . together, this demonstrates a quality ranking of tgnomon > tframa > tkim > tgenscan.

performance evaluation
the runtime of frama mainly depends on the number of input reads, the resulting number of assembled transcript contigs and the size of the reference transcriptome. for the complete nmr dataset and  <dig>  reference transcripts as input, frama had a total runtime of 338 h on an 8-cpus linux workstation  and a memory size of  <dig> gbyte. the major computational load was due to de novo assembly and blast searches, each taking about 40 % of the total runtime. using a smaller input subset of  <dig> million reads, the total run time of frama decreased to 48 h, indicating that the total runtime linearly depends on the volume of the read data.

discussion
though whole-genome sequencing and assembly is an essential prerequisite for genome-wide analyses, providing a plethora of information, it is still quite labor-intensive, time-consuming and costly. for example, three groups have independently worked on nmr genome assemblies and associated gene annotations, over the last four years  <cit> . in contrast, transcriptome sequencing and de novo transcriptome assembly is an affordable approach for first-pass sequence analysis of novel organisms, given automated concepts for extraction of transcripts from rna-seq data. towards this goal, we present frama, an mrna assembly and annotation pipeline for eukaryotes, which is designed to transform a primary transcriptome assembly into a comprehensive, but low-redundant, catalog of reconstructed mrna sequences.

frama is extensively guided by orthologous transcripts of a reference organism. orthologs are used  for assignment of gene symbols to anonymous transcript contigs,  for identification of representative transcripts from a complicated mixture of mrna isoforms, and  for refinement of representative transcripts, including scaffolding of fragmented transcript contigs, removal of likely intron contamination, and clipping of weakly supported 3’ ends. given the high relevance of the reference organism, the primary question is what species should be used. often, there will be a tradeoff between closely related species that have a relatively weak gene annotation on one hand, and more distantly related species with a more comprehensive annotation on the other hand. applied to the nmr case, the closest-related model organism is the guinea pig , with an estimated divergence time of  <dig> mya  <cit> . however, the guinea pig genome sequence is rather fragmentary, and the gene annotation is largely confined to the results of ensembl and ncbi annotation pipelines, which are driven by gene prediction and homology inference. human, with a divergence time of ca.  <dig> mya  <cit> , seems more challenging with regard to sequence similarity searches, but is outstanding in its extensive and experimentally based gene annotation. in fact, human as a homology reference for the nmr gave very satisfying results in this study , which suggests that even organisms as distant as  <dig> mya or more could serve as a reliable basis for ortholog inference. consistent with this, a methodological survey showed that ortholog inference using a bbh scheme performs well in comparison to other assignment methods, irrespective of species distance  <cit> .

the simplification of gene content via orthologous inference is to some extent artificial, since the ortholog-driven approach fails to identify species-specific paralogs - at best, they are misclassified as orthologs. however, the low-redundant transcript catalog is a comfortable starting point for identification of such species-specific paralogs. it is also clear that a transcript catalog based on rna-seq will remain incomplete with respect to the total gene content of an organism. since, even after sampling of multiple tissues and developmental stages, mrnas with highly specific and restricted expression profiles will not be sufficiently covered. a good example that illustrates both, tissue-specific expression as well as species-specific paralogy, is the family of olfactory receptors . humans have  <dig> functional or genes, predominantly expressed in sensory neurons of the nasal mucosa, whereas rats have  <dig> or genes. consistently, the subterranean nmr, which has an outstanding olfactory capacity, show signs of ongoing positive selection and expansion of the or family, according to targeted genome resequencing  <cit> . an incompleteness of such tissue-specific transcripts may be acceptable if a limited set of tissues will be analyzed in subsequent studies, and the established gene catalog contains all the genes expressed in those addressed tissues. furthermore, tissue-specific expression patterns are typically known from related organisms and rarely change during evolution  <cit> . thus, even a limited gene catalog from selected tissues can be expected to be conclusive with respect to gene content.

a clear advantage of frama is that it does not require genome data, allowing the study of non-model organisms with yet unknown genome sequence. when we analyzed the frama results for the nmr, we obtained quality measures for the two available genome sequences, which further illustrate the independence of the transcriptome approach. given a good correspondence on the sequence level , the nmr transcriptome provided exon sequences that filled genomic gap regions estimated to make up  <dig>  % of the latest available genome sequence  <cit> . in addition, reconstructed mrnas spanned  <dig> gaps within genomic scaffolds, thereby driving genome assembly towards higher contiguity. together, curated as well as frama transcripts provided independent support for improvements made in nmr genome assemblies through the past years  <cit> .

modern genome annotation strategies incorporate rna-seq data as experimental evidence for genes. as it had to be expected, frama based on rna-seq alone does not outperform qualified genome-based annotation strategies, like ncbi’s gnomon pipeline, that use multiple sources of gene support in addition to transcriptome sequencing  <cit> . on the other hand, the frama transcript catalog outperformed the ab initio gene prediction using genscan and the annotation of the first nmr genome. moreover, the frama transcript catalog was close to the result of gnomon with respect to structurally identical or matching transcript models . the latter can be considered as the currently best nmr genome annotation and is also well supported by an independent set of scientist-curated nmr transcripts . striking heterogeneities were found between different genome-based annotations, especially if one assumes that the same experimental evidence of rna-seq data was used. the compared methods have similar sensitivity in recovery of gene loci, measured on the tcur dataset, but the results differ largely on the gene structure level. however, such heterogeneities are in agreement with a recent benchmark study on genome-based rna-seq transcript reconstruction  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
frama realizes the de novo construction of a low-redundant transcript catalog for eukaryotes, including the extension and refinement of transcripts. thereby, it delivers a compilation of transcripts which we regard suitable for comprehensive downstream analyses performed by biologists without bioinformatics expert support.

