BACKGROUND
animal-pollinated plants produce floral signals to advertise their rewards, or mimic attractive signals to cheat pollinating animals  <cit> . floral mimicry can involve imitations of rewarding flowers, egg deposition substrates such as fungi, faeces or rotting meat, or sexual signals. floral mimicry systems, as well as pollination systems in general, are surprisingly varied, even within single plant families. orchids are a classic example, famous for their unparalleled diversity of pollination systems  <cit> . for example,  <dig> different specialized pollination systems were recognised within  <dig> investigated species in the genus disa  <cit> . orchids have also evolved some of the best known and elaborated pollination systems, such as pollination by fragrance collecting bees  <cit>  or sexual deception  <cit> . not surprisingly, evolutionary patterns and mechanisms of such diversity have long puzzled researchers  <cit> .

plant pollinator interactions often depend on a combination of different signals  <cit> . whereas floral colour is frequently included in studies on evolutionary patterns of pollination systems, floral scent has been largely ignored. however, floral scent can be the key signal for the attraction of certain pollinator guilds  and plays a decisive role in the evolution of several mimicry systems   <cit> . therefore, a better understanding of the evolution of floral scent is needed to achieve a more conclusive view on the mechanisms and patterns of evolution of pollination systems.

sexual mimicry, or sexual deception, is well known in european, australian and neotropical orchids, and is likely more widely distributed than currently known . this pollination system functions primarily through the species-specific imitation of female sex pheromones, in combination with less specific visual and tactile stimuli produced by the flowers. the mechanism of this chemical mimicry was first elucidated by schiestl et al.  <cit> , who showed that specific patterns of n-alkenes  play a key role in orchids of the genus ophrys  for the attraction of male pollinators to the flowers. alkanes, saturated analogues of n-alkenes, were shown to have a synergistic effect by increasing the intensity of male responses  <cit> .

both alkanes and alkenes are well-known compounds that have been chemically characterized in several organisms. they are present in plant and insect cuticular wax layers, with the primary function of reducing water evaporation  <cit> . whereas long chain alkanes are widespread and abundant in plant and insect waxes, alkenes have, up to now, only been found in few species, e.g. in the rosa and aloe spp. perianth, as well as sugar cane wax, and spike wax of agropyron intermedium  <cit> . they generally decrease the melting temperature of the wax layer  <cit>  and increase its permeability  <cit> . being present at the outer layer of the plant, alkanes and alkenes are also important in mediating plant herbivore interactions, both through physical properties and semiochemical  functions  <cit> . in insects, alkanes and alkenes have similar physiological functions in the wax layer of the cuticle, but also act as pheromones in intraspecific communication, by mediating kin recognition or attraction of the opposite sex  <cit> . alkenes are well known as sex pheromone compounds in flies, for example, 9-tricosene is a sex pheromone component of musca domestica, whereas drosophila melanogaster uses 7-tricosene and 7-pentacosene  <cit> . among solitary bees, alkanes and alkenes are also the male-attracting pheromones in many species  <cit> . thus, there is little doubt that many insect species use alkenes as communication signals, and consequently, there are ample opportunities for plants to mimic such signals to abuse insects as pollinators, such as by "sexual swindle" in ophrys  <cit> .

a powerful approach to trace evolutionary trajectories of pollination systems is their mapping onto phylogenies  <cit> , which has often highlighted their high evolutionary flexibility within evolutionary lineages  <cit> . fewer studies have combined phylogenies with ecological or physiological studies to investigate the evolution of specific floral traits in relation to their functions, or change of functions  <cit> . such studies are important for detecting evolutionary changes in the functions of key traits, and can help explain flexibility in evolutionary lineages, as well as adaptive radiations triggered by key innovations.

although it is clear that ophrys produces alkenes for sexual deception, it is an open question whether alkene production was a key innovation for the evolution of this pollination system, or represents a preadaptation, that primarily had a non-reproductive function in the orchidinae. this study aims to test these hypotheses by mapping the production, diversity, and amount of alkenes on a phylogeny of the investigated orchidinae, asking the following question:  is the production of alkenes as pheromone-mimics in ophrys a plesiomorphic state for this genus?  is there is any link between alkene-production and pollination syndrome among the investigated species?

RESULTS
occurrence of alkenes
of  <dig> european orchid species representing  <dig> genera , n-alkanes  of chain lengths  <dig> –  <dig> were present in labella of all species, but in varying relative and absolute abundance . odd chain-lengths alkanes with  <dig> carbon atoms or more were especially abundant . alkenes , although generally less common, were also widespread among the investigated species . in total,  <dig> species produced at least trace amounts of alkenes in their cuticular waxes . in only two species , no alkenes could be detected. in  <dig> species, alkenes constituted more than 10% of all analysed compounds . some species  produced 50% or a higher proportion of alkenes in their wax layer. the highest relative abundance of a single alkene was found in n. ustulata, where 11-tricosene  represented 42% of all the compounds found in this species. the south african disa bivalvata, used here as outgroup, produced  <dig>  μg  alkanes and  <dig>  μg  alkenes in a single labellum.

* calculated from  <cit> , see methods section. ** from  <cit>  and references therein, and  <cit> 

evolution of alkenes in ophrys
the strict consensus tree among the six resulting cladograms , with a topology broadly congruent to those reported in previous phylogenetic analyses with broader datasets  <cit> , is shown in fig.  <dig>  as expected, in spite of the fact that the majority of the terminal clades have bootstrap values above 50% , the relationships among the major clades into which the ingroup is split are weakly supported, as observed in previous published analyses  <cit> .

the macclade reconstruction of alkenes production unequivocally indicated alkenes presence as the primitive character state in the group and with only two independent losses in single species . concordantly, bayesian phylogenetic analysis , constrained with the model of nucleotide evolution that fits the data best, , was topologically similar to the tree topology of parsimony analysis and strongly supported the presence of alkenes as the ancestral state for the character.

alkenes and pollination
in our analyses, pollinator category had a significant effect on the absolute amounts of alkenes  and numbers of alkenes  produced by the flowers. species pollinated mostly or solely by male bees  produced significantly higher absolute amounts of alkenes  and greater number of alkenes with different double bond position  than the other groups. the "female bees" group was not significantly different from the "moth, beetles, flies" group for amount of alkenes  and number of alkenes . the amount of alkanes did not differ significantly among the groups ; however, number of alkanes was different , but post-hoc tests did not show any significant differences among the groups.

the relative amounts of alkanes/alkenes were also significantly different between the pollinator categories . comparison among groups revealed all groups to be different from each other  except "male bees" and "moth, beetles, flies" . species with relatively low absolute amounts but unusually high proportions of alkenes were neotinea ustulata, dactylorhiza maculata, gymnadenia conopsea, g. odoratissima, and g. rhellicani . neotinea ustulata produced unusually high proportions of 11-tricosene and 11-pentacosene. dactylorhiza maculata produced mostly 5-pentacosene and 5-heptacosene. gymnadenia conopsea, g. odoratissima, and g. rhellicani produced mostly 7- and 5-heptacosene .

discussion
the evolution of floral odour compounds mediating pollinator attraction is of general interest and can help us to understand evolutionary mechanisms in pollination systems. a relatively well understood pollination system is sexual deception in the european genus ophrys, where mechanisms of pollinator attraction involve the mimicry of alkene patterns of female bees to sexually attract the male pollinators  <cit> . until now it was, however, unclear whether the biosynthetic ability to produce these compounds represents an evolutionary novelty of ophrys within subtribe orchidinae. in our approach, combining phylogeny and chemical ecology, we found that the production of alkenes is widespread among related orchids. besides that, other species primarily pollinated by male bees produce similar high amounts and diversity of alkenes as ophrys. thus, alkene production itself is likely a plesiomorphic character in ophrys, having evolved earlier than the pollination syndrome of sexual deception. we suggest that production of alkenes is an example of a preadaptation that evolved from a primary vegetative to reproductive function and enabled the orchids to exploit various behavioural patterns of their pollinators through chemical mimicry.

alkenes are preadaptations for sexual deception
the concept of preadaptation in floral traits presumes that existing traits have acquired a new function, which can be in the form of a "transfer exaptation"  or "addition exaptation"   <cit> . the identification of floral exaptations is dependent on a combination of phylogenetic analyses and ecological studies investigating functions of floral traits  <cit> . a well known example is the tropical vine genus dalechampia, where resins are produced primarily for herbivore deterrence  <cit> ; this trait was a preadaptation for the evolution of pollination systems based on resin reward  <cit> . preadaptations of pollinators have also been assumed to influence the evolution of specialized pollination systems, such as that observed in the yucca – yucca moth mutualism  <cit> . however, some traits of pollinators in this system are, on the contrary, synapomorphies inferred to be key innovations  <cit> . for the evolution of sexual deception within orchidinae, we suggest an evolutionary scenario similar to dalechampia. the ability to produce alkenes,  is likely an ancestral trait – a preadaptation with vegetative function in the cuticular wax layer. the transition into male-pollinator attraction was achieved by producing increased amounts and different double-bond varieties of alkenes, since female bees produce large amounts of alkenes in specific patterns of double-bond positions  <cit> . additionally, morphological changes in the labellum evolved to achieve mimicry of shape, colour and pilosity of female bees  <cit> .

plants of the genus ophrys generally produce large amounts of different alkenes. erdmann  <cit>  found alkenes in all  <dig> analysed species, including o. speculum, that uses oxo- and hydroxy acids for pollinator attraction  <cit> . in this species, even buds and pollinia produce alkenes. we found that large amounts and diversity of alkenes with different double bond positions in ophrys was also shared among other species of orchidinae, namely the two outcrossing representatives of serapias, and anacamptis papilionacea. although several evidences, including chromosome number, suggest that ophrys, serapias, and anacamptis are closely related, the exact relationship cannot be inferred by the existing phylogenies that have low bootstrap support for the basal relationship among genera  <cit> . it is thus not clear whether the production of large amounts of alkenes in ophrys is an evolutionary novelty in the genus or inherited from a common ancestor with serapias. considering the latter possibility, the elaborate morphology of ophrys labella, with often dark color and uv-reflecting "mirror-patterns", that is unique to the genus, should be considered as the key innovation for sexual deception. however, earlier studies suggest that serapias is pollinated by sexual deception as well  <cit> . thus, a better understanding of the pollination system in serapias, as well as phylogenies with better resolution of relationships among the major groups are necessary to resolve this issue.

alkenes and their role in plant-pollinator interactions
the pattern of strong alkene production in the non-rewarding ophrys, serapias, and anacamptis papilionacea is paralleled by a common use of primarily male bees as pollinators in these orchids. a strong alkene production, as shown by the significantly higher absolute amounts in these species, is the likely prerequisite for these low volatile compounds to act as semiochemicals. since male bees use alkenes for chemical communication  <cit> , these orchids likely use alkenes to manipulate the behaviour of their pollinators.

in serapias, pollination by male bees sleeping in the flowers has been proposed  <cit> , but earlier studies suggested that males of the bee, ceratina cucurbita, are sexually attracted to the flowers and search for females within them  <cit> . these flowers may thus mimic either a nest entrance or virgin females sitting in the flowers, to entice males to enter the flowers. the high abundance and diversity of alkenes suggest that alkenes mediate such signalling. anacamptis papilionacea is pollinated by patrolling male bees of the genus eucera  <cit> , and the alkenes produced by the flowers may also render the flowers more attractive for the males. in both species, further investigations are necessary to clarify details of the pollination system and the inferred role of floral odor.

besides their role as pheromones in bees, alkenes are also important semiochemicals in flies. this may explain the unusually strong production of 11-tricosen and 11-pentacosene in neotinea ustulata, that is pollinated specifically by the tachinid fly, tachina  mangnicornis  <cit> . many fly species use alkenes as mating signals; one example is drosophila virilis, with 11-pentacosene as its major sex pheromone component  <cit> . female flies also use host-pheromones for host location, but little is yet known about the chemical identity of these signals  <cit> . it is possible that the flower-produced alkenes are also involved in the attraction of the pollinator via false host- or mating signals, and future investigations on the pollination system in this species may also prove interesting. the moderate to high production of alkenes in the rewarding orchid clade , may be explained as retention of the primitive state of alkene production.

why employ male bees as pollinators?
male insects invest more time and energy in mating behaviour than females, which spend more time feeding and collecting food for brood care  <cit> . therefore, females are generally considered as more efficient pollinators  <cit> . whole guilds of plants, however, are specialized for pollination by male bees, e.g. euglossine pollinated plants that produce fragrance as a reward for the pollinators  <cit> , oncocyclus irises being pollinated primarily by night sheltering eucera males  <cit> , and orchids that mimic specific model plants, such as cephalanthera rubra and diuris maculata  <cit> . since the behaviour of male and female bees differ, the resulting pollination patterns can be assumed to be different, too. whereas food-seeking female bees are more efficient pollinators, males conduct longer-distance visits and thus contribute relatively more to outcrossing  <cit> . indeed, it has been predicted that fragrance-collecting male euglossine bees, as well as males pollinating sexually deceptive orchids, mediate long distance pollen flow  <cit> . as self-compatibility and inbreeding depression are widespread in orchids  <cit> , distance of pollen flow may impact strongly on the quality of seeds produced  <cit> . additionally, pollination by exploitation of reproductive behaviour of males is often more specific, particularly in sexually deceptive orchids and orchids pollinated by fragrance-collecting euglossine bees  <cit> . specificity may decrease pollen loss, a factor that is likely important in orchids, given their highly efficient pollination via pollinia. collectively, pollination by male bees may be advantageous by mediating specific and long-distance pollen flow, and selection may thus favour floral signals that attract primarily males.

mechanisms of attracting males
we suggest that the evolution of male bees as pollinators in the deceptive pollination systems developed by ophrys, anacamptis papilionacea and possibly also serapias was achieved by "sensory exploitation". this concept has been developed in the framework of sexual selection and states that sensory preference in females drives the evolution of male signals  <cit> . a similar scenario can be proposed for the evolution of pheromone-imitations in response to male pollinators. to attract male pollinators by pseudo-pheromones, the orchids hitchhike on pre-existing, intraspecific communication channels. the existing reception system and behavioural preference of males for alkenes may have enabled the orchids to exploit this pollinator resource relatively easily, by increased production of alkenes, with pre-existing enzyme systems.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we show that alkenes, the key signal for pollinator attraction in the orchid genus ophrys can be interpreted as a preadaptation for the evolution of sexual deception in the genus. high amounts of alkenes may have evolved earlier in the evolutionary history in other genera for the attraction of male bees as pollinators, through hitchhiking on existing sensory and behavioural preferences of the pollinators. such parsimonious evolutionary pathways are probably widespread among the diverse chemical communication systems of plants and pollinators. if so, further insights are to be expected in future studies combining phylogenetic and ecological approaches.

