BACKGROUND
helicases play important roles in dna and rna metabolic processes such as replication, recombination, repair, transcription and translation  <cit> . the enzyme catalyzes the unwinding of duplex nucleic acid, utilizing the energy derived from nucleoside triphosphate hydrolysis to translocate along one strand of the duplex and to displace the complementary strand. thus, most helicases have a specific polarity. they move along the strand either in the 3'→ 5' or 5'→ 3' direction. some helicases, however, are bipolar and can move in either direction . thus, one of the first properties to be determined for a new helicase is its directionality.

to date, several different substrates have been used to determine helicase directionality. one such substrate is schematically shown in figure 1a <cit> . it is made by annealing a 5' 32p-labled complementary strand to a blunt end restriction enzyme site on a single-stranded plasmid dna , followed by 32p labeling of the 3' end using 32p-labled dntp and dna polymerase. the labeled substrate is then digested with the restriction enzyme. the result is a linear molecule with a large internal region of ssdna where a helicase can assemble, and two 32p-labled duplex regions of different lengths. depending on enzyme polarity, only one of the duplex regions will be unwound in a helicase assay. the unwound product can be resolved from the starting duplex by electrophoresis followed by autoradiography. it is also possible to use this approach to make two substrates, where in each of which only one of the two short fragments is labeled  <cit> . regardless if one or two substrates are used, this approach is amenable only for dna helicases and only for those that are capable of assembly on ssdna in the absence of an overhang region. several helicases  cannot efficiently initiate unwinding on this type of substrate.

for dna helicases that can initiate unwinding from a short  ssdna region without a fork-like dna structure, pcr can be used to generate a substrate for a polarity assay   <cit> . a pcr product is generated with 32p-labeled nucleotides, and then digested with restriction enzyme to produce substrates with a short 3' or 5' overhang ssdna end. however, this approach is also only useful for dna helicases, and only the very few that can initiate unwinding from a very short ssdna region.

the most common substrates to determine directionality are schematically shown in figure 1c. to produce them, a short 32p-labeled oligonucleotide is annealed to longer oligonucleotides, producing substrates containing either a 3' or 5' overhang region. depending on helicase polarity only one of the substrates will be unwound. a slight modification of the substrate has also been used. in this substrate  only 3' or 5' overhang regions are present  <cit> . although these approaches are suitable to determine the polarity of both dna and rna helicases they require the enzyme to be active on substrates that contain only one single-stranded overhang region. a number of helicases have extremely poor activity on these substrates  because they require a forked substrate for efficient activity. however, because a forked substrate by definition contains both a 3' and a 5' single-stranded overhang region, simple forked substrates are not suitable for directionality determination.

one approach used to bypass the requirement for a forked substrate by some helicases is shown in figure 1e <cit> . each substrate contains a duplex region with a forked structure in which one arm is composed of ssdna or rna and the other arm has dsdna or dsrna. in each substrate the directionality of the single-stranded portion is different, either 3'→ 5' or 5'→ 3', and thus this substrate was used to determine enzyme directionality. however, as several helicases can translocate on dsdna  <cit>  the approach shown in figure 1e cannot be used to determine the directionality of those helicases.

here, an improvement on the technique that utilizes oligonucleotides to determine helicase directionality is described. the assay utilizes biotinylated oligonucleotides, which upon binding to streptavidin provides an efficient substrate to determine dna and rna helicase directionality, even those that exhibit no, or limited, activity on substrates that contain only a ssdna overhanging region without a fork-like structure.

RESULTS
helicases translocate along one strand of the duplex and displace the complementary strand. they move along the dna or rna in either the 3'→ 5' or 5'→ 3' direction . knowing the directionality is important to determine the role of the helicase. for example, the directionality of the replicative helicase will dictate if it moves along the leading or the lagging strand. therefore, determining helicase polarity is one of the characteristics determined of a newly isolated helicase. although the determination of helicase polarity is relatively simple if the enzyme can initiate translocation from a flat substrate , the currently available techniques are not efficient for enzymes that require forked substrates.

it is thought that in enzymes that require forked structures, at least for the hexameric dna helicases, the role of the non-translocating strand is to ease the exclusion of one strand from the helicase. it has been shown for several helicases that in the absence of the non-translocating overhang strand the enzyme will translocate along the duplex .

a new approach to achieve strand exclusion, which depends upon biotinylated dna or rna oligonucleotides to determine helicase directionality, is described here. when streptavidin binds to the substrate shown in figure 1f it functions in a manner similar to forked substrate presumably by excluding one strand from the helicase  <cit> .

biotinylated oligonucleotides were previously used in different nucleic acid studies. for example: streptavidin-bound oligonucleotides were used to block helicase movement along dna  <cit> , to demonstrate strand exclusion  <cit>  or helicase translocation along duplex dna  <cit> . however, streptavidin-bound oligonucleotides have not yet been used to determine helicase directionality.

to determine if the biotinylated substrates enhance helicase activity for enzymes that prefer forked substrates, and to determine whether they can be used to determine helicase directionality, the substrates shown in figure 1f were tested with several dna helicases. three of the helicases, representing the replicative helicases from bacteria, eukarya and archaea, the e. coli dnab , the schizosaccharomyces pombe mcm <dig> , <dig> complex  and the thermoplasma acidophilum mcm , were previously shown to have weak activity on substrates lacking fork-like structures  <cit> . in addition, while the dnab helicase possesses 5'→ 3' polarity the mcm helicases have 3'→ 5' polarity.

as shown in figure  <dig> the binding of streptavidin to the substrate substantially improves helicase activity of all three enzymes . the streptavidin-bound substrates also allow for easy determination of helicase directionality. when the archaeal and eukaryal mcm proteins were used in the presence of only a 5'-overhang region no helicase activity could be detected . the enzymes are active only in the presence of a 3'-overhang region . similarly, the e. coli dnab helicase is active only when provided with a 5'-overhang region  but not in the presence of only a 3'-overhang . these results demonstrate that the presence of streptavidin on the substrate does not alter the directionality of the enzymes.

two additional replicative helicases, the viral simian virus  <dig> large t-antigen  and the mcm helicase from the archaeon methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus , previously shown to be active on a substrate containing only a 3'-overhang region, were also evaluated with the streptavidin-containing substrates. as has been previously reported, both tag  and mtmcm  efficiently unwind the substrates containing only a 3'-overhang region. however, even the activity of these helicases is enhanced in the presence of the streptavidin-bound template .

the substrates were also tested with two other e. coli helicases, recq and uvrd. as shown in figure 3c and 3d both enzymes are active on substrates containing a 3'-overhang region whether it contains streptavidin  or not . however, both enzymes also have activity, albeit limited, when the enzyme is provided with only a 5'-overhang region . this is likely due to limited initiation of dna unwinding from the blunt end side of the duplex as has previously been reported for both enzymes  <cit> .

for the experiments described in figures  <dig> and  <dig> two substrates need to be used; one with a 3' overhang region and one with a 5' overhang region. although this is the cleanest way to determine helicase directionality, one might prefer to use a single, universal, substrate. therefore, the advantage of biotinylated oligonucleotide was adopted to create a universal substrate for helicase activity. the substrate, schematically shown in figure 1g, uses two 32p-labeled oligonucleotides of different length hybridized to a third oligonucleotide which contains biotin at both ends. using ecdnab and spmcm as representative examples of 5' and 3' helicases, respectively, it was found that this substrate can be used to determine helicase directionality .

taken together, the data presented here demonstrate that the use of streptavidin-containing substrates can provide a general method to determine helicase directionality even if the helicase studied has limited activity on traditional substrates. the data also show that although the presence of streptavidin on the substrate does not alter the biochemical properties of the helicases it improves helicase activity of some and thus enables the determination of the directionality of weak helicases.

it should be noted, however, that several helicases have been shown to displace streptavidin from biotinylated oligonucleotide including the bacteriophage t <dig> dda helicase  <cit> , the m. thermautotrophicus helicase  <cit> , the ns <dig> helicase of hepatitis c virus  <cit>  and tag  <cit> . these enzymes are potent and thus their directionality can be detected by more conventional methods. in addition, as shown in figure 3b, although m. thermautotrophicus can displace streptavidin from biotinylated oligonucleotide its helicase activity is stimulated in the presence of streptavidin on the dna. however, it is possible that other, not yet characterized helicases will be able to displace streptavidin from the substrates described here . for such helicases, these substrates might not be useful to determine directionality.

CONCLUSIONS
here an improved method to determine helicase directionality is described, which utilizes biotinylated oligonucleotide. utilizing the approach to determine the directionality of several dna helicases as a proof of concept it was shown that the approach is particularly useful to determine the directionality, and detect helicase activity, of helicases for which the currently available methods are not easily employed.

