BACKGROUND
technologies for increasingly comprehensive evaluation of rna expression in mammalian cells yield qualitative, quantitative and temporal information about gene activity at the mrna level. however, the correlation between mrna and protein levels is often times poor because the rates of degradation of individual mrnas and proteins differ  <cit>  and because many proteins are modified after, they have been synthesized, so that one mrna can give rise to more than one protein  <cit> . thus, new tools are needed to detect global changes in protein expression patterns and to determine their subcellular localization  <cit> . improved molecular tools are also needed to detect changes in protein expression and/or localization during differentiation and development allowing a detailed study of protein function at the single cell level.

fusion of marker proteins such as β-galactosidase  or egfp with cellular proteins facilitates detection of such proteins and provides information about their intracellular localization and their potential function  <cit> . most egfp-based protein tagging techniques reported to date involved fragments of genomic libraries or individual cdnas that were fused to the coding region of egfp. fusion proteins were subsequently expressed and their subcellular localization in target cells determined by microscopic inspection. subsequently, the respective cdnas or genes were rescued from the cells or tissues, cloned and sequenced. egfp-tagged proteins can be immediately followed in living cells by time-lapse microscopy to determine their cellular dynamics  <cit> . however, when tagging proteins n-terminally or c-terminally, consideration must be given to the effect of the reporter protein on masking targeting signals contained within the expressed protein. for example, amino-terminal fusions of egfp to target proteins potentially block signal sequences associated with import into mitochondria or the endoplasmic reticulum. another disadvantage of the strategies described above is that they rely on exogenous promoters to drive expression of the tagged protein, possibly leading to higher levels of the tagged protein relative to its untagged endogenous counterpart. this again may impact the correct sorting of such proteins.

to bypass these shortcomings, alternative strategies to tag proteins were developed. morin et al.  <cit>  have presented a novel protein trap approach in which full-length endogenous proteins were expressed in drosophila as egfp fusion proteins from their endogenous promoters. they described a transposable artificial exon encoding an egfp reporter. devoid of initiation and stop codons and flanked by splice acceptor  and splice donor  sites, its insertion into an intron resulted in the production of a chimeric protein in which egfp was fused with the trapped protein to yield a tripartite fusion protein. several hundred independent lines were generated and shown, in the case of known proteins, that the chimera's subcellular distribution reflected that of the unmodified endogenous protein. furthermore, the use of egfp allowed a dynamic study of this distribution in live tissues. jarvik et al.  <cit>  have tested a similar approach in mammalian cells. several hundred mouse nih 3t <dig> cell clones expressing egfp from moloney murine leukemia virus -based protein tagging vectors were isolated and some  <dig> of them analyzed. the cellular location of the tagged proteins analyzed corresponded with those of the untagged counterparts, indicating that the egfp tag did not affect the subcellular sorting of the tagged proteins. protein tagging approaches involving small epitope tags have also been described  <cit> . the usefulness of this approach in the context of mammalian cells has recently been established  <cit> .

a shortcoming of the egfp-based tagging strategy reported by jarvik et al.  <cit>  is that the mlv vectors tend to preferentially integrate within transcriptional start regions  <cit> . this may lead to a biased distribution of tags within protein coding regions. in this communication, we describe a system that overcomes this shortcoming by using lentiviral vectors to stably introduce egfp in mammalian cells. the system also employs a removable drug resistance marker that allows for selection of insertion events into expressed genes.

RESULTS
design of improved protein tagging strategies
the protein tagging strategy is outlined in figure  <dig>  a drug resistance marker  lacking a translation initiation codon and harboring two consecutive stop codons allows selection of cells expressing fused proteins by drug selection. to facilitate subsequent excision of the drug resistance marker by cre recombinase  <cit> , loxp sites were placed 5' and 3' of the bsd gene. upon providing bsd-positive cells with cre recombinase, the bsd resistance gene is deleted. this leaves behind an egfp-encoding region, ultimately resulting in a tripartite fusion protein consisting of egfp flanked by sequences of the tagged cellular protein .

protein tagging in human osteosarcoma cells
the usefulness of the method was tested in human osteosarcoma  cells. hos cells were transduced with a modified lentiviral vector  <cit>  bearing the artificial exon in the long terminal repeat  sequence . a total of  <dig> cells were transduced and then subjected to bsd selection  for two weeks resulting in a total of  <dig> bsd-resistant cell clones. finally, seventy clones were isolated and subsequently transduced with a cre recombinase-encoding lentiviral vector . all seventy clones were subjected to facs analysis. six of the clones analyzed exhibited a significant increase in the percentage of egfp-positive cells upon transduction with the nl-cre vector encoding cre recombinase as judged by flow cytometry  indicating that excision of bsd sequences and concomitant activation of egfp expression had taken place.

analysis of tagged proteins by confocal microscopy
clones that exhibited significant egfp fluorescence were then subjected to confocal microscopy to investigate the subcellular localization of egfp fusion proteins. as shown in figure  <dig>  egfp expression was detected in different subcellular compartments. for example, two of the clones analyzed displayed nuclear staining with egfp accumulation in the nucleolus and nucleoplasm respectively, while four of the clones exhibited cytoplasmic staining.

identification of tagged proteins
to identify the tagged proteins, rna was prepared from cell clones and then subjected to rapid amplification of cdnas ends . the pcr products that were obtained following nested 3' and 5' race were sequenced and analyzed by blast . in all cases, the subcellular localization of the egfp-tagged proteins agreed with the reported subcellular localization of the untagged proteins indicating that the tag sequence had no adverse effects as far as the subcellular localization of the proteins analyzed is concerned. for example, the ras-gtpase-activating protein-binding protein g3bp is ubiquitously distributed in the cytoplasm of cells and participates in cell signaling  <cit> . the nucleophosmin/b <dig> protein is a nucleolar phosphoprotein that changes its localization depending on the stage of the cell cycle and growth conditions  <cit> . kinectin/ktn <dig> binds to the motor protein kinesin and participates in cellular transport mediated by microtubules. this protein is distributed throughout the cytoplasm. the bcl-2-associated transcription factor/btf is found in the nucleus in dot like structures and its translocation depends on apoptotic signals  <cit> . st <dig> is an adaptor protein that mediates the association of the heat shock proteins hsp <dig> and hsp <dig>  <cit> , while g3bp <dig> corresponds to the cytoplasmic ras_gtpase activating protein sh <dig> domain-binding protein  <dig>  <cit> .

asite of egfp tag insertion was determined using 5' and 3' race; e: exon

bsite of egfp tag insertion was determined using 3' race

analysis of sites of proviral integration
functional analysis of tagged proteins
in order to directly confirm that tagged proteins retained their physiological properties, we investigated a hos cell clone expressing a b23/egfp fusion protein. a western blot analysis of extracts prepared from cells expressing the b23/egfp fusion protein revealed a band around  <dig> kda after probing with anti-egfp antibody . this finding is consistent with the view that a full-length version of b <dig> fused to egfp was present in such extracts. b <dig> was previously shown to dissociate from nucleoli of cells after treatments with various anticancer drugs including daunomycin, actinomycin d, camptothecin, and toyocamycin  <cit> . to investigate whether b23/egfp retained these properties, cells were treated with actinomycin d for  <dig> h at 37°c. exposure to this drug provoked translocation of the b23/egfp fusion protein from nucleoli to the nucleoplasm . this shows that the fusion protein retained its translocation properties.

discussion
an attractive feature of the protein tagging method described in this study is that it is independent of antibody probes and allows for direct visualization of tagged proteins by confocal microscopy. this is in contrast to a recently described protein trapping method  <cit>  involving oncogenic retroviral vectors encoding a myc epitope tag  <cit> . this method includes fixation and antibody labeling steps and is more cumbersome and ultimately limited to in vitro applications.

lentiviral vector-mediated delivery of artificial exons for protein tagging provides a number of advantages over the traditional approaches involving oncoretroviral vectors  <cit> . in contrast to oncogenic retroviral vectors, lentiviral vectors can transduce dividing and non-dividing cells  <cit>  and they appear to integrate preferentially into transcriptional units  <cit> . the preference for expressed genes for lentiviral vector integration is an attractive feature in the context of protein tagging strategies.

in our strategy, egfp was used for tagging endogenous proteins and subsequent subcellular protein localization studies. however, insertion of a bulky egfp moiety into cellular proteins may interfere with their native structure, thus leading to changes in their subcellular localization, stability and function. a report published by jarvik et al.  <cit>  clearly documented the usefulness of egfp as a marker for protein tagging. these authors isolated more than  <dig> egfp-expressing cell lines and more than  <dig> of them were analyzed in detail. the abundance and cellular location of the tagged proteins analyzed mirrored that of the untagged counterpart. our data support this view. however, it remains to be determined on a case-by-case basis whether the tagged protein retains its biological activity.

our method takes advantage of an initial enrichment step using bsd selection to enrich for cell clones expressing tagged cellular proteins. a subsequent cre recombinase-mediated excision step removes all the vector sequences except for some  <dig> base pairs derived from the r and u <dig> regions of the vector ltr. a related selection/excision strategy for protein trapping events was described by sineshchekova et al.  <cit> . in their strategy, the retroviral genome was retained. however, the presence of the complete vector genome could potentially affect the correct expression of the endogenous gene into which the vector genome has integrated.

CONCLUSIONS
genome-wide protein tagging approaches have previously been implemented in drosophila  <cit>  and in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> . tagged yeast strains have provided an unprecedented view of the yeast proteome in terms of expression levels of defined proteins and their subcellular localization and they have allowed investigating the dynamics of protein abundance and movement in cells in response to chemical and genetic influences. similar applications are emerging in mammalian cells  <cit> . we expect the improved protein tagging strategy described in this communication to strengthen such approaches. we also believe that the tagging strategy described in this report will allow for the application of approaches akin to tandem affinity purification tagging  <cit>  that can be used to purify and analyze protein complexes. another potential application of our technique would involve the use of fluorescence resonance energy transfer  to detect protein-protein interactions between fluorescent tags on interacting proteins  <cit> .

