BACKGROUND
there are approximately  <dig> synthetic chemicals known to interact with humans through air, water, and food  <cit> . these chemicals might serve as environmental contaminants and trigger neurological disorders, such as autism spectrum disorders , in genetically susceptible individuals . among this diverse group of environmental contaminants, we focused on pharmaceuticals and personal care products  due to their tendency to contaminate environmental water systems  <cit> . ppcps include psychoactive pharmaceuticals that are highly prescribed in the united states and other chemicals like bis-phenol a  in plastics, phthalates in cosmetics and teratogenic chemicals  <cit> .

psychoactive pharmaceuticals like fluoxetine, venlafaxine and carbamazepine, have been detected in the drinking water at very low concentrations  <cit> . these pharmaceuticals, some of which are metabolically active and have relatively long half-lives for over a month, reach waste-water treatment plants  through excretion by clinical patients  <cit> . due to the chemical properties of these drugs and inefficient filtration of wwtp, these drugs end up mixing up with the ground water, and thus reach drinking water at low concentrations  <cit> .

we previously hypothesized that psychoactive pharmaceuticals as environmental contaminants alter neuronal gene expression associated with neurological disorders like asd. to determine this, our lab treated juvenile fathead minnows  with psychoactive pharmaceuticals  individually and in mixtures at environmentally relevant concentrations  <cit> . after treating them for 15 days, we extracted the brains and carried out microarray analysis. using gene set enrichment analysis   <cit> , we identified enrichment  of gene sets associated with neuronal growth, regulation and development in the juvenile minnow brains in response to psychoactive drug exposure  <cit> . we also identified altered neuronal gene sets associated with neurological disorders, including asd  <cit> . moreover, fish exposed to psychoactive pharmaceuticals exposed had an altered behavioral phenotype  <cit> .

in the present study, we hypothesized that psychoactive pharmaceuticals  at environmental concentrations would alter in vitro human neuronal gene expression that is 1) similar to gene expression profile in fathead minnow, and 2) associated with neuro-developmental disorders. to determine if altered gene expression profile was associated with idiopathic autism, we also treated human neuronal cells with valproic acid, which is known to induce autism-like phenotypes in mice  <cit> . identifying altered gene expression profiles in treated cells and finding a similar pattern with valproic acid induced gene expression would reveal the extent to which psychoactive pharmaceuticals at very low concentrations could induce gene expression associated with potential neurological disorders like asd.

methods
cell culture and differentiation
human sk-n-sh cell line was obtained from american type culture collection . cells were cultured in eagle’s minimum essential medium . this media was supplemented with 1 % penicillin-streptomycin-neomycin  and 10 %  fetal bovine serum . retinoic acid  was used to induce sk-n-sh cells  <cit>  to differentiate into more neuron-like cells  <cit>  because this cell line is a mixture of different cell types. approximately  <dig>  cells were cultured in t- <dig> flask  supplemented with emem media for two days, and then retinoic acid  was added. cells were treated with ra for two weeks and media was replaced every three-four days  <cit> . cultures were monitored visually using light microscopy for morphological changes, and evaluated for neuronal cell markers  during the differentiation process  <cit> .

pharmaceuticals treatments
stock solutions  of fluoxetine , venlafaxine  and carbamazepine , and 1 mm stock solution of valproic acid  were prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide . after differentiation for two weeks, cells were treated with a mixture composed of   <cit> , and valproate   <cit> . control cells were treated with dmso  only, and the final concentration of dmso in the cultures was  <dig>  %. to examine if psychoactive pharmaceuticals in drinking water at environmental concentrations could induce neuronal gene expression, we chose to treat neuronal cells with the mixture of three pharmaceuticals . cells were treated in three replicates with the pharmaceuticals for 48 h in emem media without fbs to avoid any binding of pharmaceuticals with the serum proteins. all of the treatments were shown not to affect overall cell viability with respect to control , based on the adherent nature of the monolayers and the result from cyquant viability assay  <cit> . after treating cells for 48 h, they were collected with versene solution .

rna extraction, cdna synthesis and sequencing
after 48 h of exposure, cells were collected with trypsin, centrifuged, and rna was extracted using qiagen rneasy plus mini kit  according to the manufacturer’s protocol. total rna concentration was determined using nanodrop , and the rna integrity value  was analyzed on agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer . rna was quantified with qubit spectrophotometer . using illumina tru-seq stranded total rna kit, cdna library was prepared in following steps: ribozero depletion and fragmentation, first and second strand cdna synthesis, adenylation of 3′ ends, adapter ligation, pcr amplification, library validation using qpcr – kapa biosystems library quantification kit, and normalization and pooling in preparation for cluster generation on miseq. samples were then loaded onto flow cell  and sequenced on illumina miseq  <dig> according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

bioinformatics data analysis
quality control, alignment, and read counting
in total, three treatments  with three replicates each were sequenced with five flow cells using illumina miseq, which generated more than 10 m paired-end reads for each replicate . the raw sequences in fastq files underwent quality control analysis using fastqc . all the samples were sequenced at 75b read length and they all passed the quality check. we aligned the quality checked reads to human genome hg <dig> using tophat version  <dig> . <dig>  <cit> . most of the reads  had average base quality above q <dig>  the reference genome sequence, the bowtie index files for the reference genome sequence, and the gene annotation file were downloaded from illumina igenomes project . the number of reads that map to human known genes were counted by summerizeoverlaps function in genomicalignments r package  <cit> . only the genes that have at least one read for all replicates were retained for downstream analysis.

analysis of differential gene expression
differentially expressed genes were identified using deseq <dig> version  <dig> . <dig>  <cit> . differentially expressed genes from  <dig> groups  with respect to the control treatment were identified.

gene set enrichment analysis
we used gage version  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  for gene set enrichment analysis. we used gage to analyze gene sets that were analyzed previously in fish brains  <cit> . these gene sets are grouped as neuronal development, regulation, growth; neurological disorders ; autism spectrum disorders   <cit> . for extensive analysis, we also analyzed gene sets from msigdb ‘c2’ and ‘c5’ . enrichment analyses were carried out using gage function using non-parametric kolmogorov-smirnov tests. we used gage package to identify significantly enriched  gene sets within mixture and valproate treatments.

RESULTS
patterns of psychoactive pharmaceuticals – induced in vitro gene expression in neuronal development, growth and regulation
we postulated that psychoactive pharmaceuticals at environmental concentrations would alter gene expression of neuronal systems. support for this hypothesis would suggest that dysregulation of neuronal systems would result in altered neuronal circuits and may result in fewer neuronal connections. to address this question we used differentiated sk-n-sh neuroblastoma cells and treated them with the mixture , and valproate  in replicates of three samples for each treatment.

for the development collection, we observed six enriched gene sets  by mix treatment. vpa treatment enriched the expression of seven gene sets . axonogenesis, regulation of neurogenesis and synapse part gene sets were enriched in both vpa and mix treatments. and, synapse part gene set was also enriched  in fish brains.

for the regulation collection, we observed  <dig> enriched gene sets  by mix treatment. vpa treatment enriched the expression of eight gene sets . all eight up-regulated gene sets in vpa treatment were down-regulated in mix treatment. among those sets, two gene sets  were also enriched in fish brains.

for the growth collection, we observed eight enriched gene sets  by mix treatment. vpa treatment enriched the expression of five gene sets . all five up-regulated gene sets in vpa treatment were down-regulated in mix treatment. two gene sets  were also enriched in fish brains.

patterns of psychoactive pharmaceuticals – induced in vitro gene expression in neurological disorders  and asd groups
we then sought to determine if altered in vitro gene expression was associated with neurological disorders and asd. to accomplish this, we analyzed and compared the gene expression of already published nd and asd gene sets in mix and vpa treatments.

for the nd collection, we observed six enriched gene sets  by mix treatment. vpa treatment enriched the expression of three gene sets . autism_idiopathic and parkinsons gene sets were enriched in both vpa and mix treatments as well as in fish brains.

for the asd collection, we observed two enriched gene sets  by mix treatment. vpa treatment enriched the expression of five gene sets . asd_mild gene set was enriched in both vpa and mix treatments as well as in fish brains.

ranked gene lists from the mixture and valproate treatment
we sorted all genes from gene expression profiles in human neuronal cells treated with the mix  and valproate . in each treatment, we sequenced ~  <dig>  genes and analyzed their expression. we then ranked them based on their fold change expression within each treatment. tables  <dig> and  <dig> show, the  <dig> most strongly up-and down-regulated genes. we also reported the fold-change score of genes which were presented on the fish microarray chip.table  <dig> ranked gene list from the mixture treatment 

fam129a
angptl4
cacna2d3
thbs1
nupr1
stard13
grm8
drp2
ptchd1
tnnt2
tmem132c
aqp10
ddit3
stra6
xkr4
pappa2
chrna10
nedd9
lphn3
ggta1
serpinf2
sh3tc1
nkx3-1
adamtsl2
hrk
rgs13
scarna20
ano1
pabpc3
loc283731
kit
cmklr1
kiaa1045
vip
dll1
htr2b
c9orf150
rag2
snora14a
acvrl1
b3galt1
vcan
rimbp3c
c6
nos1ap
eno3
glyatl2
tm4sf1
stac2
pctk3
crybb2
fam65c
slc16a10
flj36208
cdh7
loc400950
myb
rarres3
lca5l
slco4c1
id4
prap1
malat1
slc18a1
snar-a3
tfpi2
edn1
fbp1
vstm2a
fgl1
herv-frd
col9a3
cntd1
lrrtm1
ell2
btk
slc13a3
slc24a2
dennd1b
irf6
cyp2c18
loc392232
amn
rd3
ncrna00087
ddc
fut9
prlhr
scgb1d2
notum
trib3
tmigd2
mybl1
rtl1
znf726
p2rx6
dleu1
dkk1
slc7a11
trim9
table representing the list of  <dig> most up- and down-regulated genes in human neuronal cells treated with the mixture . genes were ranked based on their expression in fold-change in human cells. p-value represents the significance level of the expression change in the mixture treatment than control. corresponding fold change of genes in fish brains is also reported in this table, where blank cells represents genes that are not found in the fish microarray chip

oprk1
cmklr1
neurog2
adamts2
vsnl1
hist1h4l
galnac4s-6st
elfn1
postn
col4a2
evx2
grem2
serpine1
flj45455
odz1
vcan
drd5
socs3
csgalnact1
tgfbi
hoxd13
c11orf53
c3orf57
snai1
b3galt1
loc283480
sectm1
id1
plau
ppp1r9a
pde1a
loc646498
vim
rps16p5
mme
col4a1
kcnj2
glt8d2
hs6st2
cyp26a1
snora42
slc10a1
rasef
part1
apol6
oxtr
ncrna00164
ptplad2
colq
c9orf131
cacna2d3
fos
degs2
c9orf135
nhs
glp1r
pter
ets1
edil3
nxph3
insm2
loc100128505
gfra3
kctd12
prokr2
angptl4
grm8
fosb
tle4
mpped2
wnt5a
c11orf92
smoc2
wdr38
vcam1
galnt14
frmd4b
loc283143
ptrf
accn1
dlk1
c14orf53
ptchd1
tapbpl
gpr126
nrp1
ankdd1b
bfsp2
moxd1
smad7
fam111b
hopx
loc728739
erbb4
chrna10
pappa2
nell1
pcdhgb8p
nell2
loc284454
table representing the list of  <dig> most up- and down-regulated genes in human neuronal cells treated with the valproate. genes were ranked based on their expression in fold- change in human cells. p-value represents the significance level of the expression change in the mixture treatment than control. corresponding fold change of genes in fish brains is also reported in this table, where blank cells represents genes that are not found in the fish microarray chip



discussion
comparison between human mix treatment and fish gene expression patterns
the results partially supported our first hypothesis that the mix treatment on human sk-n-sh cell line induced gene sets enrichment patterns similar to that of the fish experiment following mixture treatment, although the degree of similarity was not high.

among the neural circuit development gene sets, all the six significantly enriched gene sets in human neuronal cells following mix treatment were enriched in a down-regulated manner; whereas in the fish experiment, the two significantly enriched sets were both up-regulated. we do not know why the direction was opposite, but we do notice that, one gene set, synapse part, was enriched in both treatments  <cit> . previous studies have found that altered expression of ncam, irx <dig> and nkx <dig>  genes in synapse part change the fate and position of neurons generated in the chick neural tube  <cit> . also within those down-regulated gene sets contains gene psd <dig>  and gaba, which have recently been found to be associated with neurological disorders like autism by altering synaptic assembly  <cit> .

in the growth group, we observed similar patterns where all enriched sets in mix treatment were down-regulated and all those in the fish experiment were up-regulated. among those sets, two were enriched in both treatments, axon and neuron projection. other studies have found that genes within these two gene sets modulate the fate, lineage, and timing of neuronal development by playing a critical role in the formation and maturation of neural circuits  <cit> .

in the regulation group, we observed that neurotransmitter binding gene set was down-regulated in fish brains as well as in human cells  <cit> . this could be possible due to the therapeutic effect of fluoxetine  in the mixture treatment  <cit> . fluoxetine is known to reduce the re-uptake of serotonin by inhibiting monoamine transporters on the pre-synaptic neuronal membrane  <cit> . due to the longer availability of neurotransmitters in the synaptic cleft, the expression of serotonin receptors is down-regulated, thus a decrease in neurotransmitter binding  <cit> . another gene set synapse was significantly up-regulated in fish brains  <cit> , but down-regulated in treated human cells. this gene set was responsible for modulating wiring of neuronal circuits by controlling the number of synapse as well as organization of synaptic assembly and specificity  <cit> . altered synaptogenesis has been strongly considered as a potential mechanism in asd pathogenesis  <cit> .

comparison between human mix and vpa gene expression patterns
we used valproate  to treat human neuronal cells as a positive control because prenatal exposure of valproate has been found to be strongly associated with autism  <cit>  and valproate is known to induce autism-like phenotypes in mice  <cit> . similarly, carbamazepine  is a mood stabilizer and anticonvulsant  <cit>  and it also inhibits the epileptic effects in the brain by blocking sodium channels  <cit> . by and large, the results support our second hypothesis that the mix and vpa treatments change the rna expression profile in similar ways, albeit in an interesting fashion, since the two treatments often enrich the same gene sets but in different directions.

in the development group of vpa treatment, we found four gene sets significantly down-regulated and three gene sets significantly up-regulated in human neuronal cells. three gene sets  were enriched in both mixture and valproate treatments, but in the opposite direction. similar to fish gene expression, vpa treatment up-regulated synapse part gene set  <cit> . this states that vpa exposure might be associated with disturbed neuronal fate and position  <cit>  as well as synaptic assembly  <cit> .

in the growth group, we observed that five gene sets were up-regulated in the vpa treatment. interestingly, the same five sets were all down-regulated in the mix treatment. this suggested that both treatments disturbed the human gene expression in similar pathways despite the different directions. one gene set neuron projection was up-regulated similar to fish brains  <cit> . in the regulation group, we noticed similar results. eight gene sets were up-regulated in valproate treatment, but down-regulated in the mixture treatment. from this repeating phenomenon of opposite direction enrichment of the same gene set, we postulate a general pattern that the three pharmaceuticals  and valproate dysregulate the same pathways in different directions. however, more investigation is needed to confirm or disprove this postulation. we also plotted multi-dimensional scaling using edger  <cit>  and observed that mixture treatment samples were somewhat closer to valproate samples than control samples . however, mix and vpa samples were still apart, confirming that these two treatments did not exhibit similar response.

association of human mix and vpa gene expression patterns with neurological disorders
to determine the extent to which altered gene expression in both mix and vpa treatments were associated with neurological disorders , we examined the expression of the already-published gene sets from neurological disorders  and asd groups in both treatments. we also compared these to their corresponding expression pattern in fish brains. for nd group, mix and vpa treatments altered parkinsons and autism_idiopathic gene sets significantly but in different directions. interestingly, mixture treatment of human cells and fish brains up-regulated autism_idiopathic gene set  <cit> . for another asd group, mix treatment up-regulated two gene sets  similar to fish brains  <cit> . on the other side, vpa treatment down-regulated three gene sets  in a different direction compared to the expression in fish brains  <cit> . these expression patterns stated that vpa and mix treatments of human cells exhibited a similar response to neurological disorders , suggesting a common induction effect.

insights into important genes in both mix and vpa treatments
we sought to identify important, or novel genes that were significantly up- and down-regulated in human neuronal cells treated with mix and vpa. we generated ranked lists of genes based on their fold change, and tabulated the most  <dig> strongly up- and down-regulated genes . we also compared genes from ranked lists with the ones from fish microarray data. for mix treatment, we noticed four genes  which could be considered important and novel. the thrombospondin  gene plays an important role in synaptogenesis in the developing brain  <cit> . recent association studies have found that both rare and common variants of this gene are associated with autism  <cit> . although this gene was found to be down-regulated by two-fold, it was up-regulated in fish brains under similar mixture treatment  <cit> . another important gene, htr2b, which codes for serotonin receptor 2b, was down-regulated by ~ two-fold in human cells. similar serotonin receptor genes were also found to be down-regulated in fish brains. moreover, recent protein studies in our lab showed that htr2b protein was down-regulated in the same mixture  treatment. this mechanism is explained by the drug effect of fluoxetine , which provides more neurotransmitter in the synaptic cleft, thus reducing serotonin receptors  <cit> .

in the ranked list of genes by valproate  treatment, we found three genes  of particular importance. vsnl <dig> gene, which encodes for visinin-like protein  <dig> in humans, modulates neuronal morphology by controlling the key signaling pathways in cns. this gene was up-regulated by three-fold in the valproate treatment. we observed similar up-regulation of this gene in fish brains following mixture  treatment. other studies have recently found the association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms  in the vsnl <dig> gene with neurological disorders like schizophrenia  <cit> . another important gene, oxytocin receptor  was found to be down-regulated by two-fold in human cells treated with valproate . however, this gene was up-regulated in fish brains exposed to the mixture of psychoactive pharmaceuticals  <cit> . moreover, recent protein studies in our lab showed an increased expression of oxtr in the same cells treated with carbamazepine and the mixture . other studies have shown that oxtr serves as an anxiolytic agent by modulating serotonin release in serotonergic neurons of the raphe nuclei  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
to investigate the environmental trigger for idiopathic autism, we focused on psychoactive pharmaceuticals, potential environmental contaminants that have been detected in drinking water. we found that psychoactive pharmaceuticals altered the gene expression of neuronal systems in vitro at environmental concentrations. these altered gene expressions are associated with potential neurological disorders by playing a key role in the formation, growth and regulation of neurons. our data suggests that psychoactive pharmaceuticals might disrupt neuronal connections by altering the gene expression associated with neuronal growth, development and regulation.

additional files
additional file 1: r-programming code for rna-seq analysis and multi-dimensional scaling  function. the file contains r-code for analysis of rna-seq data for mixture and valproate treatments. this file also includes the code for plotmds function for using multi-dimensional scaling. 

additional file 2: complete data of gene sets analyzed. excel file containing a complete data of all gene sets  that were enriched  in mixture  and valproate treatments. we also reported p- values and q-values for individual gene sets. 

additional file 3: descriptions of gene sets and results of analyses. this file contains table that represents the analyses of gene sets within neuronal systems ,  neurological disorders, and  asd groups. source indicates the database from where the gene set was derived, gene ontology  or molecular signatures database . size represents the number of genes in each gene set. mix_up, mix_down, vpa_up and vpa_down indicates gene sets which were found up-regulated in the mixture, down-regulated in the mixture, up-regulated in the valproate, and down-regulated in the valproate treatments, respectively. gene sets with p-value <  <dig>  and q-value <  <dig>  were considered as statistically significantly enriched. for non-significant gene sets, refer additional file  <dig> for p-values and q-values. enriched gene sets in human cells and corresponding scores are marked in bolds. enriched gene sets in fish brains are italicized and marked in parentheses. 



