BACKGROUND
in virtually all animals with internal fertilization, male accessory reproductive glands produce a complex cocktail of seminal fluid proteins  that are transferred to females during mating. these reproductive proteins have attracted much research interest during the last two decades for at least four related reasons. first, they exhibit an extraordinary and apparently redundant diversity. for example, drosophila melanogaster males transfer well over  <dig> sfps to females  <cit>  and the seminal fluid of humans contains over  <dig> proteins  <cit> . second, in model taxa, experimental obstruction of sfps are known to affect a range of important reproductive phenotypes, such as sperm survival, male fertility, sperm usage by females, female ovulation/egg production, male competitive fertilization success and female life span and receptivity to remating . third, some of the genes encoding sfps evolve very rapidly, to the point where they are some of the most rapidly evolving genes known , and a sizeable proportion of these genes show signs of positive darwinian selection . finally, because sfps are ubiquitous, affect reproductive success and often evolve divergently, genes encoding sfps are key candidate speciation genes in several taxonomic groups  <cit> .

an understanding of the divergent evolution of sfps requires an understanding of the mechanism of selection that acts upon sfp variation. here, the primary paradigm states that strong postmating sexual selection among males generates evolution of sfps and that male-female coevolution then sparks divergent evolution in both sfps and the female molecules that interact with sfps . this tenet has received comparative support, for example from correlations across species between the inferred degree of sperm competition and the rate of evolution of sfps in primates  <cit> , rodents  <cit>  and insects  <cit> .

a large body of detailed experimental work, involving for example removal or ectopic expression of single sfps using mutants or rnai, has unveiled the function of key sfps in model taxa  <cit> . however, virtually all of what we know about sfp evolution is based on comparisons between species  <cit> . although the interspecific approach has been very illuminating, it also suffers from limitations. for example, the fact that the seminal fluid is such a multivariate phenotype/genotype makes it difficult to evaluate patterns of covariation, or indeed the lack thereof, between specific sfps and species characteristics  <cit> . moreover, the strength and nature of selection for a given sfp can differ among species, given that these proteins may have different effects in different species. finally, interspecific approaches generally do not allow functional assays, where the reproductive effects of particular sfps are assessed experimentally, simply because species are more or less reproductively isolated. for these reasons, studies focusing on within-species variation would allow us to test for selection and to characterize divergence, which is necessary to unveil the processes of sfp evolution .

the sexual selection paradigm of sfp evolution makes at least three critical intraspecific predictions. first, reproductive traits under sexual selection are generally among the most rapidly and divergently evolving traits during incipient speciation  <cit> . this predicts that seminal fluid composition should differ markedly between allopatric populations. second, because the seminal fluid is such a multivariate phenotype, haphazardous mutation-order events  <cit>  should render sexual selection and male-female coevolution to steer populations along different multivariate coevolutionary trajectories  <cit> . this predicts that diversification among populations will, itself, be multidimensional. third, because sexual selection acts on traits related to reproductive success, we predict interpopulation divergence in sfp abundance to be functional in the sense that it affects important reproductive phenotypes. this important prediction is unique to the sexual selection paradigm. unfortunately, there are very few within-species in-depth studies of sfp variation. within drosophila, several sfp genes are known to exhibit high rates of divergence across populations and at least some show significant molecular indices of directional selection  <cit> . moreover, studies of standing sequence variation in protein coding sfp genes in d. melanogaster have successfully associated allelic variation in a few candidate sfp genes with important reproductive phenotypes . however, we currently lack integrative within-species studies that use quantitative proteomic methods, which allow rich multivariate descriptions of the sfp phenotype, to relate variation in sfp abundance to functional divergence, or sfp effectiveness  <cit> . a few previous studies have revealed differences in expression level of specific sfps across populations  <cit> , suggesting that the precise compositon of the sfp cocktail may be a key male phenotype.

to improve the empirical foundation for an understanding of sfp evolution, we introduce a three-step empirical strategy to study within-species variation in sfp abundance that  contain the multivariate nature of the sf and  can be applied also to non-model taxa. first, quantitative proteomics methods  <cit>  are employed to perform protein profiling of the sf-proteome of replicated sf samples from several populations/genotypes. second, the resulting quantitative data on relative protein abundance is then analyzed using conventional multivariate statistical methods, to assess and characterize divergence in sfps between types. third, functional phenotypic in-vivo assays are used to associate differences in sfp abundance across types with differences across types in the reproductive efficacy of sf. this builds on a long-standing tradition in evolutionary biology to estimate natural selection by relating multivariate phenotypes to reproductive success.

here, we illustrate the utility of this empirical strategy by employing it to study intraspecific variation in the sf-proteome of the seed beetle callosobruchus maculatus . by profiling the male accessory reproductive gland proteome in replicated samples from  <dig> different populations, using quantitative 2d ief sds-page analyses, we find that populations vary substantially in the male accessory gland proteome and that this variation is remarkably multidimensional. we then show that a large number of accessory gland proteins  are in fact transferred to females in the sf. finally, we use functional assays to demonstrate that variation in sfp abundance across populations is closely associated with reproductive phenotypes, including measures of competitive male fertilization success and gonadotropic effects of sf in females. our study provides important novel support for the sexual selection paradigm of sfp evolution.

RESULTS
proteomics assays
our analysis showed that the male accessory gland proteome of c. maculatus is composed of at least  <dig> distinct acps . a pca performed on the relative abundance of these  <dig> protein spots yielded  <dig> pcs, each of which accounted for >1 % of the total variance in normalized spot volume. collectively, these  <dig> pcs accounted for more than 89 % of the total variance across all  <dig> replicate gels . the repeatability of mean pc score per population was moderate to high , showing that a large proportion of variance in relative protein abundance across replicate gels was due to true variation between populations rather than to other sources of variation. hence, our 2d ief sds-page analyses of replicated gels showed sufficient accuracy. one-way anovas of each of the  <dig> pcs revealed significant population differences in no less than  <dig> pcs . these analyses reveal two major and novel insights. first, populations clearly differed markedly in their accessory gland proteome. second, variation across populations in the accessory gland proteome was remarkably complex: the first  <dig> pcs differed significantly between populations. this unveils an extraordinary complexity. because each pc captures a unique aspect of multivariate variation, it shows that significant differences across populations in the accessory gland proteome occur along many distinct multivariate dimensions. to better identify individual protein spots that differed across populations, we ran one-way anovas for each of the  <dig> spots detected. after false discovery rate  compensation, significant differences in relative protein abundance occurred in  <dig> protein spots . this shows that some 34 % of all acps differed significantly in relative abundance across populations.fig.  <dig> a representative gel image of the male accessory gland proteome of c. maculatus. the proteome was separated by 2d ief sds-page and stained with colloidal coomassie blue

fig.  <dig> scree plot from a principal component analysis of  <dig> male acps. given are the proportion of total variance in accessory gland proteins explained by successive pcs  and f-values  from anovas testing whether populations differ along each pc. dashed line represents the critical f - value for p =  <dig> 



the bursa copulatrix of just-mated females showed  <dig> unique and clear protein spots that did not at all occur in the bursa of virgin females. some of these spots may represent proteins produced endogenously by females. however, because the time between the virgin state and the mated state was very short , the large number of protein spots clearly shows that the ejaculate contains a highly diverse set of proteins. preliminary proteomic analyses of the entire ejaculate  suggest that it contains more than  <dig> proteins . out of the  <dig> spots detected here,  <dig> were identified as originating from male accessory glands. thus, c. maculatus males transfer at least  <dig> sfps to females during mating. here, we refer to the  <dig> protein spots collectively as the seminal fluid  proteome. a pca performed on these  <dig> sfps yielded  <dig> pcs, each of which accounted for >1 % of the total variance in normalized spot volume. collectively, theses  <dig> pcs accounted for more than 94 % of the total variance in sfps . one-way anovas of each of the  <dig> pcs revealed significant population differences in  <dig> pcs . again, these analyses unveiled striking and multifaceted differences across populations in the male sf proteome. one-way anovas of each of the  <dig> sfps showed that, following fdr compensation, the relative abundance of  <dig> of these proteins differed across populations . hence, almost half of all sfps  differed in abundance across populations. ongoing efforts to determine the molecular identity of these sfps show that they belong to the biochemical classes of molecules commonly found in the seminal fluid of other taxa   <cit> .fig.  <dig> scree plot from a principal component analysis of  <dig> seminal fluid proteins. given are the proportion of total variance in sfps explained by successive pcs  and f-values  from anovas testing whether populations differ along each pc. dashed line represents the critical f - value for p =  <dig> 



multivariate differences across populations in sfps were not significantly related to differences between populations in either geographic distance, genetic distance or the number of years populations had been maintained in the laboratory . previous studies of these populations have also shown a lack of a phylogenetic signal in variation in reproductive phenotypes .

female fecundity
the population identity of males had significant effects on female fecundity, but this effect varied across time . to further characterize this pattern, we conducted separate analyses of female fecundity at three successive time periods . these analyses showed that the male population effect was significant and strongest early in life, intermediate during mid-life and weakest late in life. male genotypes thus differed in their ability to stimulate female egg production, primarily during the first 24 hrs following mating.

sperm competition success
males from different populations differed significantly in their competitive sperm competition success, both in terms of sperm defense and offense . this effect was relatively weak during the first 24 hours after the second mating, but was sizeable and significant after this initial period as well as for female lifetime egg production. finally, the ejaculate weight of the second male was positively related to his competitive sperm competition success in the p <dig> assays .

association analyses
to assess whether variation in sfps was functional, we conducted association analyses between variation in reproductive phenotypic variables and the relative abundance of sfps across populations. here, we used only the  <dig> sfps and the six reproductive phenotypic variables that did in fact differ significantly across populations. we first performed an omnibus test of the overall hypothesis that sfps and reproductive phenotypes covary, using a canonical correlation analysis. because the dimensionality of the sfp matrix was too large relative to the number of populations studied, we first reduced the dimensionality of this matrix by means of a pca based on the covariance matrix. this analysis showed that variation in sfps  was indeed closely and significantly associated with reproductive phenotypes across populations . a closer inspection of univariate associations revealed many specific correlations. we found that  <dig> sfp was significantly associated with f <dig>   <dig> with f <dig>   <dig> with p1 
 <dig>   <dig> with p1 
t,  <dig> with p2 
 <dig> and  <dig> with p2 
t. there was some overlap, such that in total  <dig> out of  <dig> sfps showed significant associations with at least one reproductive phenotype. notably, a single sfp was correlated with measures of both p <dig> and p <dig> and two other sfps were correlated with measures of both fecundity and p <dig>  these analyses are summarized in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  these associations, thus, demonstrate apparent functional redundancy across sfps and show that some sfps have pleiotropic reproductive effects.fig.  <dig> multivariate relationship between male reproductive success and the seminal fluid composition. an ordination of the  <dig> c. maculatus populations studied here along the first pair of canonical variables, showing a significant covariation between the relative abundance of  <dig> sfps  and the reproductive phenotypic responses to seminal fluid  . the second pair of canonical variables were marginally non-significant . a sizeable and significant proportion of total variance in reproductive phenotypes across populations was thus accounted for by variance in sfp abundance 



discussion
our study is the first to integrate an analysis of within-species divergence in the sf proteome with functional assays of reproductive phenotypes and our results provide a series of important insights. first, they unveil a high protein richness of the sf proteome. second, the sf proteome differed markedly across populations and this difference was remarkably multidimensional. third, we found that variation in the sf proteome was related to several important reproductive phenotypes. fourth, our results provide a novel form of support for the sexual selection hypothesis of sfp evolution. below, we discuss each of these points in some detail.

the sf proteome
the male accessory gland is clearly a complex reproductive organ, producing many hundreds of proteins. our analyses allowed us to distinguish the subset of acps that are actually transferred to females at mating, which form an important component of the sf proteome. using a conservative method, we show that at least  <dig> sfps are transferred from the male accessory glands to females in c. maculatus and that the entire ejaculate likely contains more than  <dig> proteins. we note that high levels of protein richness in the seminal fluid have been reported in several other taxa, such as drosophila melanogaster , honeybees , mosquitoes , crickets  mice  and humans . thus, it is clear that the sf proteome generally represents a very complex phenotype  <cit> .

population divergence
although rapid divergence between allopatric populations is a key prediction of several hypotheses for sfp evolution  <cit> , we know of no previous large-scaled quantitative proteomic study of population divergence in the seminal fluid proteome. baer et al.  <cit>  found marked differences in abundance of several sfp across three populations of honeybees, but low replication did not permit a detailed quantitative analysis. our study documented what must be considered to be very large differences across populations in the relative abundance of proteins among both acps  and sfps . yet, we feel that the most striking aspect of population divergence seen here was its extraordinary complexity: significant population differences in the sf proteome occurred along multiple and orthogonal multivariate dimensions. in other words, populations were different from one another in many different ways. the fact that populations have diverged along many distinct multivariate trajectories has important bearing on hypotheses for the evolution of sfps .

function of sfps
we show that overall variation in the sf proteome across populations was significantly related to important reproductive phenotypes, known to be affected by sfps in this species  <cit>  as well as in many other taxa  <cit> . thus, our study provides important and novel support for the tenet that variation in sfps is functional, in the sense that if affects reproductive success in both sexes. the main strength of association studies such as ours is that they are integrative and span the breadth even of complex phenotypes such as the sf proteome. however, it also suffers inferential constraints that derive from the fact that it is correlational. in contrast, experimental methods to ascribe function, for example using rnai of single gene products or allelic variants of particular sfp genes, can provide stronger direct evidence for function of specific sfps but suffer from an inability to handle complex and multidimensional phenotypes  <cit> . we note here that we have previously provided experimental evidence showing that the amount of sfps that c. maculatus females receive affects both male competitive fertilization success  and female egg production  <cit> .

variation across populations in sperm defense and offense abilities  were related to several sfps: six sfps were associated with p <dig> and eight with p <dig>  of which only a single sfp was associated with both. this suggests that the success in sperm defense and offense occurs through distinct mechanisms that act at different stages of fertilization. this is consistent with previous studies showing that different sfps affect distinct reproductive events that may all influence male sperm competition success, such as sperm storage, retention and utilization as well as egg production and oviposition . in d. melanogaster, for example, the sex-peptide  modulates sperm release from the sperm storage organs and affects p <dig>  <cit> , while acps36de facilitates sperm storage thus affecting both p <dig> and p <dig>  <cit> . moreover, acps33a, acp29ab, cg <dig>  cg <dig>  cg <dig> and acp62f have been shown to affect p <dig> and/or p <dig> through their effects on female sperm handling  <cit> . a recent study of c. maculatus showed that two different size-fractions of accessory gland proteins affected p <dig>  <cit> . the fact that several different sfps were associated with p <dig> and p <dig> in the current study provides evidence for functional redundancy  <cit> , defined as functional duplication  <cit> , in the sense that several sfps affected the same reproductive phenotype. we note, however, that the extent to which this represents lower-level redundancy is unclear, as reproductive phenotypes such as p <dig> may in itself result from a multitude of underlying physiological processes.

we also observed apparent functional redundancy for associations with fecundity. for example, no less than seven sfps were associated with female fecundity the second day after mating while a single sfp was associated with fecundity the first day. again, this is consistent with the fact that female egg production requires oogenesis, ovulation and oviposition  <cit> . in d. melanogaster, ovulin  and sp both stimulate egg production. ovulin induces the release of mature oocytes from the ovary within the first 24 hrs following mating, whereas sp stimulates egg production for several days after mating . in line with our findings, yamane et al.  <cit>  recently demonstrated effects of different size fractions of accessory gland extract on egg deposition during the first and second day, respectively, in c. maculatus. finally, we note that the apparent functional redundancy detected here did not seem to reflect concerted up-regulation of any single pathway, since a cluster analysis of variation in protein abundance across gels showed that the sfps that were associated with a given phenotype did not generally tend to cluster together .

we also identified three sfps that apparently showed pleiotropic effects . one sfp had congruent effects on both p <dig> and p <dig> and, intriguingly, two sfps had antagonistic effects on fecundity and p <dig>  interestingly, yamane et al.  <cit>  found that some size-fractions of sfps both stimulated egg laying and reduced p <dig> in c. maculatus. they suggested that this antagonistic effect may occur because oviposition can interfere with sperm uptake to the spermatheca as eggs pass down the oviduct.

sexual selection and the sf proteome
the postmating sexual selection paradigm for the evolution of sfps  <cit>  relies on phenotypic selection on sfps, such that natural within-species variation in the multivariate sfps phenotype  is related to male and female postmating reproductive success. to our knowledge, our study provides the first integrative evidence for this critical component of the paradigm. in this important regard, our findings are very difficult to reconcile with the alternative hypotheses that  host-pathogen coevolution is driving evolution sfps  <cit>  or that  the evolution sfps is an incidental side-effect of relaxed selection due to sex-limited gene expression  <cit> .

the sexual selection paradigm, then, is based on the fact that evolutionary modifications of the seminal fluid that provides postmating benefits to males will be favored by male-specific selection  <cit> . this may involve modifications of the expression levels and/or changes in form/structure of sfps  <cit> . because male and female postmating interests often diverge  <cit> , some of these modifications will have sexually antagonistic effects. incidentally, sfps with toxic side effects in females have been documented in other seed beetle species  <cit> . the resulting sexual conflict will then generate selection in females to alleviate any detrimental effects of sf substances, sparking rapid and diversifying sexually antagonistic coevolution  <cit> . as recently stressed by sirot et al.  <cit> , observations of complexity and redundancy of the sf proteome are consistent with this scenario. because sfps serve as agents that manipulate many different postmating aspects of female physiology and behavior, and because any novel sfp that benefits males will be favored by selection, we predict the evolution of a very diverse and at least partly redundant set of sfps. with such a multivariate phenotype, random mutation-order events  <cit>  may then lead male-female coevolution along different multivariate trajectories in different populations which may significantly contribute to the evolution of reproductive isolation  <cit> . two additional and novel aspects of the intraspecific divergence seen in our study are noteworthy in this context. first, the evolution of sfp expression appears rapid in c. maculatus. in fact, the effect size of divergence across these populations in the sf proteome is much larger than those seen previously for other phenotypes such as morphology  <cit>  and life-history traits  <cit> . second, population divergence in sfp expression is remarkably multidimensional. the fact that the sf proteome, as well as the acp proteome, differs between populations along so many different  dimensions shows that evolution occurs along a multitude of multivariate trajectories. previous observations of con-specific and con-population sperm precedence in the genus callosobruchus, which has been presumed to be mediated through seminal fluid , suggest that the processes that generate the population divergence in sfps seen here will also contribute to speciation in this group.

those female molecules that interact with sfps  play a crucial role in the postmating sexual selection paradigm. this is because without evolutionary modification of female traits, there would be no male-female coevolution  <cit>  and thus little evolutionary diversification  <cit> . unfortunately, we currently know little about the evolution of female receptors for sfps  <cit> , simply because very few have been identified  <cit> . in our functional assays, we used a standard reference female genotype with a given reproductive response repertoire to the different sf proteomes. however, studies of crosses between genotypes in c. maculatus have shown that females differ in their postmating response to a given male genotype . this strongly suggests that female receptors also differ across populations, potentially as much as do male sfps. revealing the full coevolutionary complexity of male-female interactions will prove a major challenge, as such studies will need to quantify not only the multidimensional male sfp phenotype dealt with here but also the multidimensional female receptor phenotype.

CONCLUSIONS
an understanding of the divergent evolution of sfps requires knowledge of the mechanism of selection that acts upon variation in this class of important reproductive proteins. sirot et al.  <cit>  recently suggested that within-species studies of variation in the sf proteome and associated reproductive responses can advance this field. here, we delineate an empirical strategy whereby such advances can be gained and we provide an application of this framework in a seed beetle. we show that within-species variation in the sf proteome was associated with the efficacy of important reproductive effects of the sf, thus providing the first direct evidence for postmating sexual selection on relative sfp abundance. differences in the sf proteome across populations were large and multifaceted, consistent with the rapid and multidimensional evolution of sfps predicted by the postmating sexual selection paradigm of sfp evolution. our results illustrate the importance of intraspecific studies of sfps and we suggest that similar studies performed in other systems would significantly help expose the processes by which sfps evolve.

