BACKGROUND
despite attempts to control bovine tuberculosis , by the end of  <dig> the average incidence of disease in cattle in great britain  had increased nearly 400% over the previous thirteen years  <cit> , causing considerable economic loss to the farming community and high costs to government. in parts of gb and ireland, eurasian badger  populations constitute a reservoir of mycobacterium bovis infection and a potential source of infection to cattle  <cit> . accurate diagnosis of m. bovis infection in badgers is an important component of the development of strategies to control tb in this species. culture of m. bovis is still considered the 'gold-standard' diagnostic test. however, confirmation of tb in the badger by culture is particularly insensitive using clinical samples obtained from the live animal; in part due to the intermittent nature of detectable bacterial excretion among infected animals  <cit> . the sensitivity of culture of necropsy tissues was recently estimated at around 55% using a standard necropsy protocol. more infected animals, particularly adults and those with no visible lesions, were detected using a protocol that included many more tissues, cultured individually, and submitted to an extended culture regime  <cit> . against this background, alternative, sensitive in vitro diagnostics that can be used to test live animals are required.

the first immunological test for tb infection in the live badger was called the brock test; a serum antibody elisa test directed to a single antigen of m. bovis, mpb <dig>  developed over  <dig> years ago  <cit> . the brock test has traditionally lacked sensitivity   <cit> . subsequent developments in badger immunology have resulted in a lateral flow serum antibody test   <cit>  and most recently, an enzyme immunoassay  for interferon-gamma   <cit> , analogous to the bovigam® tb test for cattle. the brocktb stat-pak® is no more sensitive than the brock test  <cit>  but is cheaper, quicker, and easier to perform. in contrast, the ifnγ eia is a more involved test but has the best performance of any test so far developed for the diagnosis of tb in live badgers, with a sensitivity of  <dig> % and a specificity of  <dig> %  <cit> .

however, few reports stratify the performance of immunodiagnostic tests for tb in animals relative to age. previous studies using the brock test in badgers suggested that it may give a higher rate of false positive reactions  in cubs/juveniles compared with adults  <cit> . in a similar vein, the bovigam® ifnγ tb test for cattle cannot be used in young animals due to a large proportion of non-specific reactors; a fact attributed to the production of ifnγ by nk cells ex vivo in response to mycobacterial antigens, even when calves are uninfected  <cit> . therefore we sought to evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of the brock test, brocktb stat-pak®, and ifnγ eia in badgers of different age groups.

we reported recently that the sensitivity of the brocktb stat-pak® was significantly higher in animals with more severe tb, characterised by high excretion frequency of m. bovis or the presence of visible lesions at necropsy  <cit> . we inferred that such animals represent more advanced disease and the greatest risk for onward transmission of infection, and proposed that serological tests would be more suitable for detecting such animals. here we provide supporting evidence for this, as the sensitivity of the brock test increased significantly, the longer the badger had been detected as tuberculous.

RESULTS
influence of age of animal on test performance
asignificantly different from one another .

to investigate this further we generated non-parametric receiver operating characteristic  curves from the data . the existing cut-off for the test  was chosen to maximize the number of correct test results when no differentiation of badger age was made  <cit> . by roc analysis, if the test cut-off was reduced to  <dig>  when applied to cubs, the sensitivity would increase from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, whilst still retaining a specificity of  <dig> %.

an earlier longitudinal study of the brock test using badgers that were captured, sampled, then released as part of on-going ecological and epidemiological studies in woodchester park , south-west england  <cit> , indicated that brock test positive results in young animals were frequently transient and did not necessarily correspond with m. bovis culture positivity  <cit> , leading to the perception that serological tests for tb produce more 'false positive' results in cubs compared with adults. in the wp study, animals were sampled live for m. bovis culture and so the true tb status of culture negatives was not known. by using samples from badgers of the randomised badger culling trial  we have been able to readdress this issue, and report that the specificity of the brock test was just significantly higher  in cubs compared with adults. the same trend was almost significant for the brocktb stat-pak® .

influence of duration of infection
we previously found that seropositivity is more likely in badgers at more advanced stages of tb  <cit>  and that the brock test is more sensitive in detecting badgers with a history of excreting m. bovis  <cit> . to investigate this further with respect to the age of the animal, we evaluated brock test results from wp badgers. the brocktb stat-pak® and ifnγ eia have only recently been introduced in the wp study so insufficient data were available for their inclusion here. instead two analyses were performed. in the first case, the brock test result was analysed with respect to the age category in which the badger was first culture positive. the analysis included animals that were first tested as a cub and were either culture positive then or at a subsequent test. animals first culture positive as an adult were included only if they were also tested as a yearling. a logistic regression was fitted to available data from  <dig> animals as a function of age class only. table  <dig> shows the distribution of the data and the sensitivity of the brock test in badgers of each age category. from the logistic regression analysis, there were no significant differences in brock test sensitivity between the age classes . however, a trend towards increasing sensitivity with the age of the badger at wp was noted.

afrom faeces, urine, sputum, pus from abscesses, or bite wound swabs.

to test the association between the sensitivity of the brock test and the duration of infection, all brock test results that corresponded to a sampling event yielding a positive culture were used . to facilitate analysis, three 'duration categories' were assigned:  the brock test result at the time of the first positive culture result;  the brock test result at the time of a culture positive result within  <dig> days of the first culture positive result; and  the brock test result at the time of a culture positive result more than  <dig> days after the first culture positive result. a logistic regression model fitted to the brock test results as a function of the age class and duration factors indicated no significant differences in the sensitivity of the brock test between age classes  when adjusted for the 'duration categories' . this supported the analysis presented in table  <dig>  in contrast, when adjusted for the age of the badger, the sensitivity of the brock test was significantly  influenced by the length of time the badger had been detected as tuberculous  . this is illustrated by figure  <dig> that shows the running mean smoothed plot of the brock test sensitivity against the time in days since the animal's first culture positive sample.

anumber of days since first culture positive sampling event.

badjusted for age of badger at time of brock test and relative to culture of m. bovis from faeces, urine, sputum, pus from abscesses, or bite wound swabs.

discussion
in an effort to increase the power of the statistical analyses to detect differences in the performance of the three tests between age classes, we used samples from badger populations where the likelihood of encountering tb positive individuals was known to be high  <cit> . nonetheless, a far greater proportion of tb negative badgers were available for analysis and the number of cubs confirmed with tb by culture was in some cases very small. as a result, there was low power to detect differences of the order of 10%  for all analyses, except the comparison of specificity between the age classes for the two serological tests. as a consequence, we were unable to detect any difference between the sensitivities of the serological tests  in cubs and adults. in fact, the sensitivities were very similar. in comparison, the sensitivity of the ifnγ eia was notably lower in cubs compared with adults . since the test cut-off for the ifnγ eia is based on the difference in magnitude of ifnγ production following stimulation with bovine and avian tuberculins, it could be that the response to bovine tuberculin is simply lower in cubs than adults, possibly because they are likely to be at a less advanced stage of infection than adults. alternatively, the level of exposure of cubs to environmental mycobacteria such as m. avium may be lower than for adults, and hence a smaller difference in the response to bovine and avian tuberculins is more relevant for a positive result . both mechanisms may be working together. we could find no analogous published report, although newborn mice produced lower ifnγ responses than adults to a variety of different antigenic stimuli  <cit> .

logistic regression analysis of data from wp badgers showed there were no significant differences in brock test sensitivity between the age classes. in other words, the sensitivity of the brock test was not influenced by the age of the badger per se, supporting the results obtained with the rbct samples. the trend towards increasing sensitivity with the age of the badger at wp would be consistent with the hypothesis that an older animal may harbor m. bovis for longer resulting in more opportunity for the infection to progress and bacterial numbers to increase, even if it had failed to yield a positive culture at an earlier stage of life . this is supported by the observation that when the logistic regression analysis was adjusted for the age of the badger, the sensitivity of the brock test was significantly influenced by the length of time the badger had been tuberculous. in other words, the sensitivity of the brock test was significantly lower at the first culture positive event, but increased as infection progressed.

by virtue of the larger sample size available for comparing the specificities of the serological tests in cubs and adults, the statistical power to detect a 5% difference between specificity estimates was 80%. in all cases, the specificity of each test varied little between cubs and adults . nonetheless, the specificity of the brock test was just significantly higher in cubs compared with adults and was nearly so for the brocktb stat-pak®. this finding demonstrates that both tests actually produce fewer, or at least no more, 'false positive' results in cubs compared with adults, and concurs with earlier observations made during the initial evaluation of the brock test  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
together with previous studies that showed seropositivity is more likely in badgers at more advanced stages of tb  <cit>  and that the brock test is more sensitive in detecting badgers with a history of excreting m. bovis  <cit> , this study supports the contention that serodiagnosis could be a valuable tool for detecting a higher proportion of badgers with the greatest probability of transmitting infection. it also provides new evidence that test specificity is not apparently influenced by the age of the animal, contrary to previous concerns that higher rates of false positive reactions are seen in younger animals. elaboration of the most suitable cut-off for the ifnγ test when used in badger cubs should be attempted as data from a larger number of tuberculous cubs become available, so that high sensitivity can be achieved for all age groups.

these results are relevant to researchers and those tasked with formulating policy on badgers and tb, as well as those who use these tests in badger rehabilitation programmes. the findings are useful in interpreting immunological tb test results in badgers of different ages and in the absence of culture confirmation, as well as for determining the relative risks posed by test-positive badgers for transmission of infection. they also highlight the difficulty of performing this type of study in wildlife populations, where the numbers of samples available from animals in different age and disease classes are frequently limited.

