BACKGROUND
rna elements that are functional at rna level, i.e., functional rnas , are becoming to be appreciated more and more as their diverse structural, regulatory and catalytic roles are revealed  <cit> . several classes of frnas have been identified, including different types of non-coding rnas  such as trnas, rrnas, micrornas , telomerase rna, rpr <dig> , small nuclear rnas  and small nucleolar rnas . the cis-regulatory elements in the 5'- and 3'-untranslated regions  of mrnas constitute another class of frnas that are mostly involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression . recent developments in computational tools for prediction of frnas have shown a widespread set of rna elements that are specifically involved in post-transcriptional regulatory processes  <cit> . although crucial in many different species, post-transcriptional regulation is especially the major mechanism for regulation of gene expression in a group of unicellular parasites called trypanosomatids.

trypanosomatids, including trypanosoma brucei, t. cruzi and different leishmania species, are the causative agents of serious human as well as animal diseases, with a very high incidence and mortality rate if untreated. genes in trypanosomatids are transcribed as polycistronic mrnas  <cit>  that are further processed via trans-splicing  <cit> . regulation of gene expression which occurs mostly during or after splicing involves several cis-acting frna elements, such as u-rich elements , short interspersed degenerated retroposons , etc.  <cit> . these elements mostly regulate either the stability or translation rate of mrnas via interaction with different trans-acting proteins, many of which are unknown. it has also been proposed recently that mirnas may play a role in posttranscriptional gene regulation in t. brucei  <cit> , although no experimental substantiation has been found.

experimental identification of cis-acting frna elements is an exhausting task that requires extensive functional assays with several strains carrying deletion/substitution mutants of a likely regulatory sequence. the situation is not better for ncrnas, as it is not clear in which region in the genome they should be searched for and for what particular function the screening experiment should be designed . although computational identification of frnas from genome sequences can be an alternative, it is not yet as robust as identification of protein-coding rnas, due to the lack of strong conserved signals in their sequences  <cit> . here, we present a computational examination of the genomes of t. brucei and l. braziliensis in order to identify a set of conserved ncrnas that, based on computational and statistical analysis, are highly reliable. we show that our methodology is able to find a large number of known as well as novel potential ncrnas. we further examine our candidate ncrnas for the presence of potential pre-mirnas, and show that the existence of mirna genes that are conserved between t. brucei and l. braziliensis is highly unlikely. we also use a different method for homology-independent identification of short regulatory rna motifs in 5' and 3' utrs of t. brucei genes. these motifs complement our predicted ncrnas by providing a set of the most functionally important regions of potential cis-regulatory frna elements. in addition to offering new insights about the regulatory mechanisms of protein expression in t. brucei, these regulatory motifs can be used for prediction of gene function.

RESULTS
identification of conserved ncrnas in t. brucei
we compared the genome sequences of t. brucei and l. braziliensis in order to identify conserved genomic regions. l. braziliensis is the only trypanosomatid other than t. brucei with available genome sequence in which the putative components of rnai machinery have been identified  <cit> . thus, its comparison with t. brucei provides the possibility of detecting conserved ncrnas involved in or processed by this machinery. we used a binomial-based model  <cit>  to assess the conservation across t. brucei genome in comparison to the genome sequence of l. braziliensis. using this model, we found that about 18% of the t. brucei genome shows conservation degrees above the median that would be expected from a random distribution. these regions, in addition to being enriched for functional elements, have allegedly the highest-quality alignments compared to the alignments that correspond to less conserved regions. this conserved subset of the t. brucei genome consisted of about  <dig>  mbp of protein-coding sequences and  <dig> kbp of non-coding sequences. we used qrna  <cit>  to identify parts of these conserved genomic regions that showed patterns of conserved structural rna elements. about  <dig>  kbp of the non-coding conserved genomic regions obtained rna scores above zero, using qrna. for the protein-coding conserved regions, this number was about  <dig>  kbp, indicating a false positive rate of about  <dig> %. assuming this false positive rate, we would expect about  <dig>  kbp of false positives among non-coding genomic regions and, hence, a precision of about  <dig> % , where tp and fp stand for the number of true positives and false positives among non-coding genomic regions, respectively).

it should be noted that the estimated false positive rate from coding sequences would not be applicable to non-coding sequences if we had included scores other than the rna score from qrna, such as the cod and oth scores . however, the behavior of qrna may still be different between coding regions and non-rna, non-coding genomic regions as coding sequence evolves in a very specific way. furthermore, rna structure in coding sequence may be specifically selected against. we have thus used a different, more conservative method for estimating the false positive rate of our ncrna predictions, which is explained in the section "identification of highly significant candidate ncrnas".

about  <dig>  kbp of our found candidate frnas overlapped with already annotated rrna, snrna, and trna genes, indicating the capability of our approach in finding non-coding rnas. the sensitivity of this approach, i.e., tp/ where fn indicates the number of false negatives, showed considerable differences among different classes of structural rnas. for example,  <dig> of our predicated candidates overlapped one of the  <dig> known trnas, equal to about 50% sensitivity for detection of trnas. on the other hand, only  <dig> candidates overlapped one of the  <dig> known rrna genes, indicating a lower sensitivity for rrna detection. this is while we detected none of the  <dig> known small nucleolar rnas . this may indicate the lack of conservation of snorna structure between t. brucei and l. braziliensis.

a complete list of all found ncrna candidates along with their associated information can be found in additional file  <dig>  many of these candidates can be grouped into several homology clusters, as shown in figure  <dig>  when several homologous sequences are independently predicted to be ncrnas, the predictions can be considered highly reliable. sequences within clusters  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> either overlap with or are homologous to known trnas. similarly, sequences within clusters  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> seem to represent rrnas. however, clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> do not correspond to any known ncrnas and, thus, may represent novel ncrna classes with unknown functions. cluster  <dig> is of particular significance due to its large size, indicating that the elements of this class may be present at a high frequency in the genome.

investigating the presence of conserved mirna genes
based on a computational analysis of t. brucei genome, it has been recently proposed that trypanosomatids may use mirnas in order to regulate the levels of particular mrnas  <cit> . however, this report is not consistent with our current knowledge of mirna origin  <cit> : regulation via mirna seems to have emerged in a completely different branch of life, although its convergent evolution in several branches is not impossible. hence, we decided to investigate the presence of putative mirna precursors among our predicted ncrnas through a relatively simple, yet specific approach that considers a few structural and thermodynamic criteria for identification of pre-mirna sequences . using  <dig> pre-mirnas that, as control sequences, were randomly selected from  <dig> different organisms , it can be estimated that the sensitivity of pre-mirna prediction using our criteria is about  <dig> % ±  <dig> %. also, using a set of  <dig> randomly selected sequences from t. brucei genome, the specificity of this method can be estimated at about  <dig> % ±  <dig> %.

after removing low-complexity regions , only five of the predicted ncrna sequences met our criteria for structure and free folding energy . however, these rare sequences are mostly consisted of dinucleotide repeats , and can be accounted for false positives of our method. based on our analysis, it is highly unlikely to expect any conserved mirna genes in t. brucei. it should be mentioned that a large number of the previously predicted t. brucei mirnas  <cit>  were potentially targeting variant surface glycoproteins , which are absent in l. braziliensis. however, other predicted mirnas were targeting conserved complexes such as 20s proteasome, and thus would be expected to be found in this study if they were conserved. although this does not exclusively reject the presence of mirnas in t. brucei genome, suggests that a reexamination of this genome for the presence of such elements is required.

identification of highly significant candidate ncrnas
in order to select a highly significant subset from our set of candidate conserved ncrnas, we filtered out the candidates whose qrna scores were not significantly higher than expected from a random distribution. the random distribution for each candidate ncrna was obtained by computing the qrna scores of  <dig> randomly scrambled t. brucei-l. braziliensis alignments, as described in the methods section. a candidate ncrna was rejected if it was outscored by more than three randomized versions . this filtering procedure resulted in  <dig> highly significant novel putative ncrnas , of which  <dig> neither overlapped nor were homologous to any annotated features of t. brucei genome and, hence, may represent completely novel ncrnas . all  <dig> candidates that did not overlap with a coding sequence had the highest score for the rna model and not the cod and oth models, although they were initially selected only based on their rna scores and irrespective of their cod and oth scores.

candidate ncrnas are classified based on either homology with known ncrnas or overlap with known genomic features. candidate ncrnas within each class are further divided into subgroups based on their location relative to known genomic features.

* each candidate may contain several closely located single ncrnas, some of which may have already been annotated on the current release of the t. brucei genome. however, at least one ncrna within each sequence is unannotated, for which a known homolog is found. these unannotated ncrnas represent novel instances of their classes.

** these categories may overlap.

*** these categories may overlap.

the calculated p-value provides another measure, though more conservative, for estimating the precision of our method. for example, a p-value ≤  <dig>  is equal to about  <dig>  kbp of false positives , assuming that most of the non-coding genome is consisted of non-rna random sequences. this is while more than  <dig>  kbp of our candidates  were significant at this level, indicating a precision of about 85% at this level of significance.

these novel ncrnas did not show any statistically significant enrichment in particular genomic positions such as regions with clustered ncrnas, strand switch regions  or regions adjacent to coding sequences , indicating a relatively uniform distribution on the genome. nonetheless, a crude guess can be made for biological function of some candidates based on their positions. for example, eight unclassified candidate elements occur in the vicinity of a coding sequence. these elements may represent regulatory structures at 5' or 3' utrs of coding sequences, involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. also, one unclassified candidate frna was found to occur in a strand switch region. as transcription of polycistronic mrnas start from strand switch regions, this frna may represent an element in the 5' end of the resultant transcript, and may be involved in its localization, posttranscriptional processing or regulation.

expectedly, none of the previously characterized cis-regulatory rna elements of t. brucei were found among our set of candidate structural rna elements. this is not surprising since the known regulatory rna elements of t. brucei are not conserved in leishmania species  <cit> . furthermore, many of these elements are known via their sequence, not their structure. we specifically discuss the computational identification of cis-regulatory rna elements in t. brucei in the next section.

finding informative function-specific regulatory elements
we used a homology-independent approach to investigate the presence of function-specific motifs in 5' and 3' utrs of t. brucei genes, using a recently developed algorithm, named fire  <cit> . it has been shown that fire is able to identify many known and novel regulatory elements, with a near-zero false positive discovery rate, in upstream and downstream of genes that are clustered according to their expression patterns. here, we used fire to find 'function-specific' regulatory elements in 5' and 3' utrs of t. brucei genes: genes with similar functions are usually co-regulated  <cit> , indicating that they should have similar cis-regulatory elements. thus, clustering genes according to their functions can be used as a surrogate of clustering them according to their expression patterns. this approach is particularly useful for organisms in which gene regulation occurs mostly at post-transcriptional levels, such as trypanosomatids . we were able to identify  <dig> function-specific motifs in 5' utrs of t. brucei genes and  <dig> function-specific motifs in their 3' utrs . based on the results of running fire on  <dig> permuted sets of gene-function assignments, we can estimate an expected precision of  <dig> % for discovering function-specific 5' utr motifs and  <dig> % for 3' utr motifs.

most of the motifs that are found by fire have orientation bias, i.e., mostly occur at a particular orientation with respect to the coding sequence. this property is expected from rna motifs. furthermore, two of the motifs that were predicted in 3' utrs have position bias, which means that they prefer to be at a particular distance from the stop codon of the upstream coding sequence. this property has also been observed for many regulatory motifs in different organisms  <cit> , and further increases the possibility that the predicted motif has a biological role.

our predicted function-specific motifs overlap with a number of experimentally found regulatory sequences in t. brucei, mostly identified by deleting different parts of utrs and evaluating the effects of these deletions on regulation of a reporter gene: it has been shown that the 3' utr of glycosomal phosphoglycerate kinase pgkc can cause bloodstream form-specific gene expression  <cit> . we found that this regulatory sequence contained six of our predicted 3' utr motifs , most notably the glycolysis-specific motif vgggccrcv . interestingly, the 5' utr of the same gene, which has been shown to affect splicing in procyclic stage  <cit> , also contains two copies of the 5' utr motif uhuducnh. as another example, the 3' utr of fructose bisphosphate aldolase contains an instance of the fructose metabolism-specific motif muggvacak. this untranslated region has also been reported to be able to cause regulated expression of genes in t. brucei  <cit> .

it should be noted that our approach is only able to identify function-specific short rna motifs, not motifs that are involved in regulation of expression in a rather genome-wide scope, or in a gene-specific manner. thus, it is not surprising to see that some of the previously identified regulatory elements, such as the widely used u-rich elements  <cit>  are not among our motifs. structural rna elements also cannot be identified using fire; nonetheless, some of our found short motifs may represent the most functionally important regions of rna structural elements.

function prediction using regulatory rna motifs
we devised a naïve bayesian network that based on the pattern of presence and absence of motifs in 5' utrs and 3' utrs can predict whether a gene belongs to a particular pathway . for many pathways, this naïve bayesian network can be used to classify t. brucei genes with acceptable reliability . as it is shown in figure 4a, only a few motifs are needed to reach the maximum possible prediction power. however, adding more motifs to this classifier does not reduce the prediction power, which simplifies the design of effective naïve bayesian networks. we expect that by combining this method with other function prediction methods, we will be able to expand the functional annotations of t. brucei genes extensively. a complete assessment of function prediction in t. brucei using our method can be found in additional file  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
the ncrnas predicted in this study can provide candidates for experiments that are focused on understanding the functional rna repertoire of trypanosomatids. the most interesting candidates are perhaps those that do not have characterized homologs, as they most probably represent novel ncrna classes in t. brucei. unraveling the function of these ncrnas will help us to understand the biology of these parasites more clearly. however, it should be noted that our set of predicted ncrnas is far from complete, as we only considered two genomes in this study. considering a larger number of trypanosomatid genomes may reveal other ncrnas and provide a more thorough view of the non-coding functional transcriptome of these organisms.

prediction of gene functions based on our set of function-specific short motifs can also provide a very useful alternative to homology-based annotation methods, especially that a huge number of trypanosomatid genes are not conserved in other organisms. we anticipate that combining this method with other established systems-based function prediction approaches provides a robust method that can be applied to many genomes.

