BACKGROUND
the endosymbiotic captures of free-living prokaryotes, leading to the evolution of two types of organelles, mitochondria and plastids, are considered to be key events in the establishment and success of extant eukaryotic lineages  <cit> . if all mitochondria are likely to be derived from an α-proteobacterium-like ancestor, possibly due to a single and ancient endosymbiotic event, the history of plastid acquisition in the diverse photosynthetic eukaryotic lineages seems to be more complex  <cit> . it is now largely accepted that a single primary endosymbiotic event involving the capture of a cyanobacterium led to an ancestral primary plastid, which subsequently gave rise to the green plastids of the terrestrial plants and chlorophytes, the rhodoplasts of red algae and the cyanelles of the glaucophytes. once established, primary red or green algal plastids later spread independently to other eukaryote lineages via secondary or tertiary endosymbioses, whereby a photosynthetic eukaryote was engulfed by another eukaryote. subsequently, plastids have also been independently lost and/or replaced in several eukaryote lineages, making the reconstruction of plastid evolution very difficult.

the current consensus of eukaryote phylogeny recognizes six putative super-clusters: opisthokonta, amoebozoa, plantae, chromalveolata, rhizaria, and excavata  <cit> , but this division is still debated  <cit> . the three primary plastid-containing lineages, viridiplantae, rhodophyta and glaucophyta form the "plantae" or "archaeplastida" supergroup. photosynthetic eukaryotes with secondary or tertiary plastids have evolved independently in the chromalveolata, rhizaria, and excavata  <cit> . among the secondary plastids, chlorophyll c-containing plastids have been shown to be derived from an ancestral red alga via a secondary endosymbiotic process that took place around one billion years ago  <cit> . this type of plastid is found in cryptophyta, haptophyta, heterokonta  and dinophyceae algae  <cit> . cryptophyta, haptophyta and heterokonta eukaryotic lineages have been grouped under the name of "chromista" by cavalier-smith  <cit> , and were later associated with the alveolata, which includes the apicomplexans, dinoflagellates and ciliates, to form the "chromalveolata" supergroup. in  <dig>  cavalier-smith proposed that all the chlorophyll c-containing plastids were derived from a single secondary endosymbiotic event and that the common ancestor of chromalveolates was originally photosynthetic  <cit> . during diversification of the four extant chromalveolates lineages, photosynthetic capacity and/or the plastid organelle would then have been independently lost several times in different eukaryotic lineages, such as oomycetes , apicomplexa or ciliates . according to this so-called "chromalveolate" hypothesis, plastid and nuclear genomes have similar evolutionary histories and one would expect monophyly of chromalveolate lineages in both nuclear and plastid phylogenies. this hypothesis has been extensively debated over the last ten years , in part because of incongruence between plastid and nuclear phylogenies  <cit> .

at the nuclear level, both the monophyly of heterokonts and alveolates and that of cryptophytes and haptophytes have received increasing support in recent years . two contemporary phylogenetic analyses based on expressed sequences tag surveys of the cryptomonad guillardia theta and the haptophyte emiliania huxleyi supported the close relationship of cryptophyte and haptophyte host lineages  <cit> . in nuclear phylogenies alveolates and heterokonts often form a sister group  <cit> . unexpectedly, several large scale nuclear phylogenies have also shown a very robust relationship between members of rhizaria, cercozoans, and these two main clades of the "chromalveolates", but with the exclusion of haptophytes and cryptophytes  <cit> . the debate is becoming more complex with the emergence of this new putative sar  supergroup, as proposed by burki  <cit> . recent phylogenetic studies employing large gene- and taxon-rich datasets continue to question the reality of the "chromalveolate" supergroup, by placing the haptophyte-cryptophyte clade as a sister group to the plantae  <cit>  or by having them emerging independently and separately from the sar supergroup  <cit> . it is however well known that reconstructing the evolution of host cell lineages can be difficult, especially because of the chimeric nature of nuclear genomes and because large-scale horizontal gene transfers have occurred in some lineages during evolution  <cit> .

plastid genomes are less affected by horizontal gene transfer, with some rare exceptions  <cit> . at the plastid level, the monophyly of chromist plastids is supported by analyses of single genes  <cit> , of small numbers of concatenated plastid genes  <cit> , and of larger datasets of plastid-associated genes, i.e. plastid and nuclear-encoded plastid-targeted genes  <cit> . the relationships among chlorophyll c-containing plastids are, however, particularly hard to resolve and the results obtained are sometimes incongruent with host cell phylogenies  <cit> . haptophyte plastid genes more often group with the heterokont/dinoflagellate clade, than with those of cryptophytes  <cit> . a clade grouping haptophyte and cryptophyte species has been inferred from some plastid gene phylogenies  <cit> . this clustering was not strongly supported and was highly dependent on the plastid gene dataset used  <cit>  and/or on taxon-sampling  <cit> . other variant topologies have included the placing of dinoflagellates either as a sister-group to haptophyte plastids  <cit>  or to heterokont plastids  <cit> . however, a close evolutionary relationship between haptophyte and cryptophyte plastids would be consistent with the presence of a unique laterally transferred bacterial rpl <dig> gene in both plastid genomes  <cit> . other multigene analyses produced alternative results, such as low support for the chromist clade  <cit>  or paraphyly of red-algal derived plastids  <cit> .

the inability to recover congruencies between plastid and nuclear phylogenies, especially concerning haptophyte and cryptophyte monophyly, may be explained by poor taxon sampling of red algal and chromist species  <cit> . until now, insufficient sequence data have been available for the chromalveolates, in terms of both nuclear and plastid genome sequences. in public databases, more than  <dig> complete plastid genomes are available from land plants and green algae, whereas less than  <dig> sequences belong to red algae or photosynthetic chromalveolate species. only five complete plastid sequences have been reported for red algal species  <cit> . for the chromalveolates, with the exception of the highly diverged red-algal derived plastid genomes of non-photosynthetic apicomplexans  <cit>  and those of dinoflagellates  <cit> , complete plastid sequences have been published for two cryptomonads, guillardia theta and rhodomonas salina  <cit> , one haptophyte, emiliania huxleyi  <cit> ,  <dig> diatoms, odontella sinensis, phaeodactylum tricornutum and thalassiosira pseudonana  <cit> , one raphidophyte heterosigma akashiwo  <cit>  and one xanthophyte vaucheria litorea  <cit> .

here we report the complete sequences of the plastid genomes of ectocarpus siliculosus and fucus vesiculosus. these sequences represent the first fully characterized plastid genomes from two distinct orders of phaeophyceae, namely ectocarpales and fucales  <cit> . we have performed phylogenetic studies using large sets of genes and different reconstruction methods. the results still do not resolve the question of the monophyly of chromist plastids. however the topologies of concatenated plastid protein phylogenetic trees support both the monophyly of heterokont plastids and that of cryptophyte and haptophyte plastids, in agreement with nuclear phylogenies.

RESULTS
structure and gene content of the phaeophyte plastid genomes
the plastid genomes of e. siliculosus and f. vesiculosus are  <dig>  and  <dig>  base pairs  in size, respectively, and both contain two inverted repeat regions . these irs divide the circular molecules into large  and small single copy  regions . the size difference between the genomes was partly due to the presence of longer irs of  <dig>  bp in the e. siliculosus cpdna. the  <dig>  bp f. vesiculosus irs contain only the ribosomal rna operons. another reason for the difference in size between the two genomes is the presence of longer intergenic regions in the e. siliculosus cpdna. these sequences represent about 20% of the genome, whereas only  <dig> % of the f. vesiculosus cpdna is intergenic. the overall gc content is  <dig> % for e. siliculosus and  <dig> % for f. vesiculosus. in both fucus and ectocarpus, the cpdna irs contain two ribosomal operons encoding 16s, 23s and 5s rrna. the f. vesiculosus and e. siliculosus plastid genomes are predicted to encode a total of  <dig> and  <dig> protein-coding genes, and  <dig> and  <dig> trna genes, respectively, when the duplicated genes in the irs are counted only once. an intron was identified in the f. vesiculosus trnl <dig> gene, which encodes trna-leu. interestingly, its closest homologue in e. siliculosus cpdna  does not possess an intron. the other trna-leu genes in these plastid genomes, trnl1_ <dig> of e. siliculosus and trnl <dig> of f. vesiculosus, present 98% sequence identity to each other and also lack the intron .

gene organisation is highly similar between the two genomes and around two thirds of both molecules are conserved with respect to both gene identity and order. about 50% of each genome is incorporated into two large, locally collinear blocks. one block contains a large proportion of ribosomal protein-coding genes and covers up to 24% of the plastid genomes. the second block extends between trnm and atpa and covers 26- <dig> % of each genome . when compared to other heterokont plastid genomes, the number of genome rearrangements since the common ancestor of e. siliculosus and f. vesiculosus is comparable to the number of rearrangements that have occurred since the divergence of the three diatom species . this number increases more than twofold when higher taxonomic levels are considered .

the two plastid genomes are also very similar in terms of total gene content . as already found in most of the green and red photosynthetic plastid genomes, excluding those of dinoflagellates  <cit> , they possess the common core set of  <dig> genes, but with the exception of the psbz gene . they also contain  <dig> additional protein-coding genes, which are only found in red algal and chromist plastid genomes, giving a total of  <dig> genes that are shared with the red plastid lineage . these genes mainly encode essential plastid proteins, involved in transcription, protein synthesis and transport, and photosynthetic metabolism, such as components of atp synthase, cytochrome, photosystem i and ii complexes. nine genes are shared by all the chromist plastid genomes, but not with all the red algal plastid genomes . another  <dig> genes are encoded by most heterokont plastid genomes, but are not consistently present in the plastid genomes of haptophytes, cryptophytes and red algae. of the  <dig> remaining genes that are common to e. siliculosus, f. vesiculosus and v. litorea cpdnas, nine are present in the raphidophyte plastid genome, but all are absent from the diatom cpdnas .

e. siliculosus  and f. vesiculosus  cpdnas were compared with those of other heterokonts, haptophyte , cryptophytes  and rhodophytes. presence , absence  or presence of only a subset  of the genes listed in the first column is indicated. species abbreviations: vaucheria litorea , heterosigma akashiwo , phaeodactylum tricornutum , odontella sinensis , thalassiosira pseudonana , emiliania huxleyi , guillardia theta , rhodomonas salina , gracilaria tenuistitipata , porphyra purpurea , cyanidium caldarium , cyanidioschyzon merolae .

 see additional file  <dig> 

among the unknown plastid proteins, the conserved open reading frames  ectocarpus escp <dig> and fucus orf <dig> encode putative proteins of  <dig> and  <dig> amino-acids, with 48% identity between species. both protein sequences are predicted to possess five transmembrane helices. a homolog of these plastid proteins is also encoded by the plastid genome of the xanthophyte v. litorea. interestingly, the most similar protein in the public databases is a nuclear-encoded protein, tic <dig>  found in several apicomplexa species, including toxoplasma and plasmodium. the c-terminal ends of these proteins also share weak similarity with the conserved hypothetical plastid proteins encoded by the ycf <dig> genes of plastid genomes from e. huxleyi, g. tenuistitipata and cyanidiales .

phylogenetic analyses
for phylogenetic analyses, three concatenated amino acid datasets were constructed  and analysed using maximum likelihood , neighbour joining  and bayesian inference  methods. for the ml analyses, cprev and jtt amino acid substitution matrices gave the same tree topologies . trees were constructed using a dataset of  <dig> proteins  from a broad range of species, including  <dig> taxa of red-algal type plastids,  <dig> taxa of viriplantae, the glaucophyte cyanophora, and two cyanobacteria . plastid sequences of chlorophyll-c-containing dinoflagellates were not included in the analyses because this would have resulted in a significantly reduced common protein dataset. all but four of the nodes in the trees were well resolved and supported by the three different methods . as observed in previous studies, the red-algal and red-derived type plastid sequences grouped together, whereas green plastids formed a separate monophyletic group, derived from the cyanobacterial sequences. in all our analyses, the glaucophyte plastid from cyanophora emerged at the base of the green plastids, with high confidence in the bi analysis but with low bootstrap support in the ml and nj analyses . among the green plastids, the order of branching of mesostigma and arabidopsis was not fully resolved, but the phylogenetic position of mesostigma within the streptophyta has been studied recently, with expanded taxon sampling of the viridiplantae  <cit> . in the other part of the tree, the cyanidiales grouped together outside a strongly supported clade that includes the florideophyceae and bangiophyceae, together with the heterokont, the haptophyte and the cryptophyte plastids. the trees also strongly grouped all heterokont plastids together, with a split between diatom plastid sequences and those of the raphidophyte and phaeophytes. the florideophyceae and bangiophyceae branched together with high confidence using all the methods, as did the two species of cryptophytes. in these phylogenetic studies, the haptophyte e. huxleyi emerged as the closest branch to cryptophytes in the bi analysis but this topology had low bootstrap support in the ml analysis , and no support in the nj analysis. the order of branching of the following three major groups: heterokonts, , and , was also uncertain. in fact, the clade of heterokonts and  plastids was only well-supported by the bi analysis, and very poorly  or not supported by the ml and nj analyses, respectively.

to strengthen the topology of branching in the region of the tree corresponding to the red-alga derived plastids, we decided to increase the protein dataset by focusing the phylogenetic studies on  <dig> species. a full dataset of  <dig> plastid-encoded proteins  was analyzed in parallel with a sub-dataset of  <dig> slowly-evolving plastid proteins, excluding the fast-evolving proteins . using the phylobayes software, the values of the saturation index have been calculated for each dataset. the observed and predicted homoplasy rates are, respectively,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for the 83-protein dataset, and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for the 33-protein dataset. these results show that the exclusion of the fast-evolving proteins tends to decrease the global level of saturation. both trees still showed two well-supported plastid groups, corresponding to heterokonts and the cyanidiales. globally, the branches that were strongly supported by the 44-protein dataset were maintained. interestingly, the group formed by haptophyte and cryptophyte plastids had greater support in the ml analysis  but little support with nj method with the 83-protein dataset  and was strongly supported by the three methods in the analyses of the slowly-evolving proteins . compared to the 44-protein trees, the 83- and 33-protein trees differed in their branching patterns with respect to the  and the . both the ml and nj trees built with the dataset of  <dig> proteins clustered these two groups with high bootstrap values, whereas the red algal plastids were found outside the clade of heterokont/ plastids in the 33-protein trees. this latter topology was strongly supported in the ml, nj and bi analyses .

to further test these phylogenetic positions, we compared different topologies by performing the approximately unbiased  and shimodaira-hasegawa  tests . four topologies were selected to evaluate two hypotheses: 1) are chromist plastids indeed monophyletic; 2) are haptophyte plastids specifically related to cryptophyte plastids to the exclusion of heterokont or  plastids? our analyses showed that, for the 83- and 33-protein datasets, the best topologies correspond to the trees shown in figure 4a  and 4b , respectively. considering the two datasets, these two topologies had a much higher likelihood in au and sh tests, than topologies that place either the haptophyte plastid outside a ) clade  or that propose that the closest relationship is between heterokont and haptophyte plastids . for the 83-protein dataset, the three topologies  were significantly rejected with p value under  <dig>  for au tests, but not for sh tests. for the 33-protein dataset, the topology i could not be significantly rejected by both tests , whereas the other topologies were refuted with p values below the significance level.

discussion
monophyly and evolution of heterokont plastid genomes
until very recently, all of the plastid genomes available for the heterokont lineage were from diatoms , and these genomes featured conserved gene content and gene clusters  <cit> . along with the recently published plastid genomes of two strains of the raphidophyte h. akashiwo  <cit> ) and the xanthophyte v. litorea  <cit> , the complete sequences of the e. siliculosus and f. vesiculosus plastid genomes presented here significantly increase the number and diversity of heterokont plastid genomes available, allowing a more extensive comparison of these genomes. our results support a unique origin for all heterokont plastids, based on similarity in terms of gene content  and on their forming a strongly supported group in all our phylogenetic analyses . these analyses were, therefore, consistent with the well established monophyletic origin of the heterokont host cell  <cit> . however, despite their common origin, genome comparisons revealed specific traits in the evolution of heterokont plastids during the diversification of the different heterokont orders.

all the xanthophyceae or phaeophyceae plastid genomes analyzed to date, including that of f. vesiculosus described here, contain a trna-leu gene with a single intron  <cit> . this canonical group i intron is thought to have been acquired from the ancestral cyanobacterial endosymbiont and to have been lost independently in several lineages of plastids, including the red algae and almost all their secondary plastid derivatives, except the xanthophyceae/phaeophyceae lineage  <cit> . given the high sequence similarities found between these plastid trna-leu genes in v. litorea, f. vesiculosus and e. siliculosus , they are probably derived from the same ancestral trna-leu gene, containing the endosymbiotic derived intron. in the e. siliculosus gene, its loss is likely to be recent because it is still present in the plastid trna-leu genes of laminariales species and of two ectocarpales, pylaiella littoralis and scytosiphon lomentaria   <cit> . this feature is evidence for continued evolution of brown algal plastid genomes within the recently-derived order ectocarpales  <cit> .

in terms of gene content, the brown algal plastid genomes seem to be more closely related to those of v. litorea and of h. akashiwo than to those of diatoms and this is consistent with evolutionary relationships of the nuclear compartment  <cit> . although the structural organisation of plastid genomes is highly conserved within the brown algae  and within diatoms  <cit> , there is evidence of intensive gene rearrangements having occurred earlier in evolution after the separation of diatoms from raphidophytes, xanthophytes and phaeophytes. moreover, more extensive gene losses seem to have occurred in diatom plastid genomes than in other heterokonts . these genes could have been transferred to the nucleus or replaced by bacterial counterparts, functionally-integrated through horizontal gene transfer as often seen in the diatom nuclear genome  <cit> . all these data, together with the topologies of plastid phylogenetic trees  support a relatively ancient split between diatoms and the raphidophyte-phaeophyte clade, in agreement with the early divergence of the bacillariophyceae from the other photosynthetic heterokont lineages in nuclear phylogenies  <cit> .

what is the closest relative of the heterokont plastid clade?
a critical step for the transformation of the endosymbiont into a permanent organelle was the establishment of an efficient protein targeting and translocation system from the nucleus to the plastid  <cit> . the canonical tic/toc protein import complex of secondary plastids was inherited from the first red-algal endosymbiont, with components of both eukaryotic and eubacterial origin  <cit> . both brown algal plastid genomes have a gene  that shares similarity with the tic20-like genes in xanthophyte, haptophyte and red algal plastid genomes. there are no homologues of this gene in raphidophyte, diatom and cryptophyte plastid genomes . this plastid-encoded tic <dig> gene  encodes a small membrane protein and is thought to be endosymbiont-derived with a cyanobacterial origin  <cit> . interestingly, the highest similarity scores of brown algal and xanthophyte plastid orfs were found with a homologous protein encoded in the nucleus of several apicomplexan species, including toxoplasma and plasmodium. in t. gondii, this tic20-like protein has been shown to be essential for protein import into the apicoplast  <cit>  and is therefore likely to be linked to apicoplast evolution  <cit> . escp <dig> and orf <dig> protein sequences are also predicted to have five transmembrane regions, suggesting a putative location in the plastid membrane. it is now widely accepted that alveolates and heterokonts are derived from a common host cell ancestor. escp <dig> and orf <dig> could be footprints of a common photosynthetic ancestor of heterokonts and apicomplexans. this hypothesis is in agreement with several recently published studies suggesting that contemporary alveolates are derived from a photosynthetic ancestor. these studies include the characterization of a photosynthetic alveolate closely related to apicomplexan parasites  <cit> , the identification of plastid-derived genes in a non-photosynthetic alveolate  <cit>  and the identification of remnant algal-related genes in ciliates  <cit> .

is the monophyly of chromist plastids still in doubt?
all the phylogenetic analyses carried out in this study suggest that the red algal ancestor of chromist plastids was more closely related to the more recently evolved red algae  than to cyanidiales, confirming the report by sanchez-puerta et al.  <cit> . it is worth mentioning that cyanidiales are extremophile unicellular red algae and have been shown to be the earliest diverging red algal group. they emerge very distinctly from the other multi-cellular red algal taxa in nuclear phylogenies  <cit> . within the chromist plastid clade, most plastid phylogenies have hitherto featured a clade grouping haptophyte and heterokont plastids  <cit>  and the relationship between haptophyte and cryptophyte plastids was never strongly recovered in previous studies  <cit> . these conflicting results have been discussed in the light of taxon- or data-sampling limitations  <cit> . our results do not support a preferential link between heterokont and haptophyte plastids, neither in terms of gene content  nor phylogenetic relationship. moreover, these phylogenetic analyses strongly support the monophyly of haptophyte and cryptophyte plastids . in general, addition of taxa has been shown to reduce support for previously robust clades, whereas the addition of more positions has been shown to increase support regardless of the topology  <cit> . indeed this topology has high confidence, especially when the dataset of genes was increased or slowly-evolving proteins were selected. moreover, whatever the datasets used, with or without fast-evolving proteins, au tests significantly rejected topologies separating haptophyte and cryptophyte plastids. the monophyly of haptophyte and cryptophyte plastids is in complete agreement with recent nuclear phylogenies that support a common origin of their host cells  <cit>  and with a previous study that identified a unique, laterally transferred bacterial gene in plastid genomes from these two groups  <cit> .

horizontal gene transfers into plastid genomes happened only rarely after the establishment of the endosymbiont within the host cell. the major events which can affect the structure of the organelle genome are gene transfer to the nucleus and/or gene loss. indeed, red algal plastid genomes possess more than  <dig> protein-coding genes while those derived from a red-algal endosymbiont encode less than  <dig>  of which more than half are shared by all the genomes . an exceptional case is the drastic reduction of plastid minicircular genomes of peridinean dinoflagellates  <cit> . in other plastid genomes derived from a red algal endosymbiont, the remaining pool of genes is the result of losses that have occurred independently in the different lineages and of retention that could constitute interesting fingerprints of ancestral plastid gene contents. a comparison of gene content did not reveal any particular relationships between heterokonts and cryptophytes/haptophytes and therefore did not provide support for a common history. for the phylogenetic analyses, whereas the use of the complete dataset supported a different red-algal origin for heterokont plastids , monophyly of all chromist plastids was recovered when the most conservative data was used in the phylogenetic reconstruction , as previously observed  <cit> . other studies have also shown the disruption of the monophyly of chromist plastids  <cit> . our dataset and taxa sampling are not sufficient to completely refute or confirm the polyphyly of chromist plastids, given that the monophyletic topology does not significantly exclude the polyphyletic one when using the slow-evolving proteins . the slowly evolving proteins may reflect more ancient divergences, but the exclusion of fast-evolving proteins decreases the number of analysed amino-acid positions by a factor of two and the issue of dataset size is critical in plastid multi-gene phylogenetic studies  <cit> . in the context of the chromalveolate hypothesis, the major separation between cryptophyte/haptophyte and heterokont/alveolate host cells is more likely to have occurred very early after the secondary endosymbiosis. an alternative origin of heterokont/alveolate plastids has recently been proposed, with laterally transferred red-algal derived plastids from the haptophyte/cryptophyte clade into the heterokont/alveolate lineage  <cit> . the monophyly of all chromist plastids is also consistent with this tertiary endosymbiosis hypothesis, if the heterokont plastids were captured before the divergence between the haptophyte and cryptophyte host lineages. it is however clear that plastid phylogenies alone will not resolve these currently discussed questions about vertical or lateral inheritance of red-algal derived plastids  <cit> .

it has been shown that plastid metabolism could also involve a significant number of nuclear-encoded proteins recruited from diverse origins, such as laterally transferred genes from chlamydiae  <cit>  or green algae  <cit> . phylogenies based on nuclear-encoded plastid-targeted proteins could then trace and reflect complex evolutionary pathways, whereas phylogenies based on complete sets of plastid-encoded genes should better reflect the evolution of the organelle since its engulfment by the host cell. as illustrated by the high resolution of the heterokont plastid clade, additional plastid genomes from haptophytes, cryptophytes and dinoflagellates, but certainly also from other evolved red algae will be required to fully resolve chromist plastid phylogenies and, subsequently, test the different hypotheses concerning red-algal derived plastid origin.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study of two novel plastid genomes belonging to brown algal species has shown the importance of increased taxon sampling when analysing phylogenetic relationships based on large datasets. as expected, the phylogenetic analyses showed that heterokont plastids are monophyletic, although very diverse in terms of gene arrangement. there is also evidence that some heterokont  plastids have retained finger-prints indicating a common ancestory with alveolate plastids. moreover, monophyly of haptophyte and cryptophytes plastids was strongly recovered whatever the dataset or the method used, in complete agreement with large-scale nuclear phylogenies.

