BACKGROUND
substitution rates in plant mitochondrial genomes are generally low relative to their nuclear and chloroplast counterparts, as well as relative to the mitochondrial genomes of other organisms  <cit> . in fact, absolute rates of sequence evolution in seed plant mitochondrial dna  are among the slowest ever estimated . a series of recent studies, however, has revealed notable exceptions to this generalization  <cit> . there are angiosperm species that not only deviate from the slow substitution rates typical of plant mtdna but also exhibit some of the highest eukaryotic substitution rates ever documented . with such a substantial fraction of known rate variation captured in a relatively small twig within the tree of life, plant mitochondrial genomes represent an intriguing system for investigating the evolutionary forces that shape substitution rates  <cit> .

studies of rate accelerations in plant mitochondrial genomes have consistently shown that these effects are most pronounced at so-called synonymous sites, which do not affect the corresponding amino acid sequence . one of the pillars of the neutral theory of molecular evolution is that the rate of neutral substitutions  is expected to equal the mutation rate  <cit> . synonymous substitutions are not completely neutral, however. they are subject to a variety of selection pressures including translational efficiency, mrna stability and the conservation of regulatory motifs , and direct measurements of mutation rates can be more than an order of magnitude higher than those estimated from synonymous substitution rates  <cit> . nevertheless, synonymous sites still offer one of our best approximations of the underlying mutation rate. therefore, considering the absence of well-supported alternative hypotheses, the extreme synonymous substitution rates observed in certain plant mitochondrial genomes are most likely a result of mutational acceleration.

silene noctiflora  is a recent addition to a growing list of angiosperms exhibiting major accelerations in mitochondrial synonymous substitution rate  <cit> . in other well-documented examples , rate accelerations appear relatively old  having preceded the divergence of large clades or even an entire genus  <cit> . in contrast, the extreme mitochondrial substitution rates of s. noctiflora appear unique relative to other silene species, suggesting a very recent acceleration. estimates of mitochondrial substitution rate, however, are available for only a few silene species, representing a tiny fraction of this large and diverse genus. the sparse sampling severely limits the phylogenetic resolution to detect historical changes in substitution rate.

the scarcity of mitochondrial sequence data within silene reflects a broader under-representation of plant mtdna in studies of molecular evolution. whereas chloroplast dna  and animal mtdna are utilized extensively in phylogenetic studies, the low baseline substitution rates and growing evidence for rate heterogeneity in plant mtdna often limit its utility in this context--particularly at local phylogenetic scales  <cit> . understanding the causes and consequences of mutation rate variation is a fundamental problem in evolutionary biology  <cit> , but the lack of plant mtdna sequence data is a hindrance to investigating this question. to characterize the pattern of mitochondrial substitution rate variation throughout silene and related genera, we sequenced four mitochondrial loci in a sample of  <dig> species that were selected to capture the phylogenetic diversity of this genus and its closest relatives . to our knowledge, this effort represents the most extensive species-level sampling to date of mitochondrial sequence divergence in a plant genus.

herbaria abbreviations are from holmgren et al.  <cit> , except dickoré , and strid . asterisks indicate that a second specimen was used for one or more loci .

to compare absolute substitution rates in a gene across lineages requires an estimate of the genealogy with dated nodes . in cases of extreme rate variation, generating such a tree directly from the gene in question is problematic. with rate variation, slowly-evolving taxa can be difficult to resolve, and long branch attraction can favor incorrect topologies  <cit> . even with an accurate topology, rate variation can bias the estimate of divergence times with molecular clock based methods. for this reason, previous studies of substitution rate variation in plant mitochondrial genomes have constrained their analyses based on phylogenies and divergence times inferred from nuclear and chloroplasts sequences.

because both mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes are predominantly maternally inherited in silene, they are expected to share a common genealogy  <cit>  . therefore, we chose the chloroplast gene matk to estimate phylogenetic relationships and divergence times. this gene has proven to be highly informative in phylogenetic reconstruction, partly because of its high rates of substitution  <cit> . it has also been used in two recent analyses of divergence times within silene and the caryophyllaceae  <cit> .

we identified substantial rate accelerations in multiple lineages within the silene phylogeny as well as major rate differences among mitochondrial genes. here, we discuss the complex patterns of mitochondrial rate variation in the genus silene and the implications they have for the evolution of mitochondrial mutation rates and the patterns of selection on mtdna at the sequence level.

RESULTS
chloroplast dna phylogeny
likelihood, parsimony and bayesian phylogenetic methods were in general agreement for the matk dataset. the 70% parsimony bootstrap consensus tree  did not conflict with any of the nodes from either the ml or bayesian analysis. the results were also generally consistent with previous cpdna studies of the tribe sileneae  <cit> . the analysis recovered the two previously identified subgenera --silene and behenantha  endl.  rohrb.)--along with the relationships among the major clades in subgenus silene. there was, however, incomplete resolution in some parts of the tree--particularly among the major lineages within subgenus behenantha, which appear as a large radiation. four silene species were not grouped with either of the two major subgenera. as found in the analysis of other chloroplast loci, s. sordida was placed in a clade with lychnis  <cit> . silene odontopetala was also assigned to this clade with strong support. the relationships between subgenus behenantha, subgenus silene, the lychnis/s. odontopetala/s. sordida clade, and a fourth lineage consisting solely of s. cordifolia could not be confidently resolved. finally, there was unexpected support for a sister relationship between s. delicatula and the rest of our silene/lychnis sample.

divergence times
we used three different dating methods, which produced roughly similar estimates of divergence times, but there was a consistent pattern distinguishing them . specifically, the langley-fitch method produced the youngest estimates of divergence times within sileneae, while a penalized likelihood method produced the oldest. for example, the estimated age of the root node for the entire silene/lychnis clade differed by 50% between the two methods . the beast model  generally produced intermediate estimates of divergence time relative to the other two methods. only the beast values were used for subsequent rate analyses, so the uncertainty in divergence times should be considered when interpreting absolute substitution rate estimates.

mitochondrial rate variation
branch lengths in terms of both synonymous  and non-synonymous  substitutions per site for each mitochondrial gene are shown in figure  <dig>  all four genes show little divergence at non-synonymous sites across the entire tree . in addition, they all share a pattern of extreme synonymous divergence in six silene species that can be divided into two clear clades:  the previously characterized s. noctiflora along with its close relative s. turkestanica and  s. ammophila, s. conica, s. conoidea, and s. macrodonta, which all belong to section conoimorpha. beyond those similarities, the four mitochondrial genes differ markedly in synonymous branch lengths . very little divergence is observed in nad <dig> outside of the aforementioned six species. synonymous divergence is similarly low throughout much of the cox <dig> and atp <dig> trees, but there are a number of species that exhibit substantial divergence, particularly within subgenus silene. this group includes s. nutans which, despite showing no sign of abnormal divergence in cox <dig> and nad <dig>  is highly divergent for atp <dig>  finally, synonymous divergence in atp <dig> is extreme and highly variable throughout most of the genus silene, although many of the outgroup genera exhibit typically low levels of divergence. the total synonymous tree length is approximately 9-fold larger for atp <dig> than the slowly-evolving nad <dig>  this gap widens to 41-fold if the six taxa that have accelerated rates across all genes are excluded from the analysis .

values represent tree-wide average rates  based on the subset of  <dig> species for which we have sequence for all  <dig> mitochondrial genes. the values in parentheses are the rates estimated after excluding the two clades with highly elevated rates across all  <dig> genes.

as expected given the enormous variation in mitochondrial divergence across species, absolute synonymous substitution rates  differ dramatically throughout the tribe sileneae . the outgroups to silene tend to have rs values of less than  <dig>  substitutions per site per billion years , and certain branches have an estimated rs of  <dig> because they lack a single synonymous substitution . many lineages within silene have maintained these low rates. at the other extreme, the rapidly-evolving silene lineages have rs values that are more than two orders of magnitude greater than the low rates of beta vulgaris and other outgroups. the fastest rate estimates observed in the entire dataset were found in the atp <dig> tree. the internal branch subtending the minimally inclusive clade that contains s. succulenta and s. imbricata had an estimated rs value of  <dig> ssb. the fastest terminal branch in the atp <dig> tree was that of s. schafta with a rate of  <dig> ssb, although it should be noted that the error associated with atp <dig> rate estimates for individual branches was generally large . rs and rn values were both positively correlated across atp <dig>  cox <dig> and nad <dig>  but this correlation broke down in comparisons with atp <dig> and matk . in addition, rs and rn values were significantly correlated with each other within genes for atp <dig>  cox <dig> and nad <dig> but not for the other two loci.

values above and below diagonal are from pairwise comparisons between genes for rs and rn, respectively. values on the diagonal are correlation coefficients between rn and rs within each gene. bold values are significantly different from  <dig> based on a bonferroni corrected α of  <dig> / <dig> =  <dig> .

evolutionary congruence between mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes
we utilized a constrained topology derived from cpdna to analyze evolutionary rates in mtdna, reflecting the assumption that the two organelle genomes share a single genealogy. although the mitochondrial genes often yielded limited phylogenetic signal because of the dual problems of low variation and long branch attraction, there was some evidence to support phylogenetic congruence between these genomes . for example, s. hookeri and s. menziesii were consistently paired by both chloroplast and mitochondrial genes, suggesting that the allopolyploid s. hookeri inherited both of its cytoplasmic genomes from the s. menziesii parental lineage  <cit> . in addition, the rapidly evolving atp <dig> gene produced a tree that generally agreed with the chloroplast matk topology at younger nodes, which are presumably less susceptible to saturation at synonymous sites.

there were a large number of incongruencies between chloroplast and mitochondrial trees, but they were generally lacking in support. perhaps the most suspicious example of conflict between mitochondrial and chloroplast topologies was the placement of s. samojedora, s. seoulensis, s. zawadzkii and the major accelerated species from subgenus behenantha in a clade otherwise populated by subgenus silene in the cox <dig> tree . although this clade was supported by 74% of bootstrap replicates, inspection of the alignments showed that the grouping was based entirely on a single  <dig> bp region with  <dig> substitutions, raising doubts about the independence of those characters. overall, we found no overwhelming evidence of conflicts between mitochondrial and chloroplast topologies, but the lack of mitochondrial divergence in many lineages gave us little statistical power. therefore, it is possible that topological inaccuracies in our constraint tree could have led to misidentification of small mitochondrial rate accelerations, but given the phylogenetic scale of our analysis, it is unlikely that any of the major rate changes was an artifact of topological conflicts.

to date, studies of angiosperms with major increases in plant mitochondrial substitution rates  have concluded that the observed accelerations are largely independent of evolutionary rates in the chloroplast or nuclear genomes . in our dataset, we found little substitution rate variation among species for the chloroplast matk gene and no significant correlation between mitochondrial and chloroplast rates .

discussion
mutation rate variation among species
silene noctiflora has been shown to have dramatically accelerated rates of mitochondrial evolution relative to its congeners  <cit> . we examined the phylogenetic distribution of this rate acceleration within the tribe sileneae and identified six silene species grouped into two clades that exhibited major increases in synonymous substitution rates across all four loci examined . as an illustration of the magnitude of these accelerations, we note the average synonymous pairwise divergence between these two closely-related clades within silene subgenus behenantha exceeds the divergence typically observed between flowering plants and liverworts--the deepest split in the land plant phylogeny  <cit> . based on the currently available data in seed plants, the synonymous substitution rates exhibited by these rapidly-evolving lineages  are exceeded only by the fastest lineages of plantago   <cit> . in addition, the observed rates are on par with average estimates for mammalian mtdna, although they still fall well below the fastest mammalian rates  <cit> . as discussed above , the observed differences in synonymous substitution rates most likely reflect differences in the underlying mutation rate.

the phylogenetic data remain ambiguous with respect to whether the two clades with rate accelerations represent independent evolutionary events. the matk tree does not strongly support or reject a monophyletic relationship between s. noctiflora/s. turkestanica and section conoimorpha . more thorough phylogenetic analyses of these taxa have recently been conducted, utilizing both chloroplast and nuclear loci  <cit> . these studies have found that, while cpdna sequences suggest phylogenetic independence between the two clades, at least some nuclear loci support monophyly. therefore it is possible but inconclusive that both high rate clades are sister taxa that inherited an accelerated mitochondrial substitution rate from a common ancestor. if so, the two clades must have split shortly after that acceleration, because internal branches shared by the two lineages in the mitochondrial gene trees are quite short relative to the divergence between the lineages . resolving these phylogenetic relationships could prove difficult because previous studies have shown that the evolutionary history of subgenus behenantha may be complicated by reticulation  <cit> , such that relationships differ across genes and genomes

comparisons of mitochondrial sequences from multiple populations of s. noctiflora have revealed very low levels of polymorphism, suggesting that the historically high mutation rates in this lineage may have undergone a reversion to more typical levels . this conclusion was, at least partially, supported by our phylogenetic data. the terminal branches for s. noctiflora and s. turkestanica exhibited a marked reduction in rs values relative to the ancestral rate for that clade . in contrast, the patterns of divergence within section conoimorpha gave little indication of rate reversions.

the genus silene is characterized by great diversity in breeding system and life history, and there has been substantial interest in how these traits may be related to molecular evolution in mitochondrial genomes  <cit> . there is no clear correlation between breeding system/life history and rate acceleration. the species exhibiting rate acceleration across all four mitochondrial genes are all hermaphroditic/gynomonoecious annuals with the exception of s. turkestanica, which is perennial. however, there are at least ten additional annual lineages represented in our sampling, and breeding system  has yet to be determined for most species.

mutation rate variation among genes
substitution rates commonly differ among regions within a genome because of variation in selection and/or mutational pressure, and a previous study had already identified substantial rate heterogeneity among silene mitochondrial genes  <cit> . nevertheless, the differences in synonymous substitution rates among mitochondrial genes in the current study are surprisingly large. if the six species that show universal acceleration across all four mitochondrial genes are excluded, atp <dig> appears to be evolving more than  <dig> times faster than nad <dig> at synonymous sites, while cox <dig> and atp <dig> fall in between these extremes.

the extreme elevation in atp <dig> substitution rates calls into question whether a biological mechanism other than an increase in the mutation rate might be responsible. the obvious alternatives to explain high levels of divergence include horizontal gene transfer  from distantly related species  <cit> , maintenance of ancient, trans-specific polymorphism by balancing selection  <cit> , re-localization of the gene to the higher mutation rate environment of the nuclear genome  <cit> , or relaxed selection in a non-functional pseudogene  <cit> .

none of these explanations, however, are fully consistent with the data. to explain the observed levels of divergence based on hgt without an increase in evolutionary rates would require multiple phylogenetically distant donor species . phylogenetic analysis of atp <dig>  however, clearly places these sequences within the caryophyllaceae . likewise, in the absence of rate acceleration, an explanation based on balancing selection alone would require that polymorphism be maintained for hundreds of millions of years. such a model seems extremely unlikely and even still could not explain the retention of partial phylogenetic congruence between atp <dig> and matk. of course, the fact that balancing selection alone cannot explain the pattern of divergence in atp <dig> does not rule out the possibility that balancing selection has been acting on atp <dig> and other mitochondrial genes in silene.

it is unlikely that atp <dig> has been functionally transferred to the nucleus in at least four silene species--s. latifolia, s. noctiflora, s. vulgaris and s. paradoxa. whole mitochondrial genome sequences confirm that atp <dig> is mitochondrially encoded in both s. latifolia and s. noctiflora . in addition, the gene has been shown to be maternally inherited in s. vulgaris  <cit> . comparing cdna and genomic sequence also confirms that atp <dig> contains a site that undergoes c-to-u rna editing in s. paradoxa--a process that is characteristic of organellar but not nuclear genes in plants . although we cannot definitively rule out the possibility of nuclear transfer, these data strongly suggest that nuclear transfer is not the driving force behind the pattern of elevated substitution rate observed in atp <dig> 

it is also clear that atp <dig> is functional based on its low ω values and the absence of internal stop codons. therefore, we conclude that the most likely explanation for the high levels of divergence is an increased mutation rate that is specific to atp <dig> .

the molecular evolution of atp <dig> could be influenced by the presence of multiple gene copies in at least some species . the existence of multiple copies could reflect heteroplasmy resulting from paternal leakage  <cit> , non-functional paralogs in the mitochondria or other genomes  <cit> , or the existence of multiple functional mitochondrial copies  <cit> . it is conceivable that atp <dig> is located in a region of active recombination within the silene mitochondrial genome or is experiencing frequent retroprocessing back into the genome from mrna. both of these processes may be mutagenic as well as lead to gene duplication and, therefore, would be consistent with our observations  <cit> . alternatively, high mutations rates in atp <dig> may have simply increased divergence between heteroplasmic and/or paralogous copies, thereby enhancing our ability to detect multiple copies of atp <dig> even though they exist for other genes as well. sequencing complete mitochondrial genomes, analyzing relative copy number of atp <dig> variants, and sampling multiple individuals per species would help distinguish between these possibilities. in a sample of individuals from  <dig> different populations of s. vulgaris, we found  <dig> individuals with multiple atp <dig> copies, and certain variants were only found in multi-copy individuals . this result suggests there is polymorphism for the presence of a paralogous copy within s. vulgaris, although heteroplasmy involving a rare haplotype is also plausible.

the acceleration in atp <dig> appears to be common to most of silene/lychnis. in contrast, most of the other sileneae genera exhibit more conventional substitution rates for atp <dig>  although their rates are still elevated on average. this pattern is consistent with an atp9-specific increase in substitution rate very early in the divergence of silene, which may have been magnified by further accelerations in local areas of the genus.

a previous study of mitochondrial substitution rate variation across the seed plant phylogeny identified a handful of individual species exhibiting elevated divergence in one gene but not others  <cit> . our observations of rate variation in atp <dig> within silene indicate that such gene-specific effects can be maintained across large clades of species over millions of years. we also found that these effects can occur quite locally. most notably, s. nutans exhibited an rs value of  <dig> ssb for atp <dig> , but it showed no sign of acceleration in nad <dig> or cox <dig> . a number of other species showed more modest rate increases in atp <dig> and/or cox <dig> without correlated accelerations in other genes. these patterns may reflect local mutational effects within the genome. alternatively, given the mounting evidence for recombination in plant mtdna  <cit>  and the existence of rate variation both within and among species  <cit> , rate discrepancies between genes may be the result of recombination between genomes with different mutational histories. finally, the possibility of nuclear transfer for a gene such as atp <dig> in s. nutans should also be considered  <cit> .

evolution at synonymous and non-synonymous sites
despite the massive variation in synonymous substitution rates among genes and species, we found that rates of non-synonymous substitution generally remained low . across genes, rs values vary by  <dig> to 41-fold , while rn values vary by only  <dig> to 3-fold . as a result, there is an apparent negative relationship between rs and the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous changes . while rs is commonly interpreted as a measure of the mutation rate, ω is used as an estimate of the intensity/efficacy of purifying selection . under these interpretations, our data would suggest that genes experiencing high mutations rates also face greater purifying selection. in contrast, the opposite pattern has been observed in comparisons of nuclear genes in mammals  <cit> .

the relationship between rs and ω among mitochondrial genes in silene should be confirmed in a larger sample, because we have examined only  <dig> loci in the present study, and atp <dig> may generally be subject to strong purifying selection  <cit> . whether rs and ω can be reliably interpreted as measures of mutation rate and purifying selection depends on the distribution of fitness effects for mutations at synonymous and non-synonymous sites, which are not well understood in plant mitochondrial genomes. these distributions will dictate how the synonymous and non-synonymous substitution rates scale with the mutation rate.

in a comparison of sequence divergence in  <dig> protein-coding mitochondrial genes between angiosperms and the liverwort marchantia, laroche et al.  <cit>  found much greater variation among genes in dn than in ds--the opposite of what we observed. this discrepancy highlights the importance of phylogenetic scale in these studies. across deep nodes in the land plant phylogeny, local differences in gene-specific mutation rates are apparently averaged out, and variation in the magnitude of purifying/positive selection among genes becomes the primary determinant of evolutionary rates. in contrast, at the local phylogenetic scale of our study, the signature of gene-specific differences in mutation rate is apparently maintained.

because of the high variance and abundance of  <dig> values associated with short branches in our analysis, it is difficult to test for the same relationship between rs and ω across lineages that we observed across genes. we did see, however, that removing the rapidly evolving branches from each tree raised the ω ratio for all four genes, suggesting that the same pattern may hold. mower et al.  <cit>  conducted a broad phylogenetic survey of seed plants in which short branch lengths would be expected to be less of a problem. their data showed a strong negative relationship between rs and ω across lineages . therefore, it appears that major increases in mitochondrial synonymous substitution rate--either gene or taxon-specific--are accompanied by a less than proportional increase in non-synonymous substitution rate such that the effects of an apparent increased mutational pressure on amino acid sequences are greatly dampened.

uncertainty in divergence time estimates
we used molecular clock based methods to estimate divergence times in our matk gene tree. the estimated ages were generally older than estimates from two previous studies  <cit> . the discrepancy between these studies is likely attributable to two major differences. first, there is simple difference in calibration age between our study and the analysis of mower et al. , which utilized an age of  <dig> myr for the beta/silene divergence derived from a broader molecular clock analysis of the angiosperms  <cit> . this date appears to be in conflict with our fossil calibration point, as all three of our analyses estimate the age of the beta/silene split to be at least  <dig> myr old. this distinction, however, cannot explain the contrasting results between our study and that of frajman et al.  <cit> , because we used essentially the same calibration point. instead, we note that there was a significant difference in sampling schemes between these two studies. our focus on the genus silene produced a very imbalanced topology with much denser branching in certain parts of the tree than others. in contrast, frajman et al.  <cit>  utilized a much more balanced phylogenetic sampling. because it is easier to detect multiple substitutions at the same site in regions with lots of branching, there is a tendency to estimate longer branch lengths in species-rich parts of a phylogeny . this effect may contribute to our older age estimates within the tribe sileneae. because of this potential bias, the uncertainty over calibration points and the many assumptions associated with molecular clock based dating, it is important to stress that the divergence times used in this analysis should be considered only as approximations.

divergence time estimates are necessary to calculate absolute substitution rates, so dating uncertainty should be considered in comparing absolute rates across studies. for example, re-calibrating node ages within silene to correspond with the  <dig> myr divergence time for the genus estimated by frajman et al.  <cit>  would increase our substitution rate estimates by approximately 50%. in relative terms, however, our three dating analyses were quite consistent within sileneae. therefore, our estimates of proportional variation in substitution rate across species and genes are less sensitive to dating method.

CONCLUSIONS
based on our analysis of mitochondrial divergence within the tribe sileneae, we conclude that mutational acceleration is not restricted to a single species nor is it completely confined to a small number of high rate lineages. the patterns of divergence in atp <dig> illustrated that elevated rates have been maintained throughout much of the genus silene for at least one mitochondrial gene, highlighting a complex gene × species interaction in the distribution of rate variation. the diversity in phylogenetic and genomics scale suggests that there is no simple rule or single mechanism underlying mutation rate variation in plant mitochondrial genomes. elucidating the mechanistic forces that shape mutation rate variation should represent a high priority in the field of plant mitochondrial genomics. silene was targeted for this in-depth sampling of species-level mitochondrial divergence because of a priori knowledge of the rate acceleration in s. noctiflora. determining whether the patterns of rate variation among species and among genes in silene are broadly representative of angiosperm genera or represent something unique about the molecular evolution of silene will require similar levels of sampling in taxa that currently show no evidence of rate increase.

