BACKGROUND
membrane-bound extracellular vesicles , are referred to by various terms in the literature, including microvesicles or microparticles. however, they may be divided into two main types formed either by budding of the plasma membrane  or by exocytosis of multivesicular bodies    <cit> . while it is important to recognize that these two main populations of evs have distinct biogenesis pathways, it remains technically challenging to isolate their respective pure populations due to their overlapping size distributions and most preparations are therefore heterogeneous  <cit> . evs are targeted to specific recipient cells by surface receptors which mediate their internalisation and uptake of their content, comprising lipids, proteins, mrnas and micrornas   <cit> . a significant physiological role for evs is supported by their implication in cancer progression, angiogenesis, cell reprogramming and differentiation  <cit> .

mirnas are a class of small rna molecules that regulate gene expression by binding to specific mrna targets and triggering their degradation or inhibiting their translation. primary mirnas , transcribed either as independent genes or as introns of coding genes, are processed to form precursor hairpin loops  and then mature mirnas by the rnase iii enzymes drosha and dicer respectively. one strand of the mature mirna is loaded into an rna induced silencing complex , which mediates the interaction between the mirna and its target mrna molecules. argonaute  proteins are part of the risc and mediate cleavage of target mrnas  <cit> .

recently, mirnas have been found extracellularly, being encapsulated within vesicles , or associated with ago <dig> or npm <dig> proteins or high-density lipoproteins   <cit> . ev preparations isolated by ultracentrifugation are heterogeneous and include both exosomes and other vesicles. extracellular mirnas have emerged as prognostic markers for various diseases, such as cancer and cardiovascular disorders  <cit> . recent studies have demonstrated that mirnas can be shuttled between cells in evs and modulate gene expression  <cit>  and control different physiological functions in the recipients  <cit> .

it has been shown that mirna export into exosomes occurs via the ceramide-dependent secretory pathway and independently of the endosomal sorting complex required for transport   <cit> . although the mechanism of release of shedding vesicles is less well known, the role of p4-atpase and escrt has been recognized recently  <cit> . several studies have suggested that the mirna content of evs does not simply reflect the mirna repertoire of the cells of origin and that some mirnas are selectively exported or retained within the cell  <cit> . however, the mechanism whereby specific mirnas are selectively exported is unknown.

the potential for exploiting extracellular vesicles as vehicles for delivery of therapeutic molecules has been appreciated  <cit> . for example, evs prepared from a patient’s own cells could potentially be enriched with specific sirnas and/or mirnas and used as a tool for therapeutic delivery of these regulatory rna molecules. alternatively, the therapeutic effect could be achieved by transplanting cells engineered to over-express critical mirnas, which are delivered to the target cells via evs <cit> . to most effectively harness evs as therapeutic tools, it will be crucial to understand and control how they are loaded with regulatory rnas.

as a step towards understanding the mechanism of selective export of mirnas to evs we have applied deep sequencing to characterize the global expression pattern of small rnas in hek293t cells and the evs that they release. although the enrichment of overexpressed mirna in evs has been shown by rt-qpcr in hek293t cells, mesenchymal stem cells, macrophages and immune cells  <cit> , it is not known to what extent overexpressed mirnas are exported into evs and how they affect the export of endogenous mirnas. to address these questions, small rnas from cells transfected with mir-146a expressing plasmid and their evs were also subjected to deep sequencing. ectopic overexpression of mir-146a in hek293t exosomes was previously shown to exert a functional effect upon recipient cells, including downregulation of target gene expression  <cit> .

comparison of our data with other publicly available data sets of mirna expression in cells and their evs revealed a subset of mirnas that tend to be preferentially exported in various cell types, suggesting a common function in intercellular communication.

RESULTS
evs from hek293t cells were obtained by ultracentifugation of conditioned media at 100000 g. the presence of spherical membrane bound structures of variable diameter up to approximately  <dig> nm in these preparations was confirmed by transmission electron microscopy . rna extracted from cells and evs was analyzed on a bioanalyzer . the shape of the rna profiles observed when comparing rna from psm30-mir-146a transfected cells and evs and their non-transfected counterparts were similar . total rna from evs was enriched in small rnas and lacked ribosomal rna peaks typical for cell rna profiles . analysis of the small rna profiles of ev samples revealed enrichment of sequences of the size expected for mirnas, with a peak at approximately  <dig> nt.

to compare the global mirna profile of non-transfected and psm30-mir-146a transfected cells and their evs, small rna libraries were prepared and sequenced on an illumina genome analyzer. raw reads were subjected to adaptor removal and aligned to mirbase   <cit> . both raw and processed data has been deposited in gene expression omnibus , with accession number gse <dig>  the total numbers of reads > <dig> bp matching each mirna were calculated. these values were then normalized to number of reads per million mapped  in each library, to enable direct comparison of expression levels. as a measure of the relative levels of expression of individual mirnas in cells and evs, the log  of the ratio of the read number in evs over that in cells was calculated ). the mirna expression data for cells and evs is presented in additional file 1: table s <dig> 

the enrichment of mir-146a in cells and evs following transfection with psm30-mir-146a was striking: mir-146a was enriched from  <dig> rpmm  to  <dig>  rpmm  in cells and from  <dig>  rpmm  to  <dig>  rpmm  in evs. sequencing revealed that overexpressed mir-146a was correctly processed, with the most prevalent isomir being the same in all cell and ev libraries  and represented by approximately half of the reads. rt-qpcr from independent psm30-mir-146a transfections confirmed consistently high overexpression of mir-146a in both cells and evs .

to evaluate how the overexpression of mir-146a affected the proportions of other, endogenous mirnas, we excluded reads for mir-146a from transfected cells and evs and re-normalized the expression values of all other mirnas to reads per million mapped . this enabled direct comparison between read numbers in transfected and non-transfected cells and evs. this re-normalisation revealed extremely high correlation between mirna expression values in non-transfected and transfected cells  . moreover, high correlation was also observed between evs from non-transfected and transfected cells  . however, correlation between both transfected and non-transfected cells and their respective evs was much lower  . from all mirnas that had been detected in both non-transfected cells and evs, only  <dig> % had log <dig>  between − <dig> and + <dig>  therefore being represented by similar number of reads in cells and evs.

the mirnas preferentially retained within the cell or released in evs are highly consistent even after over-expression; a scatter plot of log <dig> ratios of mirnas represented by more than  <dig> reads either in cells or evs revealed relatively high correlation . the most retained and most released mirnas which are represented by more than  <dig> reads either in cells or in evs are listed in tables  <dig> and  <dig> respectively. mir- <dig> was found to be the most retained and mir- <dig> the most exported mirna. if mirnas are incorporated passively into evs as a random sample of the cellular population one would expect the ratios of ev:cell expression values to be approximately 1: <dig> when both values are normalized to million reads mapped  centred on zero). however, we observed a skewed distribution , with more mirnas represented by higher rpmm values in evs than cells  ratio). the values of the positive ratios representing the most released mirnas, were more extreme than the most negative values. however, several very highly expressed mirnas had negative values .

those mirnas represented by at least  <dig> reads in either cells or ev are listed. * for the transfected cells and evs the rpmm values were calculated after removal of the reads from over-expressed mir-146a, to facilitate comparison with non-transfected samples .

those mirnas represented by at least  <dig> reads in either cells or ev are listed. * for the transfected cells and evs the rpmm values were calculated after removal of the reads from over-expressed mir-146a, to facilitate comparison with non-transfected samples.

to confirm sequencing data, we performed rt-qpcr on rna samples isolated from biological replicates of non-transfected and psm30mir-146a transfected cells and their evs. mir-26a was chosen for normalization of the rt-qpcr data because this mirna had relatively high expression  and the numbers of reads in cells and evs were similar . the mirna ev:cell ratios obtained by pcr correlated with sequencing data and confirmed retained and exported mirnas .

the most highly exported mirna in evs in our data, mir- <dig>  was also reported previously to be highly exported from breast cancer cells lines and mesenchymal stem cells  <cit> . this was intriguing, and it prompted us to speculate that the same mirnas may be preferentially exported or retained in various cell types. we therefore tested two other cell types, namely a human microvascular endothelial cell line,  and primary outgrowth endothelial progenitor cells  with the same panel of primers used to confirm sequencing data in hek293t cells. for the  <dig> mirnas expressed in both endothelial cells and evs the proportions retained or released followed a similar pattern to that observed in hek293t cells . two mirnas, mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> were not detected and mir- <dig> was not detected in endothelial evs.

to obtain a broader view of mirna export in various cells types, we retrieved publicly available data  on mirna expression in various cell types and their evs . the ratios  between the expression levels in evs and cells were calculated and the mirnas ranked accordingly. comparison of the ranks of the mirnas present in our data with their ranks in the other datasets revealed correlations between the different cell types. this was visualized by assigning a color for each mirna according to its rank in a particular data set: figure 6a shows the ranks of the top and bottom  <dig> mirnas sorted according to the data from hek293t non-transfected cells . mir- <dig>  the most highly enriched mirna in hek293t evs, was among the top  <dig> exported mirnas in  <dig> out of  <dig> of the other datasets.

mir- <dig> is the only reported mirna that is not processed by dicer, but instead uses an ago2-mediated pathway for its maturation  <cit> . it is tempting to speculate that this unique processing pathway might be connected with the high extracellular export of mir- <dig>  in this case one might expect the most exported mirnas to also be the most affected by loss of ago <dig> activity. we therefore ranked mirnas according to the reduction in their expression in bone marrow of ago <dig> ko mice compared to the wild type  <cit> . remarkably, in addition to mir- <dig>  several other mirnas among the top  <dig> affected by the ago <dig> deletion  were also found to be highly exported in several data sets  in figure 6).

as an initial step towards understanding the function of the preferentially exported mirnas we attempted to determine the genes which are being targeted by these mirnas. it is difficult to predict these interactions with certainty, but the algorithms available are improving. we employed microt-cds, which has recently been shown to perform well in terms of sensitivity and specificity compared to other available algorithms  <cit> . the  <dig> genes predicted to be targeted by one or more of the ten most selectively exported mirnas are listed in additional file 3: table s <dig>  functional analysis of these genes revealed that the most enriched pathway was endocytosis   which contained  <dig> predicted target genes . all the enriched pathways and gene ontologies are listed in additional file 4: table s <dig> as well as clusters of functionally related terms, which include transcriptional regulation, intracellular transport and organelles. recently developed techniques based upon crosslinking of risc proteins with their target mrnas have facilitated experimental determination of mirna:target interactions  <cit> . therefore, to complement the in silico target prediction, the genes with target sites for the same  <dig> most exported mirnas predicted by any algorithm that are supported experimentally by clip-seq reads available in starbase  <cit>  were downloaded . these genes were also significantly enriched in the endocytosis pathway  and because only three of the predicted target genes in this pathway are common  the in silico and experimental predictions provide largely independent associations with endocytosis. from the total of  <dig> microt-cds and  <dig> starbase predicted target genes  <dig> were common.

discussion
mirnas are involved in regulation of a wide array of biological processes, from development to immunity. extracellular and circulating mirnas have been found both in the non-vesicular fraction and encapsulated in evs. they have been shown to associate with lipids  and proteins . while the role of ev mirnas in cell-to-cell communication has now been widely accepted  <cit>  and hdl-mediated mirna transfer has been shown to regulate recipient cell gene expression  <cit> , there is still no direct evidence that mirnas associated with proteins act in a paracrine fashion  <cit> .

realisation of the potential importance of mirnas in cell-to-cell communication has triggered research into the mechanisms of mirna release and their effects upon recipient cells  <cit> . evidence is accumulating that mirna export into evs is selective, but it is not known how this export is regulated. several studies have compared the mirna content of cells and evs using microarrays or rt-qpcr. deep sequencing is an alternative approach for measuring mirna expression which has the advantage of providing a digital measure that does not require an internal standard for normalisation. this is particularly important when comparing mirna levels between cells and evs, where no common internal standards have been identified. although several previous studies have applied deep sequencing in similar scenarios, they involved fewer reads and the expression of only selected mirnas was reported  <cit> . here we report a global comparison of the mirna pools in hek293t cells and their evs. our analysis confirmed previous observations that some mirnas are preferentially exported and found to be enriched in evs.

enrichment of a mirna in evs after its overexpression in cells has been measured previously by rt-qpcr. however, it is important to reveal how such overexpression compares with and affects expression and export of endogenous mirnas. we found overexpressed mir-146a to contribute almost a third of all reads in cells and even more in evs, representing almost half of their cargo. it is very important for the mirna therapeutic field to understand the consequence of mirna overexpression. our data suggest that if a mirna is overexpressed in a specific cell type the possibility that a significant amount of this mirna will be exported and potentially affect other cells should be considered. although we cannot assess the effect of mir-146a overexpression upon the absolute expression of other mirnas, this effect is likely to be similar in both cells and evs. however, our data demonstrates that the relative expression levels of endogenous mirnas  remain very stable and are largely unaffected by the mirna overexpression. the fact that selective mirna export is tightly regulated suggests that it plays an important role in cell physiology. this will be an important consideration not only for further studies into the mechanism of mirna export but also for the development of methods for enrichment of evs with mirna for therapies. it is possible that the overexpressed mirna and endogenous mirnas use different export routes and therefore do not affect each other. since our ev preparation does not distinguish between exosomes and shedding vesicles we cannot exclude that one of these is preferentially used to carry overexpressed mirna. fractionation of evs will be necessary to further examine this possibility. nevertheless, there may be an overlap between the two pathways, as a recent study has suggested that shedding vesicles and exosomes require the same gtpase  and escrt proteins for their biogenesis and therefore may be regulated by the same mechanisms, regardless of their distinct cellular localization  <cit> .

comparison of our data with publicly available expression sets from other cell types revealed that some mirnas tend to be universally exported. it is possible that this reflects release of the same type of vesicles  by all the cell types analysed. the commonly exported mirnas possibly fulfill a common function in intercellular communication. mir- <dig> was found to be the mirna with the highest ratio between expression levels in evs and cells. in relation to its maturation mir- <dig> is a non-canonical mirna, processed by the ago <dig> protein, in contrast to other mirnas that commonly require dicer for this process  <cit> . ago <dig> has been shown previously to be associated with both ev and non-vesicular mirnas  <cit> . comparison of mirna expression between cells and their ev counterparts from other published data sets reveals mir- <dig> to be one of the most highly exported mirnas in multiple cell types. deletion of ago <dig> in bone marrow leads to reduced expression of several other mirnas in addition to mir- <dig>  <cit> , notably some of the mirnas that are most preferentially exported from various different cell types. these data suggest that there may be a connection between ago <dig> processing and the selection of mirnas for export. recent studies have demonstrated the physical colocalisation of risc and mvbs and their functional interactions in regulating mirna loading and rna silencing  <cit> . being a key component of risc, ago <dig> may potentially be involved in directing mirna towards exosomal secretion. however it has not been investigated whether ago <dig> mediated mir- <dig> processing also occurs within risc and in colocalisation with mvb membrane, or in another subcellular compartment. future studies are required to characterize mirna export into specific ev populations and must also address the challenge of dissecting the function of ago <dig> in mirna processing from its potential role in mirna export.

CONCLUSIONS
specific endogenous mirnas, most notably mir- <dig> are selectively released from hek293t cells in evs by a process that may involve ago <dig>  conservation amongst the mirnas exported by different cells suggests that this process may be widely used to regulate similar target cell functions. enrichment in genes involved in endocytosis amongst the targets of the most selectively exported mirnas suggests that these functions may include intercellular vesicular transport itself. the demonstration that ev mirna content can be manipulated by cellular overexpression of a specific mirna bodes well for future therapeutic use of this system to deliver mirnas/sirnas to target cells.

