BACKGROUND
polypodium hydriforme is an endocellular parasite whose unusual life cycle, peculiar morphology, and high rates of dna evolution, have led to much controversy regarding its phylogenetic position within metazoans  <cit> . polypodium spends most of its life inside the oocytes of acipenseriform fishes . during this time, polypodium develops from a binucleate cell into an inside-out planuliform larva and then into an elongate inside-out stolon; the epidermal cell layer is located internal to the body and the gastrodermis is located externally  <cit> . the embryo, larva and stolon are surrounded by a protective polyploid cell, which also functions in digestion  <cit> . just prior to host spawning, polypodium everts to the normal position of cell layers, revealing tentacles scattered along the stolon. during eversion, the yolk of the host oocyte fills the gastral cavities of the parasite, supplying the future free-living stage with nutrients  <cit> . finally, upon emerging from the host egg in fresh water, the free-living stolon  fragments into individual medusoid-like forms  that go on to multiply by means of longitudinal fission, form sexual organs, and ultimately infect host fish with their gametophores  <cit> .

two conflicting hypotheses have been proposed regarding the phylogenetic placement of polypodium. the first, more traditional hypothesis is that polypodium is a cnidarian. some have suggested it is nested within a derived group of hydrozoans, the narcomedusae  <cit>  or the cnidarian class scyphozoa  <cit> ; while others have suggested it belongs to a separate cnidarian class, polypodiozoa  <cit> . the assignment of polypodium to cnidaria is based primarily on morphological evidence, most notably the fact that polypodium possesses nematocysts  <cit> , the stinging structures characteristic of all cnidarians. in addition, the presence of tentacles and overall body-plan organization of polypodium are reminiscent of cnidarians, although it is unclear if the adult free-living stage is homologous to a polyp or medusa stage. this hypothesis is supported by a cladistic analysis of small subunit nuclear ribosomal dna  sequences in conjunction with morphological characters   <cit> . in this study, polypodium falls within the medusozoan clade of cnidarians, although the non-cnidarian placozoan, trichoplax  <cit> , also fell within this clade, rendering cnidaria paraphyletic.

the second hypothesis is that polypodium is the sister taxon to myxozoa, a diverse group of parasites in aquatic animals, and that polypodium + myxozoa is the sister group to bilateria  <cit> . this hypothesis is derived from cladistic analyses utilizing 18s rdna sequences  <cit> . however, because polypodium and myxozoans have unusually high divergence rates in their 18s rdna sequences, these cladistic analyses have been criticized by a number of authors who suggest that the data might be unduly affected by long-branch attraction   <cit> . despite some attempts to overcome the effects of lba through the use of a maximum likelihood  approach  <cit>  and pruning long branches  <cit> , these results have been largely silent on the placement of polypodium. for instance, kim et al.  <cit>  applied a maximum likelihood approach to 18s rdna sequence data and found that myxozoans and polypodium did not group together. instead, polypodium was part of an unresolved polytomy that included several cnidarian lineages and trichoplax, as well as myxozoans + bilateria. most recently, jimenez-guri et al.  <cit>  utilized multiple protein-coding gene sequences in a ml analysis and found the myxozoan, buddenbrockia plumatellae nested within cnidarians. unfortunately, this study had relatively limited sampling of cnidarians and did not include polypodium.

in an attempt to resolve this controversy, we sequenced an additional marker in polypodium, a partial gene sequence of the large nuclear ribosomal unit , and greatly expanded the taxonomic sampling of cnidarian sequences. using this approach, we provide evidence that polypodium is nested within cnidaria and does not group with myxozoans.

RESULTS
sampled taxa
all taxa used in this study are arranged taxonomically in table  <dig>   <dig> sequences were obtained from genbank.  <dig> new cnidarian sequences for 18s and  <dig> for 28s  were generated for this study and deposited in genbank . polypodium hydriforme sequences were obtained from both north american and eurasian hosts. eurasian samples were collected from two individuals of acipenser ruthenus. north american samples were collected from polyodon spathula and scaphirhynchus platorynchus. this is the first reported presence of polypodium infection in scaphirhynchinae. while polypodium was recovered from the oocytes of s. platorynchus, the sample from which we extracted sequence data was found externally attached to its presumed host. more specific collection data for polypodium specimens are associated with each sequence submitted to genbank .

a complete list of sequences used in the analyses with genbank accession numbers and museum voucher numbers. bold numbers indicate new sequences generated for this study. kumip = university of kansas museum of invertebrate paleontology, kunhm = university of kansas natural history museum, mhng = muséum d'histoire naturelle de genève, ypm = yale peabody museum, usnm = us national museum of natural history.

all polypodium sequences were newly generated for this study. we did not include the previously published 18s polypodium sequence  because of concern over the quality of the sequence which included a number of ambiguities. furthermore, while the two new polypodium 18s sequences  differed from each other by a total of  <dig> sites they differed from #u <dig> by  <dig> and  <dig> sites respectively. these differences included a large number of insertions and deletions. the two new 28s sequences  only differed from each other by  <dig> sites.

position of polypodium
the complete combined dataset of 18s rdna and partial 28s rdna contains  <dig> characters,  <dig> of which are variable and  <dig> parsimony informative. both the ml and parsimony topologies reconstructed from the combined dataset suggest that polypodium is nested within a monophyletic cnidaria, and myxozoans are the sister taxon to bilaterians . the ml bootstrap values supporting a monophyletic cnidaria , a monophyletic medusozoa  and the polypodium + hydrozoan clade are  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> respectively . parsimony analysis of the combined dataset differs from that of ml in that polypodium is nested within a group of hydrozoans, the leptothecates . the parsimony bootstrap values supporting a monophyletic cnidaria and hydrozoa, with polypodium nested within these clades are  <dig> and  <dig> respectively . the clade nested within hydrozoans, that includes polypodium + leptothecates is weakly supported in the sub-sampling tests with a bootstrap value of less than  <dig> 

the analyses using partial 28s rdna sequences alone  contains  <dig> characters,  <dig> of which are parsimony informative. the ml topology using this dataset reveals polypodium nested within cnidaria, specifically within leptothecate hydrozoans, . this analysis however fails to recover a monophyletic cnidaria, as the anthozoans are placed outside the cnidaria + bilateria clade. analysis of the 18s rdna dataset alone  under both optimality criteria conflicts with the combined and partial 28s topologies. the 18s rdna topology for both criteria place polypodium at the base of bilateria . however, the ml topology also reflects a sister relationship between polypodium and myxozoans  while the parsimony topology does not . moreover, under parsimony criteria the position of myxozoans is dependent upon how gaps are coded: if gaps are coded as a fifth character state, myxozoans are placed as a highly derived clade of bilaterians ; if gaps are coded as missing, myxozoans are placed as sister to all metazoans . the 18s analysis showing placement of polypodium with bilateria, and more specifically as sister to myxozoans, is consistent with previously reported studies using the same marker  <cit> , but raises similar concerns of long-branch attraction  <cit> .

test of long-branch attraction
myxozoans and polypodium have unusually high rates of evolution in their 18s and 28s rdna sequences relative to the other sampled taxa. to investigate the influence of myxozoans on the placement of polypodium, we removed the myxozoans from our three datasets and re-ran each analysis. under the ml analysis of 18s rdna, the removal of myxozoans results in the placement of polypodium nested within cnidaria . this result suggests that the placement of polypodium at the base of bilaterians in the 18s analysis  was indeed an artifact of lba. the placement of polypodium within cnidaria was not effected by the removal of myxozoans in the 28s  and combined datasets .

to investigate the possible role of lba on myxozoan placement, we removed polypodium from the combined ml analyses and found that it did not affect the position of myxozoa at the base of the bilateria . given that bilaterians also form long branches, we tried removing all bilaterian sequences in the combined ml analysis. this resulted in a myxozoa + polypodium clade nested within cnidaria . however, when polypodium and bilaterians were removed, myxozoans fell outside the cnidarians . similar effects of myxozoan placement to long-branches were also found in parsimony analyses of the combined dataset .

discussion
polypodium is a cnidarian
our metazoan dataset of 18s and partial 28s rdna sequences, with a large taxonomic sample of cnidarians, places polypodium within a monophyletic cnidaria. this accords with the fact that polypodium possesses nematocysts  <cit>  and a cnidarian-like body plan  <cit> . the precise placement of polypodium within cnidaria is less certain. the ml combined analysis places polypodium as sister to hydrozoa , a hypothesis consistent with the suggestion that polypodium be considered a separate class of cnidarians, polypodiozoa  <cit> . by contrast, the combined parsimony analysis  and the ml analyses of 28s alone  place polypodium within the hydrozoan clade leptothecata. given that leptothecates have relatively high rates of evolution within hydrozoans, one possible explanation for the conflicting hypotheses is that the placement of polypodium within leptothecates is an artifact of lba and that the combined data, in conjunction with the ml approach , overcame this localized lba artifact.

evolution of polypodium life-history characters
although the fresh water habitat of polypodium is unusual for cnidarians, it is not unheard of, especially within hydrozoans. for instance, the model organism hydra and the jellyfish craspedacusta are both exclusively fresh-water hydrozoans. hydra and craspedacusta are distantly related  <cit>  and our analyses do not indicate a close phylogenetic affinity of polypodium to either of the clades containing these taxa. thus, it appears that in the evolution of cnidarians, invasion to fresh-water habitats has happened at least three separate times.

although polypodium is the only known intracellular cnidarian parasite, other cnidarians have adopted parasitic life-styles  <cit> . for example, parasites belonging to the narcomedusae  have been reported to live in the stomach cavities of other narcomedusae  <cit>  and anthomedusae  <cit> . in addition, the sea anemone edwardsiella lineata parasitizes the stomach cavity of the ctenophore mnemiopsis leidyi  <cit>  and the anemone peachia quinquecapitata is reported to parasitize the stomachs of hydromedusa  <cit> .

effects of long-branch attraction
the well-documented effects of long-branch attraction artifacts  are particularly concerning when investigating relationships amongst early-diverging metazoans, where rates between lineages vary greatly  <cit> . suggestions for avoiding lba artifacts include choice of appropriate markers  <cit> , increased taxonomic sampling to effectively break up long branches  <cit>  and utilization of best-fit models that incorporate rate variation  <cit> . previous conflicting reports that show polypodium and myxozoans form a sister taxon to bilateria  <cit>  can be explained by limited taxon sampling and an inadequate number of informative characters in their analyses, both of which confound long-branch problems. in this study, the increased taxonomic sampling of cnidarians and the addition of 28s rdna sequence data proved critical to placing the highly divergent polypodium taxon within cnidaria. the choice of optimality criteria  both supported polypodium as a cnidarian but did affect the placement within cnidaria.

polypodium and myxozoa
our analyses are inconclusive in the placement of myxozoa within metazoans. we found that myxozoans consistently grouped with long-branched taxa and that removal of long-branches resulted in myxozoans being placed to the next longest branch. for example myxozoans group with polypodium in the absence of bilateria and group with bilateria in the absence of polypodium .

jimenez-guri et al.  <cit>  sampled the myxozoan, buddenbrockia, and found it to fall within cnidaria, as the sister group to two hydrozoan representatives and a single scyphozoan. previous studies have suggested a sister group relationship between cnidarians and myxozoans  <cit> , and some morphological evidence has been used to support this view  <cit> . although our present study does not support this relationship, further investigation is merited. myxozoans are a highly diverse group  that comprise two clades, the myxosporea and the malacosporea  <cit> . we were only able to include 28s rdna sequences from myxosporeans, although the malacosporean buddenbrockia was included in our 18s analysis and found to group with other myxozoans and outside of cnidaria. future studies with a comprehensive sampling of myxozoans together with polypodium, in a dataset that includes a large taxonomic sampling of cnidarians, should shed further light on the relationships between myxozoans and polypodium.

CONCLUSIONS
although previous molecular phylogenetic hypotheses conflicted with the traditional interpretation of cnidarian affinity for polypodium, the molecular evidence we present, using an augmented dataset, ultimately confirms and reconciles this traditional hypothesis and suggests that polypodium is indeed a cnidarian. this study also reaffirms the importance to large taxonomic sampling and inclusion of additional informative characters for avoiding long-branch attraction artifacts.

