BACKGROUND
understanding the crosstalk between the microbiota and the intestinal epithelium is essential because of the involvement of the intestinal microbiota in human health  <cit> . about 90% of the bacterial community that composes the intestinal microbiota and colonizes the gastrointestinal tract  are members of the phyla bacteroidetes or firmicutes  <cit> . b. thetaiotaomicron is a gram negative bacterium, belonging to the bacteroides genus from the bacteroidetes phylum. faecalibacterium prausnitzii is a gram positive bacterium, in the clostridium leptum group from the firmicutes phylum. these two species are metabolically complementary: b. thetaiotaomicron is an acetate producer whereas f. praunistzii is an acetate consumer and a butyrate producer  <cit> . both are major components of the intestinal microbiota and, therefore, contribute to the interactions between the microbiota and the git. to establish a relevant simplified model of microbiota, we studied these two commensal bacteria as functional members of the microbiome influencing host metabolism  <cit> .

the intestinal mucus layer is located at the interface between the intestinal epithelium and the microbiota; it is, therefore, a key factor in the crosstalk between the intestinal epithelium and the microbiota and, hence, in the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis. disruption of this protective layer may lead to inflammation  <cit> . mucus is continuously secreted into the git lumen by specialized epithelial cells, the goblet cells, and is mainly composed of heavily o-glycosylated proteins called mucins  <cit> . the number and function of goblet cells are modulated by the microbiota  <cit> . however, neither the species nor the mechanisms involved in this process have been described. the microbiota expresses a wide range of carbohydrate-degrading enzymes which process otherwise indigestible dietary compounds and mucus polysaccharides  <cit> . the host genome does not encode homologs of many of these enzymes, evidence of the complementarity between host and microbiota and illustrating the adaptation of the intestinal microbiota to the host digestive environment  <cit> . b. thetaiotaomicron possesses a large repertoire of genes involved in sensing and hydrolyzing numerous diet- and host-derived polysaccharides  <cit> . according to nutrient availability, b. thetaiotaomicron can redirect its metabolism from dietary polysaccharides to host-derived polysaccharides, including mucus, and vice versa, and further refine its niche specificity  <cit> . this ability of b. thetaiotaomicron to grow on mucus contributes to its colonization and persistence in the git  <cit> . although the ability of b. thetaiotaomicron to use polysaccharides from mucus has been described, little is known about its effect on goblet cells.

f. prausnitzii has been only poorly described in vivo; it is extremely oxygen sensitive and thus difficult to cultivate. nevertheless, various observations link f. prausnitzii with health status. f. prausnitzii is of particular physiological importance because it can be considered as a sensor and a marker of human health  <cit> . intestinal disorders, such as inflammatory bowel diseases  <cit> , irritable bowel syndrome  <cit> , colorectal cancer  <cit>  and obesity  <cit>  have all been reported to be associated with a diminished prevalence and abundance of f. prausnitzii. moreover, several diseases have been shown to be associated with abnormal bacteroidetes to firmicutes ratios  <cit> . therefore, analysis of the species b. thetaiotaomicron and f. prausnitzii may be informative about the crosstalk between the host and microbiota. the first objective of our work was to determine whether b. thetaiotaomicron affects goblet cell differentiation, mucin synthesis and glycosylation in the colonic epithelium. we then investigated how f. prausnitzii influences the colonic epithelial responses to b. thetaiotaomicron. for this study, we developed a new model based on b. thetaiotaomicron and f. prausnitzii di-associated gnotobiotic rodents to show metabolic cooperation between these species. this work illustrates how two bacteria, representative of the two main phyla, can modulate the mucus profile in the colon.

RESULTS
establishment of a model of bacteroides thetaiotaomicron mono-associated rats stable as early as  <dig> days and up to  <dig> days after inoculation
b. thetaiotaomicron colonized the git of recipient germfree  rats quickly and stably: the maximum count,  <dig> cfu/g of content, was attained with one day of inoculation and was maintained for at least  <dig> days . scanning electron microscopy of cecal contents of bt-2d  and bt-30d  rats revealed b. thetaiotaomicron as short bacilli with rounded ends ; the bacteria were associated with luminal contents, food-residue particles and shed mucus, consistent with previous descriptions in the distal gut intestine  <cit> . the cell surface of b. thetaiotaomicron differed between bt-2d rats and bt-30d rats. most of the bacteria in bt-2d rats but not those in bt-30d rats exhibited granules on the cell surface . the presence of b. thetaiotaomicron was associated with the cecal-content ph being much lower than that in controls . short-chain fatty acid  production by b. thetaiotaomicron was investigated: acetate and propionate was produced within two days of implantation but no butyrate was produced . thus, two days after inoculation, b. thetaiotaomicron was stably and abundantly implanted and was metabolically active.

b. thetaiotaomicron modulates the cell signaling pathway in the colon by favoring goblet cell differentiation
histological staining of the colonic epithelium from bt-2d and bt-30d mono-associated rats and from gf rats showed that there were no significant differences in general morphology, crypt depth or total numbers of cells per crypt . b. thetaiotaomicron is specialized in the degradation of polysaccharides, notably those of mucus. we, therefore, analyzed goblet cell counts and differentiation. the numbers of goblet cells stained either by alcian blue  or periodic-acid schiff , specific for acidic and neutral mucopolysaccharides, respectively, were significantly higher in bt-2d and bt-30d rats than gf rats . similarly, the amount of klf <dig> protein, a transcription factor involved in goblet cell terminal differentiation  <cit> , was higher in bt-2d and bt-30d than gf rats . also, muc <dig>  muc <dig>  c1galt <dig> and b4galt <dig> mrnas, encoding proteins involved in mucin synthesis and glycosylation, were significantly more abundant in bt-2d and bt-30d rats than in gf rats . the klf <dig> mrna level was higher in bt-2d, but not in bt-30d, than in controls . the amount of chromogranin a protein, a marker of enteroendocrine cells, another population of differentiated cells of the secretory lineage, was lower in bt-30d rats than in control rats . thus, b. thetaiotaomicron appears to stimulate the goblet cell differentiation pathway of the secretory lineage.

relative abundance of muc <dig>  muc <dig>  klf <dig>  c1galt <dig>  b4galt <dig>  st3gal <dig>  st6galnac <dig>  gal3st <dig> and chst <dig> mrnas in germfree  , bt-2d , bt-30d  and bt + fp-30d . means with different letters  are significantly different ; n.d., not detected.

acetate, a bacterial metabolite produced by b. thetaiotaomicron, modulates goblet cells in vitro
the main metabolites produced by b. thetaiotaomicron in the git were acetate  and propionate  . we evaluated the effects of these bacterial metabolites on the amount of klf <dig> protein produced by the mucus-producing cell line ht29-mtx  <cit> . the amount of klf <dig> protein was higher in the presence than in the absence of acetate   whereas propionate  and butyrate  had no effect . the amount of butyrate-responsive protein, p <dig>  <cit> , was increased by incubation of ht29-mtx cells with butyrate and there were similar trends with propionate and acetate . thus, consistent with the findings in vivo in the presence of b. thetaiotaomicron , klf <dig> protein production in vitro was up-regulated by acetate, the major metabolite produced by b. thetaiotaomicron. however, the stimulation was lower in vitro than in vivo.

metabolic cooperation between b. thetaiotaomicron and faecalibacterium prausnitzii in vitro and in vivo
bacterial metabolites are essential for epithelium homeostasis  <cit> . we investigated whether the effects of b. thetaiotaomicron are modulated in the presence of f. prausnitzii which is a major butyrate-producer and acetate-consumer  <cit> .

we first checked in vitro that b. thetaiotaomicron produced acetate and propionate and that f. prausnitzii consumed acetate and produced butyrate . when both bacteria were grown together, butyrate was produced rather than acetate. the butyrate production by f. prausnitzii was higher in the presence than absence of b. thetaiotaomicron  suggesting that f. prausnitzii synthesized butyrate from the acetate produced by b. thetaiotaomicron. we thus developed an experimental model of associated b. thetaiotaomicron and f. prausnitzii in rats . two single consecutive inoculations of the two bacteria did not lead to a stable di-associated model. inoculation with f. prausnitzii was thus repeated weekly  but it became implanted only after week  <dig>  from week  <dig> to week  <dig>  a stable balance was maintained between the two bacteria, with b. thetaiotaomicron counts being 100-fold higher. in these bt + fp-30d rats, there was less acetate and more butyrate than in bt-30d rats:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm acetate,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm propionate and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm butyrate in the cecal contents of bt + fp-30d rats, versus  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm acetate,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm propionate and no butyrate in bt-30d rats . f. prausnitzii is an extremely oxygen-sensitive bacterium. we, therefore, monitored the eh value, reflecting the oxido-reduction potential, in the cecum. the eh value progressively decreased in the presence of b. thetaiotaomicron  from the value found for gf rats  and decreased further in the presence of f. prausnitzii, that is, in bt + fp-30d rats  . moreover, the ph of the cecal content in bt + fp-30d rats was significantly higher  than that in bt-30d rats .

we were unable to obtain f. prausnitzii mono-associated rats since successful implantation of f. prausnitzii required the presence of b. thetaiotaomicron. in di-associated rats, b. thetaiotaomicron produced acetate and f. prausnitzii converted it into butyrate. we then used this gnotobiotic model, where both bacteria were metabolically active, to study the effects of these two commensal bacteria on the mucus production pathway.

f. prausnitzii shifts the steady state induced by b. thetaiotaomicron in the colonic epithelium
in bt + fp-30d rats, colonic epithelium morphology, crypt depth and total number of cells per crypt were similar to those in bt-30d rats . however, the numbers of ab- and pas-positive cells per crypt were lower in bt + fp-30d than bt-30d rats . furthermore, the amount of klf <dig> protein tended to be lower in bt + fp-30d than bt-30d rats . the amounts of muc <dig>  muc <dig>  klf <dig>  c1galt <dig> and b4galt <dig> mrnas were not different between bt-30d and bt + fp-30d rats . muc <dig> staining was clearly lower in bt + fp-30d than bt-30d rats and, indeed, was similar to that in gf rats . the numbers of muc2-positive cells tended to be lower in gf and bt + fp-30d rats  than in bt-30d rats . chromogranin a protein was more abundant in bt + fp-30d than bt-30d rats . thus, in this model with two metabolically complementary bacteria, f. prausnitzii seemed to attenuate the effects of b. thetaiotaomicron on goblet cell differentiation.

implantation of both commensal bacteria is associated with a shift in the mucin glycosylation profile
having investigated mucus quantity by evaluating goblet cell number and mucin synthesis, we assessed expression of genes encoding host enzymes and mucus quality by studying the profile of mucin o-glycosylation. we performed analyses of sialyltransferase  and sulfotransferase  gene expression . in bt-2d rats, we observed an increase in the expression of the sialyltransferase st3gal <dig>  no modification was observed for the other genes tested. in parallel, we quantified the proportions of neutral/sulfated/sialylated oligosaccharides in the rat colonic mucins by studying the profile of mucin o-glycosylation. there were substantial changes to mucin glycosylation after colonization by b. thetaiotaomicron . in bt-2d rats, the proportions of sulfated  and neutral  oligosaccharides were lower than in gf rats, and this was associated with higher proportions of o-glycans carrying neuac  or neugc  residues . only minor differences were observed between the mucins in bt-2d and bt-30d rats. the pattern of glycosylation of mucins from di-associated bt + fp-30d rats resembled that in gf rats. interestingly, b. thetaiotaomicron increased the ratio of sialylated  to sulfated mucins in mono-associated compared to gf and di-asscociated rats . thus, as observed for goblet cell differentiation, f. prausnitzii seemed to attenuate the effects of b. thetaiotaomicron.

discussion
we report that commensal bacteria can influence goblet cells and mucin composition in the gut, providing new information about the relation among mucus, bacteria and intestinal homeostasis. b. thetaiotaomicron enhances goblet cell differentiation leading to an increase of goblet cell number and mucin gene expression in the colon of gnotobiotic rats. the presence of b. thetaiotaomicron also affects the composition of mucin o-glycans, with relative decreases in sulfated and neutral oligosaccharides in favor of sialylated oligosaccharides. b. thetaiotaomicron, therefore, appears to provoke modifications in the secretory lineage compared to gf rats, favoring mucus production and we could hypothesize that this is possibly for its own benefit. when b. thetaiotaomicron is associated with f. prausnitzii, which is an acetate consumer and a butyrate producer, the effects on both goblet cells and mucin o-glycosylation are attenuated. using a novel gnotobiotic model, which is the first described involving f. prausnitzii, we showed that two major species of commensal bacteria can modulate the effects of the bacteria on goblet cells and thus on mucus production and mucin glycosylation.

the git is an environment with harsh constraints  which shape the microbial composition. the genome of bacteroides species possesses gene clusters for capsular polysaccharide synthesis  <cit>  and these polysaccharides are important for bacterial colonization of the git: they improve survival in the git, and also stimulate the immune system  <cit> . scanning electron microscopy revealed differences in the b. thetaiotaomicron cell wall in bt-2d and bt-30d rats. possibly, during the first days of adaptation to the git, b. thetaiotaomicron produce capsular polysaccharides which collapse through a dehydration process, as previously described  <cit> . the transcriptomic profile of b. thetaiotaomicron before and after its passage through git shows that b. thetaiotaomicron adapts its metabolism to survive in the git  <cit> . when b. thetaiotaomicron is associated with eubacterium rectale, a representative of the c. coccoides group, both bacteria adapt their own metabolism to the presence of the other  <cit> . thus, bacteria in the git presumably adapt to the host, and also to other bacteria  <cit> . in this study, we observed that in mono-associated rats, b. thetaiotaomicron induces goblet cell differentiation leading to an increase in mucin gene expression and goblet cell number, and a parallel decrease in chromogranine produced by enteroendocrine cell. these observations are in accordance with previous work showing that the colonic epithelium also adapts to the presence of bacteria  <cit> ; these adaptations are parts of the mutual interactions essential for human health.

we show that, following colonization of the git by b. thetaiotaomicron, the pattern of mucin glycosylation changes, with increased expression of glycans carrying sialic acid residues , correlated with decreased expression of sulfated and neutral oligosaccharides. a previous immunohistochemical study described similar alterations in the glycosylation pattern in the mouse intestine, induced by b. thetaiotaomicron implantation or by soluble factors produced by this microorganism  <cit> . b. thetaiotaomicron also induces fucosylation of intestinal epithelial cells, which is linked to its ability to use fucose, a component of glycosylated mucin  <cit> . thus, glycan production or distribution is modulated by b. thetaiotaomicron, and this may involve processes important for signaling and mediating the host mucosal response. according to the enhancement of the expression of st3gal <dig> in the presence of b. thetaiotaomicron, we can assume that there is a mechanism by which this bacterium modulates the composition of mucus chain o-glycans by impacting directly enzyme expression of the host. b. thetaiotaomicron may require high levels of expression of sialylated mucins for attachment and colonization of the git. indeed, b. thetaiotaomicron may express adhesins specifically recognizing and binding to sialic acid residues and may also use sialic acid residues as host substrates. b. thetaiotaomicron possesses  <dig> predicted sulfatases and only  <dig> single predicted anaerobic sulfatase-maturating enzyme which allow bacteria to adapt to and forage on host sulfated glycans as nutrients  <cit> . our observations of a substantial decrease in sulfated oligosaccharides in the rats colon two days after b. thetaiotaomicron colonization are consistent with this enzymatic potential. presumably, b. thetaiotaomicron uses these sulfate residues rapidly not only as nutrient sources but also to gain access to other monosaccharides, such as n-acetylglucosamine  and galactose , the two monosaccharides substituted by sulfate residues on mucin o-glycans. in a favorable ecosystem , there is probably no need for the bacteria or the host to maintain a high level of expression of sulfated glycans. however, when b. thetaiotaomicron is associated with f. prausnitzii, the proportion of sulfated glycans is greater than that observed in the presence of b. thetaiotaomicron alone. this suggests that, in a more complex environment involving a competitive ecosystem, sulfated glycans may confer an ecological advantage on b. thetaiotaomicron.

we were unable to obtain, on a large scale and reproducibly, f. prausnitzii mono-associated rats; the implantation of f. prausnitzii required the prior presence of b. thetaiotaomicron. furthermore, f. prausnitzii was unable to colonize the git early after the introduction of b. thetaiotaomicron. this may have been due to the physicochemical environment. f. prausnitzii became established in the gut only after a decrease in the oxidoreduction potential, caused by the presence of b. thetaiotaomicron, suggesting that b. thetaiotaomicron “prepares” the git to accommodate sustainably more oxygen-sensitive bacteria. f. prausnitzii and, to a larger extent, the c. leptum group, arrive in the git late after birth, presumably because they are sensitive to oxygen. moreover, after intestinal resection, disrupting the gut structure and exposing the colon to oxygen, the c. leptum group disappears from the microbiota  <cit> . in the case of strict anaerobes like f. prausnitzii, their ability to colonize is governed by the physicochemical constraints of gut rather than by any lack of metabolic substrates. this contrasts with lactobacillus bulgaricus, which is an aerobic-tolerant lactic acid bacterium, and which does not colonize the gut of gf rats in the absence of lactose  <cit> . that colonization by b. thetaiotaomicron precedes the implantation of f. prausnitzii gives clues about mechanisms governing microbial ecology and processes of colonization.

the two bacteria were metabolically complementary both in vitro and in vivo. f. prausnitzii consumes acetate produced by b. thetaiotaomicron and in turn produces butyrate. short-chain fatty acids  trigger pleiotropic signals in the host, including signals regulating mucin synthesis and secretion  <cit> . scfa, in particular butyrate and to a lesser extent acetate, are reported to have inducer effects on mucin synthesis and production in vitro <cit> . butyrate also increases the expression of the transcription factor klf <dig> in ht <dig> cells  <cit> . on the contrary, another experiment reported an inhibitor effect of butyrate on mucin synthesis in vitro <cit> . all these data show the potential role of scfa in modulating the mucus pathway and it may be a mechanism by which they affect the goblet cell differentiation pathway in our gnotobiotic models. using ht29-mtx, a mucus producing cell line, we showed that acetate increases klf <dig> abundance. understanding the effects of the microbiota on mucus production and goblet cell differentiation is of major importance as mucus acts as a protective barrier and disruption of this mucus layer leads to inflammation  <cit> ; abnormalities of the mucus layer, and modulations of goblet cells and mucin secretion have been described in inflammatory bowel diseases  <cit> . in a murine model of dss-induced colitis, the mucus layer is altered before the induction of any inflammation evidencing the importance of mucus layer integrity to prevent inflammation  <cit> . the o-glycosylation pattern of mucins has also a determinant role in health, with sulfated colonic mucins playing a protective role  <cit> . indeed, mucins are poorly sulfated in patients with ulcerative colitis  <cit> . butyrate induces the expression of sulfotransferases, the enzymes catalyzing sulfatation of mucin in the mouse colon  <cit>  and also up-regulates expression of galactose-3-o-sulfotransferase  <dig> in human intestinal epithelial goblet cells  <cit> . the increase in sulfated mucins observed in our b. thetaiotaomicron and f. prausnitzii di-associated rats is consistent with these previous studies. we, therefore, suggest that metabolites, mainly acetate and butyrate, produced by b. thetaiotaomicron and f. prausnitzii, respectively, may be responsible, at least in part, for the modifications that we observed in goblet cells and mucin o-glycosylation.

CONCLUSIONS
our study reveals relationships between intestinal microbiota and the differentiation and secretory program of colonic goblet cells. we propose that b. thetaiotaomicron and f. prausnitzii, two main members of microbiota representative of bacteroidetes and firmicutes, contribute to the establishment of epithelial homeostasis. these two bacteria, which are metabolically complementary, modulate in vivo the intestinal mucus barrier by modifying goblet cells and mucin glycosylation. here we show how the balance between b. thetaiotaomicron and f. prausnitzii could be determinant for maintaining colonic epithelial homeostasis and health via their respective effects on mucus.

