BACKGROUND
the african continent continues to attract a growing proportion of research attention due to the unprecedented level of genetic diversity of its peoples  <cit> . in particular, northern and central african countries have been increasingly incorporated into studies assessing human population structure. the luhya of kenya, the maasai of kinyawa and the yoruba of nigeria are well documented in both the hapmap and  <dig> genomes projects ; the latter of which will also include data pertaining to gambian , mende  and esan  populations. the human genetic diversity project  provides genotyping information for populations residing in the central african republic, the democratic republic of congo and senegal  <cit> , whilst independent assessments of malawian and ethiopian genetic structure are also available  <cit> .

less well represented in current research, however, are inhabitants of the southern africa region. defined here as the collection of botswana, lesotho, swaziland, namibia and south africa , southern africa is home to a predominant population of bantu-speakers; a sub-group of the niger-kordofanian  linguistic group that expanded southwards from nigeria and cameroon, beginning approximately five thousand years ago  <cit> , reaching south africa ~ <dig> to  <dig> years ago  <cit> . specifically, speakers belong to the “s” group of bantu language classification  <cit> , consisting of mostly sotho-tswana, venda and nguni languages  <cit> . the genetic architecture of nk-speakers, in general, has been described as fairly homogeneous  <cit> , despite their broad distribution across the continent, however, few studies have sampled extensively from southern african countries. the hgdp includes only a scattering of southern bantu-speakers from south africa , whilst tishkoff et al.  <cit> , xing et al.  <cit> , schlebusch et al.  <cit>  and pickrell et al.  <cit>  include limited samples of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> such individuals respectively. these individuals were interrogated using a comparatively small selection of genetic markers , restricting the information density. the resulting data are thus not ideal as a suitable reference resource that captures the genetic diversity of the region’s dominant ethnolinguistic group.

the lack of local genetic information with robust allele frequency distributions currently serves as a significant hurdle to designing biomedical research and may have important medical implications. with the highest worldwide prevalence of hiv/aids  <cit>  and rising rates of diseases of lifestyle due to rapid urbanisation, southern africa suffers under the full weight of medical needs, including communicable, non-communicable, perinatal and maternal disorders  <cit> . according to the world health organisation  <cit> , roughly 60% of deaths within southern african countries are attributable to communicable diseases, whilst 30% are caused by non-communicable disorders. hitherto, investigations into the population-specific genetic causes underpinning these diseases have largely relied on the hapmap reference data for yoruba and luhya populations to guide study design. however, the accuracy of this approach remains in doubt, as it is still unclear to what extent tag snps from the yoruba or luhya can be ported to other africans  <cit> . moreover, southern africans are geographically distant from these proxy populations, resulting in genetic differentiation due to genetic drift, different selection pressures and admixture with different indigenous groups   <cit> . the generation of local genetic information therefore presents several key benefits in both evaluating the applicability of proxy populations within africa as well as providing a more accurate reference foundation on which to support future disease research. in addition, it provides a reference from which to identify local founder effects, signatures of selection, levels of admixture and allele frequency variations. such benefits facilitate the future ideals of personalised medicine, and the knowledge gleaned may well have uses for other populations worldwide, given africa’s importance for human history. it is these reasons that provided the impetus for the southern african human genome programme   <cit> , which ultimately aims to provide a comprehensive, publically available database of genetic information for this region.

as a prelude to the sahgp, we sought to investigate the genetic diversity amongst urban black south africans residing in the soweto-johannesburg metropolitan area of the gauteng province - one of the urban centres in south africa most densely populated by southeastern bantu-speakers. soweto is a major contributor to south africa’s leading rates of urbanization  <cit> , retaining a regular influx of migrant workers  since the gold-mining era  <cit> , who intermix with local inhabitants. this sets the stage for substantial genetic mixing between separately defined ethnolinguistic subgroups, further complicated by known caucasian and indian influences on the area. accompanying rapid urbanization is a simultaneous transition in epidemiology. for example, the heart of soweto study  <cit>  has uncovered distressing statistics that point to a widening spectrum of both traditional forms of infectious heart disease as well as non-communicable forms more commonly seen in developed countries. as a pertinent demonstration, the atherosclerotic disease phenotype that was once largely unobserved amongst black south africans, was documented in 14% of study cases. indeed, more than 75% of black south africans are now considered to possess at least one major risk factor for heart disease  <cit> . more generally, mayosi and colleagues  <cit>  reviewed the overall burden of non-communicable disease in south africa, citing numerous references that demonstrate the increasing prevalence of these diseases. specifically, they noted the unequal distribution of disease, with the heaviest burden being endured by poor communities in an urban context, as is typical of soweto. thus, we aimed to provide a closer examination of genetic variation within soweto, with the main purpose of providing a more accurate reference dataset for medical and genetic research. we contrasted this variation with selected populations worldwide, with the view of placing southeastern bantu-speakers in the context of global genetic diversity. finally, to assess the applicability of such a reference, we sought to determine how similar a larger random sample of black sowetans was to our own “reference set” by incorporating results from a recent case–control study on rheumatoid arthritis in soweto, and used the comparison to note certain implications for genomic research in southern africa.

RESULTS
performance
it is commonly accepted that the inadequacy of snp chips is exposed when used to assess most african populations  <cit> . thus, to compare the performance of our samples  on the omni <dig> chip to other populations, we obtained allele frequency data for the ceu , yri , chb  and jpt  hapmap samples that were genotyped on the omni <dig> chip, in-house, by illumina. for each population, the distribution of minor allele frequencies was plotted. note that minor allele designation was dependent on genotyping frequencies per population, thus the minor allele per snp may be different between populations. results are shown in figure  <dig>  our samples performed similarly to those of the yri, with a slighter higher fraction of markers with an allele frequency less than  <dig> %, but a lower fraction of markers with a minor allele frequency between  <dig>  and 10%, as well as a lower percentage of monomorphic snps. a clear bias for low frequency variants was noted for ceu individuals, as snp selection for the omni <dig> was largely based on european data. asian populations  fared least well, with over 50% of markers typed as monomorphic and, therefore, of reduced utility.

principal components analysis 
to contextualise sowetan genetic variation, pca plots  were generated from the combined dataset  where data from different population combinations, as well as different principal components are shown. figures 2a) and 2b) demonstrate intercontinental variation, and include the major african, asian and european representatives. we included gujarati indians in houston, texas  as well, based on historical accounts of indian influences on the sowetan gene pool. with respect to principal components   <dig> and  <dig>  populations were positioned into broad continental clusters, with the exception of the gih who clustered separately. bso individuals clustered along with other black african populations  speaking a niger-kordofanian language, whilst the nilo-saharan speaking maasai appear as a distinct cluster. selected bso individuals appeared to position spatially in the direction of ceu and gih populations, reflecting possible admixture.

principal components  <dig> and  <dig> more clearly distinguished african populations from one another. component  <dig> highlights the separation between europeans, oriental populations and gujarati indians, the latter of which appears as an extended cluster. component  <dig> disaggregates african populations along a north–south gradient, with a correspondingly clear distinction between sowetans and the more northern african groups. southeastern bantu-speakers  typed by schlebusch et al.  <cit>  remained closely paired with bso, in line with soweto demographics. in both plots, clustering amongst bso individuals appeared to be more dispersed compared to other african groups, with a greater overall spread.

to investigate the distinctions between african populations further, we generated an intracontinental plot that included only african populations, namely the bso, seb, yri, mkk, lwk, kar , kho  and nam  . in agreement with typical plots of pc <dig> versus pc <dig>  black african populations demonstrated a clear separation as a consequence of their geographic distance from each other  <cit> , with pc <dig> reflecting a north–south split. the maasai are separated out along pc <dig>  whilst the khoe-san groups showed limited clustering in accordance with their high genetic diversity  <cit> . again, bso clustering was noticeably weaker than that seen for northern africans, suggesting a greater degree of interindividual variation.

admixture
admixture results for ancestral populations k= <dig> to k= <dig> and k= <dig> to k= <dig>  for intracontinental and intercontinental datasets respectively, are shown in figure  <dig>  intracontinentally , the present study sample was seen to closely resemble seb, in confirmation of observed pca results. from k= <dig>  yri individuals were already distinguished from their african counterparts. by k= <dig>  clear separation between bso, yri, mkk and lwk populations was evident, along with a clear link between southeastern bantu-speakers and the southern khoe-san, in confirmation of previous reports  <cit> . at k= <dig>  bso and seb presented with greater diversity in admixture than northern africans. intercontinentally , k= <dig> separated africans from non-africans, whilst k= <dig> and k= <dig> formed african, european and asian clusters, with gih initially shown as having mixed ancestry from both europe and asia  before separating as a distinct population at k= <dig>  with increasing k clusters, african populations are increasingly distinguished. in particular, bantu-speakers appeared to be significantly different with relatively small contributions from all  <dig> ancestral populations; a result that was not typical for members of the other populations investigated.

sample comparison
to examine how well our reference soweto sample represented another larger and independently selected sample of unrelated black sowetans, we performed a comparison with data from a case–control study for rheumatoid arthritis. pca results are displayed in figure  <dig>  we limited our selection of populations outside of the african continent to just ceu and gih due to reported admixture with bso. comparative data were available for  <dig>  <dig> snps. controls  from the study closely matched the clustering pattern of the bso group, suggesting similar overall genetic profiles. interestingly, the cases  demonstrated a wider spread of variation, strongly indicative of varied degrees of admixture with europeans and indians.

discussion
the rapid urbanisation of soweto and its subsequent epidemiological transition are largely representative of the transformations occurring across the developing southern africa region  <cit> . consequently, the area’s predominant ethnic group of southeastern bantu-speakers constitute one of the african continent’s largest health burdens, and understanding their susceptibility to disease, both communicable and non-communicable, grows increasingly important. progress, however, is hampered by a paucity of genetic data that necessitates the use of proxy populations; an approach with obvious limitations. an appropriate reference dataset would thus greatly improve local research capabilities and obviate the need for proxy genetic data. in the present study, we sought to address the lack of reference data and contrast sowetan genetic variation to that seen worldwide, and more specifically, within africa.

using principal component analysis, we noted two important observations. firstly, we confirmed that southeastern bantu-speakers  occupy a distinct space from northern africans. secondly, we observed a relatively loose clustering of bso individuals, consistent with the demographic “melting pot” of the urban soweto community. in confirmation, admixture results suggested sowetans comprise of small contributions from a diverse assortment of ancestral populations, more so than was evident for other african populations investigated, with the exception of the khoe-san. such varied contributions, however, were not significant enough to detract from the general homogeneity of the group , suggesting that most migration and admixture into soweto is likely from areas where individuals have a similar genetic heritage. consequently, the average level of admixture is unlikely to significantly interfere with the analysis of disease association studies. however, individuals with significant admixture also form part of the sowetan population . it is therefore necessary to screen for such individuals and to exclude them from phenotype-genotype association studies, in order to avoid false positive associations as a result of underlying population structure.

amongst the numerous and diverse sources of genetic variation, bantu-speakers are specifically known to display levels of khoe-san admixture  <cit> . our results confirm a degree of admixture between the bso and the more southerly located khoe-san , including the nama, the khomani and the karretjie peoples . this admixture likely underpins the weaker clustering of southeastern bantu-speakers, and uniquely distinguishes them from northern africans. indeed, the separation observed between nk-speaking populations included in the present study highlights some of the key benefits to improved marker density and more focused comparisons between populations when assessing genetic structure. although fairly homogenous when considered on a global scale  <cit> , our comparisons at the intracontinental level revealed significant heterogeneity between western , central  and southern  nk-speakers. both pca and admixture analyses suggest bso are dissimilar from the populations commonly used as their proxy , with greater interindividual genetic variation. these findings support the use of more detailed assessments of population genetic structure to improve the resolution between closely related, but nonetheless distinct groups of individuals. moreover, they augment the value of local genetic information, especially when researching the more innately diverse african populations.

in confirmation that our sample was a good representation of the larger soweto population, we investigated its similarity to a sample of over  <dig> individuals from a recent rheumatoid arthritis case–control study . the cases and controls were separately identified and in the comparisons, the controls clustered tightly with the bso group, reflecting their common origin, and thus strengthening the applicability of our data as a suitable reference for soweto and south africa . interestingly, among the cases, the majority clustered closely with the bso, but a minority displayed significant admixture, with a wider spread of genetic variation, despite being selected on the grounds of self-reported black ethnicity. to what reason this wider dispersal is owed remains unclear. most likely, the more admixed individuals within the group are not permanent residents of the soweto region, but may have been referred from other locations in order to receive specialised medical treatment beyond the scope of local clinics. controls were all workers at the hospital , and thus more inclined to reside permanently in soweto. the more divergently clustering individuals with significant indian and caucasian admixture were removed from the rheumatoid arthritis association study before analysis , according to quality control procedures. however, information on divergent and significant admixture in specific individuals is not typically available to health care professionals, and may have important health-related implications since self-reported ethnicity may be used to guide medical advice, including the prescription of drugs. numerous studies have already reported on certain locus specific population effects concerning drug metabolism, particularly for drugs used to treat cancer and hiv  <cit> . this comparison thus emphasises the value of obtaining local genetic information to highlight ethnic nuances of potentially important clinical relevance.

the performance of the omni <dig> in assessing african genetic variation merits comment. based on our comparisons, the platform performs well in typing common variation in africans, and will have use in genome-wide association studies. beneficially, the superior marker density improves the chances for positive associations, which are more likely to progress to the identification of causal variants due to the limited linkage disequilibrium  of african populations  <cit> . conversely, limited ld may result in poor detection of association, compounded by the lack of private african alleles on the platform. regardless, true progress in meeting the medical demands of southeastern bantu-speakers, and indeed all africans, will be subordinate to an increased collection of complete genome sequences, which will further outline unique african variation and facilitate the improved stratification of individuals by genetic composition. for example, targeted resequencing of the cyp3a <dig> gene in a sample comprised of khoe-san, xhosa and mixed ancestry individuals from south africa identified  <dig> snps, two of which were novel, non-synonymous variants  <cit> . only one third  of these variants are included on the omni <dig> chip, whilst the novel variation is likely to be private to the african continent, suggesting that full genome sequencing of black africans will be a necessity if we are to enhance our understanding of the genetic architecture of these peoples. beyond population stratification, a more thorough appreciation of confounding environmental factors will also need to be fostered  <cit> , especially given the spectrum of living conditions on the continent; from arid to tropical and from rural to urban  <cit> . despite these concerns, as one of the most comprehensive genotyping chips currently available, the omni <dig> represents a good option for those wishing to pursue gwas in african populations, based on the performance levels we have witnessed here.

several limitations to the present study are acknowledged. ideally, a larger sample size and complete genome sequences would more accurately reflect the full spectrum of genetic diversity across southeastern bantu-speakers. our sample of  <dig> individuals does, however, compare in size to those of the hapmap and  <dig> genomes projects, which have more than demonstrated their value as reference panels for specific populations. the comparison to sowetans in the rheumatoid arthritis study was done primarily with markers related to loci relevant to autoimmune disease, which may have introduced some bias, since they may have been involved in significant selection pressures as highlighted by schlebusch et al.  <cit> . lastly, the illumina omni <dig> chip is subject to an ascertainment bias for snp selection, favouring those polymorphic in european populations, and thus potentially distorting some of the conclusions drawn  <cit> . in addition, the omni <dig> was designed to assess mostly common variants in european populations with a frequency greater than 1%, meaning that the characterisation and distribution of rare variants is still to be incorporated in the assessment of sowetan genetic structure.

our data have begun to address the paucity of southern africa genetic information, although considerable work remains in sampling more broadly across the region. numerous other ethnicities, including the cape mixed ancestry, southwestern bantu-speakers  and afrikaner populations inter alia, present interesting genetic diversity in their own rights, distinct from that seen amongst the more populous southeastern bantu-speakers. several studies have already commenced with the documentation of this variation  <cit> , but it is the larger aim of the sahgp to provide more thorough reference databases on par with those available for selected populations participating in the international hapmap and  <dig> genomes projects. forthwith, the data of the present study may, therefore, be considered the southeastern bantu-speaker equivalent of a hapmap reference for this population. future studies will aim to mine these data further, attempting to extract information of particular biomedical relevance.

CONCLUSIONS
to conclude, our investigative search into sowetan genetic variation is, to date, the most detailed of its kind. we have observed a distinct genetic profile for these individuals, different from other more widely studied african populations, supported by principal component analysis as well as admixture. combined, these results aligned well with demographic and historical knowledge on the inhabitants of the soweto region, clearly highlighting the significant, but relatively small genetic contributions from far and wide, that have been made to the local gene pool. we have demonstrated that this dataset is a good reference sample for future research on black south africans who speak southeastern bantu languages. most importantly, some of the implications for future medical policy and research are highlighted. lastly, the dataset may be considered a first step toward the sahgp, and is available at http://sbimb.core.wits.ac.za/data/snpgenotyping_ <dig> html.

