BACKGROUND
the nematode caenorhabditis elegans is a top model organism in biology. the wealth of data on its biology has greatly contributed to advancing knowledge in developmental, cellular and molecular biology. yet the laboratory biology of c. elegans is disconnected from its natural context, and studies of natural populations are in their infancy  <cit> . one aim in deciphering the natural history of c. elegans is to provide an evolutionary and ecological context for the accumulated genomic and mechanistic knowledge. a complementary aim is to develop c. elegans as a model species for evolutionary and ecological studies, making use of genetic and molecular tools and knowledge that this organism affords, and integrating the two facets of its biology. in addition to the experimental advantages of c. elegans, its mode of reproduction with selfing hermaphrodites and facultative outcrossing to males makes it a favorable system to study the regulation of outcrossing and its evolutionary consequences. recent years have thus seen a surge in interest for using c. elegans in evolutionary studies  <cit> . yet, even the habitat where it feeds and reproduces has so far not been well characterized.

c. elegans develops in three to four days at 20°c in the laboratory, going through a short embryonic development and four juvenile/larval stages separated by molts, followed by the reproductive adult  <cit> . in conditions of low food, crowding and high temperature, the young larvae of c. elegans develop into an alternative l <dig> diapause stage called the dauer. specification of dauer development occurs at the end of the l <dig> stage, which then molts into an l2d pre-dauer stage. entry into the dauer stage is still reversible at this stage if better conditions resume. if not, the l2d larva molts into a dauer larva, which can pause in its development for several months, without feeding, and is resistant to a range of stresses. if the dauer larva encounters a new favorable environment, it will start feeding, develop into post-dauer l <dig> and adult stages.

previously, c. elegans has been sampled mostly in compost heaps  <cit>  where individuals were found predominantly in the dauer stage  <cit>  and also found in association with invertebrates, such as snails and isopods  <cit> . we occasionally found c. elegans in rotting fruits  <cit> , which drove us to a more systematic survey of rotting vegetal material on different continents and islands. we and others thereby found many new caenorhabditis species, most of them in tropical regions  <cit> . a genomic analysis was conducted on a worldwide set of c. elegans isolates and suggested the recent occurrence of several worldwide selective sweeps affecting large genomic regions  <cit> .

understanding the habitat, food, and pathogens that c. elegans experiences may provide clues to the possible selective pressures that it encounters in the wild, which may have driven these intense selective sweeps.

here we describe the systematic local sampling of c. elegans and c. briggsae in rotting fruits and stems. c. elegans and c. briggsae are the two most common caenorhabditis species in mainland france. the approximate census size and frequency of developmental stages could be assessed by analyzing fresh samples that were examined in the laboratory within a few hours after collection. rotting fruits in orchards and rotting herbaceous stems in wood and shrubland areas, support large proliferating populations, some of them without any diapausing dauer larvae. remarkably, c. elegans and c. briggsae often co-exist in the same locations and substrates. in order to study their relative abundance and distribution, we systematically sampled a large spatio-temporal structured set over four years in an apple orchard in orsay and over three years in a wood in santeuil. the two species present a strikingly different temporal distribution during the year, with c. briggsae dominating in summer and c. elegans appearing during the fall, as c. briggsae gradually fades out. this seasonal shift correlates with their respective temperature preferences in the laboratory, as shown in a laboratory competition experiment.

RESULTS
c. elegans and c. briggsae proliferate in the same natural habitats in rotting fruits and stems and are found associated with the same invertebrates
rotten vegetal habitats were sampled in different locations in france  and assayed for the presence, abundance and developmental stage distribution of caenorhabditis nematodes. caenorhabditis populations were found on various substrates, which include rotting fruits and rotting stems . by exploring these habitats, we found for the first time caenorhabditis populations that were in proliferative stages, without any dauer juveniles .

this table includes the locations that were repeatedly sampled over several years. cbr, c. briggsae; ce, c. elegans; latit., latitude; longit., longitude; n, number.

scoring of caenorhabditis populations in ten orsay apples  and ten santeuil samples . these sets were chosen to represent a variety of caenorhabditis population size and type, and maximize the proportion of positive samples . only a part of each apple was analyzed, which is taken into account for in the total census. weight is in grams. total census is on a log scale. d: dauer larva. ad: adult. the tentative stage of the population is indicated: d, dauer stage; p, proliferating; p <dig>  early stage of proliferation ; p <dig>  intermediate stage ; p <dig>  late stage . the caenorhabditis species was identified for a set of individuals of each population, as indicated in the last column. ~, approximately; cbr: c. briggsae; cel: c. elegans.

c. briggsae and c. elegans were both found on rotting fruits of the same species, such as apples, pears, plums, peaches, tomatoes and figs. a mix of both species could be found proliferating in the very same individual fruit. plant species in the fruits of which we found only one of the caenorhabditis species, but not the other  were c. briggsae on wild cherries and peaches in gif-sur-yvette and le blanc, respectively, and c. elegans once on wild sloe fruits in plougasnou. quantitative data on caenorhabditis occurrence in several samples at the same location are found in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  we focused on sampling rotting apples in the orsay orchard . summing over the four years of sampling in orsay, we found c. elegans and c. briggsae each at a frequency of around 20% of the rotten apples . analysis of rotten fruits still hanging on the trees . several of these are bi-annual plants with relatively thick stems that rot in summer or fall off during the second year of growth. again, both c. briggsae and c. elegans were found proliferating in stems of the same species, and sometimes in the same individual stem. we focused on the santeuil wood for rotting stems and sampled over three years in october . each year, c. elegans was found in santeuil on about 50% of the rotten stems and c. briggsae on about 10% of the rotten stems . note however that these proportions are only indicated as an example of a habitat and location where caenorhabditis was abundant and that they may vary as a function of season and location .

substrates negative for caenorhabditis, but not for other nematodes, include rotting wood, decomposing grass and generally rotting leaves. caenorhabditis can be only occasionally found in soil, for example immediately below a rotting apple  or a rotting stem . in contrast, oscheius tipulae is very commonly found in soil in the dauer stage  <cit> , and was here found for the first time in proliferative stages in rotting fruits and stems, like caenorhabditis species.

other nematodes could be commonly found proliferating in rotting fruits and stems, sometimes in large populations: i) several species of the eurhabditis clade  <cit>  including o. tipulae and o. sp.  <dig>  species with tube-waving dauers , and several others; ii) pristionchus spp.; iii) panagrellus  and panagrolaimus  spp.; iv) rhabditophanes sp. ; v) mesorhabditis sp.; and vi) fungi-eating aphelenchoides .

besides nematodes, the biotic environment includes bacteria and phages, fungi, acellular and cellular slime molds, ciliates, slugs and snails, collembola, mites, insect larvae , isopods, myriapods, and so on. at a small scale, when observed under the high-power light microscope, the rotting fruits and stems are colonized by an assemblage of bacteria and fungi, the latter under both their yeast and hyphal forms. these microbes form growing colonies that may be separated by remains of plant walls and thus constitute heterogeneous micro-environments .

possible invertebrate carriers of nematodes were also sampled and analyzed for the presence of nematode species. c. elegans and c. briggsae were found on the same species of arthropod or mollusk hosts, often in the same local host population or even the same individual host. specifically, as previously reported for c. elegans  <cit> , we found c. elegans and c. briggsae on diverse isopods, millipedes, snails and slugs . we also found once c. briggsae on a dead adult male firefly in gif-sur-yvette and on insects  associated with a rotten apple with a large c. briggsae population , and c. elegans on the surface of an annelid in a rotten apple with a large c. elegans population . whether there is any higher specificity of association other than co-occurrence of nematode and host in the same rotting material is unclear. systematic sampling of the diverse set of potential invertebrate carriers outside rotting fruits/stems still remains to be performed to determine whether insects, myriapods and annelids carry dauer larvae beyond one patch of rotting habitat. drosophila species share the rotting fruit substrate with caenorhabditis. however, catching drosophila adults never yielded caenorhabditis, but did yield panagrellus sp., both in le blanc and orsay . in le blanc, drosophila flies were caught at a given spot of the vegetable garden spot with mouth aspiration tubes  or baits of vinegar-coated fly tubes and worm agar plates and then plated individually or by groups of five flies. panagrellus sp. was isolated in four out of six five-fly sets and in two out of seven individual flies, suggesting a proportion of about 20% of the flies being carriers.

the caenorhabditis developmental stage previously shown to be carried by isopods and terrestrial mollusks was the dauer larva for c. elegans and related species such as c. remanei  <cit> . we have observed dauer larvae being discharged from isopods  <cit> . yet, so far we had not reported the developmental stage of caenorhabditis individuals on mollusks, because we could only observe them on the plate several days after sampling. here we succeeded in observing nematodes within hours of sampling, by better shearing and spreading the snail or slug tissues on large plates, thus allowing the worms to exit more easily. surprisingly, c. elegans and c. briggsae were not restricted to the dauer stage but occurred as adults and mixed larval stages, indicating the presence of proliferating populations . although we do not know in which mollusk body part the nematodes were harbored, it is possible that the caenorhabditis individuals were inside the intestinal lumen rather than in the host body. in one instance , we could observe that dauer juveniles were found both in intestinal contents and under the mantle.

populations differ by their developmental stage composition
most of the populations were analyzed on the day of sampling, which enabled us to determine the population census and developmental stage of individual worms. the corresponding data are in additional file  <dig> for orsay and in additional file  <dig> for the other locations. table  <dig> shows examples of population scoring on ten orsay apples  with c. briggsae and ten santeuil samples  with c. elegans.

population sizes in a given sample spanned one to more than  <dig>  caenorhabditis individuals, and were expressed on a log scale with an index of  <dig> for  <dig> to  <dig> individuals,  <dig> for  <dig> to  <dig>   <dig> for  <dig> to  <dig>   <dig> for  <dig> to  <dig>   <dig> for >  <dig>  some populations of small census size  contained individuals that were all in dauer, corresponding to non-proliferating populations in migrating or pausing stage. some populations of moderate census  included all stages that would be expected from a proliferating population . samples with high census  always contained some l2d and dauer larvae , and some did not contain l <dig> and l4s at all , indicative of populations entering the dauer stage at the end of a proliferative stage. note that some populations of smaller size were also found to include dauer and l2d larvae. this perhaps occurs when the environment is only able to sustain a smaller population and entry into dauer occurs at a lower abundance, or when most animals have already migrated out and/or when only some immigrating dauers have resumed development.

we could not detect any difference between c. briggsae and c. elegans, nor between fruit and stem substrates, as to the general composition of populations or the overall density of caenorhabditis in the sample . in the specific samples where both species were found together, their populations were composed of similar developmental stages . the only notable exception is apple o <dig> on  <dig> november  <dig>  where the only dauer out of about  <dig> animals was c. briggsae, the rest being c. elegans. at this late time in the season , most c. briggsae were found in the dauer stage.

dauers can be seen waving individually or in groups at the surface of any pointed structure of the habitat. this nictation behavior is thought to help in finding an invertebrate host for migration  <cit> . we observed that the masses of dauer larvae can reach centimeter-size, with thousands of dauers oscillating en masse . this behavior appears similar in c. elegans and c. briggsae.

sex, food and infections
the isolation of caenorhabditis individuals from fresh samples provides information about their life in the wild, especially concerning mating, food and pathogens.

c. elegans and c. briggsae both reproduce through selfing xx hermaphrodites and facultative x <dig> males. in agreement with previous reports  <cit> , males were rarely observed in natural populations. we occasionally observed single adult males in large populations, sometimes a few , which could be the result of spontaneous x-chromosome non-disjunction. when we isolated l1-l3/dauer individuals from the population to determine their species, without knowing their sex , we never isolated a male. an exception is the stem sample population p <dig> where we found two males out of  <dig> isolated c. elegans individuals  . mating of a male with a hermaphrodite results in half of the cross-progeny being male. by isolating hermaphrodite adults from the wild, it is thus possible to assess whether they were mated by scoring the male frequency in their progeny. out of hundreds of isolated hermaphrodite adults of each species, we observed a f <dig> brood with a large proportion of males in one of  <dig> individual adults isolated from apple o <dig> for c. elegans and one in five adults in apple o <dig> for c. briggsae  . we thus confirm that outcrossing does occur, albeit very infrequently in natural populations of c. elegans and we extend here the observation to c. briggsae.

concerning nutrition, c. elegans is cultured in the laboratory on the bacterium e. coli op <dig> and a supplement of cholesterol that the bacteria do not provide. observations of c. elegans and c. briggsae animals freshly isolated from natural sources revealed that their intestinal lumen often contained eukaryotic cells, mostly yeasts . the yeast cells sometimes appeared digested, with only cell wall remains, suggesting that c. elegans and c. briggsae may feed off them as well as off bacteria.

wild caenorhabditis were observed to often harbor a live bacterial flora in their intestinal lumen, as shown in figure  <dig>  in some instances, the flora proliferates and a large plug of bacteria obstructs the whole intestinal tract . in some freshly isolated wild animals, pumping has in addition been observed to be hindered by bacteria that obstruct the anterior part of the alimentary tract, in front of the posterior bulb grinder . the distinction between bacteria being food or pathogens is difficult to make in such cases.

we found several other types of pathogens in these natural populations. the first c. elegans natural virus was found during this survey in animals from orsay apple o <dig>  <cit> . we previously reported microsporidia in c. elegans from an apple near santeuil and in montsoreau  <cit> . consistent with our previous observations that microsporidia are relatively common natural parasites of c. elegans  <cit> , microsporidia were observed in the surveyed c. elegans populations in orsay apples in december  <dig>  october  <dig> and november  <dig> , and in a stem in plougasnou in august  <dig> . as predators, trapping fungi with adhering knobs or rings are commonly found . in addition, we observed fungi that develop hyphae from spores that are either ingested by the nematode or adhere to its cuticle, such as harposporium sp. or drechmeria coniospora  <cit>  . bacteria that appear pathogenic from their effect on caenorhabditis morphology, behavior and rate of proliferation are frequent and most remain to be characterized. in the most dramatic infection , the bacterium first induces worm bagging  and then dissolves the worm cuticle, killing the entire population on the plate within about four days. the bacterium  was isolated by culturing on c. elegans n <dig> and identified by 16s sequencing to be an elizabethkingia sp. . bacteria of this genus are known to be able to digest keratins  <cit>  and the present strain seems to be able to digest the collagens of the nematode cuticle.

spatio-temporal differences in distribution: studies in the orsay orchard
in order to assess the relative spatio-temporal distribution of c. briggsae and c. elegans in a given location, we undertook a systematic sampling of rotten apples in the orsay orchard. we sampled  <dig> to  <dig> apples throughout the orchard at  <dig> time points over four seasons  and, within a few hours of sampling, analyzed the distribution of developmental stages of caenorhabditis in each of them. in addition, we sampled adjacent groups of apples twice in october  <dig> . from positive samples, we isolated  <dig> to  <dig>  individual caenorhabditis and determined the species to which each belonged. during this survey, we also found a new male-female caenorhabditis sp., c. sp.  <dig>  <cit> .

both c. briggsae and c. elegans were abundantly found every year in the orchard. the two species could be found in the same apple . however, considering all individual apples, no positive correlation between the c. elegans and c. briggsae abundance in a given apple could be found . the temporal distribution of c. briggsae and c. elegans is presented in figure  <dig>  and their spatial distribution in additional file  <dig> 

for each species, both day of sampling and individual apple were significant explanatory factors . each species showed a significant temporal distribution along the season, an effect of the year and a significant interaction term . indeed, the temporal distribution of the two species did not coincide . c. briggsae was found alone in summer and c. elegans only appeared in september to early october. c. briggsae faded out from october on. c. elegans was then predominant in november and finally faded out in december to january . the third species, c. sp.  <dig>  was only found once in september  <dig>  twice  in november/december  <dig> and once in november  <dig> .

at a time when both species were present, we screened for c. elegans and c. briggsae at a smaller spatial scale, by sampling two sets of apples, each below one tree, in four groups of five apples. the distance between apples within one group was  <dig> to  <dig> cm, and the distance between groups was  <dig>  to  <dig>  m . each apple was cut in the field into four pieces , namely top, bottom, lateral and inner sides, and each part was separately analyzed in the laboratory . there was no effect of day on the abundance index of each species in this dataset, and a strong effect of group, at least for c. elegans for which the sample size was larger . thus, at the scale of the apple groups, the distribution of caenorhabditis individuals was heterogeneous, indicating that migration among groups  was limiting. molecular analysis of the isolated worms will eventually provide more power to detect spatial patterns. within apples that contained c. elegans, individuals were preferentially found at the bottom of the apple  compared to the top . such a distribution was not found for c. briggsae, not even a similar trend; however, sample size was low .

temperature affects the relative abundance of c. elegans versus c. briggsae in laboratory competition experiments
several ecological parameters could account for the observed different seasonal distribution of c. elegans and c. briggsae in the orsay orchard. temperature is an obvious candidate as it varies between summer and winter in france  and the range of temperature allowing fertility in the laboratory is lower in c. elegans compared to c. briggsae  <cit> . in order to show that temperature can affect the distribution of the two species in a given habitat, we performed competition assays between c. elegans and c. briggsae populations grown at 15°c, 21°c and 27°c in a controlled laboratory environment. two different wild isolates of c. elegans and c. briggsae  were competed in parallel at each temperature. these two pairs of sympatric strains were chosen arbitrarily among the wild isolates of c. elegans and c. briggsae to test for the effect of species, but not to study sampling site effects . overall, six different combinations of temperature and genotype were assessed and for each one, five replicate cultures were grown in parallel and transferred to fresh plates at fixed intervals of time to avoid starvation. the number of transfers was thus used as a measure of time in the analysis. starting from an equal number of c. elegans and c. briggsae larvae, the proportion of both species was followed through time using quantitative pyrosequencing. as expected, for both pairs of genotypes , the temporal dynamics of c. briggsae frequency depended on temperature . the competitive ability of c. briggsae versus c. elegans increased as the temperature increased from 15°c to 21°c  and from 21°c to 27°c . in addition, although the genotype of the wild isolates did not affect the direction of the temperature effect, it significantly changed the dynamics of species frequency . indeed, for each temperature condition, the competitive ability of c. briggsae versus c. elegans is always higher for the santeuil strains compared to the orsay strains, resulting in a significant genotype effect and in a non-significant genotype × temperature interaction . strikingly, the c. elegans strain from orsay was fixed in all replicate plates after ten transfers  when competed against c. briggsae from orsay at 21°c , whereas at the same temperature, c. elegans from santeuil disappeared in four out of five replicate plates when competed against c. briggsae from santeuil .

compared with c. briggsae, the c. elegans strains used in the competition assays reached sexual maturity at a lower age at 15°c, but at a higher age at 21°c and 27°c . therefore, phenotypic variation in minimal generation time between the two species might contribute to the effect of temperature on the temporal dynamics of mixed populations of c. elegans and c. briggsae. in contrast, the effect of the genetic background is not likely to be explained by differences in the age at maturity, as this trait does not vary between the two c. elegans strains or between the two c. briggsae strains for all temperatures .

these results confirm that temperature is a relevant parameter to explain the seasonal distribution of c. elegans and c. briggsae and suggest that its fitness effect could partially be mediated through variation in minimal generation time. however, temperature is not sufficient to predict the relative abundance of the two species, since for intermediate temperatures the species found in the majority was shown to depend on the genetic background of the strains.

discussion
natural habitat of c. elegans and c. briggsae
here we provide the first detailed analysis of natural populations of the nematodes c. elegans and c. briggsae in a habitat where they feed and proliferate. we identified rotting fruits and stems of herbaceous plants as natural habitats where c. elegans can be found feeding and proliferating in large numbers. in contrast to tropical areas where large wild fruits are easily sampled  <cit> , the main source of large fruits in mainland france is provided by domesticated plant species. in temperate areas, rotting stems of herbaceous plants may be a more natural habitat of c. elegans.

individual and population stage
scoring a large number of natural populations of c. elegans and c. briggsae in rotting fruits and stems provided a comprehensive overview of individual  and population stages . populations in compost were previously found to be mostly composed of dauer larvae. here in rotting fruits and stems, we found for the first time populations without any dauer larvae, usually with an intermediate census size of  <dig> to  <dig>  individuals . larger populations of  <dig>  to  <dig>  individuals included pre-dauers  and dauers. the stages of individuals in small populations could not always be assessed , yet some were seen to be composed of one or a few dauer larvae.

the analysis of groups of adjacent apples below a given tree showed heterogeneity at this scale in the distribution of c. elegans and/or c. briggsae. thus, migration among groups  was likely limiting. the fact that nearby apples may contain widely different population census and stages  suggests that proliferating populations mostly remain in the same fruit.

from these population snapshots, one can infer the likely dynamics of these populations. migrating dauer larvae initiate a new population in a given fruit or stem, either being discharged from a large invertebrate or migrating at small range through the leaf litter or soil. depending on habitat and available food, the dauer larvae may start a new population by staying in place, exiting the dauer stage and reproducing. exit from the dauer stage is a key decision. upon food exhaustion and crowding, young l <dig> larvae in the population may enter the pre-dauer and dauer stage. entry in the dauer stage seems to occur quite synchronously for all young larvae in a population . it is so far unclear how many generations are supported by a given fruit or stem, but from the larger observed populations, at least two to three generations must be required before all larvae are in the dauer stage in good conditions. dauers may then leave the substrate, and only a few will make it to a good food source. c. elegans and c. briggsae thus typically have booming population dynamics, which selects for a short generation time and fast progeny production.

associated micro-organisms and resource for further studies
the organisms occurring in the habitats where c. elegans and c. briggsae feeding stages are found are likely to be important players in their ecology, either as potential food or as pathogens. pathogens may enter through the digestive tract or else adhere to the nematode cuticle.

we here show that wild-caught caenorhabditis often harbor a large microbial fauna in their intestinal lumen. the n <dig> reference strain of c. elegans cultured on e. coli op <dig> in standard laboratory conditions crushes bacteria in its pharyngeal grinder almost fully efficiently. in older laboratory adults , some live e. coli may eventually succeed in entering the intestinal tract, escaping defecation and starting to colonize and proliferate in the intestinal lumen  <cit> . e. coli can enter the nematode intestine much earlier in c. elegans phm- <dig> mutants with a defective grinder  <cit> . some  pathogenic bacteria can pass the grinder of c. elegans n <dig> and colonize its intestinal lumen  <cit> , perhaps by regulating the production of enzymes that affect it  <cit> . the absence of live bacterial cells in the intestinal lumen is thus considered the norm for laboratory c. elegans. in contrast, wild animals were observed to harbor a live bacterial flora in their intestinal lumen. the flow of bacteria is regulated by four dynamic components, namely, i) entry past the pharyngeal valve and grinder, ii) proliferation, iii) disappearance by digestion or host defences, and iv) exit through the rectum with worm defecation. in many cases, a healthy steady-state of bacterial flow appears to result from the balance between these four components. in some instances however, proliferation takes over and the obstructed intestinal tract can no longer support any flow . such weak and strong colonization phenotypes can sometimes be maintained over several generations and depend both on the microbial fauna and on the worm genotype: many wild c. elegans isolates were not as efficient in crushing e. coli op <dig> as c. elegans n <dig> is, and many wild bacteria could colonize c. elegans n <dig> more readily than e. coli op <dig> does . the dynamics of microbe entry, growth, digestion, and exit will be interesting to study, as well as to determine the metabolic and pathogenic effects of different intestinal microbial communities.

c. elegans n <dig> cultured in standard laboratory conditions activates its pharyngeal muscles in a rapid cycle, pumping several times per second in the presence of food  <cit> . pumping of wild-caught animals could occasionally be observed to be hindered by bacteria obstructing the pharynx . such animals appeared malnourished, as indicated by the pale coloration of their intestine. the case in figure 3g appears to result from an interaction between the bacteria in the samples and the c. elegans wild genotype, because neither c. elegans n <dig> fed on the corresponding wild bacteria nor the wild c. elegans genotype fed on e. coli op <dig> displayed this defective swallowing phenotype.

fungi are abundant in rotting fruits and stems, and could be seen in the intestines of wild-caught caenorhabditis. yeasts synthesize sterols such as ergosterol and dehydroergosterol , which can be used as a sterol source by c. elegans  <cit> . it is thus possible that c. elegans derives its sterols from fungi. alternatively, it may ingest sterols from plant remains as well.

we here established a large collection of isolates of c. elegans, and to a lesser degree c. briggsae, which was generally frozen without bleaching, thus potentially retaining associated microbial fauna. we also directly froze a fraction of the original sample at -80°c for further analysis. this opens the way for evolutionary and ecological characterization, such as population genetic analysis of the nematodes, metagenomics and isolation of the microbial fauna, and surveys of the occurrence of pathogens.

habitat sharing: c. elegans likes it cool
c. elegans shares its habitat with c. briggsae, and also with a variety of other bacterivorous nematodes of various genera in the families rhabditidae  and panagrolaimidae . these species are likely to compete for food, and some of them, such as pristionchus species  <cit> , may also act as predators of caenorhabditis species, although this remains to be demonstrated.

most strinkingly, we find c. elegans and c. briggsae in the same type of habitat. however, several results suggest that c. elegans is preferentially found at cooler temperatures than c. briggsae. first and most strikingly, the seasonal pattern in the orsay orchard is strong, with c. briggsae found in summer and early fall and c. elegans in the late fall. second, the plougasnou area in brittany was sampled over the years in many places, and particularly in high summer when only c. briggsae could be found in orsay. this western france region presents an oceanic  climate and only yielded c. elegans. both species were found in all other tested regions of france, north, south and east.

both species are found on several continents, but c. briggsae is found in both tropical and temperate regions whereas c. elegans is found mostly in temperate regions, or in tropical regions at relatively high altitudes  <cit> . the latter might be explained by decreased temperatures or by other correlates of altitude, such as oxygen levels. deeper sampling will be required to confirm the tendency of c. elegans to live at high altitude in tropical locations.

the laboratory competition assays performed in controlled environments clearly show an effect of growth temperature on the relative fitness of c. elegans and c. briggsae when sharing the same habitat. consistent with the seasonal and worldwide patterns, c. briggsae wins at higher temperatures and c. elegans at lower temperatures . in these competition experiments, the effect of temperature is likely mediated in part by the difference in generation time between the two species . other temperature-sensitive traits of c. elegans and c. briggsae can be inferred from comparisons of independent studies in each species and may also contribute to the competition results. for example, self-brood size declines in c. elegans at temperatures above  <dig> to 20°c  <cit> , whereas the decline occurs at higher temperatures in c. briggsae, with still a high brood size at 28°c  <cit> , a temperature where c. elegans is fully sterile. dauer entry is another key developmental decision that is differentially regulated by temperature in c. elegans and c. briggsae and thus could be involved in the spatio-temporal dynamics of the two species in wild populations. a growth temperature above 27°c is sufficient to trigger dauer entry in c. elegans wild isolates with various penetrances, whereas it seems to have no effect in c. briggsae  <cit> .

our data further indicate an effect of the genotype within a species in the competition experiment. other competition experiments will be required to determine which species is involved in this genotype effect, which may be due to a difference of fitness between the two c. elegans strains, the two c. briggsae strains, an independent combination of both, or a specific interaction. this intraspecific difference between the two sets of genotypes is unlikely to be explained by a difference in generation time . each species was shown to display intraspecific variation in the temperature that maximizes lifetime fecundity of wild isolates  <cit> . in c. briggsae, the temperature resistance correlates with the latitude of strain isolation  <cit> . in c. elegans, a few quantitative trait loci  involved in the thermal plasticity of fertility, age at maturity, growth rate and egg size have been mapped from a set of recombinant inbred lines  between n <dig> and the hawaiian strain cb <dig>  <cit> . the plasticity of gene expression to temperature was shown to vary between n <dig> and cb <dig>  primarily due to trans-acting eqtls  <cit> . finally, a third analysis from the same rils led to the identification of a coding polymorphism in the tra- <dig> gene that affects body size response to temperature  <cit> . in the wild, besides an effect of these life history traits, the temperature-dependent distribution of c. elegans and c. briggsae could also be regulated through variation in behavioral responses. interestingly, when placed in a temperature gradient, different isolates of c. elegans present different thermotactic behavior and seem to show a preference for the temperature maximizing their fitness  <cit> . the reference strain n <dig> could have lost this adaptive thermophilic response after introduction to the stable temperature of the laboratory  <cit> . a better understanding of how thermotactic behaviors evolve in the wild will thus require a better characterization of the spatial and temporal dynamics of temperature in natural habitats of c. elegans.

apart from temperature, the population dynamics of caenorhabditis species is likely to be affected by other ecological parameters that are not yet identified. we note for instance that the distribution of caenorhabditis species of the elegans group in europe is puzzling and does not quite fit a simple temperature pattern. indeed, c. briggsae has only been found so far in france . c. remanei instead is found in germany, switzerland and hungary  <cit>  and the north-east of france . whether this pattern might be due to limited migration or results from aspects of local adaptation other than temperature sensitivity remains to be determined.

CONCLUSIONS
c. elegans and c. briggsae were found to proliferate in the same rotting vegetal substrates. for the first time, we found proliferating populations without arrested dauer stages. the large populations, however, always contain pre-dauer or dauer stages. together with the fact that these rotting substrates are temporary habitats, it appears thus likely that c. elegans and c. briggsae undergo successive population growth periods upon encountering a favorable rotting substrate, separated by periods of migration in the dauer stage. the discovery of habitats where c. elegans and c. briggsae feed opens the way for evolutionary and ecological characterization. here we show that the temporal sharing of the habitat by c. elegans and c. briggsae coincides with their temperature preference in the laboratory, with c. elegans populations growing faster than c. briggsae at cooler temperatures, and c. briggsae faster at higher temperatures.

