BACKGROUND
though kin selection  has been theorized to be one of the most important forces driving the evolution of social complexity in mammals, we still know surprisingly little about how this process occurs  <cit> . vocalizations are an important cue for the recognition of maternal kin  in species with large brains, complex social systems and cohesive foraging groups  and in small-brained species with varying degrees of social complexity ). far less is known about recognition of paternal kin , though it is expected to shape the evolution of social behavior through paternal kin selection and inbreeding avoidance  <cit> . long-term field studies of species with complex social systems suggest they often behave as if they recognize paternal kin . studies investigating the cues have shown that large-brained macaques use vocalizations for paternal kin recognition  <cit>  and that small-brained laboratory rodents use olfaction . to our knowledge, our study is the first to demonstrate acoustic patrilineal signatures and paternal kin recognition via vocalizations in a solitary-foraging mammal, suggesting that this ability can evolve independently of social complexity.

we investigated the grey mouse lemur  as a model for small-brained mammals with relatively simple social systems  <cit> . within primates, it retains basal morphological traits including a small brain-size relative to body size  <cit>  and has been suggested to represent an ancestral primate model  <cit> . it is a tiny, nocturnal strepsirrhine primate endemic to madagascar that maintains social networks involving shared home ranges and sleeping sites, but forages alone for insects and fruit in thin, terminal ends of tree branches in tropical forests  <cit> . this is a particularly interesting species in which to investigate paternal kin recognition via vocalizations, because in the wild females are philopatric and cooperatively raise their young in nests with maternal kin  <cit> . males provide no paternal care and do not co-nest with their mates or with their young, thus limiting the opportunities for the familiarity-based mechanisms seen in species with more complex social systems . however, inbreeding avoidance is still likely to be highly important, because males may remain in the same area for multiple years and during the breeding season they can expand their ranges to be more than twice as large as the females’ ranges, making it likely that adult males’ ranges will overlap the ranges of their daughters from previous mating seasons  <cit> .

because mouse lemurs are nocturnal, solitary-foragers living in dense forests, vocal communication is highly important for regulating social interactions across distances where visibility is poor and olfactory communication is limited  <cit> . mouse lemurs suffer from high predation  <cit> , and their high frequency and ultrasonic calls have been suggested to be an anti-predator strategy by calling above the hearing range of owls  <cit> . two of the most frequent calls are the mate advertisement call and the alarm call. the mate advertisement call is used in social and sexual contexts  <cit> . it is a complex, high frequency / ultrasonic vocalization that starts with a whistle unit, followed by an upward sweep, and a highly modulated tail unit  <cit> . the alarm call is given in social and disturbance contexts and it is a short, almost non-modulated, high frequency call  <cit> . both call types contain individual signatures  <cit> . if used for paternal kin recognition, both call types could facilitate kin selection, and the advertisement call could also enable inbreeding avoidance in sexual contexts.

we tested two hypotheses in each call type:  patriline signature hypothesis: calls will be distinctive by patriline, and  patriline recognition hypothesis: females will respond differently to calls from their fathers and unrelated males when familiarity is controlled. we found patrilineal signatures and paternal kin recognition in the high frequency/ultrasonic male advertisement call but not in the high frequency alarm call. these findings suggest that paternal kin recognition via vocalizations can emerge in mammals independently of a large brain and high level of social complexity.

RESULTS
patriline signatures
advertisement calls, but not alarm calls, contained patrilineal signatures. seventy nine percent of the advertisement calls and 45% of the alarm calls were correctly assigned to their respective patrilines . figure  <dig> shows the separation of advertisement calls and alarm calls by patriline produced by the principal components analyses . because the acoustic structures of the calls are complex, principal components analysis was used to reduce the number of parameters  <cit> . for the advertisement calls, high positive values on component  <dig>  were associated with modulations of a longer duration and a greater frequency range and higher maximum frequencies in the tail modulations. high positive values on component  <dig>  are associated with high maximum frequencies in the first seven modulations.

frequency is measured in herz and time in milliseconds. components  <dig> and  <dig> are 37% and 22% of the variation, respectively.

acoustic dissimilarity between dyads correlated significantly with patrilineal genetic dissimilarity between dyads  and did not correlate with matrilineal genetic dissimilarity between dyads .

patriline recognition
the females paid more attention to advertisement calls from unrelated males than from their fathers, but showed no differences in response to alarm calls from unrelated males and from their fathers . the components of the females’ responses to advertisement calls accounted for 47%, 15%, and 15% of the variation in the original response behaviors. component  <dig>  the attention to speaker component, showed that nonestrous females paid more attention to the advertisement calls of the unrelated males than to calls from their fathers . high values on component  <dig> correlated with looking towards the speaker faster, approaching the speaker sooner, spending more time near the speaker, and spending more time in the box area. .

components  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> are 47%, 15%, and 15% percent of the variation, respectively.

behavioral variables that correlated highly  with component  <dig> are in bold. frequency is measured in herz and time is in frames .

using component  <dig> scores, nine of the  <dig> females paid more attention to the unrelated males’ advertisement calls than to those of their fathers . components  <dig> and  <dig> did not differentiate between responses to fathers’ and control males’ advertisement calls .

the components of the responses to alarm calls accounted for 39%, 22% and 16% of the variation in the original response behaviors. none of the components differentiated between responses to fathers’ and control males’ alarm calls .

to exclude the possibility that arousal confounded our results, we measured parameters most likely to vary with arousal  <cit> , and tested for differences between the stimulus calls of related and control males. we measured the peak frequency of the fundamental, the call duration, number of modulations and the modulation rate  of the advertisement calls . peak frequency of the fundamental, call duration, and modulation rate did not differ between the five father-control male dyads . the number of modulations showed a trend , but was not significantly correlated with the attention to speaker component . therefore, we concluded that the arousal state of the caller did not confound our results.

discussion
we found that male grey mouse lemur advertisement calls, but not alarm calls, contain acoustic patrilineal signatures. furthermore, females paid more attention to the unrelated males’ advertisement calls than those of their fathers. though the females were not in estrous at the time, this increased attention to unrelated males suggests that such discrimination may be an important mechanism for inbreeding avoidance.

the two main kin recognition mechanisms proposed for mammals are familiarity and phenotype matching . in our study subject females were equally familiar with the calls of both their fathers and their control males, but this does not exclude the possibility that the females used their own calls and/or calls of their full-siblings as a template against which the stimulus calls were compared  <cit> . . thus, inbreeding avoidance could be accomplished if females prefer males with calls that are different from their own and their paternal/full siblings’ calls, and alternatively, kin selection could occur if mouse lemurs give preferential treatment to lemurs with calls similar to their own and their paternal/full siblings’ calls.

mateo  <cit>  argues that phenotype matching would be selected for in species with  a lack of paternal care,  multiple paternity litters, and/or  communal nesting. thus, the social system of mouse lemurs should favor phenotype matching:  since males do not provide paternal care and do not co-nest or co-forage with their mates or with their young  <cit> , this strongly limits the effectiveness of the familiarity-based mechanisms often seen in more gregarious species with cohesive foraging groups .  mouse lemur litters can have multiple paternities within the same litter  <cit> , thus infant mouse lemurs could be predicted to evolve self-referential phenotype matching to distinguish between full-siblings and maternal half-siblings in the nest.  given that multiple females may breed in the same nest  <cit> , infant mouse lemurs could potentially encounter paternal half siblings within the other mother’s litter and use self-referential phenotype matching to recognize them. self-referential phenotype matching has been observed in ground squirrels using olfactory cues  <cit>  and future work on mouse lemurs will aim to distinguish between self-referential phenotype matching and phenotype matching using kin as templates.

the difference in kin recognition between the two call types may be due both to the structure of the call types and to their role in the social system of this nocturnal, solitary foraging mammal. the advertisement call has a highly complex modulated structure that is well-suited to display patrilineal signatures. the alarm call is a shorter, non-frequency modulated call that may provide less opportunity to display the subtle differences between callers that appear necessary for patrilineal signatures. the lack of kinship signatures in the alarm calls also fits well with a prior report of cooperative mobbing of snakes by wild mouse lemurs which resulted in the rescue of an unrelated conspecific  <cit> . it suggests that mouse lemurs do not behave in the wild as if they are using kin signatures from the alarm calls  to selectively give aid to kin  <cit> . the costs of responding to a related conspecific’s mate advertisement call  may be high enough and the costs of responding to an alarm call low enough, that patrilineal signatures may be more strongly selected for in the advertisement call than the alarm call. our results on paternal kin recognition, combined with prior work showing differences in maternal kin recognition across call types , indicate that the selective pressures that drive the evolution of acoustic kin recognition are not uniform throughout all aspects of the communication system and that kin recognition in different calls may evolve independently.

the costs of sociality for a small-bodied, nocturnal mammal with a dispersed social system may have selected for higher frequencies in the social advertisement calls than in the alarm calls. alarm calls are typically given in the context of a present threat when crypsis appears to no longer be the primary tactic of predator/threat avoidance  <cit> . in contrast, advertisement calls are social/mating calls and may facilitate interactions in close proximity, leading to an increased risk of detection due to the movements of multiple, rather than one, animal. the increased crypsis offered by the ultrasonic frequencies may help limit eavesdropping opportunities for predatory birds to only movement-related and not vocalization-related acoustic cues  <cit> . additionally, the evolution of patrilineal signatures and kin recognition in these calls may enable listeners to choose not to approach the caller, thus avoiding the extra predation risk inherent in approaching the caller should the caller not be an advantageous mate. such discrimination could be advantageous to both the listener and the caller.

an additional, non-mutually exclusive possibility is that the advertisement call may have been under more selective pressure due to interference from environmental background noise  <cit> . radespiel and colleagues  <cit>  provide evidence that male mouse lemurs leave their sleeping sites earlier in the night than the females during the breeding season and use that time to go to the females’ sleeping sites and potentially monitor their estrous status. if this early evening/dusk time is critical for finding mates, it may coincide with a time of heightened background noises, including rising winds due to changing temperatures and increased insect activity . this increased noise at this time of night could select for the calls to be given at higher frequencies, thus enabling individuals to maintain a better signal-to-noise ratio if there is a lot of background noise in the lower frequencies  <cit>  . in addition, in this context, where the caller and receiver are in close proximity  it may be advantageous that the ultrasonic frequencies will rapidly scatter and not be heard by other conspecific competitors  <cit> .

this suggests that high predation pressure and basal mammalian traits such as small body size and dispersed social systems select for paternal kin recognition in the high frequency and ultrasonic range, thus limiting the risks of inbreeding and being eavesdropped by predators or competitor conspecifics. future analyses will determine which acoustic parameters make this kin recognition possible and will involve experimentally manipulating the acoustic parameters.

to our knowledge, our study is the first to demonstrate that that acoustic paternal kin recognition in mammals can evolve independently of a large brain, cohesive foraging groups, and a complex social system, and that it can also evolve in small-bodied, nocturnal solitary foragers whose main predator defense is crypsis. given that more complex forms of sociality with cohesive foraging groups are thought to have evolved from an ancestral solitary forager much like the grey mouse lemur  <cit> , this suggests that mechanisms for kin recognition like those seen in this solitary forager may have been the foundation from which more complex forms of kin-based sociality evolved.

CONCLUSIONS
we provide the first evidence for paternal kin recognition using vocalizations in a small-brained, nocturnal, solitary foraging mammal, indicating that high predation, and basal mammalian traits, such as small body size and a dispersed social system, may select specifically for paternal kin recognition in the high frequency/ultrasonic ranges, thus limiting the risks of inbreeding and eavesdropping by predators or competitor conspecifics. paternal kin recognition via vocalizations in mammals is not dependent upon a large brain and high social complexity, but may already have been an integral part of the dispersed social networks from which more complex, kin-based sociality is thought to have evolved.

