BACKGROUND
angiogenesis, the process of growth of blood capillaries from the pre-existing vascular tree, is a complex phenomenon that is either associated with or involved in the development of numerous physiological or pathological situations  <cit> . among them, angiogenesis is considered crucial for revascularization after cardiac ischemia, and is also implicated in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis, diabetic retinopathy, and tumoral progression. in particular, numerous clinical and experimental data show that the growth of cancerous tumors and the formation of metastases are highly dependent on the establishment of tumoral neovascularization from the pre-existing vascular network  <cit> . the tumor microvascular network then represents a new target for cancer treatment and the identification and characterization of molecules that control the formation of blood vessels become of interest in the development of anti-cancer therapies. in addition, there is also a great interest in combining antiangiogenic therapy with other conventional cytotoxic therapies in cancer treatment since several studies have demonstrated that the delivery of therapeutics may be increased during vessel normalization induced by angiostatics  <cit> .

several angiogenesis regulators have now been identified and characterized  <cit> . although first clinical trials of single agent antiangiogenic treatment have not always given satisfactory results, the use of an antiangiogenic therapy still remains highly promising in pathologies where angiogenesis is undesired  <cit> . in contrast, strategies aimed at stimulating angiogenesis could also present interest in many cases where neovascularization is needed such as after cardiac ischemia or after tissue graft. then, there is a great challenge to find new potential angiogenesis activators or inhibitors that may be candidate for therapeutics. within this context, the setting up of models for screening active molecules  on the angiogenic response, is of considerable importance. numerous in vitro angiogenesis models have been developed  <cit> . they are either two-dimensional  models such as conventional cell proliferation and migration tests or more elaborated three-dimensional  assays. concerning 3d angiogenesis models, assays involving matrigel, a matrix derived from mouse engelbreth-holm-swarm sarcoma, are among the most common commercially available in vitro angiogenesis assays. other 3d models are based on the use of fibrin or type- <dig> collagen as a support matrix for endothelial cells. however, both 2d and 3d models mostly involve the study of one particular step of the angiogenic response, but do not recapitulate the entire angiogenic process including proliferation, migration and tubulogenesis. although they exhibit some interest for primary screening because of their simplicity, an assay recapitulating all the sprouting angiogenic process should be preferable since it would be more physiologically relevant. other models that more closely recapitulate the sprouting angiogenic response have therefore been established. they include models based on the 3d culture of endothelial cell-coated microcarriers or endothelial cell spheroids embedded in collagen gels  <cit> . however, they require multi-step procedures and are not easy to perform. mouse embryonic stem cells  have also been shown to be a good alternative as a system for the study of differentiation towards the endothelial lineage  <cit> . in addition, this cellular system, into which genetic modifications can easily be introduced, can go through most of the stages of budding angiogenesis as observed in vivo  <cit> . in the previously described es cell model, two steps are required for angiogenesis to proceed  <cit> . first, es cells are induced to differentiate into embryoid bodies . ebs are then collected and further cultured into a type i 3d collagen matrix for another period, during which the eb primary vascular structures extend and invade the collagen matrix, leading to complex and ramified endothelial sprouts mimicking the sprouting angiogenesis process. this two-step model makes possible to carry out qualitative and quantitative studies by cell imaging  <cit> . all of these characteristics together, therefore, make it a powerful study model that enables to evaluate, in vitro, the efficiency of active molecules with respect to both vascular development and angiogenesis, and to improve the understanding of the molecular mechanisms that are called into play during these responses.

ideally, an in vitro angiogenesis assay suitable for the screening of potentially active compounds should be convenient, reliable, easily quantifiable and physiologically relevant. in addition, it should allow evaluation of multiple samples in one experiment. although the es cell-based angiogenesis model fills most of these requirements, it remains time consuming since it proceeds in two culture steps and requires many manual interventions before being processed for angiogenesis visualization and quantification that may constitute an inconvenient for screening experiments.

matrix proteins, including type i collagen, support cell differentiation in many lineages  <cit> . a recent study indicated that es cells can undergo multi-lineage differentiation including differentiation into cells of the endothelial lineage when plated directly into collagen gels  <cit> . a 3d collagen environment for es cell differentiation then appears to constitute a mean to improve es two-step angiogenesis models. moreover, some early unpublished data have also postulated that es cell differentiation into a mixture of type i and type iii collagens could be used for the screening of angiogenesis regulating factors  <cit> . in this context, the aim of the present work was to simplify the in vitro differentiation model of es cells in order to establish and to validate a one-step model that may be relevant for the preclinical screening of active molecules on angiogenesis.

RESULTS
in order to simplify the two step es-based angiogenesis initial model, a first series of experiments was designed to test the ability of type i collagen to support the formation of ebs and of endothelial sprouts. a type i collagen gel was used since previous works have shown that sprouting angiogenesis can develop from ebs embedded in this matrix  <cit> , and since type i collagen was observed to support multilineage es cell differentiation  <cit> . es cells were directly seeded into type i collagen gels in the presence of angiogenic factors  in  <dig> mm-diameter dishes or in 12-well microplate format . vegf was added since it has been proven efficient for both es cell endothelial differentiation  <cit>  and es-derived eb sprouting angiogenesis  <cit> . in addition to the regulation of the early stages of mesoderm induction and angioblast formation  <cit> , fgf <dig> was also shown to increase vascular development in the embryoid body model  <cit> . in these conditions, formation of ebs was observed within a few days, as previously described in methylcellulose semi-solid differentiation medium  <cit> . first signs of eb sprouting were observed after day  <dig> of differentiation. these sprouts further extended and developed a complex cellular network after  <dig> days of differentiation. cd <dig> immunostaining experiments revealed that many sprouts were constituted of endothelial cells. ebs exhibiting cd31-positive sprouts were termed angiogenic. in the presence of both vegf and fgf <dig>  added at the initiation of the culture, near 30% of ebs  displayed an angiogenic phenotype, whereas less than 5% of ebs  were found angiogenic when no exogenous growth factor addition was done . to improve the number of angiogenic ebs, repeated addition of angiogenic factors were tested during the course of es cell differentiation in collagen gels. we have found that a second growth factor addition at day  <dig> of differentiation greatly improved the development of angiogenic ebs to a level similar to that observed in the initial two-step model  <cit> . in this condition,  <dig> to  <dig> ebs  can form from  <dig>  es cells when initially plated in  <dig> mm-diameter dishes, and we observed that more than 60% of ebs  displayed a sprouting angiogenic phenotype when two growth factor additions were performed . a representative sprouting angiogenic eb is illustrated in figure 1c.

in order to characterize the maturation level that can be achieved in endothelial sprouts, we then looked at vwf expression, a marker characteristic of mature endothelial cells, and investigated whether pericytes may be associated with endothelial sprouts by looking at the expression of ng <dig> proteoglycan. ng <dig> proteoglycan has been shown to be expressed by nascent pericytes during development  <cit> . such an association between endothelial cells and vascular mural cells was previously described in two steps more complex es cell-based differentiation models  <cit> . we observed that several cells located in the cd31-positive sprouts contained vwf, as shown by co-immunofluorescence studies . analysis of eb sprouts also revealed that several ng <dig> proteoglycan-positive cells can be found in the vicinity of the endothelial cells constituting the sprouts .

to validate the one-step model as a screening assay for both activators and inhibitors of angiogenesis, we examined whether known angiogenesis regulators were able to affect the sprouting response. after cd <dig> immunostainings, ebs exhibiting endothelial cd31-positive sprouts were selected for image capture. in each experiment, at least  <dig> different ebs and in most cases more than  <dig> ebs were analyzed per condition of test. the extent of the eb endothelial sprouting was quantified by morphometric analysis using the metamorph software. figure  <dig> illustrates the result of the image processing with the metamorph software. we first analyzed the respective contribution of vegf and of fgf <dig> on the eb endothelial sprouting response. for this experimental series, es cell differentiation was initiated in the presence of both vegf and fgf <dig> added at day  <dig>  the eb endothelial sprouting responses induced by the addition at day  <dig> of optimal vegf and fgf <dig> concentrations  <cit> , used alone or in combination, were quantified at day  <dig>  we found that vegf plays a key role in the formation of endothelial sprouts since its addition was responsible for approximately 60% of the eb endothelial sprouting response obtained when both vegf and fgf <dig> were present . the contribution of fgf <dig> was lower than that of vegf, and the effects of the two factors were found to be additive .

we also evaluated whether agents exhibiting known antiangiogenic activity were effective in this system. several angiogenesis inhibitors are now identified and characterized including matrix-derived and non-matrix-derived compounds  <cit> . among these two categories, platelet factor  <dig> , angiostatin  and transforming growth factor β <dig>  were tested on the endothelial sprouting response induced by angiogenic factors . quantitative analysis revealed that  <dig>  μg/ml pf <dig> decreased the length of endothelial sprouts. moreover, treatment with  <dig>  μg/ml angiostatin or with  <dig> ng/ml tgfβ resulted in highly significant inhibition of the mean length of total endothelial sprouts per eb .

discussion
in this paper, we report the development and the validation of a simple one-step es cell differentiation model for the screening of angiogenesis regulators. we provide evidence that this one-step model can recapitulate the various stages of sprouting angiogenesis, as initially reported for previously established two-step es differentiation models. moreover, we describe a standardized procedure to obtain reproducible and efficient development of endothelial sprouts from ebs using this one-step model. compared with the two-step procedure, only one growth factor addition is required after initial seeding without any further intervention, which greatly simplifies the test. in comparison with other available in vitro models, the one-step es cell based angiogenesis model shows the major advantage of reproducing at least three aspects of the sprouting angiogenesis response: proliferation, migration and vascular morphogenesis. as previously observed in two-step es cell differentiation procedures  <cit> , the vascular endothelial sprouts that develop in the one-step es cell model are associated with pericytes, which confers to the one-step model superiority to many in vitro angiogenesis models that mostly recapitulate only limited aspects of the angiogenic response  <cit> .

multiple steps of the angiogenic process may be altered by an angiogenesis-targeted drug. the fact that the es differentiation model mimicks the complexity of the sprouting angiogenesis response makes it relevant for further identification of novel molecules and mechanisms regulating this process. eb endothelial sprouting was specifically induced by angioactive molecules, namely vegf and to a minor extent fgf <dig>  and inhibited by known angiostatic factors. these data validate the one-step es differentiation model as a versatile angiogenesis system for the screening of both activators and inhibitors of angiogenesis.

the es differentiation one-step procedure is easier to use than the other 3d angiogenesis existing models since they all proceed into two steps and require extensive manipulations. screening experiments can be performed in both 6-well or 12-well-microplaque format that could be very useful for further adaptation of the model for automatization and may be convenient to further characterize molecules identified by primary screens using less complete cellular models.

CONCLUSIONS
thus, the one-step es-based angiogenesis model, that allows routine and reproducible accomplishment in a reduced time, constitutes a good alternative for existing in vitro angiogenesis models. in addition, in view of its simplicity, it allows an easy transfer to non-specialist investigators. we expect the one-step es angiogenesis model to be particularly valuable to extend drug discovery screening.

