BACKGROUND
surgical techniques are continuously evolving to be more efficient for patients and to reduce the duration of post-operative recovery. in gastrointestinal surgery, a major challenge is represented by anastomosis dehiscence  <cit> . recently, several studies have focused on identifying a strategy to reduce this complication, which represents a failure in the surgical procedure that can be potentially fatal  <cit> . some of these investigations have suggested using substances that are able to accelerate the wound healing process. regenerative medicine may offer some important guidance in this area  <cit> . the use of platelet-rich plasma  alone or in combination with growth factors   <cit>  naturally secreted by platelets, such as platelet-derived growth factor , transforming growth factor-β , and vascular endothelial growth factor , may play a role in improving anastomotic healing  <cit> . prp and prgf differ in composition and methods of preparation. several methods to produce a biologically active product have been developed and they differ in the concentration of growth factors, white blood cells, and characteristics of the fibrin scaffold  <cit> . prp was defined by ehrenfest et al.  <cit>  as a preparation with leucocytes and with a low-density fibrin network after activation. prgf contains moderate platelet concentration, no leukocytes, nor a three dimensional fibrin scaffold  <cit> . from a therapeutic perspective, there are two main advantages in using prgf. first is the release of proteins and growth factors from platelets that stimulate regeneration. second is the creation of a three-dimensional fibrin matrix that retains and releases growth factors and acts as a temporal scaffold for the cells  <cit> . furthermore, the absence of leukocytes is an important characteristic of prgf. leukocytes produce metalloproteinase, free radicals, reactive oxygen species, and nitrogen, which can cause damge to healing tissues  <cit> . the rationale for prp therapy lies in reversing the blood ratio by reducing the amount of red blood cells, which are less useful in the healing process, to approximately 5% and to increase the amount of platelets to 94% to stimulate recovery  <cit> . the use of autologous prp and prgf has been proposed for the treatment of several acute and chronic syndromes, such as for corneal epithelial defects and dry eye syndrome, avoiding gum bleeding during oral surgery, and in orthopaedic surgery . the most important feature of prp is that autologous products circumvent immunogenic reactions and disease transmission. according to dr. anitua, who first proposed the technique, prgf has some peculiar characteristics that may favour its use over that of prp. in particular, the lower number of leucocytes in the prgf may improve healing because of the absence of inflammatory cells  <cit> .

with each passing year, the number of relevant articles published in pubmed has increased ; however it is difficult to compare all published results, given the lack of uniformity in processing platelets and the different techniques used. papers dealing with the possible use of prp have not been in complete agreement. the majority suggest that these substances have a positive effect on wound healing of colonic anastomosis, while one paper  <cit>  indicated that application of prp could only increase fibrosis and granulation tissue, without improving the breaking strength of anastomotic sites. to date, all studies have dealt with prp, while none have tested the use of prgf on anastomosis healing.

our hypothesis was that prgf, rather than prp, could be more effective in promoting the healing of intestinal anastomosis because of its intrinsic characteristics . the purpose of the present study was to evaluate and compare the effects of prp and prgf on various parameters of anastomotic healing in a swine model.

RESULTS
assessment of the characteristics of autologous preparations
results from assessing the characteristics of the autologous preparations are reported in table  <dig>  the concentration of platelets and leukocytes of freshly collected whole blood for both groups were within the normal range of values for landrace pigs  . the concentration of platelets in prp was  <dig> -fold higher  than the concentration of whole blood, while in prgf, it was  <dig> -fold higher .table  <dig> comparison of the characteristics of the preparations 






a
p =  <dig> 


b
p =  <dig> 




surgical procedures
all animals recovered uneventfully from anaesthesia and there were no surgery-related complications in the postoperative period

macroscopic examination
macroscopic evaluation showed no evidence of leaking in any anastomoses in either the control or treated animals. anastomoses treated with prp showed more adhesion formation  compared to those treated with prgf  or controls ; nevertheless, this increase in adhesion formation was not significantly different . when adhesion formation was noted, it was scored  <dig> or  <dig>  with only one case in the prp group that was scored  <dig> . the median adhesion score for group prp was  <dig>  and  <dig> for group prgf .fig.  <dig> a grade  <dig> adhesion in the prp group




bursting pressure
bowel sections treated with prgf demonstrated more resistance at the bursting pressure test , although not significantly different from controls and prp-treated anastomoses. prp-treated anastomoses were significantly less resistant than intact intestinal tissue.table  <dig> bursting pressure measurements 


a
p =  <dig> 




histology
results of the histological evaluation are reported in table  <dig>  there was no significant difference among the samples treated with prp, prgf, and controls relative to inflammatory infiltrate, proliferation of fibroblasts, neovascularisation, or deposition of collagen .table  <dig> results of the histological evaluation 


fig.  <dig> histological appearance of the anastomotic site in each group: a,b control. c,d prgf. e,f prp, bar: 100 μ, a, c, e hematoxylin and eosin 10×. b, d, f trichrome masson staining 10×, *inflammation, black arrow: epithelization, white arrow: fibrosis




microscopic evaluation highlighted a significant increase in epithelization of the mucosa in the prgf-treated group 

discussion
during the early stages of intestinal wound healing, platelets play an important role during the initial 72 h after injury  <cit> . the release of growth factors from platelets mediates the healing process  <cit> . the use of autologous substances, such as platelet rich products, has been considered a promising advance for new surgical and clinical approaches. furthermore, recent advances in their use should eliminate the risk of immunological reactions. moreover, it is assumed that they increase the local growth factor concentrations at the site of healing, thereby accelerating the wound healing process  <cit> . this type of biological treatment mimics natural tissue healing, while optimising and reducing the time required  <cit> . thus, all proteins necessary for tissue repair are released locally.

to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study comparing prp and prgf healing effects on intestinal anastomosis.

bursting pressure is considered to be a more accurate measure as it reflects the physiologic strain in intestinal tissue rather than than the breaking strength  <cit> . intestinal healing is characterised by three phases of healing: inflammatory, proliferative, and the maturation phases. these steps occur between post-operative days  <dig> and  <dig>  from days  <dig> to  <dig>  and from days  <dig> to  <dig>  respectively  <cit> . usually, during the first phase, fibrin contributes to wound healing and strength, but the major strain is allocated to the sutures. in a normal setting, between days  <dig> and  <dig>  the anastomotic strength is lower due to fibrinolysis and collagen deposition. under such conditions, dehiscence of the suture line can easily occur. this study considered only the proliferative phase because all pigs were euthanized at day  <dig> after surgery. we specifically took into consideration this period because, in this phase, macrophages are involved in fibrin debridement  and natural growth factor production is at its maximum peak and might modulate fibrosis and angiogenesis  <cit> . the application of a prp or a prgf treatment should promote intestinal healing and lower the risk of dehiscence.

the results obtained from the present study highlighted that there are no significant differences between anastomotic samples treated with either prp or prgf preparations. bursting pressure showed a high resistance of prgf-treated anastomoses, in comparison with prp treated ones. a statistical significance was found between the prp-treated anastomoses and the healthy intestine. this finding could be due to the presence of leukocytes in the prp, which release substances  that may damage healing tissues. leukocytes, by participating in an inflammatory cascade, could decrease anastomotic bursting pressure more so than in the control anastomoses, where leukocytes concentration is lower. during the proliferative phase, an increase in neo-vascularisation, fibroblast proliferation, and collagen deposition should be noted along with a decrease in inflammation. however, in our study, no difference was found between groups regarding these parameters. our results showed only a better epithelization of the jejunal mucosa in the prgf-treated group. the data from this study are partially in accordance with the results of fresno et al.  <cit> . the authors employed a similar experimental design, but, following treatment of the anastomosis with the prp suspension, the anastomotic sites were covered with omentum. this could cause an increase in fibrosis at the anastomotic sites that could be considered a bias. in the present study, in order to avoid this type of interference, the omentum was not placed on the anastomosis site.

in our study anastomoses treated with prp showed more adhesion formation compared to samples treated with prgf or controls. these results could be explained by the composition of the prp, which contains leukocytes and platelets. adhesion formation is triggered by inflammatory mediators and by dispersion of fibrin onto the affected surface  <cit> . converseley, as reported by anitua et al.  <cit> , who first proposed the technique, prgf was found to not contain any leukocytes. instead, prgf was found to contain a moderate platelet concentration, which would circumvent all potential pro-inflammatory effects that could explain the higher number of adhesions in the prp group.

as already argued by fresno et al.  <cit> , the immersion of the intestinal edges in the treatment bath may present some issues. intestinal edges after a resection usually bleed, and may be contaminated with intestinal contents, thus potentially influencing prp or prgf efficiency and concentration.

some authors  <cit>  have investigated platelet rich plasma and considered eliminating leukocytes from such preparation so as to avoid higher concentrations of pro-inflammatory cytokines that might reduce tissue healing. the study by anitua et al.  <cit>  used prp that was either rich or poor in leucocytes in order to evaluate whether this could influence tissue healing; however, it appeared that leucocyte concentrations did not interfere with wound healing after oral surgery. some issues were raised by del buono and colleagues  <cit>  against the indiscriminate use of prp or prgf. they explained that these substances could successfully improve wound healing in orthopaedic and oral surgery, but should be carefully handled for other applications, because concentrations of prp or prgf, doses, timing and length of applications have not been defined yet. yamaguchi et al.  <cit>  investigated different concentrations of prp to evaluate dose-specific effects on intestinal anastomosis in rats and established that the optimal concentration of platelets should be around  <dig> -fold higher than that found in the initial blood collection. as also reported by yamaguchi et al.  <cit> , clinicians should be cautious in thinking “if some is good, more is better” as it does not apply to prp applications. it has been shown that platelet concentrations of  <dig> – <dig> -fold higher than that found in whole blood may interfere with the normal wound healing process  <cit> . in our study, platelet concentrations achieved in both groups  were  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold higher, respectively, than the initial ratio. this is higher than what is considered the optimal ratio to achieve a maximum effect from plasma-rich preparations on intestinal anastomosis  <cit>  and perhaps this could be the cause of the poor effect demonstrated in our study. reducing the platelet concentration to around  <dig> -times the plasma concentration or changing the method of its application at the anastomotic site may yeld different results.

fresno and colleagues  <cit>  did not find a significant difference in breaking strength when prp was applied to anastomoses in pigs, but they found a higher degree of fibrosis and granulation tissue. while the finding on bursting pressure is in accordance with our study, the difference between their histological findings and ours may be due to a certain degree of subjectiveness in the evaluation. yol and colleagues  <cit>  instead found that prp application increased the bursting strength of intestinal anastomoses in rats. in this case, the difference with our study may be due to differences in species , intestinal segment  and method of production of prp.

certainly, as in the study conducted by fresno and colleagues, our study is limited from having tested the two treatments together with the control in the same animal. it is possible that this was a confounding factor and that, eventually, resulted in growth factors from one preparation effecting sites that were distant from the application site.

further studies are needed to prove the effectiveness of platelet rich preparations in species other than rats and in different intestinal segments. furhtermore, methods that could modulate the final concentration of platelets in the preparation would be beneficial.

CONCLUSIONS
both prp and prgf suspensions should be considered a safe strategy and represent a relatively low-cost technology that are flexible enough to be applied in several therapeutic fields. no true benefit could be proven in our study compared to the no treatment following anastomoses formation, with the exception of enhanced epithelization of the mucosa in the prgf group. nevertheless, further studies are required to clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying the biological effects on wound healing and to understand how to improve this promising tool.

