BACKGROUND
sex differences in body size, or sexual size dimorphism , are widespread across the animal kingdom  <cit> , and hypothetically reflect the different selective pressures acting on males and females  <cit> . female-biased ssd  is the most common pattern, typical in invertebrates and ectothermic vertebrates. even though fecundity selection favoring large females  <cit>  is the most accepted explanation for female-biased ssd, two questions remain unsatisfactorily solved. first, what selective pressures act on males in order to keep them small  <cit>  in spite of the usually high genetic correlation between the sexes?  <cit> ; and second, what factors are responsible for the wide range of variation in ssd present in nature?  <cit> .

ssd is widespread among spiders . there is a general pattern of female-biased ssd which is highly variable among taxa  <cit> . additionally, spiders are the only group of free-living terrestrial organisms in which extreme ssd - i.e., females twice as large as males  <cit> -, is common, and in which this pattern has evolved several times independently  <cit> . most spider species exhibiting extreme ssd are found among orbicularian spiders  and the family thomisidae within the rta clade. however, some exceptional cases can be found in other taxa, including the mygalomorphae  <cit> . hormiga et al.  <cit>  in a study based on  <dig> families of orbicularian spiders  found that  <dig> out of  <dig> genera showed female-biased extreme ssd and that extreme ssd had been gained and lost several times across the phylogeny. vollrath & parker  <cit>  found that in web-building spiders ,  <dig> out of  <dig> species showed extreme ssd, and  <dig> out of the  <dig> species of sampled thomisidae also showed extreme ssd. in contrast none of the  <dig> species from the  <dig> families: pisauridae, lycosidae, salticidae, philodromidae, sparassidae, clubionidae and gnaphosidae, showed extreme ssd  <cit> . thus, spiders, especially those from the orbicularian clade and the family thomisidae, constitute a perfect system to study the evolution of extreme ssd.

in spiders, the most accepted hypothesis explaining the actual pattern of ssd is the fecundity selection hypothesis, by which females increase in size due to selection imposed on fecundity  <cit> . nevertheless, this hypothesis does not offer a solid explanation for the wide range of ssd found across spiders. in particular, fecundity selection does not explain why there are some species in which males grow almost as giant as females while in others males stay small while females grow gigantic. additionally, there is a strong controversy about which selective pressures act on male size and thus on the adaptative significance of ssd  <cit> . in spiders, males and females share the same lifestyles until maturation. following maturation males, which are generally the searching sex, change their lifestyle and start roaming, searching for females to mate with . as a consequence of this particular male lifestyle, many hypotheses have tried to explain the adaptive significance for the evolution of ssd in relation to male agility or the ability of males to find receptive females, which usually point to advantages of small body size  <cit> . however, a global and integrative explanation for the evolution of extreme ssd has not been achieved thus far .

the gravity hypothesis   <cit>  links the evolution of extreme ssd with the capacity of males to move on vertical surfaces. the gh predicts that smaller males should be favored because they climb faster and, as a result, these males would have an advantage either by scramble competition  or natural selection . although there is some controversy around the gh  <cit> , it has been shown that the relationship between climbing speed and body mass is curvilinear with an optimal body mass for climbing  <cit> . consequently, it has been suggested that extreme ssd has evolved only in those species that 1) live in high habitats and 2) in which females are larger than the optimal climbing mass.

however, in species living in high habitats spiders do not only walk or climb to disperse: they also bridge. bridging is a very common means of aerial locomotion in spiders  <cit>  that has nevertheless been relatively neglected in the literature . to bridge, a spider releases a line of silk that the wind attaches to a distant plant, and after actively tensing the line by pulling it back with its legs, the spider crosses hanging upside-down from the line  <cit> . different sources of evidence support the hypothesis that the morphology  of modern spiders  that hang upside-down from their webs, has evolved to facilitate bridging, allowing spiders to swing as pendulums from their silk threads  <cit> . this finding suggests that bridging plays an important role in the life of some spider taxa  <cit> , and that during evolutionary time morphological adaptations to bridging locomotion should be expected in spiders that live in high places  <cit> . given that dispersal through bridging is very uncommon among very large individuals , constraints on bridging could help to explain the evolution of ssd in spiders.

morse & fritz  <cit>  hypothesized that heavy misumena vatia females did not use bridging for long-distance dispersal because, due to the elasticity of silk, the sag of the fiber would bring the spiders down to the ground when they crossed their silk bridges. this hypothesis is confirmed by a biomechanical model showing that large spiders cannot use bridging as an efficient dispersal mechanism. large spiders are limited to short bridging events or to bridging events that start high above the surface . spiders have up to  <dig> different types of silk glands which spin fibrous silks characterized by different mechanical properties and linked to distinct ecological functions  <cit> . the kind of silk used to bridge is spun in the minor ampullate glands  <cit> . some remarkable properties of this kind of silk are the thin diameter of its fibers, their low strength and their high extensibility  <cit> . although spiders have some control on the diameter of their minor ampullate silk fibers  <cit> , as well as the diameter of other types of lines , phenotypic plasticity in thread diameter is severely limited  <cit> , possibly constraining the ability of large spiders to bridge. thus, while giant female spiders perform short bridging events during web building  <cit> , large adult web-building spiders move less often and shorter distances than juveniles  <cit> . this could be due to the fact that large spiders are not able to bridge long distances efficiently .

it is easy to see how a small size could be favored in habitats in which bridging is the most frequent mode of locomotion. if large spiders forego bridging, they will have to walk along leaves, twigs and branches, climbing down to the ground, walking towards their target and climbing up again. other than the extra time and energy expended by climbing up and down, this implies an increase in the length of their trajectory. in addition, once spiders are morphologically adapted to bridge, this would be particularly disadvantageous, as their ill-adapted morphology makes large spiders clumsy walking on the ground  <cit> . if, on the other hand, these large spiders choose to bridge, the short distance they can span in a single bridging event will force them to perform a greater number of bridging events to cover the same distance, as compared to smaller individuals, thus expending more time and energy by having to build more lines  <cit> . bridging imposes a final cost on large spiders linked to the gh of ssd  <cit> . the actual trajectory of a spider during bridging has some resemblance with an inverted parabola: from the midpoint on, spiders must actually climb to reach their goal. if climbing speed decreases in spiders of relatively large mass, as a few studies have shown,  <cit> , large size will be disadvantageous during the final stages of bridging. even though some studies have failed to find a negative relationship between body size and climbing speed in spider males  <cit> , the lack of this pattern in males, which exhibit a small range of variation in size than females, could be the product of the "ghost of the evolution past"  <cit> . this would imply that we could not find a climbing disadvantage for larger males because the sizes of extant males fall below the threshold beyond which body size constraints climbing speed. indeed, using a sufficiently wide range of body sizes, researchers showed that the relationship between climbing speed and this trait has an optimum at intermediate value, after which climbing speed decreases with body size, as predicted by the gh  <cit> .

given that males are the searching sex in spiders  <cit> , selective pressures on morphological traits enhancing mobility in general, and bridging in particular, should be much stronger in males than in females. hence, in species living in high habitats, where bridging is a common mode of locomotion  <cit> , being a good "bridger" could be adaptive for males, since they could be favored from sexual selection by scramble competition. previous studies have already suggested the advantage of more mobile males related to scramble competition in spiders with extreme ssd as well as the implications in the evolution of ssd  <cit> . considering the biomechanical constraint of the model mentioned above and the low rate at which giant females seem to bridge, we hypothesise that there should be a negative relationship between body size and bridging ability and that this bridging constraint should have played a role in the evolution of extreme ssd in spiders. in this paper we test these hypotheses.

a more comprehensive way to introduce these predictions is assuming a trade-off between traits positively correlated to body size and traits negatively correlated to body size . assuming heritability in body size, if bridging is negatively correlated with body size and other traits are positively correlated with large size, such as fecundity in females  <cit> , and in males walking on the ground  <cit>  and/or advantages in male-male contest competition  <cit> , two scenarios are possible, the evolution of extreme ssd and the evolution from extreme ssd to reversed monomorphism  <cit> . the evolution of male and female body sizes along the trajectory of the trade-off will depend on the direction and magnitude of the net effect of opposing selective forces, those that favor a large body size on the one hand and those that favor a small body size on the other. furthermore, this net effect of opposing selective forces will also have to overcome the genetic correlation between the sexes  <cit>  for extreme ssd to evolve. reversal to monomorphism could evolve in environments in which dispersal by bridging is more important in females than fecundity  and/or contest competition or walking on the ground is more important than bridging for males .

here we use bridging propensity, i.e., the probability of building a bridging line and crossing it by walking upside-down under laboratory conditions of constant wind speed, as a proxy for the ease with which spiders can bridge in nature. the rationale of the approach is that if larger spiders have a stronger constraint for bridging, then selection should have favored a lower propensity to disperse by this mechanism in larger individuals. we measured bridging propensity in laboratory conditions for adult males and females of  <dig> spider species of considerable phylogenetic diversity , both within the orbicularian clade and the family thomisidae -rta clade-, covering a broad range of spider body sizes . after the trials were finished all the spiders were weighed and their carapace width  measured. to analyze the data we used phylogenetically controlled analyses. we predicted that i) ssd would explain sex differences in bridging propensity, in the sense that when both males and females are small and of similar size both would bridge at the same rate, but when females start growing to a large size and males remain relatively small, then females would bridge at a much lower rate; ii) there is a negative relationship between body size and the probability of bridging for both males and females.

bridging propensity is the proportion of females or males that bridge.

RESULTS
bridging propensity vs. ssd
as predicted, we found a negative relationship between ssd and sexual dimorphism in bridging propensity. the phylogenetically controlled gls analysis showed that the differences in bridging propensity across species were significantly explained by ssd, whether measured as body size  or as body mass . this relationship was negative for both variables , which implies that when females are much larger than males, males bridge at higher rates relative to females . the variation of the gls analyses including male bridging propensity as well as female and male body size as independent variables, with female bridging propensity as the dependent variable, also revealed that ssd was negatively related to differential bridging propensity. after controlling for male body size and male bridging propensity, female body size was negatively related to female bridging propensity for both cw and body mass . taken together, our results show that a lower bridging propensity of females is linked to stronger female-biased ssd across taxa.

bridging propensity vs. size in females and males
both females and males tended to bridge less when larger. the gls analyses ran separately for females showed that female size, measured either as cw or body mass, explained the proportion of bridging females, with the larger taxa having a lower propensity to bridge . likewise, males with wider carapaces were significantly less prone to bridge , and a negative relationship was also found for body mass, although this last relationship was only marginally significant . the slopes for males and females  differ in almost one order of magnitude, being those of males much flatter than those of females. actually, when we combined males and females in the same gls analysis we found a significant interaction between sex and body size, measured either as mass  or cw .

empirical probability of bridging as a function of size
and   

respectively, where body mass, m, is expressed in mg and carapace width, cw, in mm. these equations can be used to determine the maximum body mass and size beyond which spiders do not bridge. we define the bridging threshold as the body mass or size beyond which the probability of bridging declines below  <dig> . setting p =  <dig>  in equations  <dig> and  <dig> and solving for m and cw, we obtain that spiders in our sample size were very unlikely to bridge if their body mass was greater than  <dig>  mg  or their carapace was wider than  <dig>  mm  .

discussion
as we predicted following our extended version of the gh, ssd  clearly explains the different bridging abilities between males and females, suggesting that in species living in high habitats, selection has favored small size in males via the enhancement of bridging. due to the genetic correlation in body size between the sexes, this force acting upon males should have been strong enough to overcome the strong fecundity selection acting on females, which is the driving force of female gigantism. our results show that in species where females are small and of similar size to males , both sexes bridge at a similar, and substantially high rate, but when ssd increases and females become much larger than males, these relatively giant females stop using bridging to move, while males keep bridging at a very high rate. this pattern showing that large body size constrains bridging is also found when we analyze the sexes separately. thus, body size alone can explain a large part of the variation on the proportion of females that bridged across species. although we found the same trend in males, the results tended to be less clear - probably because the size of all males examined was too low to severely constrain bridging locomotion  and a high proportion of males bridged even in the largest species. therefore, within bridging species, the current body size distribution of male body sizes could be the product of the "ghost of the evolution past"  <cit> , which refers to the fact that the evolutionary processes that we can measure today do not necessarily reflect adaptive evolution occurring in the past . in other words, if we measure natural selection within a species in nature, and find that smaller sizes are not favored during mate search, the underlying reason could be that all male sizes fall below the bridging threshold, and this by no means would mean that selection for bridging had not originated the pattern of ssd in the evolutionary past , but rather that past selection has been stronger in males . the strength of the evolutionary comparative method relies precisely in comparing species , allowing expanding the range of variation of traits and thus increasing the chances of detecting adaptive patterns. together, our results confirm a size-mediated trade-off involving bridging which leads to the evolution of extreme ssd. in species living in high habitats, selection would have favored a small size in males via the enhancement of bridging. by contrast, in females, a relatively low environmental stochasticity in prey availability would select for fecund  females that would need to disperse relatively little, leading to the evolution of extreme ssd. a reversal to monomorphism could also occur when an increase in environmental stochasticity for prey availability selects for high dispersal rates in females or when male-male contest competition or other dispersal modes favoring a large size become more important for males. the fact that the slope of the relationship between size and bridging propensity is much steeper in females than in males also supports the hypothesis that selection in the past has been much stronger in males than in females, making the slope of the trade-off to tilt up in males  <cit> .

a question remaining to be tested would be whether the evolution of ssd is a cause or a consequence of bridging dispersal in elevated habitats. although the final answer will have to wait for a larger study than this one, including species with and without ssd, with and without bridging dispersal, our data suggest that selection to preserve bridging in males has induced ssd when female size has increased. at least in the orbicularian clade, the ancestral state would be small males and females  <cit> , and we can hypothesize that both sexes bridged . if this was indeed the ancestral state, it follows that through the evolution of the clade females of different species have repeatedly and independently foregone bridging because the advantages of increasing body size  were larger than the costs of losing mobility. males, on the other hand, have remained small enough to bridge. in this scenario, ssd is the result of two selective pressures: on females to increase their fecundity  <cit>  and on males to retain their bridging ability. for the family thomisidae, on the other hand, the lack of a resolved phylogeny and the paucity of our data preclude us from advancing even a preliminary answer to the question. however, the hypothesized trade-off in figure  <dig>  and the evidence supporting it in this paper, suggests that bridging would have always preceded the evolution of extreme ssd, as this is a plausible scenario in which opposing selection for large size in females and small size in males leads to extreme ssd. it is more difficult to think about a possible reversed scenario, in which extreme ssd would lead to an increase in sex differences of bridging propensity.

the mechanical properties of the silk prevent large spiders from bridging , and the threshold of  <dig>  mg observed in our data  is in good agreement with the biomechanical model, which predicts that bridging should be constrained beyond masses of  <dig> mg. consequently extreme ssd can be expected in high habitats and in those bridging species in which females are larger than the threshold to bridge efficiently, even if they live just barely above the ground. beyond the bridging threshold, females can still evolve to be larger , but males will not. hence, this bridging constraint and the associated trade-off  would decelerate the rate of male and female body size coevolution, relaxing the genetic correlation of body size between the sexes and leading eventually to the evolution of extreme female-biased ssd.

in addition, there is some evidence suggesting that silk properties also depend on the feeding condition of the spider, as starved spiders produce silk of worse quality  <cit> . this fact would be particularly relevant to females since they must allocate their nutritional and energetic resources not just to produce silk for bridging, but also in the production of offspring and silk for the egg sac  <cit> . thus, beyond a certain body size threshold, this reproductive trade-off could have also favored females that do not use bridging locomotion and save resources to invest in reproduction, particularly when fecundity selection is the main driving force of body size. males, on the other hand, by being released from fecundity selection, could be favored by having large protein reserves to spin the necessary silk to move around at the price of having the burden of carrying heavier body masses during mate search, which has been shown to be detrimental for bridging  <cit> . alternatively, selection could favor a smaller size that would allow males to bridge efficiently without having a high demand of nutrients. assuming that the cost of energy and nutrient expenditure of smaller males is relatively less than the benefit of bridging more efficiently, we propose that the second explanation is more likely to be true.

the hypothesis that selection favoring bridging efficiency in males has been responsible for the evolution of extreme ssd is not incompatible with other hypotheses that explain selection on small males. on the contrary, we suggest that our hypothesis is complementary. for example, the differential mortality model predicts that smaller males are favored because the high predation risk that males suffer during mate searching relaxes male-male contest competition for females, and ultimately selection favoring large males. this in turn favors early maturation because it improves male viability and his chances to reproduce  <cit> . certainly, direct selection favoring smaller bridging males and indirect viability selection also favoring smaller males can work synergistically. the gh  <cit>  also predicts that small males are favored because they move faster in vertical surfaces. additionally, a recent revision of this hypothesis shows a curvilinear relationship between body mass an climbing speed, proposing that extreme ssd would have evolved in species where females live in high habitats and are larger than the optimal body mass for climbing  <cit> . whether selection for fast climbing or efficient bridging has been stronger over evolutionary time depends on how often spiders use each of these two kinds of locomotion, and also on how often they walk on the ground, which has actually been shown to favor relatively larger males  <cit> . these different sources of selection need to be evaluated with field work. nonetheless, as far as we know, there is only one study  that has evaluated different kinds of locomotion in spiders, and this study shows that bridging is by far the most frequent mechanism used to move and that smaller males are favored at finding mates  <cit> . however, we would like to stress that this extended version of the gravity hypothesis, also considering bridging locomotion, supports the more global explanation that in general gravity is an important factor to explain the evolution of extreme ssd. furthermore, this "bridging gh" even explains the exceptional cases in which there is no extreme ssd in species with relatively giant females living on relatively tall vegetation, as it is the case for some species within the families theraphosidae, ctenidae, oxyopidae and sparassidae. the absence of extreme ssd in these taxa could be related to the fact that these species have not evolved bridging capabilities or bridging morphologies  <cit>  and consequently the selective pressures to keep males small would be less strong. finally, our hypothesis and the fecundity selection hypothesis  <cit>  are not mutually exclusive either, as the second only explains why females are large, not why males are relatively small in some species with large females and not in others. rather, a bridging-fecundity trade-off acting on females can help to explain the evolution of extreme ssd .

CONCLUSIONS
bridging is a neglected dispersal mode that can explain the evolution of extreme ssd in spiders. physical constraints make bridging inefficient for large spiders. thus, in species where bridging is a very common mode of locomotion, small males, by being more efficient bridgers, will enjoy more mating opportunities and thus will be better at scramble competition to reach receptive females. while there is general agreement that fecundity selection increasing female size is quantitatively the most significant factor that can explain the actual pattern of ssd in spiders  <cit>  our hypothesis helps to solve the controversial question of what keeps the males small  <cit> , and also contributes to explain the wide range of ssd in spiders, which the fecundity hypothesis can not explain. hence, extreme ssd should always be expected in species that commonly use bridging locomotion and in which females are large and have a low need to disperse.

