BACKGROUND
gene regulatory networks play an essential role in controlling gene expression and ensuring that the right genes are expressed or silenced at the right time in the right place to make the organism function appropriately. better understanding of gene regulatory structure aids biological researchers and biochemical engineers in obtaining more complete views of the complex gene expression and regulatory mechanisms in organisms.

in the gene regulation process, an active transcription factor  can bind dna and control gene expression. however, many tfs are not inherently active. complex mechanisms, such as forming dimers, interacting with signal metabolites or binding specific micro-rnas, are needed in order to control the activities of these tfs  <cit> . the activities of tfs also differ in different environments or during specific periods of cell development. this activation level is called transcription factor activity   <cit>  . thus, tfa is an essential component of gene regulatory networks. it regulates gene expression in response to internal and external signals to ensure appropriate gene expression.

since tfa is governed by various complex molecular interactions, it is difficult to determine directly from experiments, especially if the activation mechanism is unknown. however, it is possible to computationally predict the change of tfas relative to a reference state using transcriptome data and a known tf-gene network architecture  <cit> . network component analysis  developed by liao et al. defines the problem of calculating tfas as optimization of a linear least square matrix decomposition. liao et al. solve the problem using an expectation maximization  approach  <cit> . fast network component analysis  uses singular value decomposition  and a matrix projection technique to approximate the linear least square matrix decomposition problem defined in nca <cit> . similarly, alter and golub use svd and pseudo-inverse projection, and integrate chip and microarray data to calculate the hidden tfa layer between tfs and genes  <cit> . chip data provides additional information on proteins' dna binding occupancy. gao et al. developed an algorithm that combines microarray data for mrna expression and transcription factor occupancy to define the regulatory network  to predict tfas based on chip and transcriptome data using multivariate regression and backward variable selection  <cit> . with the predicted tfas, gao et al. calculate the tf-gene coupling factor using pearson correlation  <cit> . boulesteix et al. applied statistically inspired modification of the partial least square  algorithm to find tfas  <cit> . many more complex models are also applied to predict tfas. for example, nachman et al. apply the bayesian network approach to provide a probabilistic model to predict tfas  <cit> . the state-space model by li et al. assumes the tfas are affected by the tf gene expressions of previous time points  <cit> . probabilistic dynamical models by sanguinetti et al. consider the possibility of the same tf having different activities on different target genes  <cit> . a gaussian process model developed by gao et al. uses the bayesian marginalization approach to predict tfas  <cit> . besides predicting tfas from gene expression data and tf network structures from experiments and literature data, dna sequence motif information is also widely used  in many methods to infer potential tf-gene links to obtain a more complete tf network structure and improve the prediction of tfas  <cit> . however, compared to matrix decomposition and regression approaches, these complex models require more computational power. thus, these complex models either cannot deal with large scale tfas or they predict large scale tfas by converting tfas into binary.

high-throughput technologies have led to many algorithms for the reconstruction of large scale gene regulatory networks  <cit> . for example, many sequence analysis approaches which identify potential tf binding sites have been developed  <cit> . however, many of the predicted potential tf binding sites are not functional   <cit> . from chip-chip technology, potential gene regulatory effects can be derived by identifying the portions of a genome that are bound by a particular tf in vivo  <cit> . transcriptome data  measured by genome-wide dna microarrays are widely used for gene regulatory network reconstructions. for instance, stuart et al. use correlation coefficients between mrna levels of genes as relevance scores to reconstruct correlation networks  <cit> . the interacting genes are predicted by detecting the correlation score above some set threshold. other algorithms such as relnet   <cit>  and aracne   <cit>  use mutual information as the relevance scores. the clr   <cit>  algorithm uses an adaptive background correction method on the relevance scores to improve precisions  <cit> . clr significantly improved the performance of gene regulatory network reconstruction, and is widely adopted in the latest developed gene regulatory network reconstruction algorithms. in the field well known conference on dialogue for reverse engineering assessments and methods   <cit> , many winning algorithms are based on clr. for examples, the best performer algorithm in dream <dig> challenge  <dig>  synergy augmented clr , introduced three way mutual information instead of the pair-wise mutual information in the original clr  <cit> . madar et al. developed a ordinary differential equation  based dynamic model extension of clr  clr integrated with inferelator  <dig> ) to treat steady-state data and time-series data separately and had an outstanding performance on dream <dig> and dream <dig> 100-gene in silico network challenge  <cit> . huynh-thu et al. developed a regression and tree based algorithm to reconstruct gene regulatory networks and awarded the best performer in dream <dig> in silico multifactorial challenge  <cit> . pinna et al. developed a graph analysis based algorithm to predict directed gene regulatory network from gene knockout experiments  <cit> .

many gene regulatory network reconstruction algorithms focus only on time series transcriptome data to develop dynamic models  <cit> . these include network identification by multiple regression  <cit> , microarray network identification  <cit>  and multi-scale time-correlation estimation  <cit> . time-series network identification  <cit> , directed information-based clr  <cit> . dynamic bayesian network models use a bayesian framework to reconstruct gene regulatory networks  <cit> .

time-series based algorithms and dynamic bayesian networks models can provide realistic models to reconstruct gene regulatory networks. however, due to a lack of closely spaced time-series data and computational power, these algorithms are difficult to apply on a genome-wide scale. relevance score based algorithms are more efficient computationally and can integrate many different types of transcriptome data.

the standard simplified two-layer  model assumes a gene regulatory network model in which expressed tfs affect their target genes directly, despite the fact that tfa plays an important role in gene regulation. this simplification may lead to large false positive detection rates. recently, the problem that tf gene expression does not necessarily correlate with target gene expression was noted in  <cit> . this discrepancy was addressed using a knowledge base representation of a tf expression by averaging the expressions of its target genes  <cit> . in our gtrnetwork model, we introduce a hidden layer of tfas into relevance score approaches which connects tfs and their target genes. the three layer model  is more realistic than the two-layer model, and more biologically reasonable than the knowledge base representation model. the gtrnetwork model results in an approach to reconstruct large scale genome-wide gene regulatory networks that is both biologically more meaningful and computationally feasible.

the proposed gene expression and transcription factor activity based relevance network  is a novel gene regulatory network reconstruction algorithm. it introduces a hidden layer of tfas into relevance score based network reconstruction algorithms . the gtrnetwork combines relevance score based algorithms and tfa prediction algorithms, and generally follows two major steps. in step  <dig>  tfa ratios are predicted from transcriptome data and a specified tf-gene network topology. transcript abundance ratios can be obtained from cdna microarray or short read sequencing technology data. tf-gene network topologies can be assembled from online databases, such as regulondb  <cit> . however, tfa prediction algorithms are only based on the known tf-gene network topology and not able to predict new regulatory links. in step  <dig> of gtrnetwork, gene regulatory networks are reconstructed from the gene expression ratio data and the predicted tfas. instead of using gene expression level as the only input to detect relationships between tfs and genes, gtrnetwork uses the relevancies between tfs and genes estimated based on the tfa and gene expression ratios. a check operon step can be used to improve the sensitivity of regulatory link detection. when gene operon information is available, it can be integrated after obtaining the reconstructed gene regulatory networks. by using gene operon information, when one gene in the operon is detected as a tf target, other genes in the same operon are automatically linked to the same tf.

RESULTS
selection of tfa prediction algorithms and network reconstruction algorithms
different tfa prediction algorithms and network reconstruction algorithms affect the performance of the gtrnetwork method. in this research, the task is to reconstruct gene regulatory networks of e. coli in the whole genome scale, which includes over  <dig> genes and  <dig> tfs. in tfa prediction algorithms, only the algorithms using matrix decomposition and regression approaches could fit the computational requirements and scale needs of gtrnetwork algorithm for a whole genome. three major approaches to predict tfas are: gnca-r which uses expectation maximization   <cit> , fastnca which uses singular value decomposition   <cit> , and simpls which uses partial least square  regression  <cit> .

similar scale and computational power requirements as the tfa prediction algorithms exist in regulatory network reconstruction algorithms using tfas and gene expression levels. the relevance scores are calculated by either pearson correlation coefficients or adaptive partitioning mutual information   <cit> . while using relevance scores approach on microarray experiments, different genes may have different background noise in different patterns and scales. for example, relevance scores may fail to distinguish direct interaction from indirect influences when the experimental conditions are unevenly sampled, or when the microarray normalization fails to remove false background correlations  <cit> . research by faith et al.  <cit>  showed that using a background correction in the relevance score based network reconstruction process reduces the false positive detection rate of regulatory links and significantly improves the performance of the network reconstruction. the context likelihood relatedness   <cit>  algorithm provides background correction on relevance scores in gtrnetwork.

gtrnetwork algorithm testing
the performance of the gtrnetwork algorithm using different combinations of tfa prediction algorithm and relevance score based network inference algorithms have been tested. three tfa prediction algorithms  and two relevance score functions  have been tested with or without using clr background correction. the gtrnetwork algorithm using the expression level of tfs as tfas was also tested to demonstrate its performance without including the tfa layer. detailed information on the tested algorithms can be found in table  <dig> 

gtrnetwork algorithms using different combination of tfa prediction algorithm and relevance score based network inference algorithms.

to test the performance of the gtrnetwork algorithm using tf-gene network topologies providing different levels of information as inputs, the training datasets of input initial tf-gene network topologies are obtained by randomly knocking out 70%, 50%, 30% or 10% of links from the tf-gene regulatory links dataset of regulondb  <dig>   <cit> . the testing datasets of tf-gene networks are the links that have been removed from the training datasets respectively. thus, the ability of the algorithm to predict the removed regulatory links is tested. the transcriptome data input for testing the gtrnetwork algorithm is an e. coli gene expression data set integrating  <dig> transcriptome experimental conditions on  <dig> gene probes from the m3d database  <cit> . the operon information was downloaded from the regulondb  <dig>  database  <cit>  and used in the check operon step to find more regulatory links. gtrnetwork algorithms were applied to the input training datasets to reconstruct gene regulatory networks with different network sizes. the results are compared with the testing datasets described above and the precision and recall  values are calculated for each network:      

on each percentage level of input training dataset, the test is repeated five times to estimate the stability of gtrnetwork algorithms. in the precision-recall plots, all algorithm combinations show the same trend: as recall value increases, precision decreases. . at the same recall level, higher precision suggests better performance of the algorithm; while at the same precision, the larger recall value shows better performance of the algorithm. and the area under precision-recall curve  for each test are calculated . the larger auprc value tells us the better performance. the test results for all combinations of the gtrnetwork algorithm are shown in additional file  <dig> 

there are four factors which affect the performance of gtrnetwork: the tfa prediction algorithm, the relevance score function, the background correction effect, and the network sizes of initial tf-gene network topology. figure  <dig> shows that using predicted tfa information from em or svd-based method significantly improved the performance of the gene regulatory network reconstruction. . the apmi relevance score function gives slightly better performance than the correlation relevance score function. . however, there is no clear difference between using or not using the background correction of clr. . the performance of most algorithm combinations is relatively consistent while using different level of known knowledge of the initial tf-gene network topologies. however, when using the 90% of known tf-gene links as the initial network topology, the performances drops significantly. this performance drop is expected because as the training data  increases, the testing data is reduced. many predicted links are already known, and only few links can be identified as new predicted links. also many new predicted links might not be included in the testing dataset thus not being verified as a true positive prediction. however, the unverified prediction could still be true since the testing dataset is not a complete dataset; our knowledge of the complete biology of this system is still incomplete. when the portion of the known tf-gene links is increased in the training data, the total number of predicted new links decreases. at the same time, the number of unknown regulatory links in prediction would not change, or even increase because of more complete training information. thus, the portion of unknown regulatory links in the prediction is increased. in this case, the testing is closer to a prediction. the verification based only on known knowledge cannot reflect the real performance of identifying potential new gene regulatory targets .

in conclusion, the algorithms using em-based or svd-based tfa prediction methods along with the apmi relevance score gave the best performance. in general, using or not using clr background correction does not give significant differences in performance, but since clr has low computational requirements  and has been shown helpful in gene regulatory reconstruction algorithms  <cit> , we suggest the use of clr background correction in the gtrnetwork algorithm. thus, the e-a-c  combination is used as the default gtrnetwork algorithm in the testing and application below.

a comparison between the original clr  <cit>  and gtrnetwork algorithm is also applied on the m3d e. coli data . comparisons between clr algorithm and many other gene regulatory network reconstruction algorithms have been done in the clr paper  <cit> . and many dream winning algorithms, e.g. saclr  <cit>  and genei <dig>  <cit> , have compared themselves with clr on the m3d e. coli data and found comparable performance with clr  <cit> . gtrnetwork outperforms clr significantly when we use the full tf-gene regulatory information from regulondb  <dig>  as the initial tf-gene network topology . however, the result is predictable since gtrnetwork uses the additional information of tf-gene links as input, and all other algorithms only use the list of tfs as input. while using a 50% randomly knocked out tf-gene regulatory links from regulondb  <dig>  as the training initial tf-gene network topology, and the removed regulatory links in the training dataset as the testing data, this situation would be more relative to a real biological application. in most biological cases, only limited tf-gene regulatory information is known, and the task of gene regulatory network reconstruction algorithms is to identify new regulatory links. the result still shows stronger performance of the gtrnetwork algorithm on the task of identifying new regulatory networks based on known knowledge of gene regulatory networks .

application of gtrnetwork algorithm
according to the test results above, the e-a-c algorithm combination best fits the current known gene regulatory network topology from regulondb  <dig> . this algorithm combination was applied using the full set of regulondb  <dig>  tf-gene links as the initial network topology. the gene expression data of e. coli integrating  <dig> transcriptome experiment conditions on  <dig> gene probes from the m3d database was used as the transcriptome data input. resulting gene regulatory networks with sizes ranging from  <dig> links to  <dig> links were reconstructed. different relevance score thresholds were set to reconstruct gene regulatory networks with different sizes. higher thresholds result in smaller regulatory networks with fewer false positives. lower thresholds give more complete networks, but with more false positives. a check operon step using operon information from regulondb  <dig>  was applied to improve the sensitivity of the reconstructed regulatory networks. the complete detailed predicted results are shown in additional file  <dig> 

in the reconstructed 100-link regulatory network, there are three new predicted regulatory links: dica-insd, dica-intq, dida-ydfe. these new links are biologically verifiable since insd, intq and ydfe are in the same operon with a tf binding site of regulator dica, according to the binding-site information obtained from regulondb  <dig>   <cit> . in the reconstructed 200-link regulatory network, besides the three new links predicted in the 100-links network, another  <dig> new regulatory links were predicted . evidence of biological validity of  <dig> of these  <dig> new links can be found in the literature or in databases such as ecocyc  <cit> . for example, iscr is an iron-sulfur cluster regulator  <cit>  and fdx, hsca, hscb and iscx are all involved in the iron-sulfur cluster assembly process.

new regulatory links of e. coli predicted in a reconstructed gene regulatory network of size of  <dig> links .

the 600-link reconstructed gene regulatory network contains  <dig> new predicted gene regulatory links, including links predicted by checking operon information. these  <dig> predicted links appear biologically meaningful. for instance, the ferric uptake regulator, fur, is predicted to have links with many ferrous iron transporters and storage related genes , ydie, yqjh). many of these new predicted targets have unknown biological function, such as inner membrane protein gene, yban, and secreted protein gene, ynce. the fact that these genes may be part of the fur regulon suggests that their function may be related to iron uptake .


                              efeu

                              ybdb 

                              bfd

                              bfr

                              efeb

                              efeo

                              yban

                              ydie

                              ynce

                              yqjh
genes predicted as the targets of regulator fur in the reconstructed regulatory network of size of  <dig> links. gene function information is downloaded from the ecogene database  <cit> .

despite the fact that e. coli is so well-characterized, there are still many genes that have no known regulators. the gtrnetwork predictions help discover the regulators of those genes still have no known regulators. in the  <dig> predicted links, there are  <dig> predicted target genes which previously had no known regulators .

the reconstructed gene regulatory networks with potential new gene regulatory links can be used again in the application of predicting tfas and identify more significantly changed tfas in response to the experiment condition changes. for example, brynildsen et al. used the gene regulatory network obtained from regulondb and nca to predict tfas of e. coli under isobutanol stress from transcriptome data and identified  <dig> significantly changed tfas in response to the isobutanol condition  <cit> . we reanalyzed their transcriptome data using our reconstructed gene regulatory network, including the  <dig> predicted new links. this additional of the new regulatory links resulted in another  <dig> significantly changed tfas in response to the isobutanol condition .

                              nada, pnuc, pncb, nadb
bolded genes have significant changes in expression according to brynildson's paper  <cit> . underlined genes are predicted new regulatory target genes of the tf from gtrnetwork.

discussion
in the result section, the tests of combinations of algorithms for gtrnetwork focused on finding the best algorithm combination to give the most precise prediction and maximum recall. the test results showed that the introduction of tfa improved the prediction precision and recall rate of relevance score based gene regulatory network reconstruction significantly. the best combinations of tfa predict algorithm and relevance score functions, in terms of precision and recall depend on the sizes of the known initial tf-gene network topologies.

besides precision and recall of predictions, other properties such as the run times of algorithms are important. among the tfa prediction algorithms, the svd-based, fastnca algorithm is the fastest one. fastnca  is  <dig> to  <dig> times faster than simpls  and gnca-r  . apmi takes about  <dig> seconds to generate the relevance score matrix, while using correlation as the relevance score gets the score matrix over  <dig> times faster . applying clr background correction finishes in seconds but can improve the precision of the reconstructed network  <cit> . thus, the most time efficient algorithm combination of gtrnetwork is the svd-correlation-clr background correction  combination. although under some conditions, s-c-c does not perform as well as other combinations, it provides a quick estimation with relatively reliable results. this algorithm combination could be used to quickly generate a general view of the network.

the run times of the three tfa prediction algorithms pls, em, svd, and the two relevance score functions: apmi and correlation.

input: gene expression data: m3d e. coli microarray experiments.  <dig> experiment conditions and  <dig> gene probes. tf-gene network topology: regulondb  <dig>  gene regulatory network with  <dig> regulatory links.

machine: cpu intel core i <dig>  <dig> @ <dig> ghz. ram:  <dig>  gb. os: windows  <dig> professional 64-bit.

the algorithm combinations that use regression-based simpls to predict tfas are not as precise as the other combinations. however, simpls does not have as many restrictions as nca algorithms have, such as the non-redundancy and full column and row rank of the initial network topology. thus, simpls does not discard as much information while preprocessing data to fit the input criteria. studies show that it can predict regulatory links that gnca-r and fastnca could not  <cit> . this property of simpls is especially important when there are some regulators or genes of interest, but other tfa prediction algorithms delete these interesting regulators or genes to fit the nca criteria . there is no optimal combination of algorithms for gtrnetwork; instead, the user needs to choose the appropriate algorithm combination based on their input data and other requirements.

the tfa prediction model does not need any biological knowledge on the detailed mechanisms of the activation of tfs. the model assumes that all of the complex effects that contribute to the change of tfa are included in the predicted tfas and the control strengths. thus, the gtrnetwork algorithm is not limited to prokaryotes, but can also be applied to eukaryotes. we plan to apply this method to eukaryotes such as yeast and plants in the near future.

while most relevance score based gene regulatory network reconstruction algorithms are not able to identify the self regulation of tfs, because the gene expression data is directly used as the only input to represent both the regulators and the targets, there are always high relevance scores to connect the tf and its gene. in gtrnetwork, since the representation of the regulators  and the representation of the targets  are well separated, the relevance score between the tf and its gene is meaningful, and the self regulation of tfs can also be identified. the prediction of self regulation of tfs improves interpretation of the cyclic structures of gene regulatory networks. further analysis of the effect of feedforward and feedback loops is not carried out in this work but will be applied on the reconstructed networks in our future work.

tfa prediction methods are all based on a linear static model of experimental conditions, and treat dynamic time series data as static data of each time point. thus, although time series transcriptome data can be used as an input of gtrnetwork, the algorithm does not take advantage of dependencies in time series data.

CONCLUSIONS
the algorithm gtrnetwork introduces the hidden layer tfa into classic gene regulatory network reconstruction networks. a comparison of the performances of several algorithmic variants of this algorithm showed that the e-a-c variant of the gtrnetwork use em-based tfa prediction method, adaptive partitioning mutual information as the relevance score function and clr background correction method. this is the variant best fits the current known tf-gene regulatory networks from regulondb. the application on the e-a-c variant on e. coli data shows a promising amount of biological significance. it would be interesting and meaningful to verify more predicted result biologically and try other alternative tfa prediction such as the simpls based methods and network reconstruction algorithms computationally. the application on other organisms such as yeast is also highly recommended to be applied in the future research.

