BACKGROUND
salmonella is one of the most common foodborne pathogens, which causes diseases in humans, animals, and poultry worldwide  <cit> . it has been estimated that in the united states alone, salmonella infection causes  <dig>  million foodborne illnesses per year, which accounts for approximately 30% of total outbreaks and outbreak-related cases  <cit> . furthermore, salmonella infection has not declined significantly in more than a decade, resulting in an estimated $ <dig> million in direct medical cost annually  <cit> . salmonella infections in humans have been linked to a wide variety of sources such as under-cooked meats  <cit>  and fresh produce  <cit> . therefore, development of rapid, sensitive, and accurate methodologies for the detection of salmonella in foods and environmental samples may have an impact on the public health burden caused by this foodborne pathogen.

traditional methods for isolating and identifying salmonella in food rely on nonselective and selective pre-enrichment, followed by isolation using selective and differential media. isolated colonies are identified biochemically and by using serology  <cit> . the major limitation of these methods is that they typically take 4–8 days to obtain results. in addition, the sensitivity of the culture method, which is currently considered the gold standard for detection of salmonella, is lower compared with that of dna-based methods. this limitation may result in an increased false-negative rate  <cit> . to shorten detection time and reduce tedious work to perform traditional culture methods, immunoassays such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay  have been used for detection of salmonella <cit> , but poor performance in sensitivity and specificity as compared with other methods has relegated these methods to be a less than an ideal option for the field work  <cit> . therefore, there is a need to develop rapid, sensitive and specific methodologies to detect this pathogen in foods. recently, dna-based molecular detection tools such as conventional and qpcr have been used for bacterial diagnostics  <cit> . more recently, qpcr is gaining popularity for its sensitivity, specificity, and rapid turnaround time. however, the use of these methods is hampered by their inability to distinguish dna signals originated from live or dead cells. because detection of live cells is most relevant in molecular diagnostics  <cit> , it is essential to have reliable methods for selective detection of dna from live salmonella cells. to differentiate live and dead cells, several strategies have been used in molecular detection; one of the most commonly used strategies is to detect the presence of rna which is inherently unstable  <cit> . however, it is known that working with rna is cumbersome due to the risk of contamination with rnases and, hence can be labor intensive. recent development of a photoreactive binding dye, propidium monoazide  offers an alternative way to differentiate dead cells from live cells  <cit>  and has been successfully used for selective detection of live escherichia coli o157h: <dig> cells from food by our group  <cit> . pma is capable of penetrating membrane-compromised dead cells, but not intact live cells. once the dye enters a cell, it can bind to dna and covalently cross-link to the dna upon light-exposure. consequently, the amplification of such modified dna is inhibited. however, in some cases, such inhibition of amplification of dna of dead cells was found incomplete by several research groups  <cit> .

considering these factors, the present study embraced two objectives: first, we developed and evaluated a qpcr assay that not only improves sensitivity and specificity for detection of salmonella but also is compatible in pma-mediated inhibition of dna amplification from dead cells; second, we developed a pma-qpcr assay by combining the qpcr assay with pma-treatment for selective detection of dna from live cells from dead cells. furthermore, we applied this assay for the selective detection of dna from live salmonella cells in spiked spinach and beef.

RESULTS
effect of amplicon length on inhibition of amplification of dna from dead cells
in order to investigate whether pma-mediated inhibition of dna amplification from dead cells had any correlations with amplicon length, we designed five primer pairs that gave amplicons of five different lengths and made the comparison on their effects on dna amplification. primer pairs a, b, c, d, and e yielded amplicons of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 260 bp in length, respectively, and achieved ct value differences  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively between the treated and untreated dead cells . the results demonstrated that the pma-mediated inhibition of dna amplification of dead cells is well correlated to the amplicon length. on the other hand, when the amplicon length increased, the dna amplification efficiency of the untreated dead cells decreased slightly except that the amplicon d  was slightly more efficient than that for amplicon c . ultimately, amplicon d was selected for the further pma-qpcr assay development based on its performance in inhibiting `sustaining dna amplification from the treated or untreated dead cells, respectively .

c


t 

c


t 

c


t 

value difference
b
ainva gene sequence is from genbank accession number m <dig> 

bct value of untreated dead cells minuses ct value of pma-treated dead cells.

cthe forward primer is shared by five reverse primers.

dthe probe is shared by five primer pairs.

sensitivity of the qpcr assay
the sensitivity studies of the qpcr assay developed in this study was performed using serial 10-fold dilutions of live and dead salmonella cells. the standard curve established by the qpcr assay demonstrated with robust amplification efficiency, i.e.,  <dig> % for qpcr assay without pma treatment, and  <dig>  375% for qpcr assay with pma treatment. the detection limit of the assay was as low as 3 cfu . in addition, we compared the live cells treated with pma or without pma side by side with standard curves in qpcr. the ct values from the pma-treated live cells  and the untreated live cells  appeared to be linear and nearly identical to each other. only slight differences in ct value  were seen between the pma-treated and untreated live cells. these results indicated that pma treatment did not significantly affect the amplification of dna of live cells in the qpcr . most importantly, the amplification of dna of dead cells was almost completely inhibited as shown in figure 1b. the inhibition efficacy of dna from dead cells was as high as 100% at a cell concentration of 104 cfu/ml. at higher cell concentrations, pma showed slightly less complete inhibitory efficacy with ct values around  <dig>  but with cell concentration increased to 107 cfu/ml, the ct value difference between the dead cells treated with pma and without pma reached  <dig> or  <dig> -fold as shown in figure 1b.

exclusivity and inclusivity of the qpcr assay
the specificity of the assay developed in this study was assessed by designing inclusive and exclusive studies. a large number of salmonella strains, e. coli o157:h <dig>  non-o <dig> stec and shigella strains were examined. the results indicated that all the salmonella strains  were positively identified, and no cross-activity was detected with  <dig> e. coli o157:h <dig>  non-o <dig> stec strains, shigella or other foodborne pathogens strains tested .

d
asalmonella enterica strains  of the sara and sarb reference collections used in this study can be located in additional file 1: table s1).

bstrains from recent salmonella outbreaks.

differentiation of live cells from live/dead cell mixtures
a set of 10-fold dilutions of live cells ranging from 3 ×  <dig> to 3 × 106 cfu was treated with pma or without pma to differentiate live cells from dead cells. a progressive trend in ct values that was in a reciprocal relationship with the live cell numbers in the cell mixtures was observed in figure  <dig> . this downward trend in ct values was in a reciprocal relationship with the real number of live cells in the mixtures in spite of the presence of a large number of dead cells. these data demonstrated that the ct values on the cell mixtures preferentially reflected the amount of dna of the live cells in the mixtures amplified during the qpcr reaction. in contrast, the ct values of the untreated cell mixtures were close together and failed to reflect the real number of live cells in the cell mixtures in figure  <dig> .

detection of live salmonella cells from spiked spinach and beef
the pma-qpcr assay was applied to detect dna from live salmonella cells in spiked spinach samples. the results showed that the ct values of spinach samples were reversely correlated with the inoculated salmonella live cell numbers and duration of enrichment . samples inoculated with 3 ×  <dig> and 3 × 102 cfu/g of cells and without  enrichment yielded ct values > <dig> either with pma treatment or without pma treatment , which were generally considered as negative results for qpcr. however, the sample inoculated with 3 × 103 cfu/g of cells at 0-h enrichment was positive for salmonella with ct values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  with or without pma treatment. the samples with 3 ×  <dig>  3 ×  <dig>  and 3 × 103 cfu/g of cells at 4-h enrichment were positive for salmonella with ct values of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  with pma treatment and  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  without pma treatment, respectively. samples with any concentrations  of salmonella cells at 8-h or longer enrichment were positive for salmonella either with or without pma treatment .

we further tested the pma-qpcr assay for detection of dna from live salmonella cells in the presence of a large number of dead cells from spiked spinach samples . the samples inoculated with 3 ×  <dig>  3 ×  <dig>  and 3 × 103 cfu/g of cells without  enrichment generated ct values of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  without pma treatment but three samples after pma treatment yielded ct values all > <dig>  indicating that the positive readings were due to the presence of a large number of dead cells. with 4-h enrichment, the sample with 3 × 102 cfu/g of cells was positive for salmonella with ct values of  <dig>  or  <dig>  with or without pma treatment . similar trends were found in the samples inoculated with 3 ×  <dig> , 3 ×  <dig> . a downward trend in ct values was seen as a function of time. these results indicated the incapability of pcr alone to differentiate dna from live and dead cells and the necessity for pma treatment before dna extraction.

similar results were obtained with spiked beef samples. the beef samples inoculated with 30 cfu/g of cells were detected salmonella after 4-h enrichment with ct values of  <dig> . . together, these results confirmed that this pma-qpcr assay selectively detected 30 cfu/g live salmonella cells from spiked spinach samples after 4-h enrichment .

discussion
in spite of the fact that there are numerous dna-based molecular methods available for detection of salmonella, there is still room for improvement in qpcr assays to detect live salmonella cells from foods and environment samples. to our knowledge, this is a first new qpcr assay for selectively detect live salmonella cells that has been validated with such a comprehensive coverage of the salmonella group, including strains of sara  and sarb  collections and strains of recent outbreaks . furthermore, this assay is highly sensitive and specific for the detection of live salmonella cells, and pma-treatment is able to efficiently inhibit the dna amplification from dead cells but has little effect on the dna amplification from live cells.

we chose the inva gene, the invasive gene in salmonella, as a target gene in the qpcr assay for several reasons: first, the inva gene is an important virulence factor gene  <cit>  and is considered present in all salmonella spp.  <cit> ; second, currently, most molecular-based assays for the detection of salmonella are inva-based, especially for conventional pcr and qpcr assays; and third, the inva-based pcr assays have demonstrated inclusivity for a wide range of salmonella serotypes including all subspecies and exclusivity for other closely related species and genera  <cit> . in general, the inva-based pcr assays provide higher sensitivity, shorter turnaround time, and reduced labor cost, making it an excellent alternative to conventional culture method for pathogen detection  <cit> . however, conspicuous variations in sensitivity and specificity of inva-based pcr assays have been documented by numerous studies  <cit> , and one of the possible reasons for such discordant outcomes may be due to the use of different primers for gene detection in the assays such as conventional or qpcr  <cit> . in an effort to better understand the variations caused by the usage of different primers for gene detection in pcr assays, we systematically evaluated the most commonly used inva primer pairs for the detection of salmonella in thirteen  pcr assays . first, although the inva-based pcr assays generate reasonably good results for salmonella detection, in some cases, the false-negative and false-positive rates were rather high  <cit> . the reasons for these false-negative and false-positive results are not clear, but primers and probes used for gene detection may be to blame. although the inva gene is encoded by almost all strains in salmonella spp. examined, our blast sequence analysis revealed that the inva gene sequence is rather heterogenic among the salmonella group of more than  <dig> serotypes, especially at the 5-′ and 3′- ends of the gene. furthermore, regions further into the gene, single nucleotide polymorphisms  occur sporadically at different locations with variable frequencies among salmonella spp. inevitably, it becomes a formidable task to detect such a broad and diversified salmonella group by targeting a single gene. if previously designed primer pairs listed in table  <dig> are used, several pcr assays would fail to detect numerous salmonella spp., whose sequences are currently available in genbank. this could partially explain the false-negative results encountered in salmonella detection  <cit> . at the same time, although inva is capable of excluding non-salmonella strains, our blast sequence analysis of inva demonstrated that some non-salmonella groups such as e. coli, staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus, and solanum lycopersicoides shared identities with salmonella inva. this could give a possible explanation for the false-positive results reported by some analysis  <cit> .
inva 
gene for detection of 
salmonella


fortunately, with the usage of new high throughput sequencing platforms, many genomic sequences, including salmonella spp., are available to the public. it has become more feasible to find specific sequences within inva gene that are highly conserved among salmonella spp. that can be used as specific genetic markers for salmonella spp. to detect many more salmonella serotypes. with blast analysis of the inva gene sequence of salmonella typhimurium, we found a highly conserved segment of sequence  near the 5′-end of the inva gene , which several inva-based pcr assays have been used to target part of or the whole segment . we took advantage of this characteristic of the inva gene to design five primer pairs in that region . to enhance pma-mediated inhibition of dna amplification from dead cells, primer pairs were selected for one that generated high efficacy in inhibition of dna amplification from dead cells and provided robust efficiency in dna amplification from live cells as well. another parameter we took into account was the compatibility between the pma-treatment and qpcr efficiency. one study found that efficient pma-mediated inhibition of dna amplification required amplicons at least 190 bp in length  <cit> . this can be achieved when conventional pcr is in use, but amplicons longer than 190 bp might not work well in qpcr as shown in table  <dig>  subsequently, an optimal amplicon  size of 130 bp was determined and selected for the qpcr assay development through numerous trials where pcr parameters and pma-treatments were varied . with amplicon d, this qpcr assay offers high sensitivity , and has been validated with a large number of salmonella strains , covering all strains from sara , sarb collections  and collection strains from the recent salmonella outbreaks  . all the salmonella strains examined were positively identified without exception. this qpcr assay delivers low background on non-salmonella strains, such as e. coli o157:h <dig>  stec, shigella, or other foodborne pathogens . the excellent performance in sensitivity and specificity is not a surprise; rather there are underlining reasons:  blast analysis of the sequence of amplicon d demonstrated that this fragment shares a remarkably high homology with most of the currently available inva sequences of salmonella spp. it showed 100% identity with  <dig> genomic sequences, 99% identity  with  <dig> sequences, 98% of identity  with  <dig> sequences, and 97% or lower identity with other sequences.  the positions of the mismatches with other salmonella strains are illustrated in figure 5b. of the strains that showed mismatches, at least  <dig> strains belong to salmonella bongori subgroup. more importantly, most of the mismatches were not located in the sequences targeted by the primers and probe we used, therefore, the changes would not affect the inclusivity of the pcr assay strategy. in contrast, numerous mismatches were found between the previously designed primer pairs listed in table  <dig> and the published inva sequences of salmonella.  furthermore, we have applied this qpcr assay for detection of salmonella from environmental water samples, which were collected and shipped to dmb lab from irrigation ponds in vegetable growing farms in southern georgia, usa. briefly, the water samples were concentrated by filtration, enriched with lb broth at 37°c for 24 h, purified for dna, and subjected to this qpcr assay for detection of salmonella. of  <dig> water samples tested, over forty have been positive for salmonella by this qpcr assay . more significantly, we have isolated a salmonella strain by standard culture method  from every qpcr-positive  water sample; and every salmonella isolate was subsequently confirmed by traditional identification methods, and genotyped by genotyping microarray. and thus, the successful application of this qpcr assay for detection of salmonella from irrigation water samples is testimonial for the high sensitivity and specificity of the qpcr assay .

our second objective was to remedy a drawback of pcr’s inability to distinguish signals originated from live or dead cells, by combining the qpcr with pma treatment. recently, pma has been used for differentiation of live cells in qpcr  <cit>  however, several studies revealed that the inhibition of amplification of dna of dead cells was incomplete  <cit> . in order to improve the efficacy of pma treatment, we evaluated the effect of amplicon length on pma-mediated inhibition of dna amplification from dead cells by qpcr . we found efficacy of pma treatment appeared to be well correlated to the amplicon length, which is in good agreement with the previous finding  <cit> . however, our results showed significant differences with their conclusion on efficiency of amplicon length, i.e. pma-mediated suppression of dna amplification from dead cells was incomplete with amplicons shorter than 190 bp  <cit> . with amplicon d , we were able to achieve a ct value difference of  <dig>  between the treated and untreated dead cells . although amplicon e  generated a bigger ct value difference , the ct value for dna of untreated dead cells increased from  <dig>  to  <dig> , reflecting about a 3-ct-value decrease in sensitivity of the pma-qpcr assay . this finding is of importance because it can give guidance for selection of primer pairs for the development of qpma-pcr assays. there are no good theoretical explanations for this “amplicon length effect” associated with pma treatment. it may be related to the mechanism of the pma-treatment. when dead cells are treated with pma, the dna is blocked by covalent bonds and thus it cannot be amplified in pcr  <cit> . it could be understood that the larger an amplicon is, the longer the region that the polymerase needs to cover, the higher probability for the target dna being blocked by a covalent bond . on the other hand, if the amplicon length is too long , the sensitivity of the qpcr will be compromised, resulting in lower sensitivity of the assay. this finding has significance to future designs of qpcr assay in general.

consumption of fresh produce including salads, lettuce, juice, melon, sprouts, and berries has been identified as important sources for salmonella outbreaks  <cit> . it is important to accurately monitor live cells in food samples, because only live bacteria can cause disease  <cit> . we applied pma-qpcr technology to selectively detect low numbers of live salmonella cells in spiked spinach samples. this pma-qpcr assay positively detected salmonella in spinach spiked with 30 cfu/g at 4-h enrichment or from samples inoculated with 3 × 103 cfu/g without enrichment . additionally, with this pma-qpcr assay, we were able to detect 30 cfu/g live cells with a 4-h enrichment in the presence of large number of dead salmonella cells  . this is an improvement in sensitivity compared with recent reports on detection of salmonella. live salmonella cells were detected from spiked lettuce samples at the concentration of 101 cfu/g with 12-h enrichment  <cit> . another study reported that the detection limit of pma-lamp  was  <dig>  × 103-104 cfu/g in spiked produce and pma-pcr was up to 100-fold less sensitive compared with qpcr assay  <cit> . it is noteworthy to mention that this pma-qpcr assay reported here appears to be more sensitive. two factors might explain this: first, it may be due to the qpcr assay we developed in this study, which offers higher sensitivity with detection limit as low as 3 cfu; whereas the two previous assays used longer amplicons  in their qpcr assays  <cit> , which would make the qpcr assay less efficient compared with the assays with shorter amplicons; second, it might be due to the usage of our previously modified pma-treatment procedure, which was shown to increase the pma-qpcr efficiency  <cit> . with this modified pma-treatment procedure, not only could we achieve a relatively small ct value difference  between treated and untreated live cells , but we were also able to obtain efficient inhibition  of dna amplification with dead cells . these improvements made it possible for efficient and accurate differentiation of live salmonella cells from dead cells by this pma-qpcr assay  <cit> . furthermore, we have successfully applied this assay to detect live salmonella cells from beef  and environmental water samples  <cit> . it may be applied to other food matrices as well, fostering improvement of accurate monitoring salmonella.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a pma-qpcr assay for selective detection of live salmonella cells from dead cells in food. this assay is sensitive and specific and has been validated with a large number of salmonella strains. we were able to differentiate live salmonella cells from live/dead cell mixtures. this pma-qpcr has been applied for selective detection of live salmonella cells in spiked spinach. it allows selective detection of 30 cfu/g salmonella from spiked spinach with 4-h enrichment. additionally, we evaluated the effect of amplicon length on pma-mediated inhibition of dna amplification of dead cells. the limitation of this pma-qpcr assay is that pma treatment slightly increases the cost and reduces the sensitivity of pcr assay.

