BACKGROUND
dnazymes function as specific endonucleases by binding to predetermined sequences in rna and cleaving its phosphodiester backbone. the discovery that rna-hydrolytic properties could be encoded within a dna oligonucleotide indicated potential biotechnological applications in gene silencing. these applications might even surpass those of other oligonucleotide-based gene silencing approaches, such as antisense and rnai technologies, that require the complicity of the cell's own nuclease systems in order to cleave rna. however, the use of dnazymes has been restricted by several limitations, some of which are shared with the other oligonucleotide-based technologies. for any of these approaches to be of value, the oligonucleotide must be capable of transversing the cellular membrane and avoid being inactivated by cellular nucleases long enough to find the appropriate cellular compartment where it can bind and induce cleavage at the target rna. modification of dnazymes to improve their stability against cellular nucleases and their ability to bind and cleave rna molecules would go a long way towards increasing their general applicability.

the 10– <dig> dnazyme isolated by santoro and joyce  <cit>   provides a suitable starting point for such modification and improvement. dnazymes of this type cleave purine-uracil targets, and to a lesser extent purine-cytosine targets, and have been subjected to numerous investigations to alter target preference  <cit> , to follow the folding of the catalytic region  <cit> , and to induce cleavage at different targets  <cit> . quite conclusive is that most dnazymes of this type fail to cleave their rna targets in vitro  <cit> , and this does not bode well for in vivo application with the additional complications of cellular nucleases and substrate compartmentalization. poor cleavage in vitro is generally linked to the inability of a dnazyme to recognize its target, which involves unravelling the higher-order structure of the rna and hybridizing via the two binding arms of the dnazyme . the binding arms can be constructed to include modified nucleosides, and such modifications have improved resistance against cellular nucleases  <cit> . in principle, the inclusion of modified nucleosides at specific sites in the binding arms could also greatly enhance the hybridization potential of dnazymes at their rna targets.

modified nucleosides in the form of conformationally locked analogues  are capable of targeting complementary rna and dna with high affinity  <cit> , and are thus potentially interesting as components in dnazymes. two commercially available variants of these modified nucleosides  can be incorporated into oligonucleotides to increase their hybridization capacity  <cit> . recent reports  <cit>  have shown that inclusion of lna monomers into the binding arms of dnazymes  enables structured rna targets to be cleaved, even in cases where the targets are intractable to unmodified dnazymes. these studies indicate that the potential of lnazymes might be optimized by rational design to cleave at targets that are located in highly structured rna substrates.

here, we have conducted a systematic approach geared towards the rational design of lnazymes based on the 10– <dig> dnazyme structure. targets were displayed in rna substrates with progressively more stable structures to challenge the cleavage capacity of dnazymes. the ability of the dnazymes to unravel the rna structures was investigated by varying the lengths and the modification content of the hybridization arms. rna substrates that are essentially inaccessible to unmodified dnazymes were cleaved with markedly higher efficiency when lna or α-l-lna monomers were incorporated into the binding arms. for each rna target, there appear to be optima for lengths of the binding arms, as well as for the type and number of modifications they contain. while the improved ability of lnazymes to gain access to structured targets is the main reason for their greater capacity to cleave rnas, the modifications also appear to favourably affect other kinetic parameters.

RESULTS
rna substrates for cleavage
rna substrates contain two consecutive sequences that are complementary to the binding arms of the dnazymes and bracket the cleavage site between a purine and a pyrimidine . the cleavage sites studied here are displayed in rna substrates that are based on sequences from the escherichia coli 23s ribosomal rna, and possess a range of structural complexity . the substrates consist of a 17n minimal rna , a 33n with metastable secondary structure, 58n and 74n rnas with stable secondary structures, and a 2904n rna  with extensive secondary and tertiary structure. within these rna substrates, three cleavage sites were studied: the 745-site ; the 1093-site ; and the 1096-site .

dnazymes and lnazymes
the nucleic acid enzymes used in this study range from unmodified dnazymes to lnazymes containing up to three lna or α-l-lna monomers per binding arm . the lengths of the binding arms were also varied from five up to eight nucleotides; the catalytic loop remained unchanged in all the enzymes. a single dnazyme and two lnazymes were designed against the 745-site; one dnazyme and one lnazyme were made to cleave the 1096-site. the cleavage site at  <dig> was studied most systematically, and two dnazymes plus five lnazymes were designed against this target. in the initial tests, the nucleic acid enzymes were used in molar excess relative to the rna substrates, enabling us to study their performances under single-turnover conditions. the kinetic parameters of the most effective enzymes were then studied under multiple-turnover conditions with an excess of substrate.

cleavage at the 1093-site
cleavage at the 1093-site in the 17n, 33n, 58n and 2904n rnas was carried out under single-turnover conditions with a 5- to 50-fold excess of dnazyme or lnazyme . the unstructured 17n rna substrate was efficiently cleaved by the unmodified dnazyme , and also by the corresponding lnazymes with arms of eight nucleotides  . however, when the 1093-site was displayed in the more tightly structured 58n rna distinct differences were seen: cleavage by the unmodified dnazyme was only marginal even at high concentration, whereas the lnazymes still cut as effectively as in the 17n rna . this picture was intensified in the more highly structured 2904n rna, which the dnazyme dz1- <dig> failed to cleave, whereas lz1- <dig> and lz2- <dig> still cut the 1093-site effectively . incorporation of additional α-l-lna modifications in lz5- <dig> resulted in less cleavage of 2904n rna than with lz1- <dig> .

upon reduction of the length of the binding arms to five and six nucleotides, the unmodified dnazyme  lost all measurable hydrolytic activity and, even in large molar excess, was unable to cleave the minimal 17n substrate . the shorter arm size was counteracted to some extent by incorporating two α-l-lna monomers into each arm , resulting in good cleavage of 17n and moderate cleavage of 58n rna . further reduction of both arms to four nucleotides led to further loss of activity, and at 50-fold excess the lnazyme lz3- <dig> could only weakly cut the 17n substrate despite having two α-l-lna monomers per binding arm.

cleavage at the 745- and 1096-sites
these two additional cleavage sites were investigated to establish whether the observations made for the 1093-site could be extrapolated to other rna targets. the 1096-site is particularly interesting in this context as it is located only three nucleotides away from the 1093-site and can thus be displayed in the same hairpin loop of the rna substrates . despite this, the 1096-site proved more difficult to cleave. the dnazyme dz3- <dig> failed to cut even when the  <dig> target was presented in the relatively unstructured 33n rna . modifying the binding arms with two lna monomers to form the lnazyme lz6- <dig> led to effective cleavage at the 1096-site in the 33n and 58n rna substrates .

the 745-site was also resilient to cleavage, and the unmodified dnazyme dz4- <dig> was incapable of cutting this target in either the 74n  or the 2904n rnas . some cleavage was achieved by modifying the enzyme to include two α-l-lna monomers  or two lna monomers per binding arm , but remained incomplete at 50-fold molar excess of the enzymes. the lnazyme with lna monomers was marginally, but consistently, better at cleaving the rna substrates than its counterpart containing α-l-lna.

kinetic parameters for cleavage at the 1093-site
the two lnazymes lz1- <dig> and lz2- <dig> performed almost identically under single turnover conditions; this is illustrated in figs. 4a and 4b and is consistent with a previous report  <cit> . the rate constant  for the unmodified dz1- <dig> and the lnazyme lz1- <dig> was determined by fitting the time-course data for cleavage of the 17n rna  into an exponential curve. this gave a kobs of  <dig>  min- <dig> for the dz1- <dig> and a kobs of  <dig>  min- <dig> for the lz1- <dig>  showing that the overall reaction proceeded fifty times faster for the lnazyme. it should be noted, however, that whereas the dz1- <dig> data fit comfortably into the exponential curve, the lz1- <dig> data fit much better into an equation describing a two step exponential decay. this suggests that the lnazyme catalyzes a biphasic reaction, which has two kobs values of  <dig>  min- <dig> and  <dig>  min- <dig> 

the two most effective enzymes studied here, lz1- <dig> and lz2- <dig>  cleave under a wide range of multiple-turnover conditions, and thus function in a truly enzymatic manner. comparison of cleavage by the two lnazymes in a 20-fold molar excess of the 17n substrate revealed that lz1- <dig> functions better than lz2- <dig> . cleavage by lz1- <dig> under multiple turnover conditions was investigated further, and the results of time-course experiments for cleavage of the 17n rna substrate at  <dig> nm to  <dig>  μm are plotted in fig. 4d. the initial reaction velocities  were measured from the time curves of cleavage at each substrate concentration; these were used in double reciprocal plots to estimate km and the maximal velocity vmax. cleavage of the 17n rna by lz1- <dig> proceeded with a km of  <dig> nm and vmax of  <dig>  nm min-1; the lz1- <dig> lnazyme concentration was  <dig> nm, giving a turnover number of  <dig>  min- <dig>  the unmodified dz1- <dig> did not cleave the substrate under these conditions.

discussion
hybridization studies on oligonucleotides containing lna and α-l-lna monomers have shown that helical thermostability is greater than for unmodified nucleic acid chains  <cit> . thus, we surmised that reconstructing dnazymes to include lna and α-l-lna  would improve their hybridization properties, and facilitate cleavage of obstinate rna substrates. consistent with this idea, incorporation of lna and α-l-lna monomers into the enzyme binding arms invariably improves cleavage performance, and this proved to be the case irrespective of whether the target was presented in an unstructured or complexly structured rna substrate. this is consistent with other studies of lna modified dnazymes containing blocks of three to five lna monomers at the ends of the binding arms  <cit> . better hybridization of lnazymes at the rna target does indeed play a major role in enhancing cleavage, although other changes in kinetic parameters probably also contribute to the greater effectiveness of lnazymes.

dnazymes with eight nucleotides per binding arm were chosen as the starting point for our studies, as this arm length has been shown to provide a good balance between substrate recognition and product release  <cit> . previous observations that only a small fraction of the potential purine-uridine sites can be cleaved by dnazymes  <cit>  were reflected in our choice of sites: one site  is readily cleaved, whereas other two sites  are intractable to dnazymes.

incorporation of lna and α-l-lna monomers into the binding arms of the dnazymes improved cleavage at all three of the sites. two lna or α-l-lna monomers per eight nucleotide binding arm worked best at the 1093-site, and increasing this number to three α-l-lna monomers per binding arm  caused a slight loss of activity , which was particularly noticeable on the 2904n rna substrate. heavily modified arms could adversely affect parameters such as nonspecific hybridization at other sites  and release of the product fragments after cleavage. however, product release effects would not be expected to come into play under single-turnover conditions with a large enzyme excess, so the extra modifications in lz5- <dig> must also interfere with other processes such as the accessibility of the lnazyme's binding arms and/or the folding of its catalytic loop.

reducing the lengths of the dnazyme binding arms to five nucleotides led to loss of activity at the 1093-site . activity was re-established by incorporating two α-l-lna monomers into each of the arms . an lnazyme with four nucleotides per binding arm, two of which were α-l-lna monomers, also showed some cleavage activity . however, cleavage was only evident when the accessible 1093-site was displayed in the least structured substrate  and challenged with a large molar excess of enzyme. thus, the structure of the lz3- <dig> lnazyme with its tetranucleotide arms is probably approaching the minimal size that can be expected to have hydrolytic activity.

lna and α-l-lna monomers in a dna chain have markedly different effects on the helical geometry. helices containing lna monomers adopt a local a-form structure  <cit> , whereas helices containing α-l-lna tend more towards the b-form structure  <cit>  with less pronounced stability  <cit> . in some cases it appeared more advantageous to use one type of modified monomer – for instance, at the 745-site, the lna-enzyme was better than its α-l-lna counterpart. at the more amenable 1093-site, however, no difference was seen in the single turnover cleavage by comparable lna and α-l-lna enzymes , nor did any differences appear when the 1093-site accessibility was reduced in the structured rna substrates . the superior performance of lz1- <dig> compared to lz2- <dig> under multiple turnover conditions possibly reflects a difference in hybridisation energy that allows a faster product release from the α-l-lna containing lz1- <dig> relative to lz2- <dig> with lna monomers.

from the data presented here it can be seen that more highly structured rna substrates have a general tendency to be more resilient to cleavage by nucleic acid enzymes, and that tighter structure can be counteracted by improving the hybridization capacity of the enzyme. however, several exceptions to this rule indicate that factors additional to substrate structure and enzyme hybridization play important roles in the cleavage process. for instance, the 1096-site was more difficult to cleave than the 1093-site despite being only three nucleotides away and being displayed in identical substrates. dnazymes and lnazymes designed against the 1096-site had binding arms that were expected to hybridize at least as strongly as the enzymes against the 1093-site . cleavage at the 1096-site occurs between a and u whereas cleavage at the 1093-site is between g and u. the identity of the purine can affect cleavage  <cit> , although this does not fully explain the large difference observed in figure 3b.

the kinetic measurements at the 1093-site indicate that several parameters are involved in determining the rate of the cleavage reaction. the apparent rate constant kobs for cleavage of the 17n substrate by the lnazyme lz1- <dig> was fifty times greater than for the dnazyme dz1- <dig> under single-turnover conditions with five times excess of enzyme. although the excess of dz1- <dig> was probably not enough to saturate the target, such large differences in kobs would not be expected if this were the only factor limiting the reaction. thus, the lna residues in the binding arms probably influence parameters other than hybridisation. one such parameter could involve the folding of the catalytic loop into an active conformation. the biphasic reaction of lz1- <dig> in itself suggests the existence of two conformations of the lnazyme and/or two conformations of the lnazyme/substrate complex.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we concur with breaker's assertion that there is potential for improving the catalytic capacity of 10–23-like dnazymes  <cit> . we show here that the ability of 10– <dig> dnazymes to hybridize to their rna substrates is an important factor in determining whether the target is cleaved, and in doing so we have improved the hybridization potential of several dnazymes by the incorporation of locked nucleoside monomers into their binding arms. however, hybridization capacity is not the only parameter that can be altered in this way, and the apparent increased rate constant of the lnazymes indicate that subsequent steps such as folding of the enzyme's catalytic loop have also, if somewhat fortuitously, been enhanced. the km of  <dig> nm and the turnover number of  <dig>  min- <dig> measured for lz1- <dig> show that the binding affinity and kcat of this lnazyme are approaching values that are suitable for practical applications.

