BACKGROUND
bovine leukemia virus , a retrovirus of the family retroviridae, is the causative agent of enzootic bovine leucosis . approximately 30% of cattle infected with blv have persistent lymphocytosis, and 1-5% develop b-cell lymphosarcoma  <cit> . with a worldwide distribution, ebl is listed by the world organization for animal health as a disease of importance to international trade  <cit>  and is included in the national eradication program in australia and some member states of the european union , several of which have recently eliminated the disease  <cit> . in contrast, 89% of dairy herds in the united states are reported to be infected with blv  <cit> , and the annual economic loss due to ebl is estimated at $ <dig> million in decreased milk yield  <cit> . although ebl causes serious economic damage in the dairy industry  <cit> , thus far only regional voluntary control programs have been implemented in the united states  <cit> .

in japan, ebl is listed as a notifiable disease, but no nationwide control programs have been established. according to animal health statistics, ebl was reported in  <dig> cattle at  <dig> farms in  <dig> and in  <dig> cattle at  <dig> farms in  <dig>  these data suggest that ebl has been gradually spreading in japan.

blv is present in the circulating peripheral blood lymphocytes of infected cattle, and horizontal transmission of the virus occurs via infected blood often as a result of unhygienic farm practices such as the use of plastic sleeves to perform rectal palpation and the same needle for vaccination of more than one animal  <cit>  or unhygienic dehorning practices  <cit> . furthermore, infected lymphocytes may also be transmitted mechanically by hematophagous insects such as horseflies  <cit> . blv transmission has also been reported through physical contact between infected and uninfected cattle  <cit> . in addition, since blv and its antibodies are present in the colostrum and normal milk of infected cattle, blv transmission from infected cows to calves via infected milk is negligible  <cit> .

these transmission routes should be considered when designing preventive measures against ebl at the farm level. in addition, it may be important to determine which transmission routes are the most important for each farm. it is therefore essential to identify the risk factors associated with blv transmission in the production systems targeted for disease control. however, no such epidemiological approach for blv infection has been attempted in japan. therefore, the objective of this study was to clarify herd management factors associated with within-herd transmission of blv and to facilitate a more rational and efficient approach for controlling blv transmission on dairy farms in japan.

RESULTS
results of serological tests showed that  <dig>  of  <dig> dairy farms were infected with blv. statistical analyses were then performed for  <dig> of these farms , for which complete data were obtained from the questionnaires.

seroprevalence at infected farms at the 25th, 50th , and 75th percentiles was  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> %, respectively . visual inspection of figure  <dig> and the shapiro-wilk test confirmed that seroprevalence was not normally distributed . univariate test results showed that cattle housing conditions, availability of own grazing area, the presence of horseflies in summer, dehorning, the use of a plastic sleeve for rectal palpation, not changing needles between animals during herd vaccination, and colostrum feeding were factors possibly associated with seroprevalence , whereas herd size  and cattle replacement  were not associated with it.

1interquartile range

2mann--whitney u-test for two-level variables or kruskal--wallis test for all others

*incorporated into multivariate model

results of the mann--whitney u-test or the kruskal--wallis test showed that cattle housing conditions, availability of own grazing area, presence of horseflies in summer, dehorning, use of a plastic sleeve for rectal palpation, not changing needles between animals during herd vaccination, and colostrum feeding were possibly associated with seroprevalence . these seven variables were incorporated in the multivariate model.

starting with the seven variables with p values <  <dig>  in the univariate analyses, the final model was obtained with four variables with the smallest value of the akaike information criterion  . a loose housing system, dehorning, and the observable presence of horseflies were associated with increases in seroprevalence . these were considered as risk factors that facilitated the within-farm transmission of blv. in contrast, colostrum feeding of calves from their dams was considered to be a protective factor that suppressed the within-farm transmission of the virus . no biologically plausible two-way interactions between the remaining factors were observed in the final model.

variable
1estimated coefficients, 2standard error for the coefficient, 3reference category

standard deviation in mixing distribution =  <dig> , standard error =  <dig> 

starting from the full model with seven variables selected by univariate analyses, the best model was constructed on the basis of aic. the best model with the smallest aic included housing system, dehorning, observable presence of horseflies, and direct colostrum feeding. the coefficients  indicate that loose housing, dehorning, and observation of a large number of horseflies in summer were positively associated with seroprevalence on infected farms . in contrast, feeding of colostrum was negatively associated with seroprevalence in the infected farms 

discussion
this is the first epidemiological study to assess herd management factors related to the seroprevalence of blv on dairy farms in japan. based on our mixed logistic model with a random herd effect, the significant factors were found to be cattle housing conditions, the presence of horseflies in summer, dehorning practices, and colostrum feeding.

with regard to housing conditions, a loose housing system was found to be positively associated with seroprevalence compared with a tied housing system . a possible explanation may be that direct contact between infected and uninfected cattle is facilitated in loose housing systems such as free stalls and barns. furthermore, the chances of indirect contact between uninfected and infected cattle may be relatively high in a loose housing system because cattle randomly move about the barn or paddock and are not always handled in the same manner.

dehorning is a practice in daily herd management that can reduce the risk of injury from horn-butting in farmers and in cattle during herd conflict. this practice was found to be positively associated with seroprevalence compared with farms without it . a potential explanation for this result is the unhygienic procedure of dehorning, which is a risk factor for blv transmission. it was previously reported that calves dehorned with contaminated dehorning apparatus were more likely to be infected than those that had not been dehorned  <cit> . farmers often leave the dehorned heifers without hemostasis by cautery . although we did not include a question related to the treatment of dehorned cattle in the questionnaire, the information obtained from clinical veterinarians supported our result.

with regard to the presence of horseflies in summer, a response of "very high" was positively associated with seroprevalence compared with a response of "never to seldom" ; however, there was no significant difference between "sometimes or often" and "never to seldom" . blv transmission by hematophagous insects has been reported  <cit> . in this study, we did not measure horsefly populations quantitatively on each farm. however, given the effect of the response of "very high" in increasing seroprevalence, our findings support the results of previous studies and suggest more quantitative study in future.

in the present study, colostrum feeding of calves from their dams resulted in a decrease in within-farm seroprevalence . because colostrum contains blv and its antibodies, ingestion of colostrum from infected dams reduces the risk of blv infection during the weaning period in calves  <cit> . our result is consistent with previous studies, although there were only seven farms in our study without colostrum feeding, the reference category. in addition, despite marginal significance, pooled colostrum feeding on a farm had a negative impact on seroprevalence . therefore, colostrum feeding could be an effective way to reduce the prevalence of blv in a herd. the effect of optimal conditions for the treatment of pooled colostrum, such as heating and freezing on the farm, should be evaluated in future studies.

because this study had a cross-sectional design, it was difficult to elucidate definite relationships between seroprevalence and each risk or protective factor. however, in spite of this constraint, our results were consistent with previous studies and confirmed the important factors that should be controlled.

CONCLUSIONS
controlling blv infection at japanese dairy farms should focus on these factors. future research is required to compare the influences of each factor responsible for within-herd transmission and to facilitate more rational prioritization of control measures.

