BACKGROUND
with the development of the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats  and crispr associated endonuclease  <dig> , fast and reliable genotyping has become an inevitable rate-limiting step for in vivo genomic studies. in zebrafish, commonly used genotyping techniques are based on a locus-specific amplification by pcr followed by amplicon digestion of a specific restriction enzyme or sequencing. this requires adequate genomic dna for the reaction and substantial time to complete the screen. recently, new techniques have emerged using fluorescent pcr or high-resolution melting curve  analysis that simplify and shorten genotyping assays . specifically, hrm assays rely on the high-resolution monitoring of the denaturation process of a double-stranded fluorescently-labeled dna fragment. this technique can identify micro-indels as small as a single nucleotide and even class- <dig> single nucleotide polymorphisms   <cit> . while there are numerous commercial methods for extracting genomic dna, their price and the fact that they usually require multiple manual steps makes them ill-equipped for high-throughput assessment of indels. moreover, some genomic extraction methods have been developed such as the hotshot method  <cit>  but these have been used in standard pcr amplification.

here we report the combination of the hotshot raw genomic extraction method followed by a hrm analysis for genotyping both adult zebrafish and individual embryos. this optimized protocol allows fast  and cost-efficient adult genotyping. indeed, in our hands, hrm genotyping is more than four times cheaper than regular pcr reaction followed by sanger sequencing. furthermore, we also took advantage of this method to identify crispr-induced mutations in embryos after microinjection of crispr-cas <dig> constructs. standard methods generally assess the efficacy of crispr/cas <dig> mutagenesis by extracting dna from a 24-h embryo and indels are usually detected by t7e <dig> endonuclease assay, restriction enzyme screening or fluorescent pcr . our optimized protocol allows the reliable detection of crispr/cas9-induced indels in four hour old embryos. furthermore, we show that our hrm-based identification of indels is much more sensitive than standard sequencing of pcr fragment. lastly, we took advantage of our protocol to identify the earliest time at which we can detect crispr/cas9-induced indels in the embryo. our results show that crispr-induced mutations are detectable as early as after the first cell division of the embryo.

RESULTS
hotshot genomic dna extraction method is suitable for hrm analysis
our aim was to establish a reliable and cost-effective method for genotyping zebrafish embryos subjected to crispr/cas <dig> mutagenesis that could be used as a precise analysis tool for a broad range of applications. we optimized protocol of raw genomic dna extraction followed by a 2-steps evagreen pcr protocol and a hrm analysis. as illustrated in fig. 1a, our whole genotyping assay could be completed in about two hours. this rapid assessment is particularly important for reducing the time the animal spent in isolated tanks, particularly in laboratories with space limitations. briefly, genomic dna is extracted from caudal tail tissue, or from a whole one-day-old embryo by boiling the sample in sodium hydroxide for ten minutes. the high ph of sodium hydroxide is buffered by adding one tenth of the volume of 100 mm tris hcl ph  <dig> as described by  <cit> . raw genomic dna is then used as a template in a two-step evagreen-based pcr reaction in a 96-well plate using a lightcycler  <dig> device . a final melting step records the fluorescence over an increasing temperature gradient with a high resolution of  <dig>  °c per second. we tested this procedure by fin-clipping a heterogeneous population of fish obtained from an incross of two parents carrying a known mutation in glra4a gene encoding a glycine receptor subunit, consisting of a deletion of  <dig> nucleotides . following our procedure, the final melting curve analysis identified three profiles that were confirmed by sequencing to be the expected wild type , heterozygous  and homozygous  genotypes .fig.  <dig> genomic dna is suitable for hrm-based genotyping. a protocol timeline for sample preparation. genomic dna extraction, two-steps evagreen pcr and hrm-based analysis. b genotyping of  <dig> adult zebrafish obtained by an incross of glra4a
+/− parents. the hrm curve analysis discriminates wild-type , heterozygous  and homozygous  fish. c sequencing results from each profile identified in  confirmed the genotyping and the presence of the  <dig> base-pair deletion in the heterozygous and homozygous population



furthermore, we wanted to see if we could use this method to detect crispr-induced mutations directly in the injected embryo. in vitro transcribed rnas encoding the cas <dig> endonuclease and a gene-specific guide rna  are co-microinjected in the one-cell stage zebrafish egg . confirmation of the efficacy of the designed grna is crucial for the successful generation of mutant lines. different techniques are commonly used to detect crispr/cas9-induced indels such as pcr sequencing, or restriction enzyme screening but these methods generally assess the efficacy of the mutagenesis one day after microinjection and the results are not always easily interpretable. in fact, detection of indels by pcr sequencing of an injected embryo usually leads to multiple peaks in chromatograms at the indel site and onwards, thus such an analysis might be tricky as it could be easily assimilated as background noise . to circumvent this problem, new techniques have been developed such as fluorescent pcr or hrm analysis  <cit> .fig.  <dig> crispr-induced indels can be detected in the late zebrafish blastula. a rnas encoding the cas <dig> endonuclease and a guide rna  targeting gldc coding sequence are co-microinjected into one-cell stage embryos. the genomic dna was extracted either at the sphere stage  or at the prim- <dig> stage  using the raw extraction method. b sequencing electropherograms of  <dig> wild type and  <dig> crispr/cas9-injected embryos at  <dig> hpf. the black arrow shows the presence of faint multiple peaks in the crispr/cas9-injected embryos, indicating the presence of indels. c hrm curve analysis of uninjected wild type  and crispr/cas9-injected  embryos at  <dig> hpf. the green curves are shifted and irregular compared to the red wt curves, indicating the presence of indels at the late blastula stage. d melting curve analysis of uninjected wt  and crispr/cas9-injected  embryos at  <dig> hpf



thus, we decided to test our hrm-based optimized protocol for the detection of crispr/cas9-induced indels within the coding sequence of the glycine decarboxylase gldc gene and to confirm that our method allowed the reliable detection of mutations in injected embryos subjected to crispr/cas9-editing . indeed, raw genomic dna extraction followed by hrm analysis  from 24 h post-fertilization  crispr-injected embryos led to shifted and irregular melting curves compared to wild type larvae . the irregular profiles of these curves are explained by mosaic heteroduplex pcr fragments formed because of the random mutations induced by crispr/cas <dig> mutagenesis  <cit> . moreover, we decided to take advantage of our method to try to detect these indels earlier during development since this would allow a more rapid checkpoint of the mutagenesis efficacy. as shown in fig. 2c, we successfully identified crispr/cas9-induced mutations in gldc by hrm from genomic dna of a  <dig> hpf zebrafish blastula. in contrast, at this stage, we were unable to amplify the locus of interest by standard pcr and therefore could not detect the indels by sequencing demonstrating that the hrm-based analysis from a raw genomic extract of a late blastula is more sensitive than standard pcr and allows an early identification of the indels. as a result, this method is very useful to rapidly and accurately assess the efficiency of a crispr/cas <dig> mutagenesis assay in zebrafish.

crispr/cas <dig> induces indels in the 2-cell stage embryo
lastly, we decided to go further and try to detect the earliest indels induced by crispr/cas <dig> system in a third gene: calpn1a. to do so, we extracted genomic dna from early embryos from the very first cell division and onwards until the sphere stage . as a result, using our fast hrm assay, we performed mutagenesis kinetics from the very beginning of embryogenesis until the late blastula stage. interestingly, we were able to detect indels within calpn1a coding sequence in embryos as early as the 2-cell stage . to our knowledge, this is the earliest time point at which crispr/cas <dig> mutagenesis has been identified in zebrafish embryos. the percentage of embryos with indels increases significantly during embryogenesis after each cell division and reached 100 % efficiency at the sphere stage . this is illustrated by the increasing number of green non-smooth curves during embryogenesis . this result demonstrates that the crispr/cas <dig> system is functional very soon after microinjection but that the dna repair mechanisms are likely actively reversing the majority of induced mutations. however, error-prone none-homologous end joining allowed mutations to occur at the locus of interest  in about 11 % of embryos after the second cell division and this percentage increases to 70 % in 8-cell embryos . interestingly, our quantification suggests that the majority of crispr/cas9-induced mutations arose between the 8-cell and the 32-cell stages during which we observe the maximum variability in the percentage of embryos bearing mutations. this percentage reached a plateau from the 64-cell stage onwards with only a few non-mutated embryos at this stage  to finally reach 100 % of mutant embryos at the sphere stage .fig.  <dig> mutagenesis kinetics of crispr/cas9-induced injected embryos from 2-cell stage until the sphere stage. a melting curve analysis indicated that indels can be detected as early as  <dig> cell-stage and the proportion of embryos with indels within calpn1a coding sequence increases with time . b quantification of the percentage of embryos with indels within calpn1a coding sequence at different stages of development . the blue line is an approximation of the trendline



CONCLUSIONS
we propose that the hrm method will expedite genotyping for use with the crispr/cas <dig> technique. we demonstrated that this method is able to detect crispr/cas9-induced mutations from as early as the 2-cell stage embryo and could therefore be useful to develop new crispr/cas <dig> procedures to reduce the time required to identify mutant embryos., aiming at shifting the mutagenesis plateau even earlier in development. ultimately, such optimizations would help reduce the amount of mosaicism usually observed in crispr-induced mutants. of note is that our approach should also be feasible for genotyping other genetic model organisms.

