BACKGROUND
accurate and early diagnosis of tuberculosis  is a critical step in the management and control of tb. because conventional tests for tb have several limitations, nucleic acid amplification  tests have emerged as promising alternatives. the polymerase chain reaction  is the best-known and most widely used naa test. naa tests are categorized as commercial  or in-house . in-house tests are those assays where the investigators design their own protocols. in-house tests are commonly used in developing countries where commercial kits may not be affordable. the accuracy of naa tests for tb has been extensively studied since the early 1990s. since hundreds of studies have evaluated the accuracy of naa tests, it is now possible to evaluate their overall performance using meta-analysis methods and determine which study design or test-related characteristics are associated with higher diagnostic accuracy.

several systematic reviews and meta-analyses have been published in the past few years on the accuracy of naa tests for pulmonary and extra-pulmonary tb  <cit> . because these meta-analyses and reviews have synthesized data from over  <dig> primary studies, and because their results are highly consistent with each other, they provide us with the best available evidence on the accuracy of naa tests. the following are the main findings of the meta-analyses and reviews: most of the studies on naa tests reported very high estimates of specificity, for both pulmonary and extra-pulmonary tb  <cit> . sensitivity estimates, in contrast, have been much lower and highly variable   <cit> . sensitivity estimates have been lower in paucibacillary forms of tb , and higher in smear-positive pulmonary tb  <cit> . another striking result is the widespread lack of consistency in accuracy estimates across studies – studies have reported highly variable estimates of test accuracy  <cit> . for example, in our previous meta-analysis on naa tests for tuberculous meningitis, sensitivity estimates varied between  <dig> – 100%  <cit> . in general, almost all the meta-analyses have demonstrated that the sensitivity and specificity of in-house pcr assays have been more variable and inconsistent than commercial tests  <cit> .

why do studies on in-house pcr assays produce such highly variable estimates of sensitivity and specificity? is the variability due to differences in study design or to differences in assay characteristics and laboratory techniques? are there specific study design features and assay characteristics that yield higher estimates of accuracy? answers to these questions might help to identify features of naa tests that maximize accuracy. however, these questions are difficult to address in individual studies. meta-analytic methods, on the other hand, are well suited to explore the issue of why studies produce variable results. by synthesizing data from multiple studies and increasing the power of analyses, meta-analyses are able to employ techniques that help to identify sources of heterogeneity in study findings. in this meta-analysis, we reviewed  <dig> published studies on in-house naa tests for pulmonary tb. the main objective of our meta-analysis was to determine factors associated with heterogeneity as well as higher accuracy estimates of accuracy in studies that evaluated in-house pcr for the diagnosis of pulmonary tb.

RESULTS
study selection
by searching multiple databases and sources we identified  <dig> potentially relevant citations on naa tests for tuberculosis. after screening titles and abstracts,  <dig> english and spanish articles were selected for full-text review and  <dig> articles reported inclusion of sputum specimens tested by an in-house pcr assay. sixty-one articles were then excluded mainly because data were not separately provided for sputum samples . also, three articles were excluded because real time pcr was used and the number was insufficient to place them in a separate category. a total of  <dig> articles  <cit> , were included in the final analysis. four articles were in spanish  <cit> . thirteen articles reported evaluations of more than one naa test against a common reference standard  <cit> . each such test comparison was counted as a separate study. thus, the total number of test comparisons  was  <dig> 

characteristics of included studies
the summary characteristics of the included studies are shown in table  <dig>  the average sample size of the included studies was  <dig> . our data, as seen in table  <dig>  were affected by the poor quality of reporting in the primary studies. fifty-five of  <dig>  studies did not report blinded interpretation of naa test independent of the reference standard, while only  <dig> of  <dig>  reported single or double blinding of naa test and the reference standard. most of the studies,  <dig> of  <dig> , were cross-sectional whereas  <dig>  were case-control studies. the studies differed greatly in terms of laboratory characteristics. fifty-four of  <dig>  studies used is <dig> as amplification target by itself or in combination with other targets, and  <dig> studies  used other targets . the studies were categorized as those using any chemical method for dna extraction  and those in which any physical or mechanical extraction method was used. sixty-eight of  <dig>  studies reported a simple pcr protocol , whereas  <dig>  studies used a nested or seminested pcr protocol. lastly,  <dig> of  <dig>  studies used uv transillumination of an electrophoretic gel, and  <dig>  used dna hybridization probes to detect the amplification products.

overall diagnostic accuracy
when all  <dig> studies were evaluated together, the sensitivity estimates ranged from  <dig> % to 100%, and specificity estimates ranged from  <dig> % to 100%. both measures were highly heterogeneous . figure  <dig> shows the overall accuracy of pcr in a summary receiver operating characteristic  plot. the symmetric curve shows a trade off between sensitivity and specificity. the area under the sroc curve was 97%, and summary dor was  <dig> , indicating high accuracy. however, the significant heterogeneity in sensitivity and specificity estimates precluded the determination of clinically useful summary measures.

exploration of heterogeneity
in order to identify factors associated with heterogeneity, we performed stratified  analyses. table  <dig> presents the study quality and assay factors assessed and their effect on the estimated summary diagnostic odds ratio . as seen in table  <dig>  studies that did not report the use of blinding produced a dor nearly  <dig>  times higher than studies that reported blinded interpretation of index test and reference standard results. studies with pcr tests that used a nested protocol had almost  <dig> times higher dor than those using a regular pcr protocol. the use of is <dig> target in comparison with those using any other target for amplification showed a dor  <dig>  times higher than studies that used other targets. a similar result was obtained when studies that used uv transillumination of a gel were compared to those that used a probe for detection. studies that used chemical reagents for dna extraction produced dor estimates that were about  <dig>  times greater than studies that used physical methods, indicating that the use of chemicals  does not significantly improve the test accuracy. only five studies reported the analysis on smear negative samples. when stratified by smear status, no major difference was seen in the dor. but this result may be due to the small number of studies reporting only smear negative samples for diagnosis.

as in our previous meta-analyses  <cit> , none of the stratified analyses for dor results fully explained the significant heterogeneity across studies in this review; the statistical tests for heterogeneity were significant even within the various strata . therefore, a meta-regression analysis was performed  to simultaneously evaluate multiple covariates in the same analysis. the outcome of the regression analysis is reported as the relative diagnostic odds ratios .

as shown in table  <dig>  studies that used is <dig> as target of amplification, and studies that used nested pcr methods produced rdor that were significantly higher than those that used other amplification targets or pcr methods. we present the sroc curves for these subgroups in figures 3a and 3b for target and amplification technique, respectively, to show the trade off between sensitivity and specificity. blinding, detection technique and smear status showed a slightly higher rdor but they were not statistically significant in the final regression model. chemical-based dna extraction did not produce a significant rdor, indicating that the use of any chemical reagent for dna extraction did not substantially affect diagnostic accuracy. no difference was seen in dor in those studies that used phenol-chloroform versus any other dna extraction method .

discussion
principal findings
diagnostic methods and, therefore, control of tuberculosis would be greatly improved by the standardization and application of nucleic acid amplification tests. our meta-analytical review of  <dig> in-house pcr-based studies to detect m. tuberculosis in sputum samples showed a summary receiver operator characteristic  of 97%, indicating an overall high accuracy of these tests. however, because of significant heterogeneity in sensitivity and specificity estimates, clinically meaningful estimates of accuracy could not be derived. our analysis showed substantial variability in specificity and sensitivity estimates, and it is clear that in-house pcr tests produce highly inconsistent estimates of diagnostic accuracy. heterogeneity was clearly evident in the results and could not been explained fully even after stratified analyses. variability in study design, study quality, and differences in thresholds  across studies might account for some of the observed heterogeneity. nevertheless, the meta-regression analysis highlighted some variables that do appear to yield higher accuracy estimates. the use of is <dig> as the amplification target, and the use of a nested pcr protocol appear to enhance accuracy. it is therefore worth considering the inclusion of these elements in in-house pcr protocols. our analyses also suggest that the methods used for dna extraction and signal detection were not critical.

clinical implications
because of the observed heterogeneity in sensitivity and specificity, it is difficult to determine clinically useful estimates of accuracy. on the other hand, our findings have some relevance for the clinical microbiology laboratory. our results suggest that the use of is <dig> target sequence in the protocol, and the use of nested pcr methods appear to significantly increase the diagnostic accuracy of pcr. in our previous meta-analysis on naa test for tuberculous pleuritis, we found that naa tests that used is <dig> targets produced dor estimates  <dig>  times higher than tests that used other target sequences  <cit> . lack of blinding has been found to be associated with higher accuracy in previous meta-analyses  <cit> . nevertheless we did not find a significant effect in our meta-regression model. our stratified analyses, however, did show that unblinded studies were associated with higher summary dor than blinded studies. previous empiric research  <cit>  and our earlier meta-analyses  <cit>  suggest that studies that use a case-control design tend to overestimate diagnostic accuracy. surprisingly, study design had little impact on diagnostic accuracy in our current analyses. it is possible that laboratory factors  had a much stronger impact on accuracy than study design features in our analyses.

limitations of the review
in our review, we found only five studies reporting the analysis of smear negative specimens. therefore, we could not determine the effect of smear status on accuracy of pcr. since clinical sputum specimens frequently include smear-negative samples, the conclusions made in this meta-analysis may not apply to studies that included a large number of smear-negative samples. the accuracy estimates for smear-negative specimens have mostly been derived from studies on commercial kits, which have shown high specificity but lower and variable sensitivity  <cit> . the us food and drug administration  approved the use of specific commercial kits initially only for smear positive samples, and recently for smear negative specimens  <cit> . our review also excluded more recent studies that used other protocols for the detection of amplified dna, such as real time pcr. we found only three such studies, and hence they could not be subject to meta-analyses. in the future, such methods may prove to enhance naa test accuracy.

implications for research
one test characteristic significantly associated with increased accuracy was the use of is <dig> as a target of amplification. is <dig> is present in the m. tuberculosis genome, usually as multiple copies, which helps to increase the sensitivity of a pcr test. potential problem with using this target is that some strains from certain parts of the world lack this insertion sequence  <cit> . a possible solution may be to use more than one target. however, we found that multiplex pcr did not contribute to increase the diagnostic accuracy.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this meta-analytical review of various protocols for pcr-based diagnosis of pulmonary tb identified a few factors associated with improved diagnostic accuracy, and others that did not make a substantial difference. future development of naa-based tests to detect m. tuberculosis from sputum specimens should take into consideration these test characteristics as a way to improve accuracy of in-house naa tests to diagnose pulmonary tb.

