BACKGROUND
the biosynthesis of arginine in microorganisms and plants is accomplished in eight enzymatic steps . the first reaction in arginine biosynthesis is n-acetylation of glutamate by n-acetylglutamate synthase . the second reaction of arginine biosynthesis is phosphorylation of the γ-carboxyl group of nag by n-acetylglutamate kinase  to produce n-acetylglutamylphosphate  which is subsequently converted to ornithine in two more steps . in fungi, plants and many bacteria, a cyclic pathway occurs in the first portion of arginine biosynthesis . organisms with a cyclic pathway use ornithine acetyltransferase  to regenerate n-acetylglutamate  via transfer of acetyl group from n-acetylornithine to glutamate. the role of nags in organisms with ornithine acetyltransferase is to replenish the nag that is lost due to cell growth and division  <cit> . in these microorganisms, both nags and nagk are inhibited by arginine  <cit>  whereas in organisms with the linear pathway, nags is the target of feedback inhibition by arginine. enterobacteria, vibrio-like bacteria, a delta-proteobacterium myxococcus xanthus, xanthomonas campestris and the archaeon sulfolobus solfataricus do not posses ornithine acetyltransferase; these organisms have a linear pathway, where nags is the sole source of nag and therefore essential for the arginine biosynthesis  <cit> . in bacteria, two broad classes of nags have been found: "full-length" sequences of approximately  <dig> amino acids that resemble echerichia coli nags, and "short" nags such as those in mycobacterium tuberculosis of approximately  <dig> amino acids in length  <cit> . in both the linear and cyclic arginine biosynthetic pathways, the same enzymes and intermediates are used in the final four steps from ornithine to arginine . in eukaryotes, arginine biosynthesis is partitioned across organelles with fungal nags and nagk located in the mitochondria  <cit>  and the cognate plant enzymes located in the chloroplasts  <cit> .

in mammals, amphibians, fish and some invertebrates, nags, carbamylphosphate synthase, together with the last four enzymes of the arginine biosynthesis pathway and arginase comprise the urea cycle, a metabolic pathway that converts waste nitrogen in the form of ammonia into urea  <cit> . urea functions as an osmolyte in some fish, whereas its role in teleost fish is still unclear  <cit> . in mammals and other land animals, the urea cycle protects the central nervous system from the toxic effects of ammonia  <cit> . in these organisms, nags is localized in the mitochondria and catalyzes formation of nag, which is an essential allosteric activator of carbamylphosphate synthase i   <cit> . interestingly, the enzymatic activity of mammalian nags is not inhibited but rather increases in the presence of arginine  <cit> . the physiological significance of nags activation by arginine is not clear since its estimated intramitochondrial concentration appears to be sufficiently high to saturate nags and result in its maximal activity  <cit> .

unlike other enzymes of the urea cycle, which are conserved across phyla  <cit> , the similarity between mammalian and fungal nags is relatively low  <cit>  and the fungal and bacterial enzymes are even more divergent  <cit> . closer examination of the saccharomyces cerevisiae nags and nagk primary sequences shows the c-terminal regions of both enzymes share similarity with the c-terminal half of e. coli nags, while the n-terminal region of s. cerevisiae nagk has homology to the e. coli nagk  <cit> . the n-terminal region of s. cerevisiae nags appears more divergent and whether it has any catalytic function is unknown  <cit> . limited sequence similarity between nagk from neurospora crassa and nags from e. coli led to the hypothesis that bacterial nags and fungal nagk may have common ancestry  <cit> . the mammalian nags also shares similarity with fungal nagk  <cit> , enough that the gene was misannotated as a nagk in initial releases of the human genome project.

an evolutionary model was proposed in a recent analysis of the arginine biosynthesis pathway that the present day nags arose by fusion of ancestral bacterial argb  gene and an acetyltransferase gene  <cit> . this suggests that nags and fungal nagk evolved from a gene encoding a bifunctional enzyme with both n-acetylglutamate synthase and kinase activities.

in our search for homologs of mammalian nags, we identified a novel gene in xanthomonas campestris that encodes a bifunctional protein which can catalyze the first two reactions of the arginine biosynthesis pathway. we used phylogenetic analysis to show that this novel n-acetylglutamate synthase – n-acetylglutamate kinase  is more closely related to mammalian nags than to other bacterial nags  genes. in this paper, we report on the cloning and characterization of this novel arga-b gene and its xcnags-k protein.

RESULTS
identification of the arga-b gene coding for a bifunctional nags-k
genes coding for the bifunctional nags-k proteins were identified in the genomes of several xanthomonadales based on the similarity of their amino acid sequence to human and mouse nags genes. these genes were annotated as argb in x. campestris, xanthomonas axonopodis and xylella fastidiosa; proteins encoded by these argb genes are 80–98% identical and 85–98% similar to each other but they also showed 34–36% identity and 41–43% similarity to human and mouse nags. the similarity between the putative nags gene from xanthomonadales and mammalian nags genes spans what we term the "conserved segment" of nags  <cit> . these xanthomonad putative nags genes represent the first bacterial genes with significant sequence similarity to mammalian nags. to confirm this, we performed phylogenetic analysis of known and candidate nags and nagk protein sequences. included in the analysis were sequences of enzymatically validated nags  <cit>  as well as predicted proteins that showed similarity to human nags and e. coli arga in blast searches of genbank. the nags from plants, beta-proteobacteria, gamma-proteobacteria including argb gene products from xanthomonadales and three marine alpha-proteobacteria all share similarity with e. coli nags. sequences with higher similarity to human nags were those from mammals, other vertebrates, fungi and amoeba, but also the fungal nagk. interestingly, the argb gene products from xanthomonadales and three marine alpha-proteobacteria were more similar to human nags than even the fungal nags. in archaeal genomes there were no candidate nags genes with sequences similar either to full-length nags from e. coli or mammalian nags; genes that encode shorter proteins have been annotated as nags in archaea  <cit> .

we assembled nags protein sequences from  <dig> organisms including both bacteria and eukaryotes for phylogenetic analysis. included were enzymatically validated as well as candidate nags from mammals , candidate nags from other vertebrates , two characterized fungal nags from s. cerevisiae and n. crassa  <cit>  and two candidate fungal nags from schisosaccharomyces pombe and candida albicans, a candidate nags from an amoeba dictyostelium discoideum, candidate nags enzymes from plants , bacterial nags from e. coli, salmonella typhimurium, pseudomonas aeruginosa and pseudomonas syringae that have been previously characterized  <cit> , candidate nags from ralstonia eutropha and neisseria gonorrhoeae , three putative nags from xanthomonadales  and three candidate nags from marine alpha-proteobacteria . the putative nags from the bacterium ralstonia eutropha was included in this analysis because it had a high similarity score to both nags from e. coli and humans . fungal nagk from s. cerevisiae  <cit> , n. crassa  <cit> , schizosaccharomyces pombe  <cit>  and c. albicans  <cit>  were included based on the previously noted similarity between n. crassa nagk and e. coli nags  <cit> .

the high similarity and close evolutionary relationship between vertebrate nags and products of genes annotated as argb in xanthomonadales led to the hypothesis that the xanthomonad genes encoded nags and not nagk. however, closer inspection of the arginine operon from x. campestris  revealed a gene coding for a hypothetical protein of  <dig> amino acids in length annotated as arga, in addition to the argb gene that we had identified as a close relative of vertebrate nags. no other genes in the operon or elsewhere in the x. campestris genome were annotated as, or similar to, argb or nagk. eight genes are clustered together in the arginine operon of x. campestris; argd gene is located elsewhere in the genome . arginine biosynthesis in xanthomonadales is unusual because instead of ornithine transcarbamylase  they use acetylornithine transcarbamylase  for biosynthesis of acetylcitrulline, which is subsequently deacetylated by the arge gene product  <cit> . query of the ncbi conserved domain database with the sequence of the hypothetical argaprotein from x. campestris revealed that it is similar to acetyltransferases of the gnat superfamily. we cloned the hypothetical arga gene from the x. campestris, overexpressed it in e. coli, and purified the protein. under conditions where the x. campestris argbprotein showed abundant nags activity , the arga protein had none . it is likely that the arga recombinant protein was inactive because it lacked an important cofactor or interacting partner or it does not use acetyl coenzyme a  and/or glutamate as substrates.

the sequence of the argb gene product from x. campestris was aligned with mouse nags, nagk with known three-dimensional structures from e. coli and t. maritima   <cit> , and fungal nags and nagk from s. cerevisiae and s. pombe. amino acids that are important for binding of the nagk substrates, atp and nag, as well as those involved in catalysis of nagp formation  <cit>  were conserved in the argb gene product from x. campestris, bacterial and fungal nagk. these amino acids, which are also conserved in other bacterial argb genes  <cit> , are highlighted in red in figure 3b. this figure also shows the conservation of amino acids , found in the c-terminal half of nags from vertebrates and fungi  <cit>  with those of the xanthomonad argb gene product. three of these conserved amino acids, highlighted in gray, are mutated in patients with nags deficiency  <cit>  and therefore are important for the function of mammalian nags. moreover, the amino acid motif xxgxg , characteristic of the accoa binding sites  <cit>  is present in the mammalian nags and the xanthomonad argb gene product.

based on this evidence we hypothesized that genes annotated as argb in xanthomonadales encoded a dual-function enzyme that catalyzed the first two reactions of the arginine biosynthesis: formation of nag from glutamate and accoa, and phosphorylation of nag to form nagp  <cit> . we henceforth refer to these genes as arga-b and their products nags-k. the arga-b designation reflects the two reactions catalyzed by the product of this gene: the arga reaction  followed by the argb reaction , which are catalyzed by two discrete proteins, argaand argbin e. coli.

cloning of the arga-b gene from x. campestris and purification of recombinant nags-k
the arga-b gene was cloned from x. campestris genomic dna and inserted into an e. coli expression plasmid to produce recombinant protein. we were able to overexpress the xcnags-k protein and purify it to homogeneity . the denatured protein migrated as a single  <dig> kda band, in good agreement with the predicted molecular weight of  <dig>  da. the purified protein was tested for its ability to catalyze the formation of nag and nagp and was biochemically characterized.

aspecific activity measurements were done in triplicate bnot detectable

aspecific activity is an average of two measurements bnot detectable cnot assayed

biochemical properties of xcnags-k
km-values for accoa and l-glutamate and the corresponding maximal velocities were measured for purified xcnags-k. we also examined whether the presence of a polyhistidine affinity tag alters the biochemical properties of the enzyme. figure 5a illustrates that the dependence of the rate of nag formation on the concentration of accoa deviates from michaelis-menten behavior and is sigmoidal. this suggests cooperativity with respect to binding of accoa. the presence of a polyhistidine tag did not significantly alter the apparent km-values for the substrates , maximal velocities  or hill coefficients  . figure 5b shows the dependence of the rate of nag formation on the concentration of l-glutamate. n-terminal polyhistidine tag did not significantly alter kmapp and vmax for l-glutamate .

axcnags-k without affinity tag bxcnags-k with the polyhistidine tag and thrombin protease recognition sequence cvalues for accoa represent fitting parameters to hill equation and the associated errors dvalues for glutamate represent fitting parameters to michaelis-menten equation and the associated errors ethe vmax-values apply to infinite concentrations of glutamate and accoa only, not all substrates

we were not able to examine the km-values and turnover numbers for nag and atp because of the limited sensitivity of the kinase colorimetric assay  <cit> . the rate of nagp formation was proportional to enzyme concentration and linear with time under the conditions used to measure activity , but the dynamic range of the kinase colorimetric assay limited the usable enzyme concentrations and reaction times needed to perform detailed kinetic analysis.

regulation of xcnags-k by arginine
in microorganisms and plants, nags is subject to feedback inhibition by l-arginine  <cit> . nagk from e. coli, which uses the linear arginine biosynthesis pathway, is not inhibited by arginine, although nagk in bacterial fungi and plants that use the cyclic pathway are negatively regulated by arginine  <cit> . arginine has the opposite effect in human, mouse and rat nags, where it increases activity  <cit> . both the synthase and kinase activities of xcnags-k are inhibited by arginine . however, the synthase activity appears to be approximately  <dig> times more sensitive to arginine than kinase activity; in xcnags-k, without an affinity-tag, the half-maximal synthase and kinase activities were observed at  <dig>  and  <dig>  mm of arginine, respectively. the presence of an affinity tag did not affect the inhibition of the synthase activity of xcnags-k . however, the arginine concentration sufficient for half-inhibition of the kinase activities of xcnags-k with and without polyhistidine differed two-fold . inhibition of both reactions by arginine is consistent with xcnags-k being a target for feedback inhibition in arginine biosynthesis.

effect of ph on the enzymatic activities of xcnags-k
the effect of ph on xcnags-k activity was examined using purified protein with an intact polyhistidine affinity tag. synthase and kinase activities were measured in a series of buffers with different ph values. table  <dig> shows that the ph optimum for the synthase is  <dig>  while it is  <dig>  for the kinase. to rule out that buffering compounds used to adjust the ph may have affected the enzymatic activities, we tested whether nacl, mes, mops, tris-hcl or sodium acetate themselves had an effect on either synthase or kinase activities. the effects of variations in ionic strength of the differing buffering compounds were examined by adding  <dig> mm nacl to assay reactions. table  <dig> illustrates that the addition of  <dig> mm nacl, mops and mes did not significantly alter synthase activity, while  <dig> mm sodium acetate and  <dig> mm nacl inhibited the activity by about 22%. the kinase activity of xcnags-k did not change appreciably when  <dig> mm nacl,  <dig> mm mops,  <dig> mm tris-hcl and  <dig> mm nacl were added to the reaction mixture. the difference in optimal ph for the two reactions is probably due to different requirements for interactions among charged groups upon binding of substrates and catalysis.

anumbers represent averages of two measurements and associated standard errors bnumbers represent averages of three measurements and associated standard errors

anumbers represent averages of three measurements and associated standard errors

discussion
herein we describe a novel bifunctional n-acetylglutamate synthase and kinase  from x. campestris which is close bacterial homolog to mammalian nags. in addition to sequence similarity, mammalian nags and x. campestris nags-k have similar biochemical properties. the affinities for accoa and glutamate are similar, as is the concentration of arginine needed for half-inhibition or activation of the synthase activity of xcnags-k and mammalian nags, respectively  <cit> . the kinase activity of the xcnags-k was also inhibited by arginine. however, nag phosphorylation was approximately  <dig> times less sensitive to arginine than nag synthesis activity. this difference in sensitivity to arginine could be due in part because the synthase and kinase activities are assayed separately, while in vivo, both activities would be inhibited concurrently since the biosynthesis of nagp would stop as soon as the kinase is deprived of its substrate nag.

functional domains of nags-k
nags-k from xanthomonadales is composed of two functional domains: the n-terminal kinase domain that belongs to the cog <dig> conserved domain family and spans approximately  <dig> amino acids, and the duf <dig> domain in the c-termini, which is approximately  <dig> amino acids long . this domain organization is found in other bacterial nags, vertebrate nags and fungal nagk  <cit> . nagk from archaea, plants and most bacteria are approximately  <dig> amino acids long and have only one cog <dig> conserved domain . examination of the domain relationships in the conserved domain database revealed that duf <dig> is related to the cog <dig> acetyltransferase domain family that is found in the c-termini of bacterial and plant nags proteins. the cog <dig> conserved domain is also present in nags from m. tuberculosis, which is  <dig> amino acids long  <cit> , and the arg segment of the argh gene from the two moritella species  <cit> , suggesting that a functional glutamate n-acetyltransferase could be fully contained within the  <dig> amino acids at the c-terminus of xcnags-k. examination of the domain relationships in the conserved domain database revealed that duf <dig> and cog <dig> conserved domains are also related to the domain pfam <dig> of the gcn5-related n-acetyltransferases  superfamily, which is present in the putative arga gene in the arginine operon of x. campestris. this suggests that there may be two distinct active sites in the xcnags-k: one in the c-terminal domain that carries out the acetyltransferase function  and one in the n-terminal kinase domain, which is responsible for phosphorylation of nag. figure  <dig> shows that nags from fungi also have two domains: the c-terminal acetyltransferase domain that belongs to the duf <dig> family and the n-terminal domain whose sequence appears to have diverged from the kinase domain present in other two-domain nags and fungal nagk  <cit> . however, our phylogenetic analysis  and sequence alignment  strongly suggests that fungal nags is related to vertebrate nags and fungal nagk. it is likely that divergence of fungal nags sequences reflects possible protein-protein interactions  <cit>  or other adaptations unique to fungi. determination of the three-dimensional structure of the xcnags-k and a more detailed examination of its kinetic properties should reveal the identities and location of active site residues and lead to better understanding of how the acetyltransferase and kinase domains interact.

evolution of nags
we examined the distribution of nags and nagk across the three domains of life. although nagk is found in archaea, eubacteria and eukaryotes, such as plants, algae and fungi, initially, we were only able to find sequences similar to either e. coli or mammalian nags in beta-proteobacteria, gamma-proteobacteria and three species of alpha-proteobacteria  <cit> . the three alpha-proteobacteria, m. maris, o. alexandrii and p. bermudensis, also appear to harbor acetylornithine transcarbamylase  genes suggesting that their arginine biosynthesis pathway is similar to the one in x. campestris  <cit> . identification of the alpha-proteobacterial nags genes that are closely related to the corresponding vertebrate, fungal and algal genes and to fungal nagk is intriguing because mitochondria are thought to have arisen by endosymbiosis between proto-eukaryotic cell and an alpha-proteobacteria. current thought suggests that the alpha-proteobacteria of the order rickettsiales are the extant relatives of the endosymbiont that gave rise to mitochondria, and these do not appear to have a bifunctional nags-k. m. maris and o. alexandrii belong to the order of rhodobacterales and p. bermudensis is a member of the order parvuralculares. detailed analysis of the relationships among the alpha proteobacteria orders with respect to nags will be needed to better illuminate if the ancestry of the vertebrate nags has origins in the alpha proteobacteria. it is likely that, as more genomic data and candidate nags sequences become available, it will be possible to reconstruct the evolutionary history of nags in a way similar to that done for cps, otc and arginase  <cit> .

based on the close relationship between xcnags-k, other xanthomonad homologs, vertebrate nags and fungal nagk, it is likely that xcnags-k and its homologs are extant representatives of an ancestral gene that arose by fusion of the ancestral argb gene encoding nagk, and an ancestral gene encoding an acetyltransferase  <cit> . we speculate that the primordial bifunctional protein underwent gene duplication followed by divergence to evolve into the present day mammalian nags and fungal nagk. the present day mammalian nags retained acetyltransferase enzymatic activity and lost the kinase activity whereas the present day fungal nagk retained kinase activity and lost acetyltransferase activity. xcnags-k retains conservation of amino acids important for both activities . the evolutionary descendant of the unfused form of the acetyltransferase, if it still exists, remains to be identified.

many archaea and eubacteria, including x. campestris  and m. tuberculosis , contain genes that are between  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids long and are annotated as arga or nags. moreover, the arga gene product of m. tuberculosis appears to have nags enzymatic activity  <cit> , suggesting that the c-terminal domain of xcnags-k alone could be sufficient for catalysis of nag formation. nags function is also contained within a  <dig> amino acids long arg segment of the argh fusion gene found in the moritella abyssi and moritella profunda  <cit> . all these "short" arga gene products belong to the cog <dig> family of acetyltransferases that are distinct from the duf <dig> family . based on the above observation and the relationship between cog <dig> and duf <dig> protein families, we cannot exclude the possibility of two separate gene fusions occurred and gave rise to two families of nags proteins: one fusion of nagk and acetyltransferase from the duf <dig> family could have given rise to the xanthomonad nags-k, nags from the alpha-proteobacteria m. maris, o. alexandrii and p. bermudensis, vertebrate nags, and fungal nags and nagk, and a second fusion between nagk and an acetyltransferase from the cog <dig> family might have resulted in the extant plant, beta- and gamma-proteobacterial nags. however, data presented in figure  <dig> could also be explained by horizontal gene transfer of nags-k from eukaryotes into xanthomonadales, rhodobacterales and/or parvuralculares. sequencing and analysis of additional microbial genomes will help to resolve which one of these evolutionary models is more likely.

the high level of divergence of nags compared to other genes in the arginine biosynthesis pathway could be explained by the dual role of nags among species . in organisms with the linear arginine biosynthesis pathway and those harboring a urea cycle, nags plays an essential role of either catalyzing the formation of the first intermediate in the arginine biosynthesis or as a cofactor for the cpsi and cpsiii  <cit> . this would imply stronger selection pressure for conservation of amino acid sequence and protein function. we speculate that in microbes and plants that have the cyclical arginine biosynthesis pathway, nags plays an anaplerotic role and could therefore be subject to less stringent selection pressure, as long as nag could be regenerated by transacetylation from other precursors.

we had initially expected that amino acids involved in binding of substrates would be conserved in all nags proteins, regardless of their biological role. an accoa binding motif  in xcnags-k was identified based on its similarity with thialysine acetyltransferase , a member of the cog <dig> family with known three-dimensional structure  <cit> . in ssat <dig>  binding of accoa is mediated mostly through hydrogen bonds with the main-chain oxygen and nitrogen atoms instead of by specific amino acid side chains  <cit> . presumably the exact identity of these residues is less important as long as their side chains permit packing into the three-dimensional structure of either the cog <dig> or duf <dig> domains. this indirect form of amino acid interaction with substrates by the backbone instead of the side chains may explain, at least in part, the low conservation of nags motifs across phyla.

present day nags from bacteria, plants, fungi and animals had been, until recently, considered either very distant relatives or not related at all  <cit> . this was probably the reason that mammalian nags was the last urea cycle gene to be identified and cloned  <cit> . the similarity of xcnags-k and mammalian nags, together with the wealth of genomic data has allowed us to begin to reconstruct evolutionary history of this gene. the bifunctional xcnags-k appears likely to be a direct descendant of the ancestral fusion protein that gave rise to extant mammalian nags and fungal nagk. purified recombinant xcnags-k was recently crystallized  <cit>  and its structure and its close relationship with mammalian nags will provide new insights into structure and function of nags as well as genotype/phenotype correlations of nags deficiency.

CONCLUSIONS
based on the phylogenetic relationship and similar biochemical properties of xcnags-k and mammalian nags, we conclude that this bifunctional enzyme is closely related to the bacterial antecedent of mammalian nags.

