BACKGROUND
it is established that multiple fields/areas in each cerebral hemisphere are activated at short latency by stimuli that trigger spike discharge activity in skin mechanoreceptive afferents. of these the most extensively studied is si – a region which most investigators have come to regard as responsive solely  to tactile stimuli delivered to contralateral skin sites. in contrast, sii has long been known to be activated at short latency by mechanical stimulation of skin sites on both sides of the body midline. although this differential responsivity of si and sii to stimulation of contralateral vs. ipsilateral skin sites has been widely accepted for more than five decades , the contribution of sii activation to cortical tactile information processing remains unknown. additionally, although sii is considered to be the first cortical stage of the pathway that integrates information arising from both sides of the body, si is generally not considered as a cortical region in which ipsilateral inputs play a major role in bilateral integration of information across the body mid-line. it is known, however, that even the distal limb representational regions in si receive axonal projections  from si neurons in the opposite hemisphere  <cit> .

recently, we reported the results from experiments in which we obtained simultaneous observations of the activity evoked in both si and sii in the same hemisphere of cat cerebral cortex by a  <dig> hz sinusoidal vertical skin displacement stimulus  applied contralaterally, ipsilaterally, or bilaterally to the central pads of the forepaws  <cit> . briefly summarized, a localized increase in absorbance in both si and sii was evoked by contralateral and also by bilateral flutter stimulation. ipsilateral flutter stimulation also evoked a localized increase in absorbance in sii, but only a weak or negligible increase in the forepaw region of si. interestingly, the region of sii that responded with an increase in absorbance to ipsilateral stimulation was 2– <dig> mm posterior to the region in which absorbance increased maximally in response to stimulation of the contralateral central pad. furthermore, in the posterior sii region that yielded the largest response to ipsilateral stimulation of the central pad, the response to bilateral central pad stimulation approximated a linear summation of the sii responses to independent stimulation of the contralateral and ipsilateral central pads. conversely, in the anterior region of sii , the response to bilateral stimulation was consistently smaller than  the response evoked from the contralateral central pad.

this report addresses the response of si cortex to the same modes of stimulation used in the above-described study that focused on sii . the central finding is that flutter stimulation of the ipsilateral central pad exerts a suppressive/inhibitory influence on the si response to a  <dig> hz flutter stimulus to the contralateral central pad . in addition, the temporal relationship between stimulus-evoked activity in selected locations in the responding regions of si and sii is evaluated quantitatively , revealing a previously unrecognized, and presumably functionally important high degree of coordination between the activities evoked by forepaw stimulation in both si and the recently identified  <cit>  anterior vs. posterior components that comprise sii cortex in the same hemisphere.

RESULTS
the si response to each of the different stimulus conditions can be better appreciated when the imaging data are displayed as a multi-dimensional surface plot. figure  <dig> compares the stimulus evoked response of si to contralateral vs. bilateral stimulation at  <dig> seconds after stimulus onset . the top left panel indicates the orientation of the sampled region of interest  in si. the surface plots show the absorbance value at each pixel location in the imaged field, with absorbance defined both by elevation along the z-axis and by pseudocolor . consistent with the difference images shown in figure  <dig>  the response evoked by ipsilateral stimulation is near-background , whereas the responses to contralateral and bilateral stimulation are localized and clearly evident. close visual inspection of these surface plots also reveals that the magnitude of the si response evoked by contralateral stimulation is greater than the response evoked by bilateral stimulation.

scatter plots were used to directly compare the response of si to the different conditions of contralateral and bilateral stimulation. in each plot in figure  <dig> the absorbance value obtained at each pixel under these two stimulus conditions is plotted against each other – i.e., the x-axis is the absorbance value evoked by the contralateral stimulus and the y-axis is the absorbance value evoked by the bilateral stimulus. the plots reveal that there is a difference in the population response of si neurons to the contralateral vs. bilateral stimulus conditions. additionally, the plots suggest that there is a time dependency in the development of the response to bilateral stimulation – that is, there is little difference between the responses to the two conditions at  <dig> sec after stimulus onset , yet at a later time . points located below  the reference line  represent pixels, or spatial locations in si, where the response to contralateral stimulation is greater than the response to bilateral stimulation. it should be emphasized that this type of graphic does not reflect spatial differences in the responses to the different stimulus conditions, but rather, emphasizes whether or not different members of a set respond differently to the different stimulus conditions. accordingly, the plots in figure  <dig> indicate that with increasing time after onset of bilateral stimulation of the central pads , absorbance at particular locations within the responding region of si pixels reduces relative to the value achieved during contralateral stimulation. it also should be noted that the plots in figure  <dig> show that not all spatial locations  in the responding region of si exhibit this reduction in absorbance – that is, each plot indicates that at a minority of locations within the responding si region bilateral stimulation evokes the same or even a greater response than the response evoked by contralateral stimulation.

the across-subject consistency of the results was evaluated by determining the average absorbance values evoked by the  <dig> different stimulus conditions  for the  <dig> subjects at  <dig> sec after stimulus onset . clearly, the contralateral stimulus condition evoked the largest average  response, and therefore the values of the average  absorbance increase obtained under the ipsilateral and the bilateral stimulus conditions were normalized to this absorbance value . while the average response to ipsilateral stimulation was very weak or negligible, the average response evoked by bilateral stimulation was approximately 35% less than that evoked by contralateral stimulation. in each of the  <dig> subjects the response to bilateral stimulation was less than the response to contralateral stimulation. statistical hypothesis testing was performed in order to determine if the average  response evoked by bilateral stimulation was significantly less than the average response to contralateral stimulation . analysis of variance showed that the average bilateral/contralateral response ratio was between  <dig>  and  <dig>  in si .

comparisons between si and sii responses
our previous study  <cit>  characterized the sii response to the same contralateral, ipsilateral and bilateral stimulus conditions that we used to characterize the response of si cortex in this report. the sii responses evoked by these different stimulus conditions led to the identification of two regions in sii arranged along the anterior and posterior axis of the anterior ectosylvian gyrus. in that study, identical contralateral vs. bilateral stimulus conditions at homotopic skin sites demonstrated that the response evoked by a bilateral stimulus was 35% smaller than that evoked by a contralateral stimulus in the anterior region of sii  <cit> . this correspondence between the effects of bilateral stimulation on si and the posterior region of sii in the same hemisphere led us to evaluate the extent to which the changes in the activity of posterior sii and si observed under this condition are inter-related. to investigate the relationship between the spatiotemporal patterns of absorbance between the different cortical regions – si, anterior sii, and posterior sii – correlation analysis was performed on the data. figure  <dig> shows the results obtained when this approach is used to evaluate the relationship between the responses to contralateral and ipsilateral stimulus conditions for an exemplary subject. for both correlation maps, a correlation value is obtained for each location  in the responding si region by cross-correlating the time course of the absorbance changes at that location with a "standard" time course. in the case of figure  <dig>  the "standard" time course that was correlated with each pixel was obtained from si activity evoked by contralateral stimulation. the red line in the graph inset of figure  <dig> is the standard time course obtained from the average response evoked within the indicated si boxel. the blue plot in the graph inset is simply the negative of the red and indicates the time course of pixels that are negatively correlated with the standard time course. in the contralateral stimulus condition, note that the activity in each of the  <dig> zones within the responding region  is positively correlated to the time course of activity evoked in si by a contralateral stimulus. for the ipsilateral stimulus condition, however, only the activity in the region of sii is positively correlated with the activity in the responding region of si, whereas the activity in si and the anterior sii regions is negatively correlated. the negative correlation indicates that the time course of stimulus-evoked activity in si and anterior sii is trending in a direction opposite to that observed under the contralateral stimulus condition, whereas in posterior sii the activity modifies in a manner similar to that observed in the responding region of si. the correlation maps obtained from each of the other experimental subjects indicated similar trends.

a second method of correlation mapping was used to directly compare the responses evoked by contralateral vs. bilateral stimulation . in this method, rather than correlating each pixel with a standard time course observed at one particular cortical region for the same stimulus condition, performs a cross correlates the time courses of absorbance values obtained at the same spatial location under different stimulus conditions. thus, the correlation coefficient generated at each pixel location represents how similar  or how different  are the temporal responses of a cortical region recorded under  <dig> different stimulus conditions. the map in figure  <dig> is indicative of the type result obtained by performing a "cross-modal" correlation  in all the subjects in which si and sii was simultaneously imaged. note that this type of correlation map shows that the responding region of si and anterior sii  have high values of correlation, whereas posterior sii shows only weak, or in some local regions, negative correlation. it should be pointed out that correlation values are an indication of how similar are the trends – in particular, the slopes of the time courses – of the activity of a specific region under the different modes of stimulation. thus, although the activity levels of si and anterior sii both undergo a reduction in magnitude  under the bilateral stimulus condition, the slopes of the time course are very similar – accordingly, the activity of the  <dig> regions is positively correlated under this condition. in posterior sii, on the other hand, response magnitude increases under the bilateral stimulus condition  – thus with bilateral stimulation the activity of this region is negatively correlated with the activity in si and in anterior sii.

discussion
the findings of this study demonstrate that bilateral flutter stimulation of the central pads of the forepaws evokes an si response significantly smaller than the response evoked when the stimulus is applied contralaterally. at the locus of the maximal ois response evoked in the si region by a contralateral stimulus, bilateral stimulation evoked a response that was, on average, 35% smaller than that evoked by the contralateral stimulus. concurrently, at the locus of the maximal ois response evoked by contralateral stimulation in anterior sii , bilateral stimulation evoked a response that was, on average, 35% lower than the activity evoked by a contralateral stimulus. the same conditions that led to the decrease in activity in si and anterior sii also led to an increase in activity in posterior sii  <cit> .

although the neural mechanisms responsible for the above-described effect remains uncertain, some workers have reported that callosally-transmitted inputs exert modulatory, but inconsistent effects on si neurons. schnitzler et al  <cit> , using meg in humans, showed that tactile stimulation of one hand enhanced the response of ipsilateral primary somatosensory cortex  to median nerve stimulation. conversely, korvenoja et al  <cit>  reported that activation of si  by electrical stimulation of the contralateral median nerve was suppressed during movement of the fingers of the ipsilateral hand. in addition, hoechstetter et al.  <cit>  described "interactions" in sii cortex  during bilateral stimulation, but reported that the response in si evoked by a contralateral stimulus was not altered by the addition of an ipsilateral stimulus. shimojo et al  <cit>  also found no difference in sources localized to si evoked by unilateral versus bilateral stimulation. most recently, staines, et al,  <cit>  reported data  showing that si activity evoked by passive bilateral stimulation is weaker than the si activity evoked by passive unilateral stimulation. other findings in the same report showed that the modulation of si activity, particularly in the case of bilateral stimulation, was task-dependent. others have shown that the activity evoked in si by a unilateral stimulus can be modulated in a context-dependent manner, both in humans  and in other primates .

although an influence mediated via direct callosal projections from ipsilateral si to contralateral si  <cit>  should not be ruled out, the data presented in this study lead us to propose that sii is the major source of the modulated si response to contralateral skin stimulation that is observed under a variety of stimulus conditions  <cit> . whereas the available literature is contradictory  <cit> , it is clear that sii in cats receives its principal input from the thalamus  <cit> . while some investigators have proposed that monkey sii occupies a higher position in the somatosensory information processing hierarchy than does sii in cat  <cit> , others have warned that "these are basically descriptive schemes of connections that do not illuminate what features of somesthesis are selectively projected" and that "they also tend to ignore potential interdependence between si and sii"  <cit> . the ois observations in the present study obtained by simultaneously imaging the contralateral si and sii in cats during ipsilateral stimulation of the central pad revealed that the time course of the optical response  evoked in posterior sii is negatively correlated with the time course of the optical signal in si and anterior sii. perhaps more significantly, the results obtained by correlation of the responses evoked under contralateral and bilateral stimulus conditions revealed a similar relationship between the cortical activity evoked in si, anterior sii and posterior sii – in this case, the time course of the activities of si and anterior sii are positively correlated under the bilateral stimulus condition, whereas under the same condition those activities are negatively or only weakly correlated with the activity in posterior sii. a plausible  explanation for these outcomes is that the activity evoked in posterior sii exerts an inhibitory influence on si via the extensive corticocortical connections known  <cit>  to link topographically corresponding regions in si and sii.

an extensive literature addresses the neuroanatomical routes by which information about the status of skin mechanoreceptors accesses si and sii . while the data presented in this paper neither extend or modify what is known about the routes by which information reaches si and sii, they  address the issue of whether, and to what extent, the responses of si, anterior sii, and posterior sii in the same hemisphere are independent. the data presented here, in conjunction with evidence published previously  <cit> , shows that nonnoxious mechanical skin stimulation evokes afferent activity that is conveyed via central somatosensory pathways to sii in both the contralateral and the ipsilateral hemispheres, and raises the possibility that unlike the activity evoked by contralateral flutter, the sii activity generated by ipsilateral skin stimulation may depress  the response of si to ongoing skin stimulation. previously, we postulated that sii activity levels modulated the si response when the sii activity was evoked by vibratory stimuli  <cit> . that study showed that contralateral vibration increased sii activity levels which were correlated with decreases in si vibration-evoked activity. the findings make it seem likely that, at least in cat, the degree to which sii activation modifies the si response to skin stimulation depends on the attributes of the peripheral stimulus – that is, that si activity is modified by sii activity in a stimulus-dependent manner.

CONCLUSIONS
the responses evoked by contralateral, ipsilateral and bilateral flutter stimulation of the central pad of the cat forepaw indicate that the response of si evoked by contralateral stimulation is reduced in the presence of an ipsilateral stimulus. correlation analysis of the responses evoked by ipsilateral skin flutter stimulation showed that activity in posterior sii  is negatively correlated with the activity in si. additionally, correlation mapping of the results obtained from the contralateral vs. bilateral stimulus conditions demonstrated that the time course of the activities evoked in si and anterior sii by these conditions are similar. the data lead to the proposal that increasing levels of activity in posterior sii evoked by an ipsilateral skin stimulus suppress/inhibit the responses normally evoked in both anterior sii and si by contralateral stimulation.

