BACKGROUND
mirnas, which were first discovered in caenorhabditis elegans as post-transcriptional regulators of genes involved in developmental timing  <cit> , are small non-coding rnas of ~ <dig> nucleotides. they are now recognized as one of the major regulatory gene families, playing important roles in almost every cellular process in animals, plants and viruses  <cit> . in animals, this includes regulation of developmental timing and signaling pathways, apoptosis, metabolism, myogenesis and cardiogenesis, brain development  <cit> , and human pathologies  <cit> .

although the mechanism by which mirnas regulate gene expression remains under debate, mirnas mainly mediate gene regulation post-transcriptionally via translational repression and reduction of mrna stability by forming mirna-mrna pairs to their target genes. in vertebrates, most mirnas pair imperfectly with the 3' untranslated regions  of their targets, with a contiguous and perfect base pairing of the mirna nucleotides 2- <dig> at the 'seed' region, providing pairing specificity  <cit> . whereas mirnas repress translation of target mrnas by inhibiting translation initiation  <cit> , blocking translation elongation  <cit> , or promoting premature dissociation of ribosomes  <cit> , they induce significant degradation of mrna targets by mrna deadenylation, decapping, and 5' → 3' exonucleolytic degradation. the latter have been widely demonstrated from animal studies  <cit> , cultured cells  <cit> , and microarray analysis  <cit> . contradicting these mechanisms, it has been recently discovered that mirna have the potential to activate translation under certain conditions  <cit>  and the ability to switch from translational repression to translational activation in cell-cycle-arrested cells  <cit> .

it has been found that individual mirna can mildly down-regulate hundreds of targets by direct or indirect effects, providing a mechanism of fine-tuning for gene expression. the first demonstration of this came from a microarray study in which introduction of an exogenous mirna into human hela cells downregulated a large number of target mrnas  <cit> . consistently, depletion of the mirna machinery proteins destabilized around 20% of transcripts expressed in drosophila  <cit> . in zebrafish, mir- <dig> was found to facilitate the deadenylation and clearance of several hundred target mrnas, most of which were maternally expressed and accumulated in the absence of mir- <dig>  <cit> . in another study that employed a proteomic approach to measure changes in the synthesis of proteins in response to mirna transfection or endogenous mirna knockdown, a single mirna could repress the production of hundreds of proteins, but the repression was relatively mild  <cit> . it has also been demonstrated that some mirnas dampen the output of preexisting but unwanted transcripts to facilitate a more rapid and robust transition to new expression programs, which help maintain and define cell types  <cit> 

recent studies indicate that there exists more than  <dig> known mammalian mirna genes  <cit>  that are conserved throughout evolution with constitutive or spatially and temporally regulated expression. computational analyses suggest that a single transcript may be regulated by multiple mirnas  <cit>  and that each mirna can target tens to hundreds of transcripts  <cit> , leading to the conclusion that mirnas as a whole regulate the expression of at least 30% of human gene transcripts  <cit> . these discoveries show that mirnas and their targets are part of complex regulatory networks, for which a number of studies have been performed to reveal the effects of specific mirnas on temporal and spacial expression of their target genes, and hence the functions of mirnas. the strategy employed in these studies is to identify the relationship between the expression of a mirna and its targets by either overexpressing or silencing the mirna  <cit> .

despite all these studies, little is known about mirna regulation from a genome scale. accordingly, to gain new insight into mirna mediated gene regulation in humans, we carried out a series of studies to compare various features of mirna target genes to that of non-mirna target genes. these included the difference of gene expression from  <dig> human tissues  <cit> , mrna  <cit>  and protein  <cit>  stability, the influence of mirna binding sites on mrna degradation, and gene structures. based on these characteristics of mirna target genes and by analyzing the relationships between these features, principles of mirna mediated gene regulation were investigated. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first use of large scale data from different levels to study the mechanism of mirna regulation in humans, and the findings will therefore help provide new insight into mirna regulation of human gene expression.

we have found significant differences between mirna and non-mirna target genes for a number of characteristics, including higher and broader mrna expression, faster mrna decay rate, longer protein half-life, and longer gene structures. we also found that mirna target genes, other than having mirna repression, were most likely under more complex regulation than non-mirna target genes. the results also suggest that higher gene expression and longer length of mirna target genes may be the consequence of genomic design for regulatory complexity, but it is not the result of lacking "selection for economy", for which highly and broadly expressed genes are compact  <cit> . the higher and broader gene expression but fast mrna decay rates also suggests that mirna dampening of the output of preexisting but unwanted transcripts to facilitate transition to new expression programs  <cit>  is a general mechanism for mirna regulation of human gene expression. this can be achieved by enhancing mrna degradation through an additive effect from multiple mirna targeting.

RESULTS
mirna target genes have higher and broader expression in human tissues
as a first step to investigate mirna regulation, we used published gene expression data from the gnf atlas <dig> gene expression database from  <dig> human tissues   <cit>  to explore both the absolute expression and breadth of expression  differences between non-mirna and mirna target genes predicted from the most popular algorithms of targetscans  <cit> , pictar  <cit> , and rna <dig>  <cit> . while both targetscans and pictar predict mammalian mirna targets based on sequence complementarity, evolutionary conservation, and binding energy, they were reported to have high fidelity for target prediction from biological and informatic validation  <cit> . on the other hand, rna <dig>  rather than using cross-species conservation as the major component for prediction, employs a pattern-based approach for the identification of mirna binding sites in the sequence of interest. therefore, the use of mirna target genes predicted from rna <dig> allows one to avoid potential source of bias due to genes with preferential 3'utr cross-species conservation.

for absolute gene expression, we compared the median expression signals of mirna target genes to those of non-mirna target genes in ~ <dig> unique genes within each of the  <dig> human tissues. the results indicate that mirna target genes are significantly different from non-mirna target genes as shown in figure 1a, where the median expression signals from mirna target genes derived from pictar are significantly higher  than those from non-mirna target genes in all  <dig> human tissues. similar results were obtained from the other two mirna target gene sets . it is interesting to note that the expression differences are especially apparent in brain tissues - a complex tissue with multiple cell types.

for gene expression breadth, we compared the fraction of mirna target genes restrictively expressed in certain number of tissues to that of non-mirna target genes. in this analysis, a gene was considered as expressed if its signal exceeded a threshold of  <dig> arbitrary units according to su et al  <cit> . the results indicate that mirna target genes have wider gene expression breadth compared to that of non-mirna target genes in  <dig> ten-tissue bins as shown in figure 1b, where the fraction of mirna target genes are, in general, less than the fraction of non-mirna target genes for genes restrictively expressed in the first  <dig> tissue bins. however, this is reversed in the last  <dig> tissue bins where the fraction of mirna target genes is greater than the fraction of non-mirna target genes. comparing the median fraction distribution in each tissue bin, we observed statistically significant differences for the first  <dig>  and the last  <dig>  bins, further confirming the characteristics of wide expression breadth for mirna target genes. similar results were also obtained from two other mirna target gene sets .

we next asked whether any other factors might contribute to these observed gene expression differences between mirna and non-mirna target genes. accordingly, since transcription factors and promoter structures are involved in transcriptional regulation of gene expression, we compared promoters of these two gene groups for gc contents and transcription factor binding sites  . we found that the promoter sequences of mirna target genes were more gc- and tfbs-enriched when compared to the promoter sequences of non-mirna target genes. the median gc percentage for promoter sequences of mirna target genes is ~56%, which is significantly larger  than the median percentage of ~52% from non-mirna target genes. furthermore, the median tfbs number per promoter is  <dig> for mirna target genes, which is also significantly larger  than the median tfbs number of  <dig> from non-mirna target genes. these results indicate that the gene expression differences between mirna and non-mirna target genes may be partially due to transcriptional regulation, a topic that is worthy of further investigation.

mirna target genes are less compact
the above findings raise an interesting question why mirna target genes are highly and widely expressed, as mirna target genes are down-regulated by mirnas. previous reports have shown that highly and broadly expressed genes are shorter in both their intronic and coding sequences than genes expressed at low level or in a few tissues as a results of selection for economy  <cit> , since transcription and translation are costly. we therefore performed analysis to see if the structures of mirna target genes were more compact than non-mirna target genes.

using the predicted mirna target gene sets, we compared their structure parameters to those of non-mirna target genes in ~ <dig> unique human genes, of which 34%, 34%, and 48% are mirna target genes from the predictions of targetscans, pictar, and rna <dig>  respectively. we found that the median lengths of mirna target genes were significantly longer  than those of non-mirna target genes in all parts of gene structures . these findings were consistent in all comparisons from the three mirna target gene sets. the top  <dig> largest differences were observed from 3'utrs and introns, two gene structures playing important roles in gene regulation and organism complexity  <cit> . while the median 3'utr length of mirna target genes was between  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold of non-mirna target genes, the median intron length had more than  <dig>  fold difference between mirna and non-mirna target genes. the smallest difference was observed in 5' untranslated regions , whose median length of mirna target genes was still 15% longer than that of non-mirna target genes.

comparison of the structure parameters of non-mirna target genes with those of mirna target genes predicted from targetscans, pictar, and rna <dig>  for each gene structure parameter the first line gives the average value ± s.e.m, and the 2nd line the median values in brackets. n: the number of genes in each category. the median lengths of mirna target genes were significantly longer  than those of non-mirna target genes in all parts of gene structures.

the result that mirna target genes have longer 3'utr sequences is not surprising, as mirnas perform their regulation roles mainly by pairing with 3'utr of target genes. however, the finding that other gene structures of mirna target genes are also longer is contradicted to the "selection for economy", for which highly and broadly expressed genes are compact  <cit> . previous studies indicated that longer gene structures were most likely linked to gene regulation, such as splicing regulation and chromatin-mediated gene suppression from introns  <cit> . the result therefore indicates that mirna target genes, other than having mirna repression, are subject to more complex regulation  <cit> .

mirna target transcripts are less stable but not their protein products
it is widely accepted that mirnas mediate gene regulation by reducing the stability of their target transcripts. previous studies from manipulating individual mirnas revealed that introducing an alien mirna into human hela cells down-regulated a large number of mrnas  <cit>  and that inhibiting mir- <dig> function in mouse liver led to the increase of stability for hundreds of mrnas  <cit> . to investigate if mrna stability of mirna target genes differs from that of non-mirna target genes on the genome scale, we compared the mrna decay rates between these two gene groups using data from yang et al.  <cit> , which contains mrna decay rates for ~ <dig> human transcripts, representing ~ <dig> unique genes. out of the  <dig> genes,  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> were mapped to mirna target genes predicted from targetscans, pictar, and rna <dig>  respectively.

the results indicate that the median mrna decay rates for mirna target genes  are between  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold of that obtained from non-mirna target genes . this observation of higher mrna decay rate for mirna target genes is true for genes predicted from all three algorithms as shown in figure 2a. statistical analyses using one-side wilcoxon rank sum tests revealed significant differences of mrna decay rates between mirna and non-mirna target genes, with p-values < 10-200for the comparisons using mirna target genes predicted from targetscans and pictar and p-values < 10- <dig> for the comparison using mirna target genes predicted from rna <dig>  these findings, which are in agreement with previous reports from individual mirna studies  <cit> , suggest that mirnas enhance the down-regulation of target mrnas through increasing their decay rate.

as an extension of selection for economy for genes, one would expect that genes with a lower mrna decay rate should be more stable for their protein products. therefore, we asked if a similar difference existed for their protein products, although protein stability is not likely under mirna regulation. to address this question, we compared protein stability of mirna target genes to that of non-mirna target genes using data from yen et al.  <cit> , which contains half-life protein stability measures represented by protein stability indices for ~ <dig> unique genes. out of the  <dig> genes, we were able to map  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> to mirna target genes predicted from targetscans, pictar, and rna <dig>  respectively. contrary to the selection for economy for genes, the results indicate that proteins of mirna target genes are more stable than those of non-mirna target genes as shown in figure 2b, where the median protein stability indices from mirna target genes are larger than those from non-mirna target genes. further statistical analyses using one-side wilcoxon rank sum tests revealed significant differences between mirna and non-mirna target genes, with p-values of  <dig>  × 10- <dig>   <dig>  × 10- <dig>  and  <dig> × 10- <dig> for the comparisons using mirna target genes predicted from targetscans, and pictar, and rna <dig>  respectively.

mirna target gene expression is correlated with mrna and protein stability
the above discovered characteristics of higher and broader mrna expression, faster mrna decay rate, and longer protein half life for mirna target genes raise an important question as to whether or not they are related to each other. if these characteristics associate with mirna target genes and are dependent on each other, then they are expected to correlate from the same set of mirna target genes. this should be especially true for mrna expression and decay rate, as both are related to mirna targets. to address this question, we first mapped mirna target genes from mrna expression, mrna decay rate, and protein stability index datasets to each other. we then computed the correlation using the paired values from the overlapping genes.

the findings indicate that mrna decay rate and expression are negatively correlated. figure 3a shows the results from pictar predicted mirna target genes, whose expression values from all  <dig> human tissues are significantly and inversely correlated with mrna decay rate . to further confirm our findings, we employed the rank test to directly assess the relationship between mrna expression and decay rate. in agreement with the correlation results, as the intensity of mrna increases, the average level of mrna decay rate decreases as shown in figure 3b, where the distribution of the average mrna decay rate for the  <dig> expression groups is depicted. statistical analyses showed that the average mrna decay rates in high expression groups were significantly smaller than those in low expression groups . this observation was also true for the mrna decay rate ranked analysis as shown in figure 3c, where the average expression from  <dig> human tissues decreases along with the increasing of mrna decay rate, with significant expression differences  between low, medium, and high mrna decay rate groups.

taken together, the significant and inverse correlation between mrna expression and mrna stability but positive correlation to protein stability and the higher and broader gene expression but fast mrna decay rates for mirna target genes suggest that mirna dampening the output of preexisting but unwanted transcripts to facilitate transition to new expression programs  <cit>  is a general mechanism for mirna regulation of gene expression.

mirna binding sites have an additive effect on mrna stability
as a first step to understand how mirnas facilitate transition of mirna target genes to new expression programs, we sought to determine if the number of mirna binding sites had any effect on the level of mrna degradation. accordingly, we performed analyses to investigate the influence of the number of mirna binding sites on mrna stability by examining the relationship between the number of mirna binding sites and the level of mrna decay rate in mirna target genes.

using these  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> mirna target genes that had mrna decay rate data as described above, we first performed correlation analyses to see whether the number of mirna binding sites and mrna decay rate were related to each other. the results indicated that the number of mirna binding sites was positively and significantly  correlated with mrna decay rate in all three mirna target gene sets with correlation coefficients between  <dig>  and  <dig> . in an effort to extend our analyses for direct comparison, we employed rank tests to assess the relationship between the number of mirna binding sites and the level of mrna decay rate based on the rank order either from mirna decay rate or from the number of mirna binding sites . figure 5a shows that as the number of mirna binding sites increases, the level of mrna decay rate steadily increases. statistical analyses showed that the mrna decay rate between the low, medium, and high mirna number groups was significantly different , confirming the changing trends of mrna decay rate along with the number of mirna binding sites. this observation is also true for the mrna decay rate ranked analysis as shown in figure 5c, where the average number of mirna binding sites increases along with the increasing mrna decay rate, with significant differences for the number of mirna binding sites  between low, medium, and high mrna decay rate groups.

we performed the following  <dig> analyses to verify that the observed additive effect of mirna binding sites on mrna decay rates was indeed a property for mirna regulation. in the first analysis, we assessed the robustness of the changing trends for the additive effect of mirna binding sites on mrna decay rate by permutation tests . no changing trend was obtained from any of  <dig>  random datasets as shown in figure 5b and figure 5d, where the mrna decay rate or mirna binding sites from the  <dig>  random datasets were displayed along with the corresponding mirna binding site or mrna decay rate groups.

we next performed analysis to reveal whether the additive effect was contributed from biologically relevant mirna binding sites, or rather if it came from other factors. accordingly, we first created  <dig> random datasets by shuffling the 3'utr sequences of the  <dig> rna <dig> predicted mirna target genes which had mrna decay rate data. we then used the rna <dig> algorithm to predict mirna binding sites for individual genes in these random datasets . we subsequently employed the rank test to assess the relationship between the number of mirna binding sites from the 3'utr sequences of these random datasets and the level of mrna decay rate in corresponding genes. again, no positive correlations were observed between mirna decay rate and the number of mirna binding sites from any of the three random datasets as also shown in figure 5b and figure 5d, where the results from the complete nucleotide mixing dataset are depicted.

we also verified that the additive effect was mainly contributed from the number of mirna binding sites but not from mirna density on 3'utr sequences. in this analysis, we first computed mirna density, which was represented as the number of mirna binding sites per  <dig> nucleotides on 3'utr sequences, and then employed the rank test to assess the relationship between mirna density and the level of mrna decay rate. we found that although the level of mrna decay rate displayed changes along with the increasing mirna density , these changes were neither consistent in different mirna target gene sets nor statistically significant between mirna density groups for most of the comparisons. furthermore, no trend was observed for mirna density between different mrna decay rate groups , suggesting that mirna density has little effect on mrna degradation. we however found that mirna density was dependent on the number of mirna binding sites on target genes . therefore, the influence of mirna density, if any, on mrna stability is most likely due to the number of mirna binding sites.

we finally performed analysis to see if mrna decay rates were related to the length of 3'utr sequences. in this analysis, we first grouped mirna target genes based on their 3'utr length, we then compared the decay rates of mirna target genes with similar number of mirna binding sites across different 3'utr length groups. the results indicated that no correlation existed between mrna decay rates and 3'utr length for genes with either a few or many mirna target sites across  <dig> different 3' utr length groups as shown in figure  <dig>  where no consistent trend is observed for mrna decay rates between different 3'utr length groups. statistical analyses  showed that mrna decay rates between the low, medium, and high 3'utr length groups were, in general, not significantly different except  <dig> comparison from mirna target genes predicted from targetscans  and  <dig> comparison from mirna target genes predicted from rna <dig> . these results indicated that the 3'utr length itself had little effect on mrna degradation, further exemplifying the additive effect of mirna binding sites on mrna stability.

discussion
mirnas regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally by base-pairing to target mrnas mainly in 3'utrs. it has been demonstrated that genes preferentially coexpressed with mirnas have evolved to avoid targeting by that mirna, a phenomenon referred to as antitargets. genes of this kind are able to escape from mirna targeting by site depletion  <cit> , for which genes have either short utrs or low target site densities. one of the examples to avoid mirna regulation is the housekeeping genes which have not only shorter 3'utrs than other transcripts but also lower target site density. further evidence for antitargets came from correlation study between "seed" sequences and the expression of several highly tissue-specific human mirnas, which specifically down-regulate a large number of mrna targets. the down-regulation was correlated to the presence of mirna seed sequence in 3'utrs of target mrnas  <cit> .

since mirnas can down-regulate target mrna, one would expect that mirna target genes should be expressed at lower levels than non-mirna target genes. we however found significantly higher mrna expression for mirna target genes from different human tissues, when compared to non-mirna target genes. the high mrna expression of mirna target genes might be partly due to their promoter sequences, which generally have more tfbss and are enriched in gc nucleotides, a topic that is worthy of further investigating. on the other hand, we observed that mirna target genes had high mrna decay rates but were more stable for their protein products. further analyses indicated that mrna expression of mirna target genes was significantly and inversely correlated with mrna stability but positively correlated with protein stability. the highly expressed mrna from mirna target genes is subjected to more rapid degradation but the protein products are more stable. these observations raise an interesting question as to why mrna of mirna target genes are highly transcripted and then degraded before reaching the final protein products, as the transcriptional process is costly.

one explanation for the above phenomenon is that mrna of mirna target genes are generally subjected to tuning, which is one way that mirnas regulate their targets based on a micromanager model  <cit> . in this model, the mirna targets were classified into a few categories, with one class comprising of switch targets with multiple target sites presenting in the 3'utr. with the onset of new developmental stage or other cellular changes these mirna targets take advantage of the mirnas to dampen gene products to inconsequential levels so that new expression programs can be achieved. this post-transcriptional control could be more responsive than transcriptional control in terms of both speed and reversibility. one of the examples came from the study for zebrafish, in which mir- <dig> directly regulated several hundred targets by promoting deadenylation and clearance of mrnas. most of these mrnas were maternally expressed and accumulated in the absence of mir- <dig> but were degraded during early embryogenesis  <cit> . in agreement with others' discoveries from individual genes, our findings from genome scale analyses on the characteristics of mirna target genes also suggest that in human mirna dampening of the preexisting transcript outputs could be a general mechanism for mirna regulation. furthermore, mirna target genes are most likely under more complex regulation than non-mirna target genes.

supporting the complex regulation notion, mirna target genes in humans are significantly longer than non-mirna target genes in various parts of gene structures. the longer gene structures but higher gene expression for mirna target genes seems wasteful based on "selection for economy" for genes  <cit> , for which the highly and broadly expressed genes are shorter both in their intronic and coding sequences than genes expressed in a narrow and low fashion, as transcription and translation are energetically costly. considering the enhanced mrna decay rate for mirna target genes, the paradox against the selection for economy is even more apparent. the results from this study therefore suggest that evolution may not necessarily optimize efficiency but impose specific roles for mirna target genes such as more subtle and complex gene regulation based on a "genome design" hypothesis  <cit> . this hypothesis suggests that the length of gene structures is determined by their function and that longer gene structures are involved in more complex regulation such as chromatin-mediated suppression of gene expression.

in this study, we observed significant correlations between mrna decay rate and the number of mirna binding sites for mirna target genes. we found that mirna binding sites had an additive effect on mrna decay rate, for which genes with more mirna binding sites displayed higher mrna decay rate. these additive effects come mainly from different mirnas, since only a small fraction of all predicted targets contain more than one mirna binding site for any single mirna  <cit> . while the number of mirna binding sites for mirna target genes used in this study ranges from  <dig> to  <dig>  with average number >  <dig>  more than 82% of genes have  <dig> or more mirna binding sites, indicating that majority of mirna target genes are under multiple mirna regulation. it is suggested that the main reason for having multiple mirna targeting on individual genes is that these genes can be regulated in a variety of conditions such as developmental timing and within various tissues. results from this study revealed that multiple targeting on a gene could also act together to provide enhanced mrna decay rate, and hence stronger gene repression, which could contribute to facilitate the transition of mirna target genes to new expression programs.

CONCLUSIONS
to gain new insight into mirna regulation in humans, we have used large scale data and carried out a series of studies to compare various features of mirna target genes to that of non-mirna target genes. we have demonstrated that mirna and non-mirna target genes are significantly different for a number of characteristics, including higher and broader mrna expression, faster mrna decay rate, longer protein half-life, and longer gene structures. we have found that mirna target genes, other than having mirna repression, are most likely under more complex regulation than non-mirna target genes. we have also revealed that mirna dampening the output of preexisting but unwanted transcripts to facilitate transition to new expression programs is a general mechanism for mirna regulation of human gene expression. this could be achieved by enhancing mrna degradation through an additive effect from multiple mirna targeting.

