BACKGROUND
the electron transport chain  genes encode essential components of the mitochondrial machinery that carries out aerobic energy production. since the integrity of this machinery must be maintained to sustain life, the mammalian etc proteins are generally evolutionarily conserved. among primates, however, the etc genes show marked upsurges in the rate of nonsynonymous  substitutions  <cit> . these upsurges, indicative of adaptive evolution, have not occurred randomly; rather, they have occurred within anthropoid primates  <cit> , a clade that includes new and old world monkeys and apes, including humans. life history and morphological features characteristic of this clade include a relatively enlarged cerebral cortex, prolonged intrauterine fetal development followed postnatally by prolonged dependency of the young on nurturing adults, and longer lifespan. the aerobic demand of these features makes it plausible that they have acted as selective pressures during anthropoid evolution, producing adaptive amino acid and possibly regulatory changes in aerobic energy producing etc genes.

previous work suggested that among etc genes, cox5a, the nuclear gene encoding cytochrome c oxidase subunit 5a, may provide a striking example of adaptive evolution. initial characterization of subunit 5a in human revealed a high degree of conservation with the corresponding subunit in cow  <cit> . in a subsequent bioinformatics study, schmidt et al.  <cit>  found that, among cox5a protein  sequences from mammals, the human orthologue  differed by five amino acid residues from mouse, rat, cow and pig, all of which had identical amino acid sequences. here, with newly generated cox5a coding region nucleotide sequences and bioinformatically extracted orthologues from publicly available whole genome sequences, we tested whether this etc gene shows the pattern of anthropoid-specific adaptive evolution observed in  <dig> other etc proteins  <cit> . we did so within the context of a robust statistical framework, employing the paml package  <cit>  to determine: 1) whether the anthropoid clade has a different ratio of nonsynonymous/synonymous substitution rates  when compared to other placental mammals and 2) whether particular sites in cox5ap show the signature of positive selection within the anthropoid clade.

in addition to these sequence-based analyses, we investigated patterns of cox5a expression and localization in catarrhine brains using immunohistochemistry and quantitative real time pcr  techniques. finally, we identified the anthropoid lineages on which changes in cox5ap residues that interact with other cytochrome c oxidase  subunits occurred. based on these results, we explored the hypothesis that cox5a evolution in humankind's ancestry involved both protein structural and gene regulatory changes, and that the anthropoid-specific evolution observed in etc proteins represents an adaptive response to the increased energy demands of an enlarged neocortex.

RESULTS
complete cox5a nucleotide coding region and deduced amino acid sequences encoding the mature peptide were analysed in  <dig> vertebrate species, including newly generated data from  <dig> primate species: common chimpanzee , bonobo , gorilla , orangutan , red-cheeked gibbon , siamang , mantled guereza , olive baboon , pygmy marmoset , white-lipped tamarin , white-eared titi monkey , slow loris , brown greater galago  and brown lemur ; and one marsupial, the parma wallaby . partial sequences were obtained for three additional taxa . apart from a single amino acid difference in the elephant sequence, the protein sequence alignment showed no amino acid changes from the last common ancestor of placental mammals to present-day non-anthropoids, in a sampling that includes representatives from every major placental mammalian clade except xenarthra . interestingly, the elephant is similar to anthropoids in that both share the aerobically demanding feature of lengthy gestation. within anthropoids,  <dig> amino acid replacements were inferred by all ancestral state reconstruction methods, and eight of these occurred on the human lineage from the last common ancestor  of haplorhines  .

evidence for adaptive evolution
results from the model-based codeml analyses confirm that cox5a omega ratios vary among lineages in vertebrates. specifically, the statistical model assuming one omega value for all branches  had a likelihood value of - <dig> , with an omega value of  <dig> . the model that assumes an independent omega value for each branch  had a likelihood value of - <dig>  according to the likelihood ratio test, the free ratio model fit the data significantly better than the one ratio model . the inferred omega values and the numbers of nonsynonymous and synonymous substitutions under the free ratio model are presented in fig.  <dig>  in addition, the model that segregates anthropoids from non-anthropoid placental mammals fit the data significantly better than the model that assigned the same omega value to all placental mammals , indicating that the ratio of nonsynonymous/synonymous substitution rates differs in this clade; in particular, the omega value inferred for anthropoids is  <dig> times greater than that inferred for non-anthropoid placental mammals .

p, number of parameters. numbers in parentheses represent the posterior probability of each amino acid listed to be in the class of sites under positive selection.

despite this elevated ratio in anthropoids, we note that the overall ratio is still less than one. this result, however, is based on the assumption that all codons are under the same selective pressure and thus share the same underlying omega value. because this assumption is "grossly unrealistic"  <cit> , and because important changes in function can result from a few key amino acid changes that do not elevate the overall omega ratio above one  <cit> , we conducted a branch-site test of adaptive evolution. here, the anthropoidea as a total group was fixed as the foreground lineage, i.e., the branches on which there was permitted a class of sites with an omega >  <dig>  results from this test provide evidence of positive selection on particular sites during anthropoid evolution: the model allowing a class of sites with an omega higher than one  fit the data significantly better than an alternative model that fixed omega at one for this same site class . specifically, five sites were identified as positively selected, four of which had a posterior probability >  <dig>  . furthermore, we note that despite the many amino acid replacements inferred to have occurred throughout the anthropoidea , the five positively selected sites show changes occurring predominantly on stem lineages  and on the human terminal branch. the localization of these particular sites to these three stem lineages, combined with the m <dig> analysis  depicting a classic sequence  <cit>  of markedly increased dn relative to ds, followed by descendant lineages with a markedly decreased dn relative to ds, presents a pattern strongly indicative of positive selection.

ancestral state reconstruction methods confirm and extend results obtained by the codeml analysis. among the five sites identified as positively selected by the branch site test, four were inferred to have changed on more than one anthropoid lineage, and three were inferred to have changed on the anthropoid stem . in addition, all three ancestral state reconstruction methods inferred a fourth amino acid change on the anthropoid stem that was not identified by the branch site test: a methionine to isoleucine at residue  <dig>  it is tempting to speculate that this replacement may have acted as a "permissive" change that then allowed the selection of the other three amino acid changes occurring on this and perhaps other descendant anthropoid branch. this sequence of events was recently demonstrated in an elegant study by ortlund et al.  <cit>  in their investigation of cortisol-sensitive glucocorticoid receptor  evolution in vertebrates. using a combination of structural, phylogenetic and functional analyses of ancestral corticosteroid receptors, the authors identified a small set of permissive amino acid changes that stabilized specific elements of the protein. in conjunction with additional changes that diminished the receptor's sensitivity to aldosterone and increased its sensitivity to cortisol, these permissive changes allowed an additional and subsequent set of function-switching amino acid changes that conferred a fully gr-like phenotype that is sensitive only to cortisol. with respect to cox5ap, verification of this hypothesis in future studies would require additional, fine-tuned functional data regarding the effects of each of the observed replacements alone and in concert on the activity of the reconstructed protein.

expression and localization of cox5a
quantitative rt-pcr results showed that relative cox5a gene expression levels in the anterior cingulate cortex vary among human, chimpanzee, gorilla, and macaque . specifically, human and macaque showed similar gene expression levels, as did chimpanzee and gorilla, and the first pair of species showed higher levels of expression than the second pair . this pattern confirms the trend previously suggested by microarray analysis  <cit> , and represents a more robust dataset from which to make such observations: unlike the previous experiment, which involved hybridizing non-human samples to a human-specific microarray, these qrt-pcr results are not confounded by sequence mismatches between sample and microarray chip. specifically, the cox5a expression results reported by uddin et al.  <cit>  were based on an affymetrix probe set  that shows  <dig> % difference with the published chimpanzee genome sequence  <cit>  and  <dig> % difference with the published rhesus macaque sequence  <cit> . thus, the present results suggest that cox5a has undergone not only coding region sequence evolution, but also regulatory evolution in anthropoid primates. this hypothesis is supported by the observation of primate cox5a expression patterns in other tissues that differ from those reported here: in microarray experiments performed on fibroblast cell lineages, humans showed a lower cox5a expression level than did bonobos or gorillas, and comparison of the human and bonobo expression levels showed a significant difference  <cit> . nevertheless, without additional samples from additional chimpanzees and gorillas, the possibility that our results are due to interindividual differences within these species and/or age-related differences in gene expression profiles cannot formally be ruled out.

among macaques, gorillas, chimpanzees, and humans, the localization of cox5ap as revealed by immunohistochemistry showed a punctate staining pattern that is consistent with the morphology of mitochondria . similar staining patterns were obtained in all species with both monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies. as evident by colocalization with microtubule-associated protein  <dig>  and neuron-specific nuclear protein , cox5ap was particularly enriched in the cytoplasm of the soma and proximal apical dendrite of neurons, especially large pyramidal cells. we also observed diffuse cox5ap-immunoreactive puncta throughout the neuropil, which corresponds to the space occupied by glia, dendritic processes, axons, and synapses. double immunostaining against glial fibrillary acidic protein  demonstrated that astrocytes do not show high levels of cox5ap. indeed,  <dig> % of cells that are enriched with cox5ap also contain the neuron-specific protein neun in macaques, as estimated by optical disector counting. the white matter did not display a high density of cox5ap staining.

these results suggest that cox5ap is most abundant in the mitochondria of large-size projection neurons of the neocortex. it is noteworthy that neocortical enlargement in primates is associated with increasing numbers of large pyramidal neurons that are intensely neurofilament h protein-immunoreactive, have long-range projecting axons, and are presumably metabolically costly  <cit> . to understand more completely the functional role of cox5a in neocortical circuits and the possible consequences of positive selection on this gene, it will be necessary to define further the phenotype and distribution of cells in the brain that show high levels of expression for cox5ap using strategies such as laser microcapture dissection combined with qrt-pcr or mass spectroscopy proteomics in future studies.

role of accelerated cox evolution
as we have demonstrated, changes in cox5ap are rare among placental mammals outside the primate clade. among four positively selected sites identified by the branch site test with posterior probabilities >  <dig> , two showed changes in their physicochemical properties: residue  <dig>  which changed from positively charged to neutral on the ape and new world monkey stems and on the baboon terminal ; and residue  <dig>  which changed from nonpolar to polar in the anthropoid stem and from polar to nonpolar on the human terminal. interestingly, the charge neutralizations are parallel to those observed at the binding site for cytochrome c on cox in anthropoids, where the binding site changes reduced the electrostatic interaction between the docked molecules  <cit> . of note, one amino acid change on the human terminal at position  <dig>  is a reversal of a change on the anthropoid stem .

although the role of the inferred amino acid changes in cox5ap is currently unknown, it is noteworthy that the changes in this protein are located in residues that are in proximity to other, physically close, cox subunits . of the five positively selected sites identified by the branch site test in cox5ap, seven replacements within  <dig> Å of these sites have occurred in cox2p and cox4p during anthropoid evolution. examination of the nature of the changes suggests there has been an electrostatic change such that the interaction between position  <dig> of cox5ap and residues  <dig> and  <dig> of cox2p has been neutralized; in addition, residues  <dig> and  <dig> of this subunit have changed from polar to nonpolar. furthermore, the potentially interacting, altered residues of cox4p  have changed from neutral to positive charge , forming a positive patch. of particular interest is that cox4p residue  <dig>  which has changed from tyr to his, is adjacent to the proposed atp binding site that includes cox4p  <dig>  <cit> .

interaction is taken as a distance <  <dig> Å between residues.

*catarrhines include old world monkeys and apes, including humans

an additional consequence of the location of cox5ap in close contact to the nucleotide-binding domain of cox4p is potential regulation by  <dig> -diiodothyronine , a thyroid hormone produced when the iodothyronine deiodinase d <dig> acts over thyroxine   <cit> . t <dig> has biological activity stimulating mitochondrial respiration by nuclear independent pathways  <cit>  and is known to bind to cox5ap and abolish the allosteric inhibition of respiration at high atp/adp ratios  <cit> . more generally, triiodothyronine  thyroid hormone is considered to be a major regulator of mitochondrial activity  <cit>  and has been shown to regulate the expression of a number of cox subunits, inducing functional increases in cox enzyme activity  <cit> . cox5a amino acid evolution may thus represent the product of selective pressures acting on the regulation of metabolism. in the context of this hypothesis, we note that thyroid hormones are known to play a critical role in early brain development  <cit>  and that humans show evidence for a greater affinity of transthyretin and/or thyroxine-binding globulin for thyroid hormone when compared to chimpanzees  <cit> . thus, it is plausible that the interaction of thyroid hormones with cox5ap and other cox subunits may affect both the regulation of metabolism and the growth and development of important organ systems.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that cox5a has been subject to protein structural evolutionary changes in anthropoid primates and that these changes have likely been accompanied by additional gene regulatory changes affecting cox5a expression levels. furthermore, we have suggested that these changes could affect aerobic energy metabolism among members of this group, in part because cox5ap is a target of the thyroid hormone t <dig>  <cit> . in addition, a recent analysis of cellular scaling in the neocortex of anthropoids showed that elevated glia-neuron ratios correlate with brain enlargement  <cit> , pointing to the role of glia in providing metabolic support to neurons requiring greater energy consumption for function. because the anthropoid amino acid changes are located in the mitochondrial matrix, close to coevolving sites in subunits  <dig> and  <dig>  proposed to have a cox regulatory function  <cit> , the cox5ap amino acid replacements observed in this study may have promoted better energy regulation in an increasingly high demand environment. while alternative interpretations of the data are possible – that, for instance, the higher rate of nonsynonymous substitutions in cox5a in anthropoids may be a function of their larger body and smaller presumed effective population size  <cit> , which would reduce the effectiveness of purifying selection on slightly deleterious amino acid replacements  <cit> ; or that the changed composition of mtdna in anthropoids  <cit>  may be the "motor" driving the putative positive selection of nuclear-encoded etc  <cit> , we note that cox5ap amino acid sequences are identical in mammals with a wide range of body sizes and basal metabolic rates , and that, within the context of intergenomic interactions between nuclear- and mitochondrially encoded etc genes, it has been shown that rapid evolution in mitochondrially encoded subunits can indeed be associated with rapid divergence in interacting subunits  <cit>  and that positive selection is particularly pronounced among interacting residues in etc proteins  <cit> . more broadly, given that some of the main phenotypic differences associated with anthropoid origins are related to aerobic energy metabolism , both structural and regulatory evolutionary change in electron transport chain genes are likely to have contributed to the emergence and evolution of anthropoid primates  <cit> .

