BACKGROUND
aging is a nearly universal, chronic process that is shared by all organisms. the most prominent feature of the aging process in mammals is a gradual loss of function at the cellular, tissue and organismal levels. ‘aging epigenetics’ is an emerging field that has generated exciting revelations. a global loss of dna methylation has been identified as an age-related epigenetic alteration  <cit> . many studies have revealed that dna methylation plays an important role in aging and in the development of various diseases  <cit> . therefore, a survey of epigenetic signatures that change with age might be useful to identify biomarkers of aging and age-associated diseases, which could potentially be used to make clinical diagnoses and prolong the lifespan.

the aging process and its underlying mechanisms have been studied extensively in rodent models  <cit> . the sequencing and analysis of the pig genome  <cit>  will greatly accelerate the development of the pig as a biomedical model for many diseases in humans, such as obesity and diabetes . however, few aging studies have been carried out using pigs as models. pigs age at a rate of approximately 5 years to every 1 year of human life, resulting in an average life expectancy of 15– <dig> years. therefore, pigs could serve as an appealing model for studying aging because of their relatively longer lifespan than rodents and similar metabolic features, cardiovascular systems and proportional organ sizes relative to those of humans .

notably, an increase in the incidence of age-related pathologies mostly begins at approximately the mid-point of a species’ life span . it is well documented that the remarkable structural and functional changes that occur in skeletal muscle during aging, including a reduction of muscle mass and increased apoptosis , are initiated at the mid-point of the lifespan  <cit> . consequently, studies focusing on dna methylation changes in skeletal muscle during the mid-life period compared with the young stage are long overdue.

in this study, we used the pig as a model to perform a genome-wide survey of differences in dna methylation and gene expression in a representative skeletal muscle  between two age stages in female pigs: young  and middle-aged   <cit> . we identified the patterns of methylation in the pig genome and the age-related differentially methylated regions , then performed functional enrichment analysis for genes exhibiting dmrs. we found more genes showing a hypomethylated gene body in the middle-aged pigs than in the young pigs; these genes were potentially involved in aging processes, such as the development of muscular atrophy. we believe that this study will serve as a valuable resource for aging studies while also promoting the pig as a model organism for human aging research and accelerating the considerable development of comparative animal models for aging research.

RESULTS
global dna methylation analysis
epigenetic alterations, such as global dna hypomethylation, have been shown to progressively accumulate during aging  <cit> . we therefore first investigated the global dna methylation status of six types of tissue by performing direct colorimetric quantification of methylated dna. the global methylation level in the heart was significantly decreased in the ma pigs compared with the younger pigs , whereas the methylation levels in five other tissues showed a slight  decrease in the ma pigs. this global loss of dna methylation in older pigs was consistent with studies in humans, supporting a potential role of this type of epigenetic alteration in age-related gene regulation.figure  <dig> 
global methylation status of six tissues in young and middle-aged pigs. “5-mc%” denotes the ratio of methylated cytosines to all nucleotides in the genome. .



dna methyltransferases  are crucial for the establishment and maintenance of genomic methylation patterns  <cit> . to determine whether the global loss of dna methylation observed in the ma pigs was associated with alterations in dnmts, we evaluated the mrna transcript levels of dnmt <dig> , dnmt3a and 3b  in these six tissues. for dnmt <dig> and dnmt3a, no significant differences in gene expression were observed in most of the tissues between the two age groups , whereas dnmt3b showed increased mrna levels in most of the tissues  in the ma pigs. previous studies have revealed increased expression of both dnmt3a and dnmt3b in aging fibroblasts and in the aging human liver  <cit> . however, the expression level of dnmt3a showed no difference between young and ma pigs. our result suggests that dnmt3b, rather than dnmt3a, may regulate the genomic methylation pattern in a tissue-specific manner in pigs during aging.

summary of methylated dna immunoprecipitation sequencing  data
approximately  <dig> gigabases  of medip-seq data were generated from six skeletal muscle samples , among which 81%  of the clean reads were aligned to the porcine reference genome build  <dig> . after removing ambiguous reads from the clean reads, 75% of the reads  were uniquely aligned across all of the aligned reads. the reads that showed the same mapping locations in each sample were regarded as potentially duplicated clones generated via pcr amplification and treated as the same read. consequently, we acquired  <dig>  gb  of uniquely aligned non-duplicated reads . cpg sites covered by a read depth of more than  <dig> were scored as high-confidence cpg sites. on average,  <dig> % of the cpg sites met this threshold .

to study methylation changes on a genome-wide scale, we measured methylation levels along the chromosomes in the samples using a 1 mb sliding window to smooth the distribution . correlations between methylation levels and genomic features were assessed. we found that the methylation levels across the chromosomes were negatively correlated with the chromosomal length  and positively correlated with the gc content , single-nucleotide polymorphism  density  and gene density . in addition, a strong positive correlation was observed with the ratio between the observed and expected numbers of cpg sites  , which agreed with the results of a previous study of porcine dna methylomes   <cit> . however, methylation levels were not correlated with the density of repeat regions . among these genomic features, the cpgo/e ratio showed the highest correlation with the methylation level. the gene density also exhibited a significant correlation with the methylation level, which may due to the relatively higher gc content in the gene regions being examined , suggesting the potential role of methylation changes in the regulation of gene transcription  <cit> . previous studies have demonstrated a strong genetic component of the variation in dna methylation profiles  <cit> , and a potential role has been suggested for cpg-snps in genetic variation of the epigenome  <cit> . previous studies demonstrated that the level of methylation contributes to variation in the substitution rates at cpg sites  <cit> . we observed a positive correlation between the snp density and methylation level, suggesting that the genetic variation reflected by snps may have a substantial impact on local methylation patterns and gene expression.

we defined  <dig> categories of functional genomic elements and further classified the promoters into three types based on their cpg cites. each type of promoter was then classified according to its distance from the transcription start site   <cit> . we also classified cpg islands and cgi shores into four categories according to their genomic locations, as described in previous studies  <cit> . we found that intermediate cpg promoters  exhibited a relatively higher methylation status than did high cpg promoters  and low cpg promoters  . the methylation levels within the distal , proximal  and intermediate  regions of promoters also showed significant differences  . this result agreed with a previous finding that methylation occurs more frequently at icps  <cit> . our data also suggested that a relatively higher methylation level within gene bodies is a general phenomenon in mammals  <cit> , and it has been correlated with gene expression levels  <cit> . we observed that the methylation level of exons was higher than that of introns  , reflecting the higher gc content of exons compared with their surrounding introns and further indicating the possible different roles of exons and introns in the regulation of gene transcription  <cit> . recently, dna methylation at cpg island  shores has been demonstrated to play a more important role in gene regulation than that of the cgis themselves  <cit> . we observed distinct methylation levels for cgi shores in various genomic locations , which may suggest the distinctive roles of these cgi shores in regulating gene expression.

differential dna methylation in the subtelomeric regions of young and ma pigs
we surveyed the chromosomal profiles of dna methylation and found that the subtelomeric regions showed significant hypermethylation compared with non-subtelomeric regions for all chromosomes , which was consistent with the heavily methylated status of the subtelomeric region previously reported in mice  <cit> . epigenetic modifications of the subtelomeric region correlate with telomere elongation, which is closely related to aging. interestingly, we found that the methylation levels of the subtelomeric regions of each chromosome exhibited distinct patterns between the young and ma pigs . the average methylation status of the subtelomeric regions of all of the chromosomes of the ma pigs was significantly lower than that of the young pigs . previous studies of humans revealed that low levels of subtelomeric methylation may contribute toward increasing the levels of telomeric repeat-containing rna, whose transcription originates in the subtelomere and is accompanied by a reduction in telomerase activity  <cit> , thereby controlling the telomere length  <cit> . we therefore also measured telomere length using a qpcr assay . the ratio of the telomere signal to the signal of the single-copy gene   was relatively lower in the ma pigs than in the young pigs, suggesting that the average telomere length was shorter in the ma pigs  <cit> . this result indicated that hypomethylation in the subtelomeric regions of the ma pigs may be accompanied by telomere attrition and involved in the aging process.figure  <dig> 
comparison of the methylation state between young and ma pigs across chromosomes. methylation levels in  subtelomeric versus non-subtelomeric regions and  the subtelomeric regions of young versus middle-aged pigs on each chromosome. student’s t-test revealed no significant difference between the two groups.  distribution of dna methylation on pig chromosome  <dig>   top: the average dna methylation in subtelomeric regions in young versus middle-aged pigs. the significance was evaluated using a paired samples t-test . bottom: the t/s ratio  reflects the relative telomere length in young and middle-aged pigs.



differentially methylated regions  associated with aging
we identified  <dig>  dmrs  in skeletal muscle between the young and ma pigs, representing approximately  <dig> % of the length of the genome and approximately  <dig> % of the total number of cpgs in the genome . we performed hierarchical clustering of the samples using the dmrs of each genomic element and differentially expressed genes. among all of the clustering plots, six samples could be clustered into two groups: young pigs and ma pigs, although the topological structure within the groups showed subtle differences . this result revealed a high correlation between the biological replicates and indicated experimental reliability and relative epigenetic concordance within each group.table  <dig> 
summary of differentially methylated regions 


*total length of all dmrs relative to the length  of the pig genome .

†the number of cpgs among the total dmrs relative to the total number of cpgs  in the pig genome .



to further explore potential distribution biases in the age-related dmrs, we analyzed the percentage of cpgs within the dmrs in each of the  <dig> genomic elements. among promoters, more dmrs were enriched in the icps compared with hcps and lcps. icps generally contain weak cpg islands and are prone to regulation by dna methylation  <cit> . our results indicated that not only did icps exhibit the highest methylation levels compared with the other two promoter classes , but dmrs were also observed more frequently in icps . these observations demonstrated that icps are more susceptible to methylation and suggested that this type of alteration of the methylation status of icps may play an important role in modulating gene expression relevant to several biological processes, such as aging. meanwhile, although a previous study found that the distal  regions of promoters contained more dmrs  <cit> , no significant enrichment of dmrs was observed in the present study except in the distal regions of hcps, suggesting that various types of dmrs may participate in distinct biological processes . there is increasing evidence that methylation in the gene body affects gene expression in plants  <cit>  and mammals  <cit> . our analysis indicated that more dmrs are located in gene bodies  than in promoters  , which may suggest that gene bodies are more susceptible to changes compared to promoters during the aging process. the first exon contained relatively few dmrs within the gene body , which may be the result of certain motifs overlapping between the promoter and the first exon. we also found that the majority of dmrs occurred at cgi shores , whereas the numbers of dmrs did not significantly vary across gene features , consistent with previous reports on human cancer  .figure  <dig> 
genome-wide distribution of differentially methylated regions. the x-axis denotes the percentage of cpg sites within dmrs in each of  <dig> genomic elements .  promoters were classified into nine categories based on their cpg representation  and genomic location . the significance of the pairwise comparisons among hcps, icps and lcps was evaluated using t-tests, whereas the cpg percentage showed no significant difference among the d, i and p promoters.  cpg percentages in various gene structures.  comparison of cpg percentages between cgis and cgi shores located in distinct genomic regions. the significance of the comparison of cpg percentages between cgis and cgi shores was evaluated using two-way anova.



gene-body dna methylation and gene expression
the influence of the methylation status of promoter regions is considered to be an important mechanism regulating gene transcription. nevertheless, investigation of the specific roles of dna methylation in gene bodies is long overdue. to explore whether intragenic methylation affects gene expression, we performed a correlation analysis of dmr-mrna pairs and observed a significant negative correlation  between changes in the methylation levels in the gene body and gene expression . whether methylation in the gene body inhibits or induces transcription remains unclear  <cit> . nevertheless, we conclude here that gene-body methylation reduced gene expression, possibly via an intragenic dna methylation-induced decrease in the pol ii elongation efficiency  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
correlation of the methylation profile with expression levels. scatter plot and trend line  showing the correlation between the differences in mrna expression and methylation. the line represents a linear regression. blue and red dots represent the mrna-differentially methylated region  pairs exhibiting either inverse or equivalent relationships, respectively.



functional enrichment analysis for genes with dmrs
to examine the potential function of the genes that showed a differential methylation status, we performed an enrichment analysis for genes with dmrs in their promoters and genes that were hyper- and hypomethylated in the gene body associated with age. because dna methylation concentrates at gene bodies on the x chromosome due to x chromosome inactivation , we excluded the dmrs on chromosome x from this analysis. a total of  <dig> genes that exhibited dmrs in their promoters were mapped to their human orthologs, and  <dig> and  <dig>  genes with dmrs in their gene bodies that mapped to human genes showed hyper- and hypomethylation in the ma pigs, respectively . more dmrs were observed in gene bodies rather than promoters, and the dmrs in gene bodies were more prone to be hypomethylated with age . the finding that more genes were hypomethylated in the ma group also supported the theory of progressive global methylation loss during aging. the genes displaying dmrs in their promoters were not significantly enriched in any biological process or molecular function, which may due to the relatively low abundance of genes with dmrs in their promoters. the gene-body hypermethylated genes were significantly enriched for the processes ‘gtpase regulator activity’ , ‘atp binding’  and ‘protein kinase activity’  . notably, the gene-body hypomethylated genes showed significant enrichment for various processes related to proteolysis , protein catabolism , and energy metabolism  . previous studies have indicated that catabolic processes increase in aged muscles  <cit> . our findings suggested that the hypomethylated genes observed in the longissimus dorsi muscle of the ma pigs were involved in protein degradation and may be responsible for muscular atrophy, which is one of the general structural and phenotypic changes observed in aging muscle  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
differentially methylated  genes in gene bodies and promoters.  venn diagram of the numbers of genes showing promoter and gene-body dmrs.  comparison of the genomic cpg percentage  and the genomic length percentage  between gene-body and promoter regions.  gene-body-dm genes that overlap with known age-related genes in the hagr database.



genes involved in the aging process
to further highlight the potential roles of genes involved in aging, we considered the intersection of genes that presented dmrs in their promoters and gene bodies with the known age-related genes deposited in the human ageing genomic resources  database  <cit> . among the  <dig> genes potentially involved in the human aging process according to the hagr-genage database, we did not identify any genes with dmrs in their promoters, whereas there were  <dig> known age-related genes included in the list of genes with dmrs in their gene bodies  .

a potential role of dna methylation of the gene body in regulating gene expression has been proposed  <cit> . we therefore investigated genes with dmrs in the gene body. several genes included in the list of well-characterized human age-related genes exhibited differentially methylated gene bodies, which was confirmed using the bisulfite sequencing pcr  approach, and were shown to cause changes in mrna expression . for example, foxo <dig>  has been well documented to be an essential transcription factor involved in the atrophy of muscles and myotubes  <cit> . foxo <dig> stimulates lysosomal proteolysis in muscle by activating autophagy and proteasomal pathways, and inducing the expression of autophagy-related genes  <cit> . we observed up-regulated expression and a lower gene-body methylation status of this gene in ma pigs , in accordance with previous findings in aging muscle. another gene, fgfr <dig> , which shows an opposite function to that of foxo <dig>  could inhibit the atrophy of skeletal muscle  <cit> . down-regulated expression of fgfr <dig>  together with hypermethylation of its gene body, was observed in ma pig skeletal muscle . grb <dig>  is critical for cell proliferation, and emerging evidence indicates that grb <dig> plays a role in tumorigenesis and is over-expressed in tumors  <cit> . in addition, a reduced expression level of grb <dig> in skeletal muscle contributes to increased insulin sensitivity  <cit> . microarray mrna expression and genome-wide methylation data on grb <dig> revealed an increased expression level and hypomethylation in the gene body of this gene, respectively .figure  <dig> 
examples of age-related genes showing differential dna methylation in their gene bodies.
 dmr in foxo <dig> gene body.  dmr in fgfr <dig> gene body.  dmr in grb <dig> gene body. top panels, top half: cpg methylation. each point represents methylation level  of a sample at a given cpg site. the curves showed average over the samples. the two vertical dashed lines marked the boundaries of the dmr identified. lower half: cpg dinucleotides , cpg density . plus and minus marks denote sense and antisense gene transcription. second panels: validation of cpg methylation by bisulfite sequencing pcr . ten subclones were selected for the bsp analysis. the solid circles represent the methylated cpg sites, and the open circles represent the unmethylated cpg sites. third panels: comparison of gene expression levels between two age groups. the gene expression levels were taken from microarray data and normalized to the expression levels in young pigs.



discussion
this study provides a comprehensive analysis of genome-wide dna methylation patterns in the skeletal muscle of aging pigs. similar to previous reports in humans and mice, a global loss of methylation induced by transcriptional changes in dnmt3b was observed in various tissues of the ma pigs, suggesting that this type of epigenetic alteration is common in aging mammals. although global dna hypomethylation and promoter cpg island hypermethylation have been observed to progressively accumulate during aging  <cit> , the present study identified more dmrs in gene bodies than in promoters, and gene-body hypomethylation was observed in more genes in the ma pigs . it is therefore reasonable to assume that during the loss of global methylation during aging, there is a greater tendency toward hypomethylation in the gene body rather than the promoter. it should be noted that based on our current data, it is not feasible to identify methylation changes on the x chromosome because of xi  <cit> . further research using snp data could allow allele-specific analysis of dna methylation to identify the specific methylation changes on chromosome x  <cit> .

it is believed that increased gene-body methylation correlates with increased transcription  <cit> ; although some researchers have proposed that intragenic methylation might reduce gene expression  <cit> . our data suggested that methylation in the gene body reduces gene expression . however, gene-body methylation is only one of the many factors that influence gene expression. further studies focusing on the methylation of specific regions that exhibit distinct gene regulation contexts are needed to elucidate the complicated epigenetic mechanism underlying aging and its associations with disease.

previous reports have indicated that increased protein catabolism occurs in aging skeletal muscles  <cit> . structural and functional changes associated with aging, such as reductions in the muscle mass and muscle fibers, have been observed across a wide range of species, from worms to mammals  <cit> . this type of epigenetic alteration of skeletal muscle with aging , consistent with findings in other species, was observed in pigs for the first time in the present work. interestingly, genes related to tumorigenesis, as well as insulin sensitivity, exhibited a relatively higher expression level in the skeletal muscle of the ma pigs compared with younger pigs , suggesting a higher risk of developing diseases with increased age.

our results will promote further development of the pig as a model organism for human aging research. most of the studies carried out in pigs to date have been conducted in neonatal or very young animals , before they reach the age of 1 year  <cit> . limited studies have been carried out on relatively older pigs . here, younger  and middle-aged  pigs were examined to investigate dna methylation changes during the aging process. although the aging process differs across species, with human aging showing major differences from the aging of most other species because of the relatively longer lifespan of humans, many species, including humans, pigs and mice, exhibit similarities with respect to aging muscle, muscular protein catabolism and muscle atrophy  <cit> . however, the time course of the muscle function changes occurring in pigs remains to be determined in further studies. in addition, pigs have a longer lifespan than that of rodents and present similar metabolic features, cardiovascular systems and proportional organ sizes to those humans  <cit> . consequently, pigs can serve as a good biomedical model for human studies on the chronic aging process and its associated diseases  <cit> . however, only two age groups: young and middle-aged pigs were used in our study, and examining pigs of additional consecutive ages is necessary to further elucidate the changes in epigenetic modifications associated with age, as well as the ultimately complicated mechanisms underlying the aging process.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the present study provides a comprehensive analysis of genome-wide dna methylation patterns in the skeletal muscle of aging pigs. we identified remarkable dna methylation changes, such as a tendency toward hypomethylation in gene bodies in the longissimus dorsi muscle of ma pigs. furthermore, we identified numerous genes that exhibited age-related methylation changes and are potentially involved in the aging process. these genes are mainly related to protein catabolism, suggesting that predisposition to amyotrophy emerges during middle age. this study will serve as a valuable resource for aging studies, promoting the pig as a model organism for human aging research and accelerating the development of comparative animal models in aging research.

