BACKGROUND
fe  oxide is the most abundant metal electron acceptor in most soils and sediments and its microbial reduction greatly contributes to the degradation of organic matter in many sedimentary environments as well as to the degradation of organic contaminants in polluted groundwater  <cit> . fe  also is the primary electron acceptor supporting the growth of dissimilatory metal-reducing microorganisms when metal reduction is stimulated by adding a suitable electron donor to promote the in situ bioremediation of soluble metal contaminants  <cit>  such as uranium  <cit>  and vanadium  <cit> . thus, understanding the mechanisms of electron transfer to insoluble fe  oxides could greatly aid in the study of dissimilatory metal reduction in various sedimentary environments.

despite the wide phylogenetic diversity of microorganisms capable of dissimilatory metal-reduction  <cit> , molecular analyses of moderate temperature sedimentary environments in which fe  reduction is important have routinely found that microorganisms in the geobacteraceae are prevalent whereas other well-studied fe -reducing microorganisms, such as shewanella species, are not detected  <cit> . this has been attributed, at least in part, to different mechanisms for fe  reduction in these organisms. geobacter species need to directly contact fe  oxides in order to reduce them  <cit> , have a highly specialized strategy for searching for fe  oxides  <cit> , and use pili as conductive nanowires to transfer electrons to the insoluble electron acceptor  <cit> . in contrast, shewanella  <cit>  and geothrix species  <cit>  produce soluble electron shuttles and fe chelators which alleviate the need for direct contact with fe  oxides.

because of the insoluble nature of fe and mn oxides, metal reduction in dissimilatory metal-reducing organisms is thought to occur at or near the outer membrane. most studies on the mechanisms for fe  reduction in geobacter species have focused on the role of c-type cytochromes  <cit> . over  <dig> putative c-type cytochrome genes have been identified in the g. sulfurreducens genome  <cit> . many of these cytochrome genes are more highly expressed during growth on fe  than with fumarate as the electron acceptor and deletion of some of these cytochrome genes greatly reduces the capacity for fe  reduction  <cit> . however, the importance of c-type cytochromes in the final electron transfer to fe  has been questioned because pelobacter species, which are phylogenetically intertwined with geobacter and desulfuromonas species in the geobacteraceae  <cit> , can reduce fe , yet do not appear to contain c-type cytochromes  <cit> . if, as expected, reduction of fe takes place at, or near, the outer membrane surface, then there may be outer membrane proteins other than c-type cytochromes, which have a role in electron transfer to fe. in support of this, geobacter's pili have recently been found to play a key role in electron transfer to insoluble metals by acting as microbial nanowires that extend the electron transfer capabilities of the bacterium beyond the cell surface  <cit> .

geobacter sulfurreducens has been routinely used as a model organism for investigations into fe  reduction in geobacteraceae because its complete genome sequence  <cit>  and a genetic system  <cit>  are available. here we report that the most abundant protein in the outer membrane of g. sulfurreducens is not a cytochrome, yet this protein is required for fe  reduction.

RESULTS
identification and characterization of ompj
one protein, designated outer membrane protein j , was much more abundant than any other protein in the outer membrane fraction of cells grown with fumarate as the sole electron acceptor . this protein also was present in cultures grown with other electron acceptors such as fe citrate, fe oxides and and mn oxides . maldi-tof mass spectrometry analyses identified eight peptides  that uniquely corresponded to the protein encoded by orf gsu <dig> , annotated as a putative lamb porin family protein in the genome of g. sulfurreducens. ompj had a predicted average molecular mass of  <dig>  kda, in accordance with its mobility in denaturing gels , and a theoretical pi of  <dig>  compared with a pi of  <dig>  determined by isoelectric focusing gel electrophoresis. the psort algorithm predicted ompj to be localized in the outer membrane, consistent with its presence in outer-membrane preparations .

several secondary structure prediction methods predicted that ompj consists mainly of extended beta-chain fragments. six of the first  <dig> predictions by 3d-pssm  <cit> , which uses a threading algorithm to predict the fold of a protein most homologous to structures deposited in the protein data bank, suggest that ompj is a porin. the other predicted folds were for soluble proteins, which have large numbers of beta segments and thus appear to be inappropriate for a membrane-bound protein.

several pieces of biochemical evidence also indicate that ompj may function as a porin. first, its localization in the outer membrane. ompj was associated to the outer membrane fraction of g. sulfurreducens and was isolated in a highly purified form after removal of the cytoplasmic membrane . also, the apparent molecular weight of ompj in the absence of heating  was roughly twice that of the heat-treated protein , indicative of heat modifiability  <cit> . in addition, in situ proteinase k treatment of intact cells of g. sulfurreducens did not digest ompj  while ompj integrity was affected after proteinase k treatment of outer membrane fractions . incubation of intact cells with proteinase k leads to the degradation of exposed outer membrane proteins, while subsurface proteins such as porins remain protected against proteolysis. taken together, these data greatly strengthen our assertion that  ompj is located in the outer membrane,  it is tightly embedded within the membrane and  it is not significantly exposed on the cell surface, as expected of a porin.

presence of ompj in other geobacteraceae
homologs of ompj were found in the genomes of the two other members of the geobacteraceae for which complete sequences are available,geobacter metallireducens and pelobacter carbinolicus . a hypothetical protein in the genome of g. metallireducens  had the highest identity at the amino acid level,  <dig> % , and 80% similarity to ompj of g. sulfurreducens. a protein also was identified in p. carbinolicus  that shared 34% identity  and 51% similarity with g. sulfurreducens ompj. no close ompj homologs were found in the ncbi database outside the geobacteraceae family. ompj had 21% identity and  <dig> % similarity at the amino acid level with omp <dig> of s. oneidensis mr- <dig> , a porin-like protein found to have an indirect effect in metal reduction in this organism  <cit> . however, while ompj had no similarity to other porins in the database, omp <dig> was most closely similar to known bacterial porins such as pora of neisseria meningitidis  <cit> . these results suggest that ompj is a novel type of porin that is unique to the geobactereaceae.

characterization of an ompj-deficient mutant
the presence of the ompj gene in the geobacteraceae family but not in any other group of bacteria, suggested that ompj might play a key role in the physiology of these metal reducers. in order to elucidate the physiological role of g. sulfurreducens ompj, a deletion mutant was constructed by gene replacement with a kanamycin cassette . sds-page analyses confirmed the absence of the ompj protein band in outer membrane preparations of the ompj-deficient mutant but also showed significant differences in the protein composition of the mutant outer membrane fraction when compared to the wild-type, with some absent proteins and some new proteins present in the outer membrane fractions of the mutant .

the ompj-deficient mutant strain reduced fumarate nearly as well as the wild-type strain . however, it was markedly deficient in the reduction of metals such as soluble fe  citrate , insoluble poorly crystalline fe  oxide , as well as mn  oxides  when compared to the wild-type strain. attempts to complement the mutation in trans yielded a strain that produced ompj only at levels ca. 10% of the wild-type, as visualized on denaturing gels . such suboptimal levels of complementation have previously been observed in previous studies on the function of other genes in g. sulfurreducens  <cit> . however, even with suboptimal levels of ompj, 16% of the fe  citrate reduction capacity was restored .

the loss of the capacity for fe  and mn  reduction in the ompj mutant was associated with a significant loss of c-type cytochromes from the cell. the c-type cytochrome content in cell extracts of the wild-type was  <dig> ±  <dig>  μmol per  <dig> mg protein whereas the mutant's c-type cytochrome content was  <dig> ±  <dig>  μmol per  <dig> mg protein. heme c staining of proteins separated by sds-page confirmed there was a loss of a number of both soluble and membrane-associated cytochromes in the ompj-deficient mutant strain . there was also an apparent increase in the abundance of a  <dig> kda c-type cytochrome associated with the inner membrane.

because porins also have been shown to play a structural role in the integrity of the bacterial cell surface  <cit> , cells were examined with transmission electron microscopy . tem analyses of negatively-stained cells and of thin sections of cells from fumarate-grown cultures showed that the appearance of the mutant cells was remarkably different from the wild-type cells and was consistent with an enlarged periplasm .

discussion
the results presented in this work suggest that the most abundant outer-membrane protein in g. sulfurreducens is a probable porin and, despite its apparent lack of any moieties capable of participating in electron transfer, its presence is required in order for g. sulfurreducens to reduce extracellular electron acceptors, such as soluble fe citrate and insoluble fe  and mn  oxides. these results, coupled with the recent discovery of the importance of a porin-like protein, designated omp <dig>  in fe  reduction in shewanella oneidensis mr- <dig>  <cit> , emphasize that porins play an important role in the maintenance of the physical integrity and function of the cell surface in dissimilatory metal-reducing microorganisms.

physiological role of ompj
ompj's annotation as a porin is consistent with the predicted beta-barrel structure of the protein  <cit>  and with several pieces of biochemical evidence such as its location and abundance in the outer membrane  and the results of our proteinase k study, which suggest that it is embedded in the membrane . also, porins often assemble in the outer membrane as multimeric structures composed of several porin monomers  <cit>  and, as a result, many porins exhibit heat modifiability  <cit> . as was shown in fig. 1b, ompj also showed heat modifiability.

bacterial outer membrane porins have been studied extensively  <cit>  and porin-like proteins also are found in chloroplasts and mitochondria  <cit> . porins represent an unusual class of membrane proteins in that they exhibit no hydrophobic stretches in their amino acid sequences and form hollow beta-barrel structures with a hydrophobic outer surface. the barrel structure encompasses the trans-membranous pore that allows the passive diffusion of hydrophilic solutes across the  membrane  <cit> . the enlarged periplasm observed in the ompj-deficient mutant, as compared to that of the wild type cells, further suggests some role in solute transport. although ompj is annotated in the genome of g. sulfurreducens as a putative protein of the lamb porin superfamily, this classification does not necessarily imply a physiological role analogous to that of lamb channels. the lamb superfamily comprises channels involved in the spontaneous diffusion of specific nutrients. the lamb protein of e. coli, which also serves as the phage lambda receptor, is a prototype of this class of channels and catalyzes the influx of maltose and maltodextrins and also facilitates the influx of various carbohydrates when in low concentrations in the extracellular environment  <cit> . however, geobacter species are not known to use sugars as substrates. the finding that the ompj deletion mutant reduced fumarate at rates comparable to the wild-type suggests that the transport of the electron donor, acetate, or essential nutrients, such as ammonia, phosphate, sulfur, amino acids and trace metals, which are necessary in central metabolic reactions, was not inhibited. morevover, the enlarged periplasmic space observed upon deletion of the ompj gene is consistent with a channel involved in the efflux, rather than influx, of some nutrient.

it is unlikely that ompj is involved in the final electron transfer to fe  and mn  because it lacks any apparent electron transfer moieties and because it appears to be embedded within the membrane rather than exposed externally. in addition, other non-cytochrome proteins, type iv pili, have recently been shown to be involved in the final electron transfer to insoluble metals  <cit> . thus, the effect of the ompj mutation in the inhibition of fe  and mn  reduction appears to be indirect, as a result of the general reduction in the production of c-type cytochromes. previous studies have suggested that a number of c-type cytochromes are required in order for g. sulfurreducens to effectively reduce metals and the loss of just one of these may inhibit fe  reduction  <cit> . in some instances, outer-membrane proteins may be required for the proper localization of outer-membrane c-type cytochromes  <cit>  and, if not properly localized and folded, cytochromes may be proteolytically degraded. however, a direct role for ompj in the proper localization of c-cytochromes is unlikely because ompj homologs are also present in pelobacter species, which reduce fe  but do not contain detectable c-type cytochromes  <cit> . alternatively, ompj may be required for transport of some constituent such as iron that is required for c-cytochrome production. the swelling of the periplasm in fumarate-grown cells suggests, however, that transport of one or more solutes out of the cell might be inhibited in the absence of ompj. this abnormal periplasm is likely to interfere with protein folding and localization, thus inducing the extracytoplasmic stress responses, mediated by the rpoe sigma factor and cpx systems in e. coli  <cit> , and triggering a proteolytic cascade that relieves the accumulation of misfolded proteins in the periplasm  <cit> .

porins and metal reduction
ompj of g. sulfurreducens is the first porin ever to be described in detail in any member of the delta-proteobacteria  <cit> . similar to omp <dig>  a porin-like protein from shewanella oneidensis mr- <dig>  <cit> , it appears to have an indirect role in metal reduction. while an omp35-deficient mutant in s. oneidensis had slower rates of reduction of fumarate and soluble or insoluble fe  <cit> , deletion of ompj of g. sulfurreducens did not affect fumarate reduction but dramatically inhibited metal reduction such as soluble or insoluble fe and mn oxides. this is not surprising inasmuch as fumarate reduction occurs intracellularly in g. sulfurreducens  <cit>  while the s. oneidensis terminal reductase is periplasmic  <cit> . interestingly, the levels and distribution of key components of electron transport in s. oneidensis such as quinones and cytochromes were normal in the omp35-deficient mutant  <cit> , whereas the ompj-deficient mutant of g. sulfurreducens had a substantial reduction in heme c and c-cytochrome abundance, which may have indirectly contributed to the marked decrease of its metal reduction potential. the lack of homology and differences in function between omp <dig> and ompj may reflect the profound differences in the mechanisms for fe reduction in shewanella and geobacter species  <cit> .

most importantly, these studies emphasize the role of non-electron transport proteins in electron transfer to a variety of electron acceptors. ompj of g. sulfurreducens is of special significance because, unlike omp <dig>  it is widespread in members of the geobacteraceae, but no homologs are found in any other bacterial groups. this suggests that screening for ompj-like sequences may be a good strategy for identifying geobacteraceae sequences in libraries of environmental genomic dna. furthermore, ompj provides another gene in the short, but growing, list of geobacteraceae-specific sequences that might be used to quantify the number of geobacteraceae in fe -reducing environments or to infer rates of activity of these organisms from quantitative mrna analysis  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, ompj is an abundant outer-membrane protein in g. sulfurreducens and it is required for metal reduction in this organism. ompj also is required to keep the structural integrity of the periplasmic space, which is necessary for proper folding and functioning of electron transport components. thus, the role of ompj in metal reduction may, in fact, be indirect. while the actual role of this apparent porin is still uncertain, further studies on interactions of ompj with other proteins in g. sulfurreducens may help to better elucidate its function.

