BACKGROUND
the rapid replication rates, inherently high error rates, and large population sizes of rna viruses often result in highly genetically diverse mutant swarms within individual hosts. a number of studies with arthropod-borne viruses  have demonstrated that the precise composition and breadth of these swarms may be directly responsible for alterations in viral fitness, pathogenesis, and host breadth  <cit> . taken together, these studies demonstrate that a more comprehensive understanding of mutant swarm dynamics is required for adequate characterization of arbovirus evolution and adaptation. if the maintenance of highly diverse swarms equates to increased phenotypic flexibility, then swarm size could be particularly important for arboviruses given their requirement for replication in disparate hosts and tissues. not surprisingly, many studies have identified significant intrahost diversity of arboviruses both in laboratory-derived and naturally occurring strains  <cit> , yet the phenotypic diversity that correlates to these mutant genotypes has not been adequately characterized. quasispecies theory, although often invoked as a synonym for genetic diversity, generally argues against the maintenance of substantial phenotypic diversity, as the inevitable coupling of mutational neighbors should ultimately favor selection for canalized populations which exhibit phenotypic stability in the face of mutational change  <cit> . as such, a robust viral swarm would theoretically lack substantial phenotypic diversity and therefore tend to negate the adaptive advantage one would normally associate with genetic diversity. a virus could overcome this need for robustness by readily utilizing cooperative interactions via strain complementation in co-infected cells.

historically, discussion of complementation among viral proteins has focused primarily on defective interfering particles. the capacity for these incomplete genomes to hijack proteins from viable viral particles for replication has been documented extensively in cell culture systems, particularly during persistent infections  <cit> . in addition, previous studies with dengue virus have demonstrated the maintenance of nonviable deletion mutants in both aedes aegypti mosquitoes and acutely infected humans  <cit> , and recent work with west nile virus  infected culex quinquefasciatus also suggests that complementation may act to maintain deletion mutants in this system  <cit> . these studies together suggest that arboviruses in natural systems have the capacity to utilize complementation in co-infecting cells. although these examples would be defined as ‘cheating’ from an evolutionary perspective, such interactions could also readily occur among variants with more intermediate fitness levels and in turn provide a net benefit to an arboviral swarm that encounters diverse environments in a single transmission cycle. although previous studies provide evidence that viable genomes of vesicular stomatitis virus  can utilize complementation  <cit> , consideration of the importance of this phenomenon in the evolution of other medically important arboviruses is lacking. such interactions could permit arboviruses to maintain genotypes which are host specialized, therefore diminishing the potential for compromises in host adaptation as a result of host cycling. indeed, a number of studies have now clearly demonstrated that although host-specific adaptation may at times result in a fitness cost, adaptive trade-offs in individual hosts are not inevitable for arboviruses  <cit> .

a previous experimental evolution study conducted in our laboratory generated a strain of wnv by sequential in vitro passages which was both highly adapted to mosquito cells and highly genetically diverse . the breadth of the wnv cp <dig> mutant swarm was shown to be directly correlated with virus adaptation, and reverse genetics studies demonstrated that consensus mutations were not solely responsible for the adaptive phenotype, indicating the importance of mutant swarm variants in host adaptation and overall viral fitness  <cit> . here, we sought to evaluate the level of robustness in this strain by quantifying the phenotypic diversity and relative fitness values of biologic clones derived from this wnv population. this strain provided a unique opportunity to characterize non-consensus variants of an adapted and genetically diverse arbovirus which had sufficient time to reach an equilibrium state. in addition, we tested the hypothesis that strain complementation plays a significant role in the maintenance of both genetic and phenotypic diversity in the wnv mutant swarm. our results represent a significant advancement in the understanding of the relationship between swarm composition and viral fitness and the potential role of cooperative interactions in shaping arboviral mutant swarms.

RESULTS
distribution of relative fitness values of clonal populations of mosquito cell-adapted wnv
previous studies have demonstrated that the accumulation of minority variants in the wnv mutant swarm is coupled with passage and adaptation to mosquito cell culture . in order to assess the extent to which this genetic diversity corresponds to phenotypic diversity,  <dig> biologic clones of wnv cp <dig> were isolated and the fitness of individual variants was quantified using previously established methods. all variants tested out-competed the wnv monoclonal antibody resistant strain  strain, which was previously shown to have a fitness value equivalent to the parental strain from which wnv cp <dig> was derived  <cit> . relative fitness values ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , with a mean value of  <dig>  and a median value of  <dig>  . despite this phenotypic variation, 50% of variants had relative fitness values between  <dig> and  <dig>  following mixing at equal proportions, the relative fitness value of the population was  <dig> , which was higher than both the mean and median values and  <dig> % of the individual variants.

wnv infectivity in mosquito cells
in order to assess if the level of co-infection was sufficient to allow the potential for interaction among viral genomes and/or proteins, qrt-pcr and flow cytometry were used to determine the mean number of viral particles per cell. results demonstrated that following a 1-h infection of mosquito cells with wnv cp <dig> at a multiplicity of infection  of  <dig>  approximately  <dig>  log <dig> wnv rna particles entered the cells, representing  <dig> % of the virus inoculum . flow cytometry identified  <dig> % of the cells in the monolayer as wnv positive, which is equivalent to approximately  <dig>  log <dig> mosquito cells. taken together, these results demonstrate an approximate mean particle to cell ratio of  <dig> : <dig>  signifying widespread co-infection of individual mosquito cells at high mois .

relationship between levels of co-infection and relative fitness
in vitro competition assays at mois  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> were performed using two distinct fitness variants  to assess the relationship between co-infection and the capacity of high fitness wnv variants to out-compete lower fitness variants. in a population of variants which are independently competing, the highest fitness variant, in this case cp40- <dig> , should experience a swift selective sweep. the goal of these studies was therefore to assess the role of complementation in inhibiting this selective sweep. the results demonstrate a significant negative correlation between moi and relative fitness values, indicating that the capacity for the lower fitness variant to be retained in the population is increased with increased co-infection . conversely, this indicates that a strain  which in the absence of co-infection achieves titers over  <dig> times higher than its lower fitness competitor  would be subject to an approximately 6-fold decrease in its capacity to out-compete under these conditions when levels of co-infection are high . it should be noted that the output viral titers for these competition assays were similar at  <dig> h, suggesting that the absolute fitness of the combined infection is likely comparable and that changes only reflect different proportions of the two strains. measuring relative fitness at  <dig> h post infection allowed such estimations of the overall replicative ability of the ‘population’, yet it is possible that differences in levels of replication could also be used to explain different relative fitness values . thus, to confirm the role of co-infection in moi-dependent fitness values, relative fitness was also quantified at intermediate time points for the moi  <dig> competition assay. results indicate an inverse relationship between viral titers and relative fitness values, demonstrating replication and secondary infection cannot explain differences in relative fitness and providing further support for the negative correlation between co-infection and the capacity for high fitness variants to out-compete .

relationship between levels of co-infection and genetic diversity
to directly assess the role of co-infection in maintaining genetic diversity, mutant swarm breadth was quantified after  <dig> h growth following infection at mois of  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  performing these experiments at  <dig> h eliminated concerns about secondary infection significantly altering the outcome. analyses of approximately 20% of the genome following cloning and sequencing of output populations clearly demonstrate a significant positive correlation between moi and multiple measures of genetic diversity . specifically, comparisons of normalized shannon entropy on both the nucleotide and amino acid level significantly increased with increasing levels of co-infection . in addition, mean hamming distance of the moi  <dig> mutant swarm  was significantly higher than both the moi  <dig>   and moi  <dig>   swarms, indicating that not only were more haplotypes present, but that individual variants were on average more different from the consensus sequence when co-infection was permitted. if the region analyzed is a reliable representation of the level of diversity genome-wide, the mean hamming distance for the full genome of individual variants is likely greater than  <dig> . multiple sequence comparisons of variants from the moi  <dig> group performed with the recombination detection program v. <dig>   <cit>  did not indicate that recombination contributed to the increased levels of genetic diversity observed with increased co-infection.

relationships between co-infection and fitness distributions
in order to equate changes in genetic diversity to phenotypic change and directly assess how levels of co-infection alter fitness landscapes, the relative fitness of  <dig> biologic clones was assessed for wnv cp <dig> following an additional passage of  <dig> h on mosquito cells at either an moi of  <dig> or  <dig> . with the starting population already characterized , a direct assessment of how co-infection functions to alter the phenotypic diversity in the wnv swarm could be achieved. viral titers of individual variants following plaque isolation and  <dig> h growth on mosquito cell culture were found to be modestly higher for the moi  <dig>  group . competition assay results demonstrate that the level of co-infection in a single round of amplification can substantially alter the composition of variants maintained in the population . the mean relative fitness value for the variants derived from the moi  <dig> infection was  <dig> , which, despite the relatively lower individual viral titers, was significantly higher than variants derived from the moi  <dig>  infection . in addition, more phenotypic diversity was maintained in the moi  <dig> group relative to the moi  <dig>  group . relative fitness values ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  in the moi  <dig> group and  <dig>  to  <dig>  in the moi  <dig>  group. the relative fitness value of the combined population for the moi  <dig>  group was  <dig> , which was higher than all but  <dig>  of the variants. none of the individual variants in the moi  <dig> group had relative fitness values that measured as high as the combined population fitness .

discussion
the fact that arboviruses almost exclusively possess rna genomes suggests that the maintenance of genomic flexibility may provide a considerable advantage for viruses that require host cycling, yet a more complete understanding of the phenotypic consequences of diverse arboviral swarms is needed in order to equate rna swarm breadth and composition to specific adaptive and evolutionary outcomes. this requires both an ability to correlate genomic diversity to intrahost fitness landscapes and an understanding of the potential for interactions among viral genomes and proteins. here, we determined clonal fitness landscapes of a highly genetically diverse mosquito cell-adapted wnv strain and evaluated how altering the capacity for interactions among variants affects mutant swarm dynamics and swarm fitness. the somewhat counterintuitive observation of accumulating genetic diversity of wnv in the face of adaptation  can be explained in two ways;  a mutationally robust population has formed around a high fitness master sequence, or  populations of variants of lower fitness values are maintained in the population via complementary interactions with more highly adapted variants. our results demonstrate that the production and maintenance of genetic diversity in mosquito cell-adapted wnv is likely a result of a combination of these factors. specifically, although each clone is predicted to have an average of  <dig> mutations relative to the consensus sequence , as predicted in a robust viral population, there is substantial phenotypic redundancy, with many clones displaying similar values for relative fitness . recent characterization of a mutagenized poliovirus swarm demonstrated the capacity for an rna virus population to occupy such a neutral fitness landscape  <cit> . in contrast, results here also demonstrate significant fitness variation among outliers in the wnv cp <dig> population, with a greater than 15-fold disparity measured in relative fitness values of individual clones within the population. similar to previous studies with vsv, the majority of variants were found to have fitness values lower than that of the combined population  <cit> . these data suggest that cooperative interactions among variants may function to maintain phenotypic diversity, yet also suggest that there may be a limit to the potential of complementation, as all variants possess at least modest adaptation to mosquito cells.

previous studies suggest that arboviruses in natural systems may have the capacity to utilize complementation to maintain non-viable variants in co-infecting cells  <cit> , suggesting that such interactions could also readily occur among variants with more intermediate fitness levels. experimental studies with vsv have shown that relative fitness is moi-dependent due to increased levels of strain complementation  <cit> . our results show a similar trend, i.e. an increased capacity for the lower fitness wnv marm to remain in the population when levels of co-infection are high . further, we demonstrate that this is not just dependent on initial moi, but also on viral titer during a single infection . specifically, as viral replication increases, increasing co-infection effectively decreases the pace at which lower fitness mutants are selected against and, therefore, the capacity for high fitness variants to experience selective sweeps. related studies with the bacteriophage Φ <dig> also demonstrate that co-infection can weaken selection, yet interactions with variants of this virus are further complicated by its capacity to readily reassort  <cit> . with a single open-reading frame, wnv is not capable of reassortment, nor is it thought to readily recombine  <cit> . although the full genomes of output variants from moi studies were not sequenced here, the partial sequences again fail to identify evidence of recombination, suggesting interactions likely occur on the level of viral proteins. decreased strength of selection during single mosquito infections could be particularly advantageous to arboviruses as it would increase the capacity to maintain vertebrate-specific variants which might otherwise be purged. previous studies with wnv cp <dig> demonstrated that this strain accrued no obvious phenotypic cost as a result of mosquito cell adaptation in vertebrate hosts in vitro or in vivo <cit> . it remains to be seen how widespread this phenomenon is in nature, but it is possible that it could contribute to the slower than expected pace of consensus level evolution of arboviruses which is often attributed to the conflicting selective pressures resulting from host cycling  <cit> .

our results confirm that increased co-infection results in both increased genetic and phenotypic variation . although one could argue that the genetic diversity differences could be attributed to variable bottleneck size, an moi of  <dig>  in these studies still requires approximately  <dig> million wnv particles. in addition, the differences in mean hamming distances of the moi  <dig> variants, which represent an increased likelihood to retain more genetically distant haplotypes, cannot be explained by variation in bottleneck size . taken together, these data demonstrate the potential for complementation to decrease short-term evolvability in one system by dampening the force of selection, but potentially increase long-term evolvability and phenotypic flexibility by maintaining high levels of diversity.

the difference in distributions of relative fitness values among individual variants with or without co-infection demonstrates the profound effect that interactions can have in shaping fitness landscapes . quantification of viral titers of wnv clones isolated from these populations suggest only modest phenotypic differences, with mean viral titer ~  <dig>  log <dig> pfu/ml lower for the moi  <dig> group . this result is consistent with the prediction that when co-infection is common, variants that have moderately inferior replicative ability are more likely to be maintained in the population as a result of complementation. surprisingly, despite these lower viral titers, relative fitness values were substantially higher for the variants isolated following co-infection . this result highlights how individual replicative ability is very much distinct from fitness in competition and, therefore, how misleading using such measures as a surrogate for viral fitness can be. here, high fitness variants do not grow to higher titers in the absence of competition, yet are exceedingly better at competing for cellular resources. the moi  <dig> population clearly demonstrates variant complementation, as the population fitness in this case is greater than any of its individual components. these data are unique in that they suggest not just that individual genotypes of lower fitness can be retained by complementation, but also that there may be a population benefit as a result of cooperative interactions. these cooperative interactions, i.e. interactions that result in a net gain in swarm fitness, could result from many mechanisms ranging from a negative effect on the competitor’s fitness imposed by the group, to a ‘division of labor’ strategy existing between members of the swarm. in the latter scenario, individual genotypes could act as specialists coding for proteins that vary in their capacity to carry out different functions in the wnv life cycle. for unique variants in the absence of co-infection, it is feasible to imagine that there could be some functional trade-offs via antagonistic pleiotropy, yet if products of variants are readily shared among co-infecting particles such trade-offs could potentially be overcome. although there are no specific examples of functional antagonistic pleiotropy for an arbovirus during infection of a single host, experimental evolution studies clearly demonstrate that there are many ways for an arbovirus to enhance fitness, and despite the pace and breadth at which these viruses can survey sequence space, consensus genotypes from highly fit strains often possess dissimilar changes in variable genomic regions  <cit> .

to determine the relevance of cooperative interactions in natural systems there remain many questions to answer. first, does co-infection occur frequently enough in nature such that interaction could significantly contribute to alterations in arbovirus mutant swarms and, under what conditions would cooperative interactions be selected for? it has been shown that superinfection exclusion can occur with wnv in mammalian cell culture, but also that wnv can quickly evolve resistance to exclusion  <cit> . little is known about the extent of co-infection in natural systems. studies with Φ <dig> suggest intrahost competition could ultimately select for selfish genotypes if levels of co-infection are high, yet the constantly changing selective pressures arboviruses face in nature may not permit this  <cit> . further, it is not clear if the potential costs of cooperative interactions, such as decreased strength of selection for fast replicating variants would outweigh the benefit in mosquito hosts, yet if in vitro results presented here are also observed in vivo, populations of cooperating arbovirus genotypes may have the added benefits of both higher population fitness and increased phenotypic flexibility in the face of ever changing landscapes. studies utilizing new technology to track large populations, such as recent work with poliovirus, could provide a more comprehensive characterization of dynamic rna arboviral swarms which could complement phenotypic characterization in vivo <cit> . although results presented here do not depict the full complexity of the arboviral swarm and its interactions with natural hosts, these data demonstrate the profound effects variant interactions could have on arbovirus evolution and adaptation and provide a baseline by which to study the impact of this phenomenon in natural systems.

CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that although there is mutational robustness and phenotypic redundancy in the wnv swarm, genetic diversity also corresponds to substantial phenotypic diversity in terms of viral fitness. in addition, data demonstrate that increasing levels of co-infection can lead to widespread strain complementation which acts to maintain both genetic and phenotypic diversity and significantly dampen the strength of selection for high fitness variants. lastly, we show that these interactions may be cooperative in that they lead to population fitness levels which exceed the fitness of any of the individual components of the swarm. overall, these studies demonstrate the profound effects interactions can have on rna virus evolution and adaptation, and provide a baseline by which to study the impact of this phenomenon in natural systems.

