BACKGROUND
chromatin compactness is the key feature of chromatin that reflects its accessibility to transcription machinery. tightly packed closed chromatin is considered a hallmark of gene silencing, and chromatin opening precedes lineage-specific gene expression thus providing an excellent indicator of cell fate commitment  <cit> . however, genome-wide analyses of chromatin configuration have been focused not on direct assessment of chromatin compactness, but on predictions based on chromatin marks such as dna methylation and histone modifications. predictive models recognize numerous chromatin “states” presumably indicating regulatory elements, gene activity, and other aspects of genome biology  <cit> , thereby deducing chromatin configuration from our knowledge of gene expression and chromatin marks. such predictive approach intrinsically limits the discovery of novel mechanistic links between chromatin configuration and gene expression as well as chromatin modifications, necessitating development of the alternative, more direct means to analyze genome-wide patterns of open and closed chromatin. moreover, although the models of predicted “states” are excellent tools for basic research, they require examination of numerous chromatin marks in multiplicity of assays and thus are not readily applicable to routine analysis of small clinical samples.

here, we sought clarification on two important topics in chromatin biology: first, whether there is a straightforward and immutable association between chromatin compactness and certain chromatin modifications or combinations thereof, and second – what is the relation between chromatin compactness and gene expression. toward this objective we designed and validated a high throughput assay for general chromatin sensitivity to dnase i  as a powerful approach to determine chromatin compactness across genome. previous low-throughput studies have established the power of gcsdi to detect domains of both open and closed chromatin in specific genomic loci . this feature separates gcsdi from other current experimental approaches to chromatin structure, which employ nuclease or transposase treatment to detect unusually open chromatin regions  and/or nucleosome positioning , but do not reveal contiguous open and closed chromatin domains that have been broadly implicated in gene regulation. specifically, the difference between gcsdi and the popular analysis for dnase i hypersensitive sites  is that while both methods use dnase i to introduce single-stranded nicks in accessible dna, dhs detects only sites where density of nicks is high enough to generate double-stranded dna breaks, while gcsdi analyzes frequency of nicks continuously across the region of interest . capitalizing on excellent annotation of drosophila genome and on previous genome-wide analyses of chromatin marks in drosophila schneider- <dig>  cell line, we have created the map of chromatin compactness in these cells and cross-referenced it to known patterns of chromatin modifications and gene expression.figure  <dig> 
genome viewer snapshot shows domains of open and closed chromatin detected by gcsdi. an approximately  <dig> kbp window demonstrates the relationship of differential gcsdi signal, 2cm, and 3cm models to the genes, predicted  <dig> chromatin states, and lamina-associated domains . dnase i hypersensitive site assay signal  is shown for comparison. open chromatin domains are shown in green and closed – in red in 2cm and 3cm traces. discrepancies between chromatin structure predictions  and chromatin compactness  are outlined by arrows.



RESULTS
to measure gcsdi across genome we combined a brief dnase i treatment of permeabilized cells with random amplification of the dnase i-nicked genomic dna, followed with analysis of sequence representation in amplified material by a high-throughput method. dnase i preferentially nicks dna in open chromatin, rendering these regions inefficient template for amplification and thus predisposing them for under-representation in amplified material. the difference in representation between known open and closed chromatin loci can be reliably detected by the gcsdi assay after treatment with diverse amounts of dnase i, and thus is a reliable analysis outcome that is not overly sensitive to dnase i treatment conditions .

to generate a gcsdi profile across genome, amplified dna samples from dnase i-treated and control untreated cells  were hybridized with tiling affymetrix microarrays, signal intensities for each probe were averaged within the experimental groups and fold differences between the groups were calculated. positive log <dig> values were assigned to the sequences underrepresented in dnase i-treated sample  and negative values - to the sequences overrepresented in dnase i-treated sample . the identified open and closed chromatin regions were extensive and contiguous, consistent with previous low-throughput studies  and in contrast with the narrow discrete regions detected by the dhs assay  <cit>  .

two segmentation models of chromatin compactness were created using the genome-wide gcsdi profiles.  we used a sliding window algorithm to identify transition points and to segment genome into contiguous series of open or closed chromatin domains, with the mean size of 15 kb and ranging up to 500 kb . resulting two-configuration model  is well compatible with other large-scale genome features such as lamina-associated domains   <cit>  but did not provide sufficient resolution for analysis of some gene-dense regions with small genes. this problem was overcome by implementing another type of analysis  using hmm to identify positive or negative peaks of differential signals, and consolidating clusters of such peaks into domains. this approach to identification of closed and open chromatin domains was more selective, but at a cost of assigning about one-third of genome to domains that are neither open nor closed, thereby defined as “neutral”. thus, the outcome of such analysis was a three-configuration model  of domains with the mean size of 3–10 kb . further analyses showed similar results for 2cm and 3cm. we present findings for 2cm in the main figures and the majority of results for 3cm, are shown in additional file figures.

domains of open, closed, and neutral chromatin identified by both models appeared interspersed across genome . in euchromatin, 2cm detected approximately 60% of genome in closed chromatin and 40% - in open , while 3cm detected 37% of genome in closed, 23% in open, and 40% in neutral chromatin . both the pericentromeric heterochromatin regions and chromosome  <dig> were heavily enriched with neutral chromatin in 3cm, however heterochromatin only  showed an overabundance of closed chromatin in 2cm. therefore, chromosome  <dig> appears to share overall similarities with both euchromatin and heterochromatin, consistent with known interspersion of unique sequences and repeat clusters in this genome region  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
distribution of open  and closed  chromatin domains detected by 2cm analysis on chromosomes of
d. melanogaster
.

representation of detected open and closed chromatin domains in genome and their association with predicted chromatin states. proportions of open and closed chromatin detected by 2cm are shown for individual chromosomes  and for the genome regions predicted as  <dig> chromatin states  <cit> .



next, we analyzed the relationships between identified open and closed chromatin domains and chromatin modifications, beginning with the nine major chromatin predicted “states”  <cit> . in general, predictions were confirmed in agreement with previous research linking chromatin opening with cis-regulation and gene expression  as states  <dig> through  <dig>  mostly corresponded to the open chromatin and the states  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  were predominantly identified as closed . state  <dig>  was mostly identified as closed in 2cm and neutral in 3cm consistent with enrichment of the pericentromeric regions with these configurations . in a complementary analysis, we found that a major proportion of open chromatin has been predicted as one of the “active” chromatin states  <dig> through  <dig>  and the majority of closed chromatin - as “inactive” states  <dig> through  <dig> . although the state  <dig>  appeared to be similarly represented by open and closed chromatin in the whole-genome study, analysis focusing on the x chromosome showed this state representing about 40% of open and a lesser fraction of closed chromatin. thus, overall results of our analysis of chromatin compactness were consistent with the chromatin state predictions based on chromatin modification marks, providing cross-validation of these two approaches. however there were a number of discrepancies as well. we were unable to find specific correlations between chromatin compactness and state  <dig>  which was equally distributed between open and closed chromatin and contributed about 10% to all chromatin configurations ; noteworthy, this promiscuous distribution pertained to all four distinct sub-states  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> which have been consolidated in state  <dig>  <cit>  . this finding reflected a peculiar relationship between gene expression and intron chromatin structure, described in more detail below. also, a relatively minor portion  of the closed chromatin detected in our genome-wide analysis has been predicted as “active” states  <dig> through  <dig> and a similar fraction of open chromatin  – as “inactive” states  <dig> through  <dig> . a visual inspection of the gcsdi signal distribution showed that at least some of these mismatches represented genuine differences between the direct and the predictive approaches to chromatin structure analysis. figure  <dig> provides an example: yellow arrows indicate open chromatin detected in the regions predicted as “heterochromatin”  and “polycomb-repressed” . these findings identify cases of potentially novel unconventional epigenetic regulation which warrant further mechanistic inquiries.figure  <dig> 
contributions of the predicted chromatin states to open and closed chromatin. results are shown for the whole genome, and separately for major autosomes and chromosomes x and  <dig> . in addition, cumulative contribution of the states 1– <dig> considered “active” chromatin, and of the states 6– <dig> considered “inactive” or repressed, are shown for open and closed chromatin in the whole genome .



we also analyzed distribution of individual modifications which have been traditionally linked to certain chromatin structure predictions, and intriguingly found that while open chromatin was associated with numerous abundant chromatin modifications, closed chromatin was largely unmodified. this was true in whole-genome analysis  and also when the major autosome euchromatin, x chromosome, heterochromatin, and chromosome  <dig> were analyzed separately . histone acetylation , ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and methylation at h3k <dig>  h3k <dig>  and h3k <dig> were indicators of open chromatin, and depletion of these modifications was characteristic of closed domains. among the positive indicators of closed chromatin, dimethylation of h3k <dig> and especially trimethylation of h3k <dig> were prominent, but still enrichment with these modifications accounted only for less than one-quarter of closed chromatin in 2cm and one-third in 3cm analysis. thus, the prevalent mechanisms underlying chromatin closing do not appear to extensively rely on known chromatin marks, indicating that yet unknown chromatin compaction-related modifications may exist - or perhaps that “closed” is the default state of unmodified chromatin .figure  <dig> 
enrichment and depletion of chromatin modifications in open and closed chromatin. bars show percent proportions of regions enriched with  or depleted of  particular chromatin modifications in open and closed chromatin domains detected by 3cm. data are cumulative for the entire genome.



taking into account that morphologically dense heterochromatin is often situated at nuclear periphery, we proposed that a significant proportion of closed chromatin is included in lamina-associated domains . indeed, comparison of our gcsdi analysis with the lad map of drosophila genome  <cit>  revealed that lads were predominantly closed  and approximately one-half of the closed chromatin in the genome was included in lads . considering the emerging major role for lamina in gene repression  <cit>  these findings were consistent with the model in which chromatin compaction is a feature of gene silencing, prompting further inquiry into the relationship between chromatin configuration and gene expression.figure  <dig> 
link between lamina-associated domains  <cit> and closed chromatin detected by 2cm. , proportions of closed and open chromatin found in lads in the entire genome and in its compartments including major autosomes, chromosome x, and chromosome  <dig>  , contribution of lads to the closed and open chromatin in the genome.



while intergenic spacers were mostly closed or neutral, actively expressed genes were predominantly open and silent genes were generally closed across the genome . however, this analysis unexpectedly identified a substantial fraction  of active gene chromatin in closed configuration. intriguingly, the gene size appeared a major determinant, with larger active genes displaying more closed chromatin . structural elements of the active genes were predominantly open with a single exception of introns that were equally represented by the open and closed chromatin, relevant to the aforementioned promiscuous distribution of the predicted chromatin state  <dig>  interestingly, the proportion of introns with closed chromatin configuration increased rapidly as intron length exceeded  <dig> kbp . within the long introns of active genes, the closed chromatin content was the highest in the middle and gradually decreased over several kbp toward the exon/intron borders . taking into account a rapid transition of rna polymerase across large introns  <cit> , it can be proposed that chromatin in these regions can quickly condense once the transcription complex has passed. this apparent disconnect between the activity of the genes with large introns and the intron chromatin structure probably underlies regulation of interleaved gene arrangements, where small nested genes often show little correlation with expression of larger including genes that harbor them in introns  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
relationship between open and closed chromatin and gene structure. proportions of open and closed chromatin detected by 2cm are shown for intergenic spacers and active or silent genes  and for structural elements of active and silent gene . analysis of relationship between chromatin structure and the size of gene  and intron  shows that proportion of open chromatin diminishes as the gene and intron size increases for both active and silent genes. , distribution of poen and closed chromatin along large  active gene introns.



another intriguing finding was the presence of closed chromatin in some active gene promoters  and open chromatin in silent gene promoters . we first sought to rule out the trivial explanations such as frequent presence of alternative inactive promoters in active genes, as well as imprecision of chromatin analysis or incorrect selection of the promoter regions. in these cases, even though a promoter may appear in “odd” configuration, the chromatin structure of the gene body would match its expression status. we found just the opposite - the chromatin configuration of the gene body followed that of the promoter  indicating that some genes can be active in closed chromatin and also that some silent genes are open. the sets of genes defined as active or silent were still clearly distinct in their expression levels regardless of their promoter chromatin configuration, however while silent genes with closed promoters showed essentially no detectable expression at all, a significant fraction of their counterparts with open promoters demonstrated very low but noticeable expression  consistent with the model in which chromatin compaction completely shuts down expression of silenced genes while opening  of chromatin exposes genes to transcriptional machinery  <cit> . closing of chromatin domains may be used for strict control of tissue-specific genes, especially those organized in large clusters on chromosomes  <cit> . to test this suggestion, we analyzed  <dig> clusters of three or more testis-biased genes  <cit>  and found that  <dig> of them represented uninterrupted domains of closed chromatin,  <dig> - continuous domains of open chromatin, and only  <dig> had a transition between open and closed domains within the cluster. we further analyzed cluster genes from the uninterrupted domains of open or closed chromatin. genes from closed clusters  indeed had higher tissue specificity and thus tighter transcriptional control than their counterparts from open clusters  as their expression breadth metric tau <cit>  was significantly higher  .figure  <dig> 
chromatin compactness versus gene expression. representation of open, closed, and neutral chromatin is shown for structural elements of genes that differ in their expression status and promoter chromatin configuration . , rnaseq reads per kilobase pair of gene per million  are shown as surrogate expression levels for silent and active genes with open or closed promoters. , expression breadth metric tau <cit>  of testis-biased genes from gene clusters embedded in open versus closed chromatin domains. note that if tau value is higher, the expression breadth is lower and thus tissue-specificity of gene expression is increased.



CONCLUSIONS
intriguingly, we also found that active genes with closed promoters showed lower transcript levels than conventionally expected active gene with open promoters, indicating that chromatin compactness may serve to modulate active gene expression. the mechanisms underlying this type of regulation warrant further inquiry, as do the other unexpected trends identified in our study, such as the general paucity of known chromatin marks positively identifying closed chromatin and the tendency of large introns to stay in closed configuration even when the genes are expressed. we expect that the novel analysis of epigenomic regulation with a straightforward and sensitive assay described here will contribute an empirical approach supplementing predictive chromatin structure assessments, thereby advancing both basic and biomedical research in chromatin biology.

