BACKGROUND
one of the principal complications in microarray analysis of gene expression is the relatively large amount of input rna required for each assay. on average, 1– <dig> μg of total rna are required per study using glass microarrays  <cit> . this is easily obtained from standard tissue samples, but is more difficult to obtain from smaller samples, such as laser capture microdissections  <cit> . the primary impediment to the use of laser capture microscopy  in gene expression analysis is that microdissections yield insufficient mrna due to low total rna recovered from small sample sizes. with samples such as these, the ability to conduct a linear amplification of the target mrna becomes imperative, to ensure that enough material is available for gene expression analysis. there are several methods for amplifying rna including the arithmetic transcription methods  <cit> , pcr based exponential amplification, or a combination of both arithmetic and exponential amplification  <cit> . each method has proven effective in generating large amounts of amplified rna from small starting samples. each method is not without its drawbacks however. pcr based amplification has been shown to amplify sequence-dependent biases geometrically, and hybridization kinetics during the thermal cycles can create sequence-dependent and abundance-dependant biases  <cit> . new methods must be carefully validated with large numbers of mrnas before they may be accepted for general use.

most rna amplification methods are based on the t7-based antisense rna amplification technique first described by van gelder and eberwine in  <dig>  <cit> . in this technique poly+ mrna is reverse-transcribed and converted into double stranded cdna using an oligo primer containing a promoter for t <dig> rna polymerase. the second strand cdna serves as a transcription template for amplified antisense rna  production. cdna microarray studies using t <dig> amplified rna have shown that the technique yields reproducible results that correlate with the results obtained from using total rna  <cit> . this method is incompatible, however, with standard spotted oligonucleotide microarrays when combined with conventional reverse transcription based labeling methods.

spotted oligo microarrays consist of 'long' 50– <dig> mer sense-strand oligonucleotide probes arrayed onto a suitable substrate. each probe sequence is designed to hybridize to a specific antisense cdna reverse transcribed from a given mrna species. the advantage of spotted oligo microarrays over cdna microarrays is that the oligos can be designed to be more specific, with similar hybridization kinetics, lower homology among related transcript probes, and selection among different splice variants of the same gene. however, arna prepared from eberwine-amplified mrna would produce a sense-strand cdna target that would not hybridize with sense-strand oligo probes on the microarray.

the genisphere senseamp linear mrna amplification method produces sense-strand amplified mrna by incorporating a double stranded t <dig> promoter into the 3' end of the first strand cdna, driving transcription of an amplified rna with the same strandedness as mrna. senseamp linear amplification also allows for the use of dt and random primers in the synthesis of cdna. this variation on the amplification protocol may be as effective on partially degraded mrna or, using random primers in a first-strand reaction, on rnas lacking a poly tail. further, the use of random primers combined with dt priming may help to reduce the 3' bias associated with eberwine-based amplification methods  <cit>  by improving the access of reverse transcription to the 5' end of mrna.

most studies evaluating amplification validity compare unamplified to amplified material  <cit> . however, this is not a good model of experiments normally performed with spotted oligo microarrays. in most two-color microarray experiments, an experimental sample is compared with a reference sample on the same microarray, so it is the ratio between two samples that becomes the most important parameter. rna amplification may have some sequence bias, but as long as the bias is consistent between reactions, the effect of the bias may be canceled. we chose, therefore, to evaluate amplification strategies by comparing two rna samples both before and after amplification, and correlating the ratios obtained before and after amplification. this key difference allows us to identify the best amplification method for use with two-color microarrays.

throughout the course of this study, several pre-production versions of senseamp were evaluated with the aim of judging the optimal method. total rna from replicate rat brain and liver samples was amplified using one of several different techniques including three versions of the senseamp method, messageamp from ambion, nugen's ovation rna-based single primer isothermal amplification  method, and as an additional study, senseamp amplification of partially degraded rna samples. the ratio of amplified rnas obtained from each method was compared via relative qpcr to that of unamplified mrnas from the same pool to determine how accurately the relative abundances were preserved. the use of qpcr provides a much broader range of results than possible with microarrays  <cit> . relative qpcr analysis also allowed for the quantification of amplified rna regardless of which strand was amplified, thus a direct comparison could be made between the various amplification techniques.

the fidelity of the amplification methods was determined using the ΔΔct relative quantification method for qpcr. this method is used to compare the expression of a given gene in one sample relative to a second, and is based on the amplification efficiency of the pcr primer pairs used  <cit> . quantitative pcr was selected because of its universal use as a microarray validation method  <cit> , enhanced dynamic range  <cit> , and ease of use with limited sample sizes for evaluating expression changes for several hundred genes. the basis of this method is the assumption that the exponential amplification of the starting product, and therefore the amount of pcr products produced with each round of amplification, is dependent upon the efficiency of each pcr primer pair. this efficiency is determined either experimentally or is calculated from the raw fluorescence data obtained during the qpcr amplification  <cit> . equation  was used to compare the expression of  <dig> different genes in rat liver and rat brain samples. triplicate total rna samples from rat brain and liver were analyzed for each pair of primers targeting the mrna concentrations of a given gene.

ratio of gene expression = e-ΔΔct     

through comparison of the relative gene expression across the various different amplification techniques, we were able to determine that each amplification method produces amplified rna in quantities that accurately reflect the original mrna proportions. the senseamp kit exhibited the best correlation to the unamplified control, and was effective in amplifying degraded rna samples as well. in addition, we inadvertently identified a potential bias that can arise with the use of the oligo dt in reverse transcription priming.

RESULTS
we compared liver/brain expression ratios for a broad collection  of mrnas before and after amplification. rat brain and liver rnas were chosen since we needed to begin with large quantities of unamplified materials in order to test several amplification reactions on the same starting material, and to reliably assay the unamplified rna. several variations on the amplification method were tested to determine which method best replicated the distribution of liver/brain ratios found in unamplified rnas. as anticipated, each of the amplification techniques produced amplified rna that reproduced the full range of relative quantities  between liver and brain rnas  and correlated well with the initial mrna pool . the senseamp version 1– <dig>  which was designed to incorporate aspects of both version  <dig> and version  <dig>  was shown to be most similar to the unamplified control results with a correlation coefficient of  <dig> . as indicated by the lack of overlap in the 95% confidence intervals, senseamp version 1– <dig> produced amplified rna with greater fidelity than either the messageamp or ovation methods. furthermore, each successive version of the senseamp protocol appeared to enhance the fidelity of the result. a series of two rounds of amplification with senseamp version 1– <dig> was indistinguishable in correlation to the unamplified control from a single round. these results suggest that each amplification technique is capable of producing linearly-amplified rna that represents the relationships of the two original tissues. the senseamp kit  produced the most accurate reproduction of the original liver/brain ratios while also providing a sense-strand amplified rna appropriate for use with oligonucleotide microarrays.

* number of valid samples shared with unamplified control

‡pearson correlation coefficient

amplification of partially-degraded rna samples using the senseamp version 1– <dig> method also produced a high correlation of liver/brain ratios to those from unamplified rnas . this high correlation using degraded rna appeared to be due to the presence of random primer in the amplification reaction. comparing the rank order of mrna abundances in liver , we found that reactions using oligo dt primers generally produced higher correlations between amplified rnas indicating that a similar offset to the rank order was occurring for all dt based methods. however comparing the dt primer rank order to that of random primed samples demonstrates greater dissimilarity, although this effect was variable. we interpret these results as supporting the hypothesis that the addition of a random primer to the amplification assay inadvertently enhances the correlation to random-primed, unamplified rna, partially offsetting the negative effect of rna degradation.

rank cross-correlation matrix for liver ct values. the mean cycle threshold  values obtained with liver rna samples were rank-ordered and correlated. results indicate the faithful reproduction of an ordered list of mrna concentrations in liver rna before and after amplification. results were filtered for acceptable pcr efficiencies , producing  <dig> primer pairs for this analysis. methods using random primer  are bold, those using oligo d are italicized. scatter plots of each rank ct correlation are available at: 

discussion
most studies of the fidelity of amplified rna have compared the amplified sample to the original total rna sample exclusively  <cit> . while this is valid, the approach described here more accurately reproduces the standard experimental conditions for two-color microarray expression analysis by comparing the ratio of gene expression between two different samples. the ratios obtained for amplified brain rna vs. amplified liver rna are then compared to the ratios from the unamplified control comparison . any reproducible biases within the techniques are represented in both the brain and liver samples and therefore cancelled out in the comparison. this approach models a two-color gene expression comparison experiment and demonstrates the differences in expression profiles obtained from different amplification techniques.

using this approach, all three amplification kits tested had correlation coefficients of  <dig>  or greater, indicating a great deal of fidelity in amplifying paired samples of rna. the senseamp kit performed relatively better among the three, with a correlation coefficient of  <dig> , with the 95% confidence interval lying above the means and intervals produced with messageamp or ovation methods. other researchers have shown that additional rounds of amplification yield reproducible results for a single rna sample with only modest biases  <cit> . the fidelity of amplification was maintained in the course of our experiments with the senseamp production kit, through a second round of amplification. the similar correlations between the senseamp version 1– <dig> and the two rounds of version 1– <dig> amplification indicate that a second round of amplification does not significantly affect the relative abundance of mrna. of the three senseamp versions tested, version 1– <dig> had the highest correlation to unamplified rna using this approach. in order to confirm that qpcr was an appropriate choice for validating rna amplification procedures, we compared the brain vs. liver expression ratios on oligonucleotide arrays of senseamp version 1– <dig> amplified to unamplified rna . as we observed with qpcr, a high correlation of about  <dig>  was observed after comparing about  <dig> differentially expressed genes, indicating that our qpcr experimental design was appropriate.

variations in correlation among the versions of the senseamp method may be due to modifications to the structure of the t <dig> promoter/cdna template. the version  <dig> template consisted of a completely double stranded linear dna molecule, with one strand of the promoter synthesized enzymatically. for version  <dig>  the t <dig> promoter was composed of two prehybridized, synthetic dna strands ligated to a single stranded cdna template. for version 1– <dig>  a double stranded t <dig> promoter was synthesized onto the end of a single stranded cdna template from a t <dig> template oligo by a 3' recessed end "fill-in" reaction using the klenow fragment of dna polymerase i. like version  <dig>  the promoter contains one enzymatically-synthesized strand and like version  <dig> the cdna portion is single stranded. the incorporation of an enzymatically-synthesized strand appears be a more effective initiation site for the t <dig> polymerase . furthermore, single stranded dna templates downstream of the ds t <dig> promoter have been shown to be very efficient t <dig> polymerase templates  <cit>  demonstrating a  <dig> fold improvement in kinetics  <cit> . the combined increase in t <dig> amplification efficiency in version 1– <dig> may preserve the distribution of mrna concentrations in the amplified product.

previous studies have cautioned against comparing samples using different reverse transcription primers  <cit> . priming with oligo dt reduced pcr yields and created 3' and sequence-specific biases compared with the use of random primer  <cit> . these biases arise from the specificity shown by oligo dt primer for the 3' poly tail and low processivity of t <dig> polymerase, as well as the presence of internal poly sequences which may act as additional priming sites for the oligo dt. random primer has also been shown to create a better 3'/5' ratio than the oligo dt primer  <cit> .

our experimental design called for the use of oligo dt primer in most of the rna amplification reactions but random primer in the cdna synthesis phase of qpcr. this design was used for each of the comparison experiments and therefore any bias introduced by the oligo dt primed reaction would be repeated for each of the amplification techniques. the effect of the oligo dt priming in the rna amplification was identified when the degraded rna sample was amplified using a mixture of oligo dt primer and random primer. the result showed that the degraded sample amplification resulted in a higher correlation to the unamplified control than any of the amplification techniques including the senseamp amplification of intact rna. it is our interpretation that this high correlation of the amplified, degraded samples to the unamplified qpcr samples may be due to the common use of random primers for both data sets.

CONCLUSIONS
overcoming the problem of tissue heterogeneity with lcm and other, similar techniques will allow the research community to focus its efforts on the biologically relevant cell types. the use of rna amplification with these small, cell-type specific techniques provides reliable and reproducible quantities of mrna suitable for high-throughput gene expression profiling. amplification from small amounts of lcm-selected samples provides stronger hybridization signal and reduced biological noise attributed to the presence of other cell types.

rna amplification has been shown here, and elsewhere, to be both a useful and consistent technique for production of practical amounts of rna when limited starting material is available. while there are several reliable amplification methods available, most amplify an antisense rna which is suitable for cdna microarray analysis. the most apparent benefit of the senseamp method is the amplification of the sense mrna strand. this allows for the direct use of cdna reverse-transcribed from amplified rna as a hybridization target for oligo microarrays, and any other analysis that requires a sense-strand orientation. in addition, we observed similar liver/brain ratios between amplified rnas and unamplified rnas. this comparison models the relative expression ratios observed with two-color microarrays. while each of the methods tested produced acceptable results, the senseamp methods provided optimal correlation between unamplified samples and sense-strand amplified rna.

