BACKGROUND
biogenic amines  are low molecular weight organic bases present in a wide range of food products where they become organoleptically undesirable  <cit> . it is also worth noting that several toxicological problems resulting from the ingestion of food containing large amounts of ba have been described  <cit> . although there is no specific legislation regarding ba content in many food products, it is generally assumed that they should not be allowed to accumulate  <cit> .

fermented foods are likely to contain high levels of ba, mainly due to the decarboxylase activity of some lactic acid bacteria . ba are produced by the decarboxylation of a precursor amino acid by the enzymatic action of an amino acid decarboxylase  <cit> . in these foods, the main ba are tyramine, histamine, cadaverine and putrescine, which are produced by decarboxylation of tyrosine, histidine, lysine and ornithine, respectively  <cit> .

the presence of the genes encoding the amino acid decarboxylase and the amino acid-amine antiporter is a general feature observed in all the gene clusters involved in the biosynthesis of tyramine, histamine, putrescine and cadaverine  <cit> . we have found an open reading frame coding for a protein of  <dig> amino acids with a molar mass of  <dig>  kda located next to the tyrosine decarboxylase  and the tyrosine-tyramine antiporter  genes of enterococcus durans ipla <dig>  the predicted amino acid sequence shares strong similarity to the tyrosyl-trna synthetase genes  of gram positive bacteria. the aminoacyl-trna synthetases catalyze the covalent attachment of amino acids to their cognate trnas, a crucial reaction for the accuracy of protein synthesis. these enzymes are encoded by genes regulated strictly by antitermination systems; when the corresponding amino acid, tyrosine in this case, is at low concentration, it is not linked to the trna, and this uncharged trna interact with the antiterminator located between the promoter and the start codon, stabilizing it and allowing transcription. by contrast, when tyrosine is at high concentration, it is linked to the corresponding trna  that cannot stabilize the antiterminator, and consequently the transcription stops  <cit> . genes with high similarity to those encoding the corresponding aminoacyl-trna-synthetases are generally associated to the genes involved in ba biosynthesis in other species, in the case of tyramine , enterococcus hirae , carnobacterium divergens  <dig>  <cit> ), lactobacillus brevis ioeb <dig>  <cit> , lactobacillus brevis atcc <dig> , and the histamine .

the number of tyrs genes is heterogeneous within the genera enterococcus. some tyramine-producing species as e. faecium have a unique tyrs, whereas e. faecalis has two different tyrs genes  <cit> . so far, this aspect remains unknown for e. durans . concerning the two different genes encoding tyrosyl-trna-sinthetases in e. faecalis v <dig>  tyrs- <dig> is homologous to the tyrs of other bacteria with a unique tyrs, whereas tyrs- <dig> is located in the tyramine cluster. database search revealed that tyrs- <dig> has higher similarity  to other tyrs genes associated to tyramine biosynthesis clusters than to its own tyrs- <dig> gene located elsewhere in the genome . the presence of two tyrs genes in the genome of a tyramine producing strain suggests that one  would be implicated in protein biosynthesis, whereas the one linked to tdc cluster  could be a sensor of the intracellular tyrosine pool to regulate tyrosine decarboxylation  <cit> . in addition, phylogenetic analyses of tyrs proteins associated to tyramine clusters, supported the hypothesis that these proteins made tight clusters and were clearly separated from their relatives encoded elsewhere in bacterial genomes. these results suggested a co-evolution of tyrs together with tdca and tyrp. this fact prompted us to exhaustively investigate the transcriptional regulation mechanism of this gene and its putative role on the regulation of the tyramine operon.

RESULTS
tyrs expression depends on the tyrosine concentration and extracellular ph
rna from e. durans ipla <dig> cultures grown in presence  or absence of tyrosine at two different ph conditions , was analyzed by northern blot hybridization with a tyrs specific probe . very low expression was detected in cells grown at ph  <dig>  independently of the presence or absence of tyrosine. noteworthy, at ph  <dig> , an intense band corresponding to a transcript of  <dig>  kb was observed. a policystronic mrna including tyrs-tdca was never detected  <cit> . the bigger band present in all lines with a low intensity would correspond to unspecific hybridization to the extremely abundant 23s rrna molecules. this tyrs up-regulation was specially enhanced in absence of tyrosine, suggesting that the initiation of transcription or mrna stability is controlled by ph and tyrosine.

the strength of these environmental conditions on tyrs expression was quantified by rt-qpcr. data in figure 1b confirmed that tyrs is maximally transcribed in absence of tyrosine and at ph  <dig> , showing a greater than 10-fold induction in mrna levels over levels occurring in presence of tyrosine. even when tyrosine was not added to the media, no induction was detected at ph  <dig> . these results confirmed that both conditions  are needed for expression of tyrs gene.

next, we examined whether intermediate tyrosine concentrations have an effect on tyrs expression. therefore, we investigated at optimal ph  <dig> , the effect that different tyrosine concentrations in the media  exert on gene expression by comparing rt-qpcr results obtained in each condition. as indicated in figure 1c, tyrs expression showed an inverse correlation with the increased tyrosine concentration and exhibited a great sensitivity to very low tyrosine levels, since the maximal expression level was reached in absence of tyrosine and an increase of  <dig>  mm tyrosine in the media was enough to reduce this level to the half. not significant changes in transcription were observed above  <dig> mm tyrosine, probably because of saturating concentrations of tyrosine. such concentrations were assayed because tyrosine can reach very high concentrations in some cheeses and even precipitate forming crystals  <cit> .

mapping of the tyrs transcription initiation site
to map the precise start point of the transcription of tyrs, primer extension was performed using rna samples extracted under optimal conditions of expression .

a single band of  <dig> bp was observed, indicating that the position + <dig> of the mrna corresponds to a t residue located  <dig> nucleotides upstream of the atg codon . seven nucleotides upstream this point, it was localized the - <dig> sequence tatgat spaced  <dig> nucleotides downstream of the - <dig> sequence ttgaca, that nearly matched the consensus sequence for lab promoters  <cit> . in a position 9- <dig> nucleotides upstream the atg codon of this gene, it was identified the shine-dalgarno region  .

structural features of the tyrs leader region
in e. durans ipla <dig>  the region upstream of the start codon of tyrs showed a  <dig> bp noncoding sequence that was named the tyrs leader region. a hypothetical representation of the secondary structure of the tyrs leader region is plotted on figure  <dig>  this region exhibits the sequence features of the trna-mediated antitermination systems described by grundy et al.  <cit> . it contains the typical t box sequence ugggugguaccgcg  , a tyrosine specifier uac , and most of the other less conserved boxes . in addition to these conserved sequences, the tyrs leader region may be folded into three stem-loop structures  preceding a factor-independent transcriptional terminator/antiterminator. however, the agua-ii and gaac boxes that can be found in similar antitermination systems are not present.

tyrosine concentration sensing is mediated by an antitermination system
we investigated whether the conserved primary sequence and structural motifs located upstream the start of the coding sequence play a role in the regulation of tyrs expression by a transcription antitermination system. for this purpose we compared the amount of mrna specific of the leader region  and the amount of mrna corresponding to the coding part of the gene  under optimal expression condition , and in presence or absence of tyrosine. this region-specific transcriptional quantification was performed by rt-qpcr using specific primer pairs for each region .

as shown in figure 4a, level of mrna-l was not affected by tyrosine concentration, whereas mrna-c level did not follow the same profile. in presence of tyrosine, the ratio mrna-l/mrna-c was  <dig> , whereas this value decreased to  <dig>  in absence of tyrosine . the ratio close to  <dig> observed in absence of tyrosine indicates no transcription termination and consequently the expression of tyrs. the  <dig>  ratio indicates higher levels of mrna-l than mrna-c, suggesting that the transcription in the presence of tyrosine was under the control of a termination system. these data are coherent with a tyrosine concentration regulation of tyrs mediated by a transcription antitermination system.

assessment of ptyrsΔ activity
the role of the t box in the mechanism of tyrosine sensing by tyrs was analyzed using a transcriptional fusion of lacz reporter gene with the tyrs promoter and the leader region, but with a deletion of the t box-terminator motif  . the lacz activities under the control of ptyrsΔ at ph  <dig>  were similar in the absence  and presence  of tyrosine, confirming that tyrosine regulation is located on the t box region. on the other hand, independently of the presence of tyrosine, promoter activities at neutral ph were lower than  <dig> mmol/mg total protein/min, showing an 8-fold higher strength of ptyrsΔ under acidic ph than at neutral ph. these data indicate that the induction of tyrs expression by ph is transcriptionally regulated by the promoter.

putative role of tyrs in tyramine cluster
to test the hypothesis that tyrs plays a physiological role on tyramine biosynthesis and/or in the regulation of the related genes , tyrs was over-expressed under the control of the nisin promoter. in all cases, the concentration of tyrs transcripts  was 80-fold over the physiological expression level. the presence of soluble translated tyrs was tested by anti-his immunodetection. an intense band of expected size was observed under induction conditions. next, we analyzed the in vivo effect of the over-expression of tyrs in cells grown on the aforementioned conditions, . negative controls of uninduced cultures were carried in parallel. under these experimental conditions, level of tdca-specific mrna  was not affected by the overexpression of tyrs . in addition, the concentration of tyramine in supernatants was examined by hplc. only the expected differences depending on the tyrosine concentration in the media were observed , but no significant differences between tyrs-induced cultures and the negative control were observed.

discussion
the e. durans ipla <dig> tyrs gene present in the tyramine cluster, which encodes a protein with high similarity to tyrosyl-trna-synthetases, is controlled by the intracellular concentration of tyrosine in a similar way than aminoacyl-trna synthetases are regulated by their substrate amino acid. the analysis of tyrs sequence revealed the typical high and kmsks domains of class i aminoacyl trna synthetases, being the high motif perfectly conserved, and the kmsks motif is represented by the kfgkt sequence, as in e. coli  <cit> , bacillus subtilis  <cit> , and e. faecalis  <cit> . mapping of the transcriptional start site revealed a long untranslated leader region of  <dig> bp with a highly conserved set of primary-sequence and secondary structure elements. these elements include three stem-loop structures, a highly conserved 14-bp sequence designated the t box, and a factor-independent transcriptional terminator . these features are also present in other genes of gram positive bacteria, mainly genes encoding aminoacyl-trna synthetases, but also amino acid biosynthetic genes and transporters  <cit> . several studies have revealed a crucial role for conserved leader region motifs in regulation of gene expression at the level of premature termination of transcription  <cit> . in order to test whether this mechanism regulates the tyrs gene of e. durans tdc cluster, the levels of mrna were quantified using specific primers for the leader and coding region of tyrs. when e. durans was starved for tyrosine, the predominant transcript was a  <dig>  kb mrna fragment, which is the expected size for full-length mrna . interestingly, when tyrosine was present in excess, full-length mrna was dramatically depleted, whereas the truncated mrna-l species kept almost constant. thus, tyrosine had no effect on the total number of mrna-l molecules but caused a stoichiometric replacement of full-length mrna by truncated rna molecules. these data are consistent with the idea that tyrosine controls tyrs expression by promoting the premature termination of transcription rather than by inhibiting the initiation of transcription.

experiments involving transcriptional fusions of the tyrs promoter with ß-galactosidase provided evidence for this mechanism. we showed that deletion of the t box-terminator domain of the leader region originates a complete lost of regulation by tyrosine. early termination at ph  <dig>  in presence of tyrosine observed in vivo in the leader tyrs mrna  was not observed for the ptyrsΔ promoter. this effect can be expected because the t box sequence is present in a side bulge of the antiterminator overlapping the terminator-antiterminator structures.

in addition to the tyrosine regulation, transcription of tyrs is under strict ph control in e. durans, being expressed mostly at acidic growth conditions. the aminoacyl-trna synthetases catalyze the covalent attachment of amino acids to their cognate trnas. incorporation of tyrosine to proteins is an essential function for cell life, which should not be restricted to acidic conditions. one explanation for this would be the presence of two different tyrosyl-trna synthetases, one of which would be induced under stress conditions . in general, there is only one aminoacyl-trna-synthetase for each amino acid in most bacteria, however, several exceptions are known. indeed, two very similar lysyl-trna synthetases, lyss  and lysu  have been described in escherichia coli  <cit> . in gram-positives, in addition to the aforementioned case of the two tyrs of e. faecalis, there are two distinct histidyl-trna synthetase genes in lactococcus lactis  <cit> , and two tyrosyl-trna synthetase genes  and two threonyl-trna synthetase genes  in bacillus subtilis  <cit> . in this last case, the normally silent thrz gene is induced during threonine starvation or by reducing the intracellular concentration of thrs, which is the housekeeping threonyl-trna synthetase sufficient for normal cell growth  <cit> .

the location of genes encoding an aminoacyl-trna-synthetase associated to the gene clusters involved in tyramine and histamine biosynthesis is a general feature  <cit> . one of the reasons to study the expression of tyrs in e. durans is to find out whether this protein could have a role on the genetic regulation of the tyramine cluster, being activated under limiting levels of tyrosine to prevent massive decarboxylation of this amino acid, ensuring its availability for protein synthesis. consistent with this idea would be 1) the common location of genes encoding aminoacyl-trna sinthetases next to the operon of decarboxylation  of the corresponding aminoacid  <cit> , 2) the expression of this gene only under acidic ph, which is the condition regulating positively the biosynthesis and accumulation of tyramine  <cit>  and 3) the fact that tyrs and the genes of the tyramine biosynthesis pathway  require opposite conditions of tyrosine concentration for optimal expression   <cit> . altogether, these data raise the question whether tyrs could act as a negative regulator. however, overexpression of tyrs on multicopy plasmid during growth of the e. durans strain carrying the wild-type allele had no observable effect on the expression profile of the decarboxylating gene tdca or on the tyramine concentration observed in the supernatant.

computational three-dimensional modelling of e. durans tyrs protein revealed nucleic acids-binding domains that might suggest a role as transcriptional regulator. however, the same domains have been identified in the highly similar tyrs structure of thermus thermophilus , and predicted to interact with trna . this data is consistent with the electrophoretic mobility shift  assays carried to test tyrs binding to the promoters of the tdc operon. under the wide range of conditions studied  no specific binding of tyrs was observed . these data, together with the finding of tyramine clusters without a tyrs gene in tetragenococcus halophilus  and histamine biosynthesis clusters without a hiss gene  <cit> , would suggest a non critical biological function of these genes in the modulation of the contiguous decarboxylation operon. in any case, it can not be discarded that tyrs could exert a post-transcriptional regulation of tyramine biosynthesis. in fact, both enzymes -tyrs and tdca- share tyrosine as substrate.

consequently, two are the possibilities that can be considered: i) there are two tyrs genes in e. durans -as described for e. faecalis- and the one ligated to tdc would be a stress-related gene to ensure sufficient charged tyrtrna for protein biosynthesis in those conditions that tyrosine is being decarboxylated, or ii) this is the unique tyrs gene and the low expression levels observed under neutral ph conditions are enough to assure protein synthesis for general metabolism and the increased expression at acidic ph would guarantee protein biosynthesis when tyrosine is being decarboxylated. the presence of a second tyrs gene was investigated by southern hybridizations of e. durans ipla <dig> total dna using as probes the tyrs gene of its own tyramine cluster and also tyrs <dig> from e. faecalis v <dig> , and no additional tyrs genes were found . consistent with this would be the impossibility to knockout the tyrs gene, which would support the hypothesis of a single tyrs, therefore essential. then, the most plausible model is the presence of a unique tyrs which exhibits a severe induction under acidic ph and low expression levels under neutral ph. it is important to highlight that the transcription quantification is relative, all the expression values were standardized to the reference condition, in this case ph  <dig>  . in fact, the signal observed by northern blot  is not zero in any of tested conditions. the tyrs basal expression that takes place at neutral ph would be enough to assure protein synthesis.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we provide evidence that transcription of the e. durans ipla <dig> tyrs gene is controlled at two levels, initiation and elongation. the initiation of transcription was shown to be enhanced in acidic environments, whereas elongation of transcription is subject to a tyrosine-dependent attenuation mechanism related to the t box system. this dual mechanism has thus never been described, since previously reported genes induced by trna-mediated antitermination, were not found to be ph dependent.

