BACKGROUND
drivers of morphological diversification include the evolutionary birth of new genes and changes in the regulation of orthologous genes. for some time, many biologists have argued that modifications in gene regulation have triggered many if not most of the evolutionary changes in morphology that characterize the history of life . however, the specific changes in gene regulation and expression that have driven morphological diversity remain unknown for most systems. this study employs a comprehensive, multi-species comparison of the gene expression in developing mammalian limbs to investigate how the expression of the highly conserved genes governing organ morphogenesis have been modified during the diversification of limb morphology within and among species.

mammalian limbs represent an exceptional case study for investigating the evolution of gene expression, as they have undergone extensive evolutionary diversification  <cit>  and represent a well-characterized model system for development  <cit> . furthermore, from the wings of bats to the flippers of whales to the one-toed hooves of horses, mammalian limb diversification has been crucial to the success of the group. for example, through the morphological diversification of their limbs, mammals were able to infiltrate almost every habitat in the world, and exhibit a wide-range of feeding and social behaviors  <cit> . to date, studies of mammalian limb evolution and development has been limited mostly to investigations of the role of candidate genes , or, in a couple of cases, transcriptomes , in individual species. from these studies we have learned that mammalian limb diversification has proceeded not by major changes to limb structure , but by the modification of segments inherited from their generalized, pentadactyl ancestor  <cit> . accordingly, these studies of the candidate genes and transcriptomes of isolated species studies suggest that mammalian limb diversification has likely been driven largely by the differential expression of conserved genes shared by all mammals .

while studies of the candidate genes and transcriptomes of isolated species have significantly advanced our understanding of mammalian limb evolution, and morphological evolution in general, there are several outstanding questions concerning limb developmental evolution that have proven difficult to answer with these approaches. for example, we do not yet have a comprehensive view of when, developmentally, the expression pattern of shared genes diverges among the fore- and hind limbs of a single species, or among the limbs of different species. development is a hierarchical process that builds on itself as time progresses. because of this, some biologists have proposed that the developmental processes mediating earlier developmental events  might be less variable than those governing later events  . the earlier stages of limb development also coincide with the proposed phylotypic period for vertebrates, which is the period in which vertebrate species most closely resemble each other  <cit> . the phylotypic period has been proposed to encompass the initiation and early development of the limb bud prior to the onset of chondrogenesis . strong inductive signaling between different parts of the embryo has been proposed to characterize the phylotypic period, and result in the conservation of this stage across vertebrates  <cit> . evidence for a phylotypic period has recently been observed in other systems, including plants  <cit> , flies  <cit> , zebrafish  <cit> , nematodes  <cit> , and across several vertebrates  <cit> . our first working hypothesis is therefore that the expression pattern of shared genes tends to diverge later  rather than earlier  in limb development.

we also do not have a complete picture of which shared genes and gene pathways differ the most in their expression among the fore- and hind limbs of a single species and among the limbs of different species. candidate gene approaches have identified differences in the expression of major limb patterning genes  across mammalian species  <cit> . however, these studies were not comprehensive in their gene coverage. our second working hypothesis is that the expression patterns of several, major limb patterning genes significantly differ between the fore- and hind limbs of a single mammalian species, and among the limbs of different mammalian species.

finally, we do not know the degree to which different species share a common pattern of gene expression divergence  between their fore- and hind limbs. similarly, we do not know the degree of similarity between the patterns of gene expression divergence within  and among  species. if certain aspects of the genetic basis of limb development are more evolvable than others, then we might expect the pattern of gene expression divergence to be conserved within species, and within and among species. our third working hypothesis is therefore that the same genes are differentially expressed in the fore- and hind limbs of several species, and among the limbs of species.

to test these hypotheses we performed the first comprehensive, multi-species comparison of the transcriptomes of developing mammalian limbs. we compared the overall patterns of gene expression in the limbs of four mammals that are taxonomically diverse and represent extremes of mammalian limb development and adult limb structure, namely bats , pigs , mice , and opossums . these species include a generalized, pentadactyl mammal , a representative of the only mammalian group to evolve a wing capable of powered flight , a marsupial whose hind limb development lags significantly behind forelimb development relative to eutherian mammals   <cit> , and a mammal that displays digit reduction . we performed rna-seq on the developing fore- and hindlimbs of these four mammalian species  <cit> . we then quantified the transcriptomes of the fore- and hind limbs of these species at the ridge, bud, and paddle stages of development  . the limb first begins to grow out from the flank during the ridge stage, becomes a semicircle that is as long as it is wide during the bud stage, and forms a hand-plate during the paddle stage. condensation of the limb cartilaginous elements of the limb begins between the bud and paddle stages . we then used the results to determine the pattern of transcriptomic divergence among the forelimbs of different species, the hind limbs of different species, and the fore- and hind limbs of a single species. for several genes, we also assay their spatial expression domains using whole mount in situ hybridization.fig.  <dig> representative stages of limb development used in this study. this study assembled the transcriptomes of four species  from three stages of limb development, namely the ridge , bud , and paddle  stages. the embryos shown here are from erophylla sezekorni 




results of the among-species analyses of this study are consistent with the pattern of gene expression during initial limb outgrowth being conserved among mammals relative to subsequent stages of limb development, while within-species results are more mixed. in regard to the former, results further suggest that the development of the limbs of different species likely begins to diverge before the onset of cartilage condensation. results also suggest that the expression patterns of the limb development genes hand <dig>  isl <dig>  myog, pax <dig>  tbx <dig>  tbx <dig>  and tnnt <dig> significantly differ between the fore- and hind limbs of all mammalian species. this study also identified several genes with known roles in limb development that display greatly divergent expression in the fore- and hind limbs of most species and among the limbs of all species . however, results suggest that, on the whole, the genes that are differentially expressed in fore- and hind limbs differ from species to species, and that the genes that are that are differentially expressed within  and among  species are generally distinct. this study therefore identifies a small subset of genes with possible roles in the generation of the distinct morphologies of the fore- and hind limbs, and a small but different subset with possible roles in the evolutionary divergence of limb morphology across species. this result, combined with the observed differences in the overall patterns of among- and within- species variation, suggests that the processes controlling within- and among- species variation may differ. this study therefore provides tangible insights into the pattern of gene expression divergence during the specialization of mammalian limbs, and the coupled achievement of mammalian diversity.

RESULTS

timing of the divergence of gene expression of shared genes within species  – limbs at the ridge, bud, and paddle stages  were removed from each species and total rna purified . we used the illumina truseq rna sample preparation kit to generate libraries. once libraries were generated and sequenced, data were quality controlled before analysis . we generated heat-maps to visualize the similarity of gene expression profiles for the fore- and hind limbs of all developmental stages for a given species , using the pvclust r package to determine the significance of the clusters  <cit>  and . in bats , the fore- and hind limbs cluster together at the paddle stage of development, with the forelimb bud falling at the next step out. the forelimb ridge and hind limb bud also cluster together, with the hind limb ridge as the outlier for all limbs and stages. of these, the clusters of the paddle stage fore- and hind limbs and of the forelimb ridge and hind limb bud are significant  . in mouse, the hind limb bud and paddle cluster together with the forelimb paddle as the next step out, and the fore- and hind limb ridges cluster together . the mouse forelimb bud is the outlier. the cluster of the fore- and hind limb ridge, fore- and hind limb paddle, and hind limb bud stages is significant . in opossum, the fore- and hind limb buds cluster together and the fore- and hind limb ridges cluster together, with the forelimb paddle clustering with the bud samples and the hind limb paddle falling as an outgroup to all other samples . none of these clusters are significant . finally, in pig the fore- and hind limbs cluster together at every developmental stage, with the ridge and bud stages clustering together to the exclusion of the paddle samples . of these, the bud and paddle clusters of the fore- and hind limbs are significant . thus the overall results of the clustering are mixed. the ridge staged fore- and hind limbs cluster together in three of the four species, and the bud and paddle staged limbs cluster in two. however, only four of these clusters are statistically supported .fig.  <dig> similarity of gene expression profiles within species. heat-maps of the gene expression profiles for the fore- and hind limbs of all developmental stages for bat , mouse , opossum , and pig . fl = forelimb, hl = hind limb. the stages for each species are as follows: b_st13 = bat ridge, b_st14 = bat bud, b_st15 = bat paddle, m_stw2 = mouse ridge, m_stw3_4 = mouse bud, mstw6 = mouse paddle, o_st27 = opossum ridge, o_st28 = opossum bud, o_st29 = opossum paddle, o_st30 = opossum ridge, o_st31 = opossum bud, o_st32 = opossum paddle, p_st20 = pig ridge, p_st22 = pig bud, p_st26 = pig paddle. branches with statistically significant clustered sub-branches  are indicated with asterisks 





timing of the divergence of shared gene expression among species  - pairwise species coefficients were generated for  <dig>  orthologs in the  <dig> species to measure between-species gene expression conservation at each developmental stage . the results of these correlations were used to generate heat-maps to visualize the similarity of gene expression profiles for the forelimbs of all developmental stages for all species, and for the hind limbs . all species were positively correlated , however, none of these correlations were significant at the p-value <  <dig>  level . for the ridge stage of both the fore- and hind limb, and the bud stage of the hind limb, bat and pig cluster together, and mouse and opossum cluster together . for pig and bat, this clustering pattern matches the phylogenetic relationships between these species  <cit> . at the bud stage of forelimb development , bat and pig clusters remain clustered together, followed by opossum, and then mouse. finally, for the paddle stage of development, pig and mouse cluster together, followed by opossum and then bat for the forelimb . in the hind limb, mouse and opossum cluster together, followed by pig and then bat . therefore bat, with its highly divergent limb morphology, is an outlier for the paddle stage of development for both the fore- and hind limb.fig.  <dig> similarity of gene expression profiles among species. pairwise spearman coefficient values for forelimbs at the , bud , paddle  stages for all species, and for the hind limbs of the ridge , bud , paddle  stages for all species. m. = mouse, o. = opossum. abbreviations for stages and species are as in the legend for fig.  <dig>  in each label for the heat map, stage  <dig> corresponds to ridge, stage 3– <dig> to bud, and stage  <dig> to paddle




we also calculated the conservation of the gene expression profiles of bat, mouse, opossum, and pig across embryonic limb development, using the mean of all species pairwise spearman coefficients. all resulting spearman coefficients are positive and >  <dig> , suggesting that the orthologous genes might perform similar functions between species . in both the fore- and hind limb, the degree of gene expression conservation decreases from the ridge  to bud  to paddle  stage. when all the genes are sampled, the distributions of gene expression conservation levels between the ridge, bud, and paddle stages are significantly different . to test the robustness of this difference with respect to the selection of orthologous genes, we randomly sub-sampled  <dig> sets of orthologous genes at all developmental stages at intensities ranging from  <dig> to 100% of all orthologous genes. according to the resulting distributions , only 70% of the genes need to be sampled to find a statistically significant difference  between the ridge and bud stages of forelimb and of hind limb development. however, the significances of the differences between the bud and paddle stages of the forelimb and of the hind limb are more dependent on the genes that are sampled. the distributions indicate that over 90% of orthologous genes must be sampled to find significant differences  between these stages.fig.  <dig> conservation of gene expression profiles. the conservation of the gene expression profiles of all study species  across embryonic development of the fore-  and hind limb , as determined by the mean of all species pairwise spearman coefficients . results for the ridge stage are shown in red, for the bud stage in green, and for the paddle stage in blue. to test the robustness of differences in spearman coefficients with respect to the gene selection, we randomly sub-sampled gene sets at intensities ranging from  <dig> to 100% of all genes . in the box plots, the bottom and top of the boxes represent the first and third quartiles of the data, and the line through the middle of the box the second quartile . the whiskers range from the 2nd to 98th percentiles, and the open circles depict the outliers to these percentiles




to further investigate the pattern of gene expression divergence among species, we calculated the evolutionary age of the genes of each species in our study. for this analysis, evolutionary age is defined by the phylogenetic origin of a set of genes, or its phylostratum. gene sets with lower phylostrata have a younger evolutionary age, and vice versa. we found that bat, pig, mouse, and opossum have  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  genes, respectively, that are specific to a single species  . for this, all genes  provided by the ensembl annotations were used. these genes were assigned to phylostratum   <dig>  and their evolutionary age was assigned a value of  <dig>  on the other end of the spectrum, the number of genes that are common among all four species  ranges from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . these genes were assigned an evolutionary age of  <dig>  ps  <dig> and ps  <dig> fall between the youngest  and oldest  genes, and correspond to the branching points of the phylogenetic tree . the age of each set of genes was assigned in accordance to its ps. to test if the assignment of homologous genes between any two species was coherent with the expected phylogeny, we performed a hierarchical clustering analysis based on the pair-wise number of homologous genes. we found that the clustering exactly mirrors the phylogeny of the study species , supporting the method we used to call homologous genes.fig.  <dig> evolutionary age. the evolutionary ages of the genes of each species in this study are shown in . genes were assigned to phylostratums  based on their degree of conservation. at one end of the spectrum, genes that are specific to a single species  were assigned to ps  <dig>  and at the other end genes that are common to all study species were assigned to ps  <dig>  ps  <dig> and ps  <dig> correspond to the branching points of the phylogenetic tree between ps  <dig> and ps  <dig>  genes in ps  <dig>  ps  <dig>  ps  <dig>  and ps  <dig> were assigned evolutionary ages of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. a hierarchical clustering analysis based on the pair-wise number of homologue genes  exactly mirrors the phylogeny of the study species. results shown in  were used to calculate the transcriptome age indices  of each species across development  for the fore-  and hind  limbs. smaller tais correspond to younger ages, and larger tais older ages. bat is shown in blue, pig in purple, mouse in red, and opossum in green




we then calculated the specificity of the transcriptome of each species across development using the transcriptome age index  . for the forelimbs of mouse and pig, we found that younger genes dominate the transcriptomes of the ridge and paddle stages, while older genes dominate the transcriptome of the bud stage. the forelimb of opossum showed the opposite trend, with older genes dominating the transcriptomes of the ridge and paddle stages and younger genes the transcriptome of the bud stage. bat demonstrated yet another pattern, with younger genes increasingly dominating the transcriptome as limb development progressed. when we analyzed the statistical significance of the tais using vtai  as a test statistic,  <cit>  we found that the bat, mouse, and pig forelimb trends are highly significant , whereas the opossum forelimb trend is not  . the same analysis was done for tais and vtai in the hind limbs. in the hind limb, the bat, mouse, and opossum transcriptomes are dominated by older genes at the ridge and paddle stages, and by younger genes at the bud stage. the pig hind limb shows the opposite trend, with the bud stage being dominated by older genes, and the ridge and paddle stages by younger genes. the hind limb trends for bat, mouse, and pig are highly significant  while that of opossum is not significant  . the lack of statistical significance of opossum results may stem from the reduced number of evolutionary ages that could be assigned to its genes . overall, the genes that are expressed at the paddle stage are younger than those expressed at the ridge stage for the fore- and hind limbs of all species .


similarity of gene expression patterns within  different species – we next determined the degree to which patterns of fore- and hind limb gene expression divergence are similar in the different study species. we found that  <dig> % of genes  exhibit divergent expression  in the fore- and hind limbs of all species during the ridge stage of development,  <dig> % of genes  exhibit divergent expression during the bud stage, and  <dig> % of genes  exhibit divergent expression during the paddle stage. these include genes with well-established differences in expression in the fore- and hind limbs  as well as additional genes with known roles in limb development   . of note, these genes do not include pitx <dig>  a gene known to play a fundamental role in the establishment of fore- and hind limb identity in mammals  <cit> . the reason for this is that pitx <dig> is not present in the pig genome  we used for our alignment. therefore, although our results suggest that pitx <dig> exhibits divergent expression in the fore- and hind limbs of bat, opossum, and mouse, we have no data on pitx <dig> expression in pig. in total, seven genes are divergently expressed in the fore- and hind limbs of all species at all stages . this is consistent with literature of some of these genes being differentially expressed in the fore- and hind limb .


similarity of gene expression patterns among  different species – we also compared the genes that display the most divergent expression  among the limbs of species, and found that several have known roles in limb development. at the forelimb ridge, bud, and paddle stages,  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> divergently expressed genes have known roles in limb development, respectively . these genes include members of the hoxd family and related genes , as well as the signaling factor genes fgf <dig> and shh. in the hind limb, the ridge, bud, and paddle stages contain  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> divergently expressed genes with known roles in limb development, respectively . these genes include additional members of the hox family and related genes , as well as fgf <dig>  two limb genes  are divergently expressed during all three stages of forelimb development, while nine  are divergently expressed at all three stages of hind limb development. thus, many of the most divergently expressed genes at all stages in the fore- and hindlimbs in our species under study are known to play a role in limb development.


confirmation of gene expression patterns: to further examine the expression of select genes from the hoxa and hoxd clusters , we cloned the coding sequences for bat and opossum and generated species-specific probes for wish. we focused on the hoxa and hoxd clusters because of their well-established role in limb outgrowth and patterning in mice  <cit> . in general, wish results were consistent with those of rna-seq.

in all species, the hoxd <dig> expression domain is confined posteriorly in the fore- and hind limbs before expanding anteriorly. however, the timing and degree of this expansion differs. the degree of anterior-expansion of the hoxd <dig> expression domain is greater and more symmetrical in the ridge- and bud-staged forelimbs of opossum  relative to mouse , but roughly comparable in paddle-staged opossum  and mouse  forelimbs. in contrast, the anterior-most boundary of the hoxd <dig> expression domain is located more posteriorly in the forelimb paddles of bat  relative to mouse  and opossum . this pattern of early, expanded anterior expression in opossum  and relatively anteriorly restricted expression in bat are also observed for hoxa <dig> . the bat forelimb bud  also has a proximodistally wider hoxd <dig> expression domain than that of the bat hind limb bud . hoxd <dig>  had similar expression domains in bats, and opossums for stages examined and were generally consistent with published results for mouse hoxd <dig> .fig.  <dig> 
hoxd <dig> expression in limb stages of three species. a-c: mouse forelimb hoxd <dig> in ridge, bud, and paddle, respectively. a’-c’: mouse hindlimb hoxd <dig> in ridge, bud, and paddle. d-f and d’-f’: opossum hoxd <dig> in forelimb and hindlimb ridge, bud, and paddle, respectively. g-i and g’-i’: bat hoxd <dig> in forelimb and hindlimb ridge, bud, and paddle. purple staining denotes hoxd <dig> expression boundary. in bat forelimb ridge  the posterior limb was damaged in processing, though the area of hoxd <dig> expression is intact. the inset in a is an earlier bud stage between that of ridge and image shown in b. scale bars =  <dig>  mm


fig.  <dig> 
hoxa <dig> expression in stages of mouse, opossum, and bat paddle stages. a, a’: fore- and hindlimb of mouse, respectively. b, b’: opossum, c, c’: bat




the expression domain of evx <dig>  a gene that shares regulation with the hoxd cluster , is also initially expanded anteriorly in opossum forelimb buds and paddles relative to those of mice . in mouse, forelimb expression appears in the posterior limb during the early bud stage , expands anteriorly during the later bud stage , and by the paddle  is broadly present across the limb. in contrast, evx <dig> is not expressed at ridge  and early bud stages  of the mouse hind limb, before it appears in the posterior of the limb later in the bud stage  and expands anteriorly in the paddle stage . in opossum, evx <dig> is expressed more broadly along the posterior-anterior axis in the fore-  than hind limb  bud. similar to hoxd <dig>  the opossum evx <dig> expression domain is expanded anteriorly and has a more symmetrical domain in the forelimb bud relative to mouse. furthermore, evx <dig> expression is not present in the early hind limb bud stages in mouse  while it is robustly expressed at this stage in opossum . for additional replicates of hoxa <dig>  evx <dig>  and hoxd <dig> wish, see additional file 11: figure s <dig>  additional file 12: figure s <dig>  additional file 13: figure s <dig> fig.  <dig> 
evx <dig> expression in limb stages of mice and opossums. a-b, a’-b’: mouse evx <dig> in forelimb and hindlimb of the bud and paddle, respectively. c-d, c’-d’: opossum evx <dig> in forelimb and hindlimb of bud and paddle, respectively. the insets in a and a’ are mouse evx <dig> in earlier fore- and hindlimb buds, respectively. scale bars =  <dig>  mm





similarity of gene expression patterns within  and among  species – we also compared the genes that display the most divergent expression between the fore- and hind limbs of a single species, and among the limbs of species . we found that  <dig>  to  <dig> % of genes exhibit greatly divergent expression in the fore- and hind limb of a single species and among the forelimbs of all species . similarly,  <dig>  to  <dig> % of genes exhibit greatly divergent expression in the fore- and hind limb of a single species and among the hind limbs of all species . at least seven genes with known roles in limb development exhibit greatly divergent expression in the fore- and hind limbs of three of four species and among the limbs of all species , and at least  <dig> more in two of four species  . as described, we confirmed gene expression patterns of some of these divergently expressed genes  for some stages and species by in situ hybridization.

discussion
in this study we investigated the manner in which expression of the shared genes that regulate limb morphogenesis has been modified during the diversification of mammalian limb morphology. to do this we compared the patterns of gene expression in the fore- and hind limbs of developing bats, mice, opossums, and pigs using rna-seq analysis and wish.

we first investigated the general pattern of divergence of the expression of shared genes among the fore- and hind limbs of a single species. while they vary among species, on the surface our heat-map results suggest that gene expression is generally more conserved at the earliest examined stage of limb development  than at later stages. fore- and hind limb gene expression is most conserved at the ridge stage and diverges at the bud stage in mouse, at the paddle stage in opossum, and appears not to greatly diverge in pig at any examined stage of limb development . however, while the ridge clusters are statistically significant in mouse, they are not significant in pig or opossum. the lack of significant clustering in opossum at the ridge or any other stage is not that surprising, given that comparable stages of opossum fore- and hind limb development occur at very different stages of overall development when dissimilar organism-wide processes are underway . however, the lack of significant ridge clustering in pig, combined with the significant clustering at the pig bud and paddle stages, suggests that the ridge might not be the most conserved stage of pig development. the pattern in bat, in which the fore- and hind limbs of the paddle stage significantly cluster while those of the ridge and bud do not, also appears to deviate from the early conservation hypothesis. however, it is important to note that forelimb development is often slightly ahead  of hind limb development in placental mammals such as mouse, pig, and bat. therefore, using a single embryonic stage for the fore- and hind limbs of these species might have somewhat inflated their observed differences in within-species gene expression.

we next investigated the general pattern of divergence of the expression of shared genes among species. heat-map results suggest that gene expression is conserved among species at the earliest stages of limb development , relative to later stages. specifically, the clustering of species by gene expression during the fore- and hind limb ridge stage more closely follows their phylogenetic relatedness   <cit>  than at later stages. by the paddle stage of limb development, the clustering of species by gene expression more closely follows adult limb morphology, with the highly divergent bat fore- and hind limbs emerging as the outliers. however, while the expression patterns of all species were positively correlated, no specific clusters were significant. this suggests that while the general limb toolkit is conserved among species, the examined species vary in limb gene expression at all stages consistent with their divergent timing of limb development relative to overall development and disparate adult limb morphologies.

taken together, heat-map results are consistent with gene expression patterns varying more among species during later than earlier stages of limb development, and therefore partially support our first working hypothesis. this part of our first hypothesis is further supported by our calculations of the among-species conservation of gene expression at each developmental stage. these results suggest that for both the fore- and hind limb, the earliest examined stage of limb development  displays a highly conserved pattern of gene expression across species that drops significantly as limb development proceeds. however, our heat-map results provide less support for the hypothesis that gene expression patterns vary more within species during later than earlier stages of limb development.

results of our study of the transcriptomic age index  vary across species and limbs. of the  <dig> cases in which we examined transcriptomic age ,  <dig>  fit an hourglass model of transcriptomic age, with the middle stage of limb development  possessing the oldest genes and the youngest  and oldest  stages the youngest. four cases  show the opposite pattern, with the middle stage of limb development  having the youngest genes and the youngest  and oldest  stages the oldest, and  <dig> case  displays decreasing transcriptomic age throughout development. however, it is important to note that in every case , transcriptomic age is younger at the latest  than earliest  stage of limb development.

results of this study therefore do not support the existence of a phylotypic period of limb development that ends at the onset of chondrogenesis, but do support the hypothesis that gene expression patterns vary more among species during the later than earlier stages of limb development. as a result, these findings are consistent the hypothesis that the hierarchical nature of development translates into increasing variation among species as development progresses . however, it is important to note that the temporal range of the proposed phylotypic period remains as controversial as the existence of the period itself  <cit> ; some authors propose that the phylotypic period may extend throughout the period of organogenesis  <cit> , while others argue that it may be restricted to the pharyngula stage   <cit> , or to early somite segmentation   <cit> , or to the tail-bud stage   <cit> . while morphological studies of limb development have tended to define the phylotypic period more broadly  <cit> , recent embryo-wide molecular studies in vertebrates suggest that the phylotypic period might actually be temporally restricted to the earliest stages of limb development   <cit> . at least the among species results of this study would be consistent with the existence of a phylotypic period for the limb that ends by onset of the bud stage, or roughly e <dig>  in mouse.

going beyond general patterns of gene expression, we also investigated the relative expression levels of specific genes in the fore- and hind limbs of single species and among the limbs of different species. although we identified some limb-patterning genes  that are differentially expressed in the fore- and hind limbs of all examined species, these genes represent a small subset  of the differentially expressed genes in all species. some of these identified genes were well-supported in the literature. for example, a dge-tag study of myotis ricketti  found tbx <dig> to be expressed more highly in the forelimb digits of fetal bats, while tbx <dig> was more highly expressed in the hindlimb digits  <cit> . tbx <dig> is well established to be forelimb restricted, while tbx <dig> is hindlimb restricted in mice, opossums, and chickens  <cit> , providing support for our rna-seq results. we also identified a suite of key limb-patterning genes that are differentially expressed among the homologous limbs of all species. therefore, results of this study are consistent with the hypothesis that the expression patterns of several limb-patterning genes significantly differ between the fore- and hind limbs of a single mammalian species and among the homologous limbs of different species.

the results of the rna-seq assays were generally supported by wish from this study and previous studies. results of this study confirmed that several hoxa and hoxd cluster genes exhibit distinct expression domains among species. previous studies demonstrated that prrx <dig>  is expressed in similar domains during early stages of bat and mouse limb development, but that its’ expression expands in the hand-plate of bats relative to those of mice  <cit> . fgf <dig> is normally expressed in the aer  of mammalian limbs  <cit> . relative to mouse, fgf <dig> expression in pig has been shown to be reduced at later stages of limb development  <cit> . in contrast, bat forelimbs have previously been shown to have a wider fgf <dig> expression domain in the aer relative to the forelimbs of mice at similar stages  <cit> .

results also suggest that only a small subset of genes  displays divergent expression within  and among  species. this finding suggests that the genes that display divergent expression in the fore- and hind limb of a single species are not likely to also display divergent expression across the homologous limbs of multiple species. therefore, in contrast to our working hypothesis, results of this study are consistent with a scenario in which evolutionary divergence of limb form within  and among species  is driven by changes in the expression of different genes. taken together, results of this study are consistent with a scenario in which a small subset of limb genes controls fore- vs. hind limb identity, and a small but different subset controls the evolution of limb morphology across multiple species. this result, especially when combined with the heat-map results described above, suggests that different processes might be controlling variation in limb gene expression within- and among- species.

while these results are intriguing, one potential caveat of this study is that we were forced to use heterogeneous methods to align the rna-seq reads of our study species. we first attempted to align reads of all species directly to reference genomes. while this worked well  for mouse, pig, and opossum, species for which high quality genomes are available, this did not work well for bat. as the bat species we used, carollia perspicillata, does not have a published reference genome, we initially tried to align to the published reference genome for myotis lucifugus, a phylogenetically-related bat species. however, only 7-9% of carollia reads aligned with the myotis genome . to overcome this, we generated a de novo transcriptome for carollia, which increased the alignment rate to a much more reasonable ~80% for the bat reads, and used these data for subsequent analyses. while the use of different mapping techniques for bat versus pig, mouse, and opossum could potentially introduce bias into our analysis, previous studies suggest that the aligning methods we used under the conditions we used them do not result in noticeable differences  <cit> . furthermore, if the difference in methods was introducing significant bias, then we would expect for bat reads to fall as outliers in all cross-species comparisons. instead, we found that bat reads often clustered with pig or mouse to the exclusion of other species. therefore, while it is important to note that we were forced to use heterogeneous methods to analyze our data, our data are not consistent with these different methods biasing our results. for further discussion, see methods and additional file  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
using rna-seq, we generated transcriptomes for the ridge, bud, and paddle stages of limb development in mouse, opossum, bat, and pig to explore the hypothesis that mammalian limb diversification has occurred through the differential expression of shared conserved genes. generally, there is greater variation among species at later stages  of development than at earlier stages . in addition, genes expressed at later stages tend to be younger in evolutionary age than those expressed at earlier  stages. several key limb-patterning genes are differentially expressed among the homologous limbs of the species under study, though only a small subset of these shared genes are differentially expressed in the fore- and hind limbs of all species. in addition, only a small subset of these shared genes are differentially expressed in the fore- and hind limbs of the same species. our results generally support the hypothesis that variation among species increases as development progresses, but do not support the presence of a phylotypic period of limb development that ends at chondrogenesis.

