BACKGROUND
since darwin published his classic work on sexual selection  <cit> , biologists have puzzled over the evolutionary consequences of mate choice. as a general rule, evolutionary theory predicts that females rather than males will benefit most from discriminating among potential mates  <cit> . a large body of evidence now supports the hypothesis that female mate choice is a potent evolutionary force, but its causes and consequences can vary widely. for example, choosy females may benefit directly through the acquisition of valuable resources  <cit> , may gain indirect benefits by obtaining better genes for their offspring  <cit> , or may simply prefer mates due to some preexisting sensory bias  <cit> . in the early 1980's, hamilton and zuk hypothesized that females discriminate in favor of males bearing genotypes encoding resistance to coevolved parasites  <cit> . a key prediction of this model is that females should select males based on indicator traits that reveal the bearer's status of infection. investigations of mate choice in birds and fish support the prediction that females may indirectly discriminate against parasitized males by selecting brightly colored males  <cit> , but other studies suggest that females may use cues other than condition to identify males with genes that could contribute to disease resistance. for example, results from recent experiments suggest that females of some species select males based on their genetic configuration at the major histocompatibility complex  loci. the role of the mhc in the vertebrate immune response is well established, and is known to enhance resistance to many species of endoparasites  <cit> . hence, it would seem that females could benefit from mating preferentially with males having favorable mhc profiles, provided they can identify these males in the population. this seems plausible, as recent studies have documented its occurrence in mice and rats  <cit> , humans  <cit> , and fish  <cit> .

in a previous study, we investigated the potential for active mate choice to indirectly favor the maintenance of sexual reproduction  <cit> . we found that sexual populations in which females prefer to mate with males having dissimilar resistance alleles  are more resistant to invasion by parthenogenetic clones than those in which females prefer uninfected males . in the present study, we investigate the potential for oa and cd mate choice to generate a selective advantage to females at the level of the individual, independent of the incidental effects that such choice may have on the evolutionary stability of sex.

RESULTS
the results from our study show that when populations are confronted with infectious disease, alleles encoding oa and cd mate choice both increase when rare in randomly mating populations . hence the results are consistent with the basic idea that mate choice will be spread in populations engaged in coevolutionary interactions with parasites. however, the two different kinds of mate choice had different effects on the population genetic dynamics for multilocus genotypes associated with disease resistance.

oa-choice vs. random mating
as the allele for oa increased in the population, the oscillations in both host and parasite resistance genotypes underwent a dramatic reduction in amplitude . in addition, as the oscillations became damped, the spread of the oa allele into the population was slowed. this result makes sense, as rare resistance genotypes have an advantage when oa enters the population, whether or not they are over or under infected . however, the advantage under sexual selection is not lagged in time , and the amplitude of the oscillations becomes damped as the oa phenotype increases in the population. as the oscillations become damped and the genotypes become equally frequent , the value of mate choice is diminished, and the spread of the oa allele is halted. at this point, oa and rm are selectively neutral, and their frequencies in the population change only as the result of drift. selection for oa, however, is reestablished if the oa allele drifts below  <dig> , as this reestablishes conditions favoring the production of rare resistance genotypes.

cd-choice vs. random mating
in contrast, as the allele for cd choice increased from its rare starting point, the oscillations in genotype frequency increased, rather than decreased . this result also makes sense, as genotypes that are least infected are also more likely to be selected as mates, and both advantages are lagged in time. this increases the selection for genotypes that are currently underinfected, and increasing the selection differential increases the amplitude of the oscillations. it also greatly increases the oscillations in linkage disequilibrium over time  <cit> . in addition, unlike the oa allele, the cd allele goes to fixation in an rm population. thus it would appear that in the presence of parasites, there is sustained selection against random mating, even when cd-choice is common.

oa-choice vs. cd-choice
under the conditions studied here, both oa and cd alleles increase when rare in randomly mating populations, but only the cd allele goes to fixation due to sexual selection. how does cd fare against an oa population? we found that when introduced into a population of  <dig>  oa individuals, a rare allele encoding cd choice was not favored by selection, but that it could become established and increase in frequency as a result of genetic drift . this result appears to stem from the fact that in a population dominated by oa individuals, the disease-resistance genotypes are virtually equally frequent and equally infected; hence there is little selective value in choosing the least infected individuals as mates. thus oa seems to be an evolutionary stable strategy .

in contrast, oa did increase when rare due to selection in a population of cd individuals; hence cd is not an ess . the overall pattern was similar to that obtained from our previous runs of oa against a rm population. as before, the oscillations in genotype frequencies became damped as oa increased in the population, and the oa allele lost its selective advantage and began to drift. the result is apparently for the same reasons as given above: as oa spreads the oscillations become damped and the resistance genotypes become equally frequent and equally infected. at this point cd and oa are selectively neutral. interestingly, the extent to which oa spread under selection appeared to increase in the three-locus, five-allele version of the simulation .

CONCLUSIONS
among the three strategies of mate choice for parasite avoidance considered in this study, only oa is evolutionary stable. however, oa will not eliminate either rm or cd-choice through the action of sexual selection, since oa becomes selectively neutral at intermediate frequencies in both situations by causing reductions in the fitness variance among resistance genotypes. thus, oa and rm, oa and cd, or all three could coexist in the short term in large populations . as such, in populations at risk from disease, females might practice more than a single type of mate choice.

