BACKGROUND
the probability distribution of biological variables is of great importance for modeling and understanding biological phenomena, including the mechanistic basis of ecological processes. mechanistic models are widely used in seed dispersal ecology , as propagule movement is often difficult to track .

a considerable part of the earth’s biota does not actively move. instead, they produce dormant propagules that rely on several types of vectors for their dispersal, such as wind, water and animals . among the various vectors, animals such as birds and mammals disperse a great variety of propagules belonging to different species . propagules are dispersed either externally, entangled in the fur or feathers , or internally, following ingestion and while transiting through the animal’s gut .

a key element in the study of animal-mediated dispersal is the estimation of the distance at which propagules are dispersed. dispersal distance  is usually estimated as the product of the vector movement rate  and the retention time  of ingested or attached propagules . the distribution of dispersal distances, i.e. the dispersal kernel, is a major determinant of the spatial distribution of individuals, populations and species, thus its accurate estimation is of vital importance for studying and modeling metapopulation and metacommunity dynamics  <cit> , as well as the distributions and expansion rates of species  <cit> . for example, many species distribution models , which are used to model how species are distributed along niche gradients, incorporate dispersal kernels to predict range expansions or shifts under different scenarios of environmental change and estimate realistic distributions according to the species’ dispersal potential  <cit> .

together with the vector’s movement behaviour, propagule retention time has been found to critically affect several properties of propagule dispersal kernels such as the range and frequency of dispersal events, thus the probability of long distance dispersal  <cit> . therefore, the accurate characterization of retention times is of fundamental importance for avoiding the magnification of biases already introduced by assumptions about vector movement when estimating propagule dispersal kernels. this is the reason why numerous empirical studies have investigated the different factors affecting propagule retention time, such as the size and shape of plant propagules  <cit> , the developmental stage of animal propagules  <cit> , or the morphology  <cit> , digestive physiology  <cit> , and activity  <cit>  of animal vectors.

however, obtaining continuous measurements of propagule retention time is, in most cases, extremely difficult owing to the ample time span and variable grain required , as well as monitoring interferences on the animal vector. in endozoochory studies, the most common strategy to measure retention time is to force-feed captive animals and collect their droppings at given time intervals, often of varying length . similarly, the usual practice in epizoochory studies is to record propagule attachment time at given time intervals, by measuring the number of propagules that remain attached to the fur of captive or semi-captive animals  <cit> , as well as to experimental coats  <cit> , from a sample of propagules placed there by hand at the beginning of the experiment. in both cases, propagule retention time  is recorded as a frequency at the end of given time intervals, thus as a series of interval-censored data.

nevertheless, the censored nature of these data is usually not taken into account in studies of animal-mediated propagule dispersal . although this systematic uncertainty on the precise moment of propagule deposition can severely bias the estimation of dispersal distance, fitting procedures used to characterize the distribution of retention times usually assign the frequency of retrieval to the collection time . moreover, in most cases the fitting method is not accurately reported or insufficiently described . we compared the accuracy and robustness of different methods in fitting continuous probability distributions to propagule retention-time data. because propagule retention-time data typically show right-skewed distributions with an initial peak  followed by a steep decrease and a long tail, we considered three parametric distributions commonly used to characterize these data: the lognormal, gamma and weibull distributions. we assessed the performance of five different fitting methods. in the first three methods, we fitted parametric probability distributions to empirical distributions using either the  lower,  mid or  upper bounds of the sampling intervals as the data points; and in the other two methods, we fitted cumulative parametric distributions to  data arranged as empirical cumulative distributions, using two different procedures:  maximum likelihood  and  non-linear least squares . to assess the performance of these different methods, we applied them to a simulated dataset  and compared the resulting parameter estimates and functions to the original ones. in addition, we assessed the robustness of the five fitting methods to variation in the distribution type  or parameter values of the original distribution , in the sample size  and in the length of sampling time-intervals used to generate the simulated dataset.

RESULTS
variation in probability distribution
all three types of probability distributions  could accurately characterize the distribution of propagule retention times, as exemplified in fig.  <dig>  among the different fitting methods, fittings to cumulative distributions  provided the most accurate fits for all three types of probability distribution, both in parameter estimates and in the shape of the distribution . ks values supported the high accuracy of the estimates obtained with these two methods . for fits to interval bounds, those using the upper and lower bounds had worse performances than that using the interval mid-value. the distribution type did affect, however, the accuracy of the different parameter estimates: the location parameter  was less accurately estimated  than the variance parameter  for the lognormal and gamma distributions, while the opposite was true for the weibull distribution .fig.  <dig> examples of lognormal, gamma and weibull distributions fitted to gut retention time of propagules ingested by waterfowl a and how these parametric distributions fit to empirical data b. data is taken from  <cit> 

fig.  <dig> fitting performance of the different methods to lognormal , gamma  and weibull  distributions measured by the difference between the original and fitted parameters  and the ks-statistic 



variation in sample size
fittings to the cumulative distribution  were also the most robust against variation in sample size, i.e., variation in the number of retrieved propagules . parameters estimated with these two estimation methods were remarkably accurate . despite the low variation in accuracy of cd fits , detailed inspection revealed that increasing sample sizes resulted in more accurate cd-ml fits up to n =  <dig>  from which the fitting accuracy levelled off .fig.  <dig> robustness of the different fitting methods to variation in sample size . fitting results correspond to the lognormal distribution. a estimated parameter values . the solid and dashed lines indicate the original values of the location  and variance  parameters, respectively. where error bars are undistinguishable, it means that standard errors are smaller than the mean-value dots. b ks statistic. c fitting performance of the cd-ml method for different sample sizes, estimated by the ks statistic



variation in sampling interval
consistently with the previous results, fittings to cumulative distributions  provided the most accurate parameter estimates and were the most robust against variations in the length of sampling intervals . despite the low variation in performance provided by cd fits, a detailed inspection showed that increasing the length of the initial sampling-time intervals  resulted in reduced estimation accuracy, i.e., in increased ks statistics .fig.  <dig> robustness of the different fitting methods to variation in sampling time-interval. fitting results correspond to the lognormal distribution. a estimated parameter values . the solid and dashed lines indicate the original values of the location  and variance  parameters, respectively. where error bars are undistinguishable, it means that standard errors are smaller than the mean-value dots. b ks statistic . c fitting performance of the cd-ml method for different lengths in sampling time-intervals, estimated by the ks statistic. time-intervals varied in a regular way over the whole sampling period , around the distribution mode , in the tail of the distribution , and the last time-interval 



impact of fitting method on estimates of propagule dispersal kernels
non-optimal methods used to fit propagule retention time distributions produced severe biases in estimated dispersal kernels . these biases were strongest for the frequency of long distance dispersal: when using the most common method , it increased by  <dig> and 19 % for potamogeton pectinatus and scirpus lacustris seeds, respectively. the magnitude of the bias was also related to the sampling protocol, specifically to the sampling time-interval. experiments using shorter time-intervals around the distribution mode incurred in smaller biases  than those using more spaced intervals . overall, kernel properties related to long distance dispersal  were the most affected, whereas central tendency measures  were less affected by suboptimal fitting methods.table  <dig> biases introduced by the choice of methods used to fit propagule retention time, on the dispersal kernels of two plant species  dispersed by the same vector species 

the comparison is based on four different parameters of the dispersal kernels for which the respective values are given: long-distance dispersal frequency , mean and median distance, and 99th distance percentile . values between brackets indicate the magnitude of the bias, i.e., the relative difference  between the value obtained using the optimal method  and each of all other fitting methods. note that the cd-nls method led to overall similar results to those of cd-ml 



discussion
the use of fitting methods that take into account the interval-censored nature of propagule retention time data proved necessary for a correct estimation of the underlying probability distributions. if we take the example of the lognormal fit to interval upper-bound data, which is the most used fitting method, a difference of  <dig>  in the location parameter μ  was observed in relation to the original parameter. if the vector flies at an average speed of 60 km/h, a common speed for waterfowl species  <cit> , the difference in median dispersal distance  would be 78 km, provided that the vector moves linearly until propagule retrieval. even if actual vector movement distances are incorporated into dispersal distance estimations, considerable biases are also observed, mostly in the estimation of long distance dispersal . the magnitude of these biases stress the necessity of using fitting methods that are able to account for the censored nature of propagule retention time data.

the two estimation methods based on cumulative distributions  produced accurate estimations for lognormal, gamma and weibull distributions and were remarkably robust against variations in data quality . the cd-nls method requires more data points than the cd-ml method to be equally robust, as its estimation did not converge for distributions with a low variance . we therefore recommend the cd-ml method, which fits the parameters to the censored data by maximum likelihood, as a general approach to characterize the probability distribution of propagule retention time. it can be implemented via the r package fitdistrplus  <cit>  and other software packages such as matlab and sas .

the accuracy of estimations with the best method  was high enough to ensure very low deviations from the original distribution, as the maximum observed deviation in cumulative probability  was only  <dig>  . although distribution fittings using the interval mid-points also provided satisfactory results, estimated parameters were not as accurate as those using cumulative distributions. in particular, the variance parameter  was generally overestimated, mostly at low sample sizes. the overestimation of this parameter might result in overestimated dispersal distances and, consequently, overestimated frequencies of long distance dispersal .

the robustness of the cd-ml method suggests that many hitherto obtained datasets on propagule retention time might be properly used in mechanistic models of propagule dispersal, even if the tail of the distribution is undersampled ). our results also suggest that the experimental conditions may and should be designed to optimize the accurate characterization of retention-time probability distributions by taking into account the tradeoff between sampling effort and measurement precision. simulations suggested that  at least  <dig> propagules should be retrieved to obtain more reliable estimates of retention time, and  sampling effort should ensure an accurate characterization of the time peak  of propagule retrieval by choosing sampling time-intervals of shorter length than the peak retrieval. although the sampling effort for the distribution tail can be more relaxed, adequate sampling time-intervals should also be used until the end.

CONCLUSIONS
based on our comparative analysis, we recommend the use of the cd-ml method to fit parametric probability distributions to propagule retention-time data. because propagule retention time is a key parameter in mechanistic models of passive dispersal  <cit> , an accurate parametric characterization of its probability distribution contributes to more reliable estimations of dispersal kernels and shadows. given that many plants, invertebrates and microbes  rely on passive dispersal, and that dispersal is a key determinant of biodiversity distribution patterns, the methodology presented in this study will also be useful for modeling population and community dynamics , as well as species distributions .

