BACKGROUND
a distinguished feature of plant secondary metabolism is its enormous diversity. more than  <dig>  <dig> secondary metabolites are known to date that are either widely distributed in the plant kingdom or specific for a small group of plant taxa. evidence is accumulating that this chemical diversity is shaped by selection pressures exerted by the biotic and abiotic environment of the plant  <cit> . diversification of secondary metabolism has been investigated in a number of plant systems, yet, we are only beginning to understand how metabolic diversity is generated and how it impacts ecological interactions  <cit> . the glucosinolate-myrosinase system represents one of the best studied plant chemical defenses. glucosinolates are amino acid-derived thioglucosides with a sulfated aldoxime moiety and variable side chains  that are present in the brassicales  <cit> . in contrast to many other chemical defenses, the glucosinolates themselves are non-toxic. they become activated upon tissue damage when endogenous thioglucosidases, the myrosinases, are released from their separate storage compartments and hydrolyze the glucosinolates. this results in the formation of biologically active breakdown products that play a role in plant-pathogen and plant-insect interactions and have attracted a lot of interest as health-promoting compounds in our diet  <cit> .

in the glucosinolate-myrosinase system, chemical diversity is generated by independent variation of glucosinolate biosynthesis and glucosinolate breakdown  <cit> . genetic variation at glucosinolate biosynthetic loci allows the production of more than  <dig> different glucosinolates from only a few amino acids  <cit> . structural diversity is further amplified during glucosinolate breakdown whose outcome mainly depends on the structure of the glucosinolate side chain and the presence of supplementary proteins under physiological conditions  <cit>  . a single glucosinolate can give rise to up to four different types of breakdown products with diverse physico-chemical and biological properties. the most intensely studied breakdown products, the isothiocyanates, are formed through a spontaneous rearrangement of the glucosinolate aglucone in the absence of supplementary proteins . glucosinolate-derived isothiocyanates are very reactive and have been shown to be toxic to bacteria, fungi, nematodes and insects . supplementary proteins known as specifier proteins promote the rearrangement of the aglucone released by myrosinase to products other than isothiocyanates, namely to simple nitriles, epithionitriles and organic thiocyanates, without having hydrolytic activity on glucosinolates themselves  <cit> , reviewed in  <cit>  . the biological roles of the non-isothiocyanate products are not well established, but experimental studies indicate that they may act in direct and indirect defense  <cit> .

to date, nine plant specifier proteins with different substrate and product specificities have been identified at the molecular level and characterized biochemically, namely the epithiospecifier proteins  from arabidopsis thaliana <cit>  and brassica oleracea <cit> , the thiocyanate-forming proteins  from lepidium sativum <cit>  and thlaspi arvense <cit>  and five nitrile-specifier proteins  from a. thaliana <cit> . typically, specifier proteins of different types share 50–80% amino acid sequence identity. they do not have any significant amino acid sequence identity to other functionally characterized proteins. as a structural feature, specifier proteins are predicted to contain a series of β-sheets representing kelch domains often involved in protein-protein interactions  <cit> . in addition, four of the five nsps contain one or two jacalin-related lectin  domains at their n-terminus  <cit> . the impact of these domains on nsp function or regulation is not known. previous research has identified at3g <dig> as an additional nsp homolog in a. thaliana that did not show specifier protein activity in biochemical assays and might be an ancestor of the a. thaliana specifier protein family with a function outside glucosinolate metabolism  <cit> . furthermore, nsps were proposed to represent the basal activity from which esp and tfp activities derived  <cit> . however, evidence for this hypothesis could not be provided due to the limited number of available specifier protein sequences.

here, we identified specifier protein cdnas from a range of species of the brassicaceae that showed their ability to form non-isothiocyanate products in a phytochemical screening among representatives of the brassicales order. as the amino acid sequence identity proved not to be sufficient for the assignment of a given specifier protein to one of the three types , we expressed the cdnas identified in escherichia coli and tested the recombinant proteins for their specificity with respect to product formation upon myrosinase-catalyzed hydrolysis of two different glucosinolate substrates. phylogenetic analyses performed with sequences of  <dig> characterized and three putative specifier proteins support the previous suggestion that nsp activity is the ancestral activity among specifier proteins and suggest a monophyletic origin of esps from nsps. furthermore, we show that the split between nsps and esps/tfps happened before the radiation of the core brassicaceae that dates back to at least  <dig> million years ago, respectively. phylogenetic analyses suggest that tfp activity evolved at least twice independently in different brassicaceae lineages.

RESULTS
phytochemical screening
to study the occurrence of non-isothiocyanate products of glucosinolate hydrolysis within species of the brassicales, we analyzed  <dig> species of  <dig> genera of the brassicaceae as well as seven species from five other brassicales families for their glucosinolate and glucosinolate hydrolysis product profiles . all of the brassicaceae species investigated are representatives of the core brassicaceae and belong to two of three major brassicaceae lineages   <cit> . among the  <dig> tribes comprised by lineage i  <cit> , four were represented in our screening , erysimeae, cardamineae). among the  <dig> tribes of expanded lineage ii  <cit> , plants from six tribes , brassiceae , isatideae, thlaspideae) were included. within the brassicaceae, we identified twelve species of nine genera with non-isothiocyanate products . among these, eleven species produced simple nitriles, six species produced epithionitriles, and one species produced organic thiocyanate upon tissue disruption. outside the brassicaceae, only tropaeolum minus  produced minor amounts of a simple nitrile  . in most cases, we were able to analyze different organs or developmental stages of the plants to be screened, e.g. seedlings, leaves, roots and seeds. however, we cannot exclude that different glucosinolates and glucosinolate hydrolysis products are formed in organs or developmental stages that have not been investigated. furthermore, environmental conditions that have not been considered here may induce biosynthetic enzymes and those involved in glucosinolate breakdown. despite these limitations, it appears that the generation of non-isothiocyanate products is widespread in the brassicaceae, but not common in plants of other families of the brassicales.

identification and characterization of specifier protein cdnas
brassicaceae species that produced simple nitriles, epithionitriles or organic thiocyanates were used to identify specifier protein cdnas by a pcr approach . an amino acid sequence comparison of known specifier proteins identified regions of high amino acid sequence identity within nsp or esp/tfp sequences, respectively . as nucleotide sequence identities of the corresponding cdnas in these regions were very high, degenerate primers were designed based on nucleotide sequences in these regions keeping a low level of degeneracy . cdna was synthesized from total rna isolated from leaves of species that were able to produce simple nitriles, epithionitriles or organic thiocyanates in tissue homogenates . pcr with primers p <dig> and p <dig> using cdna as template typically resulted in the amplification of fragments of 700–750 bp with highest similarity to esp/tfp cdnas. when primers p <dig> and p <dig> were used instead, pcr fragments of 650–700 bp were obtained that usually had highest similarity to nsp cdnas. full-length cdnas including 3'-utrs and at least partial 5'-utrs were obtained by 3'- and 5'-race. open reading frames  were confirmed by independent pcr amplification with gene-specific primers using cdna as template. orfs were transferred to modified pet52 + expression vectors  <cit>  allowing heterologous expression in e. coli with an n-terminal strep-tag ii. crude extracts of bacteria harbouring the expression constructs were subjected to specifier protein assays using allylglucosinolate and benzylglucosinolate as substrates for myrosinase . proteins that were able to promote the formation of organic thiocyanate from allyl- or benzylglucosinolate were designated tfps, proteins that promoted epithionitrile formation, but not organic thiocyanate formation were designated esps and proteins that promoted simple nitrile, but not epithionitrile or organic thiocyanate formation from the substrates used were designated nsps. through this approach, ten previously unknown specifier proteins were identified, namely one tfp, six esps and three nsps . as structural features, the deduced amino acid sequences of all newly identified specifier proteins contained several copies of the kelch motif . in addition, all nsps identified possessed one jacaline-related lectin domain .

listed are specifier proteins that have been identified and characterized biochemically in previous research or in the present study. in the latter case, genbank accession numbers are given. for the a. thaliana nsps, locus names are given in addition to the protein abbreviations as the nomenclature in the literature is not uniform. domain structures are given according to interproscan predictions.

activity was tested using crude extracts of bacteria expressing specifier protein cdnas, 1 mm allyl- or 2 mm benzylglucosinolate and  <dig>  units myrosinase in 50 mm mes buffer, ph  <dig> . the presence of non-isothiocyanate products  in dichloromethane extracts of the assay mixtures after 30 min incubation is indicated by +, the absence by - .

for seven of the eleven brassicaceae species subjected to the pcr approach, specifier proteins were identified . from erysimum hieraciifolium, only an incomplete orf was obtained that was not included in further analyses. in three species , specifier proteins of two different types were identified. this confirms that our pcr approach was a suitable method for identification of specifier protein cdnas. we can, however, not exclude that species from which no pcr product was obtained possess specifier proteins and that additional specifier proteins present in the same species were not detected due to low transcript abundance or deviating nucleotide sequences.

phylogenetic analyses
together with specifier proteins identified in previous studies, a total of  <dig> characterized specifier proteins representing nine genera of lineage i and expanded lineage ii of the brassicaceae according to  <cit>  were available for phylogenetic analyses. additionally, the homolog at3g <dig> and three full-length cdna sequences of putative specifier proteins identified in databases were included . amino acid sequence comparisons showed that amino acid sequence identities are high among all esp and tfp sequences  and between nsp sequences  with the exception of atnsp <dig> and its homolog from eutrema halophilum, but lower when esp or tfp sequences are compared with nsp sequences other than atnsp <dig> and its homolog  . in agreement with this, sequences clustered in three major groups in a phylogenetic tree generated using the maximum likelihood algorithm . the first and presumably oldest cluster contained atnsp <dig> and its homolog from e. halophilum and was named atnsp <dig> cluster. the second cluster was formed by atnsp1atnsp <dig> and nsps from isatis tinctoriaschouwia purpurea and cardamine hirsuta and was named atnsp <dig> cluster. a third cluster named esp/tfp cluster contained exclusively esp and tfp sequences. each of the three clusters contained sequences from lineage i and expanded lineage ii of the brassicaceae  <cit> . in the esp/tfp cluster, sequences grouped according to the brassicaceae lineage they were derived from . at3g <dig> with 65% nucleotide identity to atnsp <dig> was located at the basis of the tree. in contrast to atnsp1-atnsp5at3g <dig> with unknown function has uncharacterized homologs in a fungal, an algal, and a bryophyte species as well as in higher plant species that do not contain glucosinolates  <cit> . one of these homologs, cao <dig> from vitis vinifera , was used as outgroup and represented the root of the tree. principally, the same tree topology was obtained when amino acid sequences and other algorithms were used .

transcript or genome sequences encoding proteins with highest amino acid sequence identities to specifier proteins are listed with their database reference number. domain structures are given according to interproscan predictions.

in four species, pairs of specifier protein paralogs were available. each pair consisted of one nsp of the atnsp <dig> cluster and one esp. thus, for each functionally characterized nsp of the atnsp1-cluster, an esp paralog could be included in the analysis. pairwise analyses of the amino acid distances  as defined by the number of amino acid substitutions per number of alignment positions corrected for multiple substitutions at the same site and different substitution rates at different alignment positions of these specifier proteins showed higher divergences between nsp and esp sequences of the same species  than within nsp or esp sequences of different species  . within a. thalianadaa values for comparisons among atnsp <dig>  atnsp <dig> and atnsp <dig> were between  <dig>  and  <dig>  while distances between these proteins and atnsp <dig> were  <dig> - <dig>  . this is in agreement with the known presence of the genes encoding atnsp <dig>  atnsp <dig> and atnsp <dig> as tandem genes that likely arose by recent gene duplications. principally the same result was obtained when nucleotide distances  as defined by the number of nucleotide substitutions per number of alignment positions corrected for multiple substitutions at the same site and the likelihood of transitions and transversions were determined . paralogous nsp and esp sequences within one species had higher distances  than orthologous nsp or orthologous esp sequences . together with the topology of the trees, the data suggest one common origin of the genes encoding specifier proteins of the esp/tfp cluster from genes encoding nsps. from a biochemical point of view, a monophyletic origin of esps/tfps might be due to aspects of similarity in their catalytic roles. in contrast to simple nitrile formation catalyzed by nsps, production of epithionitriles and organic thiocyanates requires an intramolecular transfer of a sulfur atom  <cit> . as esp/tfp sequences cluster according to the brassicaceae lineages, the gene duplication that led to the split between the atnsp <dig> cluster and the esp/tfp cluster must have happened before the separation of lineages in the core brassicaceae.

distances are shown for nsps and esps which were identified as paralogous pairs. note that of the a. thaliana nsp sequences, only atnsp <dig> is included . amino acid distances are shown on the right, nucleotide distances on the left as determined by mega vers.  <dig>   <cit>  using the equal-input + g model  and the kimura-two-parameter model + g + i . alignment gaps  are regarded as non-informative posititions in this analysis. the very left column indicates the brassicaceae lineage according to  <cit> . protein abbreviations are as given in table  <dig> 

time estimates date the beginning radiation of the core brassicaceae at 40– <dig> million years ago, i.e. at about the same time as the atα-whole genome duplication is thought to have occurred  <cit> . the atα-whole genome duplication is the youngest of three whole genome duplications  that happened in the evolution of the core brassicaceae and has first been detected in a. thaliana . in contrast to the β-whole genome duplication that took place about  <dig> million years ago in the brassicales and the γ-whole genome duplication that dates back to early eudicot or angiosperm evolution, the atα-whole genome duplication is specific for the core brassicaceae. a possible link between this whole genome duplication and increasing species numbers has been proposed  <cit> . lineages i and ii appeared  <dig> and  <dig> million years ago, respectively, or later  <cit> , i.e. after the atα-whole genome duplication. consequently, the separation of specifier proteins of the atnsp1-cluster and the esp/tfp-cluster dates back to at least about  <dig> million years ago and might possibly be a consequence of the α-whole genome duplication followed by neofunctionalization. alternatively, local gene duplication and neofunctionalization may be responsible for the evolution of specifier proteins of the atnsp <dig> and the esp/tfp cluster. based on this, nsp-esp/tfp paralogs would be expected in all core brassicaceae. in four species, nsp-esp paralogs are functional. in the remaining species analyzed, one of the paralogs may have been lost due to natural selection or it may have escaped our approach.

a closer analysis of the esp/tfp-cluster revealed that specifier proteins of this cluster form several subgroups. a first branch contained only two esps identified from draba species and was separated from all other esps/tfps which clustered according to the brassicaceae lineages  <cit>  they were identified from. esps and tfp of lineage i grouped together in one branch while another branch contained esps and tfps from expanded lineage ii. overall, amino acid distances between esps of the same lineage were only slightly lower than amino acid distances between esps of different lineages . amino acid distances between tatfp and aptfp, respectively, and esps from the same lineage  were in the same range as those between esps. in contrast, amino acid distances were considerably higher between lstfp and esps from the same lineage . highest amino acid distances were determined between tfps of different lineages . this suggests that tfps originated from esps after the separation of lineage i and expanded lineage ii in the brassicaceae. presently, there are no pairs of paralogous esp and tfp sequences available whose analysis would allow to confirm an independent origin of tfps from esps in the two lineages as suggested by the phylogeny.

amino acid distances  and nucleotide distances  are given as determined by mega vers.  <dig>  using the equal-input + g model  and the kimura-2-parameter model + g + i . distances between sequences from the same genus are not included. brassicaceae lineages are according to  <cit> .

as alignment gaps are considered non-informative in the above analyses, the results represent the phylogenetic relationships based on comparisons among the kelch domain regions of the sequences analyzed. therefore, we performed a separate analysis of those regions of nsps that are jal domains. the two jal domains of atnsp <dig> were used separately with the n-terminal jal domain termed a and the second jal domain termed b. the analysis confirmed an earlier study on atnsp1-atnsp <dig> and suggested a monophyletic origin of all jal domains except jal domain a of atnsp <dig> . together with the fact that all nsps of the atnsp <dig> cluster and only these nsps possess a jal domain of the b-type, this suggests recruitment of this jal domain early in the evolution of nsps of the atnsp <dig> cluster, likely in conjunction with the gene duplication that gave rise to the split between specifier proteins of the atnsp <dig> and the esp/tfp cluster. jal domain a is only present in atnsp <dig>  more data on the architecture of the atnsp1/ atnsp3/ atnsp <dig> gene cluster in the genome of a. thaliana and its relatives are required to find out in which evolutionary time frame jal domain a was recruited.

analysis of selection pressure
nucleotide substitutions in coding sequences can either be silent  or amino acid-changing . natural selection mainly acts on non-synonymous substitutions leading to different rates of non-synonymous vs. synonymous substitutions  <cit> . the ratio of non-synonymous vs. synonymous substitutions can be used to estimate selection pressures acting on a given gene. in comparison of two sequences, the number of non-synonymous substitutions per non-synonymous site  and the number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site  can be determined with correction for multiple substitutions at the same site, different codon frequencies and transversion/transition rates  <cit> . a non-synonymous vs. synonymous substitution rate ratio ω  < <dig> indicates purifying  selection that maintains structural features required for protein function. equal occurence of non-synonymous and synonymous substitutions over the length of the sequence would result in ω = <dig> . an ω > <dig> indicates that positive selection acts on a gene changing the encoded amino acid sequence towards a certain functionality that provides selective advantages.

in order to analyze selection pressures acting on specifier protein genes, we determined non-synonymous vs. synonymous substitution rate ratios  using pairwise comparisons of full-length coding sequences . in no case did we find indications for positive selection. synonymous substitutions were by far dominating over non-synonymous substitutions over the lengths of the cdna sequences as indicated by ω <  <dig>  this suggests that purifying selection acts on specifier protein sequences preventing the fixation of mutations that impair functionality. although ω-values were quite homogenous across all comparisons, lowest ω-values were obtained for nsp-nsp comparisons  and nsp-esp comparisons  while esp-tfp comparisons generally gave higher ω-values  and esp-esp comparisons showed a broad range of ω-values . this may possibly indicate stronger selection pressures acting on nsps than on the derived esps and tfps and reduced functional constraints associated with the evolution of new biochemical functions. however, ω-values for comparisons within the group of paralogous nsp and esp sequences were similar for all comparisons . future studies have to show if the ω-values > <dig>  detected over the length of the sequences in some of the comparisons are indicative of considerably higher local ω-values to clarify if positive selection has acted on certain sequence motifs. biochemical characterization of specifier proteins of all three types has shown that tfps possess additional capabilities  as compared to esps while esps possess additional capabilities  as compared to nsps  <cit> . thus, the new capabilities do not replace those present in the ancestor but rather add to them. this seems to be true for esps that evolved from nsps following genome or gene duplication as well as for tfps that evolved from esps. in the latter case, there is, at least up to now, no indication for gene duplication events prior to gaining an additional biochemical function.

as pointed out by kroymann   <cit> , it is very difficult to dissect the original ecological role of a particular secondary metabolite that has been selected for during evolution. in case of the glucosinolate-myrosinase system, both intact glucosinolates and their breakdown products need to be considered with their effects on a diverse array of herbivores and pathogens, including specialists and generalists  <cit> . for the evolution of specifier proteins, the glucosinolate profile of a given species must have been an important factor. while nsps seem to work on glucosinolate aglycones with various side chains  <cit> , the recruitment of esps from nsps can provide selective advantage only in plants that have the biosynthetic capacity to produce aliphatic glucosinolates with a terminal double bond which can be converted to epithionitriles. such glucosinolates are only found in the relatively young families brassicaceae and capparaceae  <cit> . hence, only in those families are esps expected to occur. in a similar way, only plants that possess allyl-, 4-methylthiobutyl- or benzylglucosinolate can benefit from the presence of tfps which form organic thiocyanates during breakdown of only these three glucosinolates due to the ability of their side chains to form stable carbocations  <cit> . glucosinolates that deliver substrates for nsps and tfps are widespread among basal and core brassicales  <cit> . however, besides a minor proportion of simple nitrile formed in t. minor leaf and flower homogenates, there is no indication for the presence of specifier proteins with a function in glucosinolate breakdown outside the brassicaceae. to clarify if specifier proteins are an innovation of the brassicaceae, molecular analyses of more ancient sister families are required.

while the toxicity of isothiocyanates, whose formation does not require specifier proteins, and their role as direct chemical defenses have been proven in various studies  <cit> , much less is known about the ecological roles of the alternative breakdown products. in several cases, simple nitriles seem to be less toxic than their isothiocyanate counterparts with the same side chain structure  <cit> . why does a plant then benefit from investing into the production of specifier proteins if it is well defended by toxic isothiocyanates? a possible explanation is that specifier proteins may help a plant to defend itself against specialist herbivores that evolved adaptations to the glucosinolate-myrosinase system and use glucosinolates and isothiocyanates as cues for host identification. this has been demonstrated experimentally for direct and indirect simple nitrile-mediated plant defense against the cabbage white butterfly   <cit> , a representative of the pierinae which diversified at about the same time as glucosinolate-containing plants  <cit> . other putative functions of nsps have been suggested  <cit> . the fact that nsp and esp activities are maintained in the same species through natural selection supports different biological roles of simple nitriles and epithionitriles. interestingly, there is natural variation in a. thaliana with respect to expression of functional esp, and esp is counterbalanced by modifiers such as esm <dig> <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
phylogenetic analyses of ten newly identified and nine previously known characterized specifier proteins of the brassicaceae as well as three putative specifier proteins from brassicaceae found in databases and one homolog of unknown function suggest nsps to be the ancestral representatives of this group of proteins and provide evidence for a monophyletic origin of esps from nsps. the split between nsps and esps occurred before the diversification of the core brassicaceae, i.e. at least about  <dig> million years ago. tfp activity evolved from esps later, and phylogenetic analyses indicate that this happened independently in different lineages. based on the data available to date, specifier proteins might be an innovation of the brassicaceae that likely expands the defensive repertoire of the brassicaceae, among others possibly as a response to selection pressures exerted by specialist herbivores that evolved adaptations to the glucosinolate-myrosinase system. the evolution of specifier proteins demonstrates the plasticity of secondary metabolism in the context of an activated plant defense system.

