BACKGROUND
the domestic pig represents an excellent animal model to study a wide range of human microbial diseases due to its similarity to humans in terms of anatomy, genetics, and physiology  <cit> . because of this, there is an increasing need for the development of new biomedical tools in this species. the newborn pig trachea  cell line was established from a 2-day-old piglet obtained from a specific pathogen free herd at the instituto zooprofilattico sperimentale in brescia  <cit> . the nptr cells are non-carcinoma and non-transformed cells offering a wide microbial susceptibility spectrum which includes not only viruses  <cit>  but also bacteria  <cit> . they can be used to study host/respiratory tract pathogen interactions at the cellular level. nptr cells can also replace madin-darby canine kidney epithelial cells  <cit>  for the production of viruses such as porcine influenza viruses  <cit> . recently, air-liquid interface  culture of primary tracheal epithelial cells has been implemented with success in pigs  <cit> . ali culture conditions allow a more realistic development of epithelial cells in vitro <cit> . for instance it was shown that the pattern of expression and polarization of toll-like receptors   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> in cells cultured in those conditions mirrored that of the airways ex vivo <cit>  with a surface expression of these tlrs. furthermore, ali culture can enable the in vitro reconstitution of an epithelium presenting many features of the pseudo-stratified epithelium observed in the upper respiratory tract  <cit> . however, the use of primary epithelial cells for the ali technique can be challenging. contamination with fibroblasts and micro-organisms is common, requiring additional purification steps and the use of large amounts of antibiotic and anti-mycotic drugs. this creates complications in specific conditions where the use of antibiotics is not possible. moreover, culture of primary cells requires the sacrifice of more animals than the use of a well-established and easily available cell line. cell lines have several advantages over primary cells including their low cost, longer life span, and lower variability between passages and experiments  <cit> . in addition, they are generally easier to transfect and manipulate than primary cells  <cit> . epithelial cells, primary cells and cell lines are usually cultured in submerged monolayers on a conventional plastic support. one of the major disadvantages of monolayer culture is the potentially irreversible and total loss of ciliated cells  <cit>  although there are exceptions such as hamster cells which can develop cilia and goblet cell phenotypes in submerged culture  <cit> . many studies show that ali culture conditions are valuable to drive a differentiated phenotype  <cit>  to an extent similar to that observed in native pseudo-stratified epithelium. this could be due, partially at least, to the thin layer of apical medium minimizing the diffusion barrier and resulting in an enhanced oxygen supply to a level which better meets the requirement of airway epithelial cells. conversely it has been shown that when the cells are maintained submerged instead of at an air-liquid interface, the differentiation of epithelial cells into ciliated cells was strongly suppressed  <cit> . authors showed that the removal of some substances such as epidermal growth factor, cholera toxin, and bovine pituitary extract from the media resulted in up to 4-fold increases in the number of ciliated cells detected  <cit> . thus, the selection of the culture conditions has tremendous effects on the morphology and function of epithelial cells in vitro <cit> . for all these reasons we aimed to assess the differentiation of nptr cells cultured under ali conditions. the ability of nptr cells to differentiate was evaluated by light, fluorescence, transmission, and scanning electron microscopy as well as real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction . expression of tight junction protein zonula occludens- <dig>  and the development of transepithelial electrical resistance  were also assessed.

RESULTS
morphological analysis of the epithelial cell layer
cellular morphological changes were observed first by conventional light microscopy . prior to confluence, nptr cells were maintained with medium in the two chambers. after reaching full confluence, nptr cells were cultured in ali conditions in dmem complemented with 10% fcs and antibiotics  for a total of twenty-two days. at the beginning of the ali culture nptr cells appeared to be a homogenous population of epithelial cells with oval nuclei . the confluent cells formed a monolayer of tightly packed cells. over the subsequent days, the culture displayed darker areas, probably of stratified cells , and lighter areas corresponding to less dense regions. after two and three weeks of culture, nptr cells created multiple layers and the population seemed less homogenous with apparent increased mucus secretion . in order to evaluate the expression of differentiation markers such as apically expressed β-tubulin  and mucin 5 ac , frozen sections of nptr cells culture were fixed and immuno-stained at the beginning  and the end  of the culture . after seven days in ali conditions , the culture revealed a monolayer of confluent cells and the presence of multiple cell attachments suggesting the development of an increased internal complexity. after twenty-two days, the culture displayed continuous and robust cellular layers with the presence of more mucin-positive stained cells and a slightly more defined border of β-tubulin-positive cells . as a control, in respiratory pseudo-stratified epithelium collected from a two-month-old healthy pig, mucin-positive stained cells  and tubulin-positive cells  were easily observed. the goblet cells, mainly located in the cryptic areas of the epithelium, were capable of producing significant amounts of mucus . scanning electron microscopy confirmed the presence of some mucus particles and numerous microvilli at the apical surface at the beginning of the culture . after twenty-two days of culture under ali conditions, the surface topography was more complex showing a stratified structure covered by a mucus layer . the staining for β-tubulin was globally diffused, even if some cells seemed to present a more apical staining, suggesting that villi or cilia had not developed . thus, despite the presence of microvilli, there was no evidence of cilia development at the apical surface . cell cultures using dmem medium were monitored up to nine weeks without significant mortality of the cells. no significant differences were observed in terms of cell mortality between the second and the third week of culture where teer was maximal.

fcs: fetal calf serum; ps: penicillin/streptomycin.

in the experiments where conventional media was replaced by serum-free aecm media or dmem/hamf <dig> supplemented with serum, dexamethasone, and retinoic acid, the cellular layer gradually contracted, never fully covering the insert surface , and progressively died preventing any further analyses. when serum-free supplemented dmem/hamf <dig> medium was used the cellular layer developed better . however the culture displayed an irregular apical surface with a few mucus cells and low tubulin staining, suggesting poor cellular differentiation.

transepithelial electrical resistance integrity assessment of the cellular layer
nptr cells cultured with dmem complemented with 10% fcs and antibiotics developed progressive teer along the culture on the transwell . teer data throughout the cell culture development displayed quite stable values in the first two weeks of ali culture . then, after twenty-two days teer rose up to 350 Ω cm <dig> , suggesting the formation of stronger cellular junctions. nptr cells cultured with supplemented aecm medium failed to form a solid structure . the cellular structure totally disintegrated after 14 days of ali culture in these conditions . in contrast, nptr cells cultured with serum-free dmem/hamf <dig> medium supplemented with dexamethasone showed teer values fluctuating around 200 Ω cm <dig>  and the formation of a structure apparently more solid than the ones formed using dmem. however, the immunostaining showed irregular apical surface with few mucus cells and low tubulin staining suggesting poor cellular differentiation . cells cultured with other media  also failed to form a solid structure .

zonula occludens- <dig> protein expression and ultrastructural analysis of newborn pig trachea cells in air-liquid interface conditions
complementary immunofluorescence analysis was undertaken to evaluate the establishment of intercellular junctions by nptr cells cultured with supplemented dmem in ali conditions. zonula occludens- <dig> protein  was identified . at the beginning of the culture , nptr cells did not display any evidence of positive zo- <dig> staining . after 14 days in ali conditions, nptr cultures showed positive zo- <dig> spots throughout the cytoplasm of most of the cells. the staining intensified at week  <dig>  of culture . this general upward trend was correlated with the teer findings and suggested migration of the tight junction proteins to the cell periphery. however the staining intensity was slight and zo- <dig> protein did not seem to reach the cell membrane/cell-cell junctions as expected. this last observation could be linked to the use of an upright fluorescence microscope instead of a confocal microscope. using transmission electron microscopy, well-developed cellular junctions  were observed after three weeks of culture under ali conditions . moreover, using that technique, microvilli at the surface of the cells were identified . however, no cilia were observed, confirming previous results.

expression of differentiation marker transcripts from newborn pig trachea cells cultured under two different conditions
to investigate the capacity of nptr cells to differentiate in ali conditions, the expression of differentiation and tight junction markers was analysed by rt-qpcr in cells cultured in supplemented dmem. to normalize the mrna relative expression, the most stable reference genes were selected among eight commonly used reference genes . hprt <dig>  rpl- <dig>  and gapdh were the most stable genes with m values under  <dig>  for cell samples . in order to compare the influence of ali conditions in cellular differentiation, a parallel experiment was performed using conventional plastic supports and again dmem medium. cells cultured in ali conditions showed a significant increase in the mrna expression of mucin  <dig> , muc <dig>  occludin , and keratin  <dig>   while a significant decrease in the transcript expression of muc <dig> and zo- <dig> was observed  . the profile of mrna expression in cells cultured on conventional plastic support was similar except that the expression of ocln mrna was not increased after 3 weeks of culture . moreover, the expression of the transcripts after three weeks of culture was even more significantly modified  .


actb

b2mi

gapdh

hmbs-2

hprt-1

rpl-19

sdha

tbp-1
reference genes are underlined.

discussion
in vitro models using cell lines are indispensable for understanding the response of epithelium to infectious agents. in the current report we assessed the capacity of nptr cells to polarize and differentiate when cultured under ali conditions. using immunofluorescence and electronic microscopy we evaluated the presence of goblet and ciliated cells, the epithelial junction organization, and the transepithelial electrical resistance. we have shown that it is possible to identify both mucin-producing cells and non-mucin-producing β-tubulin-positive cells in the nptr population. however β-tubulin staining was quite diffuse and cilia were not observed at the apical side of the cells. moreover, although the heterogeneity in cell population increased when the cells were cultured under ali conditions, this condition was not absolutely necessary to generate this heterogeneity. indeed, the two kinds of cells were detected at the beginning of the culture even when the conventional impermeable plastic support was used. nptr cells would be, independent of the culture conditions, a heterogeneous population of cells including both cells specialized in the production of mucins, and non-mucin-producing β-tubulin-positive cells. nevertheless, we cannot exclude the possibility of just one kind of cell only producing mucus under specific stimuli. the presence of two cell types would be interesting in the context of the study of host/pathogen interactions as viruses or bacteria sometimes discriminate between goblet and ciliated cells  <cit> . we did not culture primary trachea epithelial cells in parallel to our cultures of nptr cells. recently , some experiments involving primary bronchial epithelial cells have been initiated in the lab. preliminary results showed significant differences between primary and nptr cells in terms of teer and immunostaining, strongly suggesting that the protocol and conditions used in our study could only partially account for the limited differentiation of nptr cells.

regarding teer, it was observed that dmem and serum free dmem/hamf <dig> supplemented with dexamethasone media were the only ones enabling the development of a higher resistance, with values close to the 300 Ω cm <dig> after three weeks of culture under ali conditions. the development of high teer values coupled with the observations we made with transmission electron microscopy and staining of zo- <dig> demonstrated the development of strong intercellular junctions. the presence of multiple layers of cells also likely contributed to the increase in teer. curiously the mrna expression of zo- <dig> was significantly lower after three weeks of ali culture than at the beginning, which is the opposite of what was expected. a similar result was observed also when the cells were cultured on the impermeable support. discrepancies between the expression of zo- <dig> mrna and protein, and the teer have also been observed by others  <cit> . one explanation for this could be variations in mrna stability or protein synthesis and turn-over. the difference in the expression of ocln mrna observed between nptr cells cultured on impermeable support and cells cultured under ali conditions is probably due to a higher development of intercellular junctions when the cells were cultured on the transwells under ali conditions. villin -a protein associated with the actin core bundle of the brush border- transcripts  were not expressed more after three weeks of culture on either the impermeable support or the transwell. nossol and collaborators demonstrated variability between different cell lines, using intestinal porcine epithelial cells  <dig>  and ipec-j <dig> . with ipec- <dig> cell culture they detected a significant increase of villin mrna levels in conventional membrane and ali cultures compared to impermeable dish cultures  <cit> . however with ipec-j <dig> villin mrna was significantly increased in cells cultured conventionally on membranes but it was not increased in cells cultured under ali conditions, in comparison to dish culture  <cit> . regarding mucins, we assessed the mrna expression of one secreted gel-forming mucin  and two cell surface mucins   <cit> . these three mucins are produced in the respiratory tract as well as in other systems  <cit> . the mrna expression of both muc <dig> and muc <dig> was significantly increased after three weeks of culture on impermeable support and under ali conditions while we observed a decrease in the mrna expression of muc <dig>  the significant increase of muc <dig> and muc <dig> mrna expression was consistent with the higher percentage of mucus-producing cells under ali conditions after three weeks of culture. the decrease of muc <dig> mrna expression is more difficult to explain and could also be related to mrna stability or protein synthesis and turn-over.

the cells cultured under ali conditions with aecm and dmem/hamf <dig> without serum did not growth well nor differentiate as well as the cells cultured with dmem supplemented with serum. together these results show the importance of fetal calf serum in obtaining the most favorable development of nptr cells in our ali conditions. after three attempts using aecm medium with similar results, this medium seems more adapted for the culture of primary epithelial cells than for nptr cell line. in previous studies focusing on the culture of respiratory tissue explants or primary respiratory epithelial cells in various species the absence of serum and retinoic acid did not prevent the harmonious development of the ciliated cells  <cit> . however, in two of these studies, bovine serum albumin was added to the medium  <cit> . in other studies  <cit> , serum at various concentrations was added to the cell line or the primary cells. in our study, we were not able to fully differentiate nptr cells under the conditions we selected. with ali conditions using dmem medium supplemented with serum the nptr cells did develop intercellular junctions and cellular polarity, however “real” goblet cells and cilia did not develop. this lack of full differentiation of nptr cells could be due to several possible factors: 1) the need to supplement the culture medium with serum, retinoic acid, or other additives despite other studies demonstrating mucociliary differentiation without this supplementation  <cit> ; 2) the potential irreversible loss of the ability to develop cilia; 3) the timing we selected for our different attempts; and 4) the potential need to supplement the culture medium with still undetermined factors that would allow a full differentiation of the cells. regarding the effect of retinoic acid, our attempts using dmem/hamf <dig> supplemented with serum, dexamethasone and retinoic acid were not convincing, as they resulted in a degraded cellular monolayer. the origin of the serum could also be particularly critical as recently demonstrated with porcine cell line ipec-j <dig>  <cit> . authors showed that porcine serum was allowing a better differentiation of the cell line than previously used bovine serum  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
briefly our data showed that both mucus-producing cells and non-mucus-producing β-tubulin-positive epithelial cells were already detectable at the beginning of the ali culture with an increase in the number of mucus-producing cells after a few weeks under ali conditions. transepithelial electrical resistance increased slowly over time and strong intercellular junctions were observed at the end of the culture period. nevertheless, even when well-developed microvilli were identified on the cells, no cilia were detected. moreover, the generated epithelium was globally more similar to a stratified squamous than a pseudo-stratified epithelium. in our study, the culture of nptr cells in ali conditions enabled the development of a system intermediate between the conventional cell line culture and the culture of primary tracheal epithelial cells in ali conditions. however, it was not possible to mimic the pseudo-stratified epithelium seen with primary epithelial cells. improvement of the cell culture conditions may allow the full differentiation of nptr cells to both ciliated and goblet cells even if we cannot exclude the possibility that nptr cells somehow have lost definitely the capacity to develop cilia.

