BACKGROUND
the effect of electromagnetic fields associated with mobile telephones on the health of human beings and animals is still controversial   <cit> . in a former clinical case study  <cit>  a potential association of nuclear cataracts in newborn calves and the installation of a mobile phone antenna on the affected farm was determined. the risk for severe nuclear cataracts in the calves from this farm was  <dig>  times higher than the swiss average. all infectious and toxic etiologies that usually occur in switzerland were ruled out. two other publications, based on an investigation on swiss veal calves, documented relations between the exposure to electromagnetic waves in the frequency range of mobile phone antennas and nuclear cataracts  <cit>  as well as the activity of redox proteins in aqueous humor  <cit> . the investigation was designed as a field study without standardized conditions. however, the radiated power from an antenna and the distance between antenna and animal are very approximate parameters, since non-ionizing radiation  propagates very variably dependent on topography and environment and since the animals constantly move towards and away from the antenna. the present study was designed so that the exposure situation was well controlled in order to determine the enzyme activity in a defined setting.

RESULTS
gsh-px
it was found that the phases were significantly different , however there was no significant difference for the cows  in the glm.

looking at the trend of gsh-px in the individual cows, it is evident that three cows  showed no effect over time or across the three phases; one cow  between pre-exposure and exposure; and the other six cows  showed an increase of gsh-px activity. between exposure and post exposure, all ten cows remained more or less constant . in each phase, each cow was present with  <dig> individual measurements over 14 days.in summary, the findings of individual cows, show a clear picture, which corresponds to the statistical analyses. the activity of gsh-px increases between pre-exposure and exposure and remains constant between exposure and post exposure .

each cow was tested ten times within each time period. the individual cells show in a row mean, standard error of mean , minimum, median, maximum. for the calculation of the rf-value refer to material and methods.

sod
the data proved not to be normally distributed and there was no suitable transformation. the glm showed that both the phases  and cows  were significantly different. it was obvious that six cows  showed a decrease in sod activity between pre-exposure and exposure. between exposure and post exposure,  <dig> cows were increasing the activity of the sod again  and one cow remained constant . of the remaining four cows, three , showed an increase of activity between pre-exposure and exposure and in  <dig> cows activity decreased between exposure and post-exposure . in one cow the activity remained constant between pre-exposure and exposure  and in another  between exposure and post-exposure .summarizing the findings of individual cows, an image corresponding to the statistical analysis arises. the activity of sod decreases between pre-exposure and exposure and remains constant between exposure and post-exposure .

catalase
the logarithmic transformation of the catalase values proved to be approximately normally distributed. the glm showed that the phases  were significantly different. the cows, however, showed no significant difference . looking at the trend of catalase in the individual cows, it is evident that six cows  showed an increase in activity between pre-exposure and exposure. these six cows then showed a reduction of activity between exposure and post-exposure. however, four cows  showed a decrease in activity between pre-exposure and exposure. these four cows showed a further decline of activity  or remained constant  between exposure and post exposure .in summary, the catalase activity of individual cows makes a clear picture, which corresponds to the statistical analysis. the activity of catalase increases slightly between pre-exposure and exposure  decreases and significantly between exposure and post-exposure .

individual response
table  <dig> shows the controversial situation that there are nir-sensitive, as well as nir-non-sensitive cows. cows representing the majority of a certain time course over the three phases were referred to as reagent. cows representing an alternative time course over the three phases were referred as inverse reagents. those without response to nir were referred to as non-reagents. although there are cows, which reacted with all the three enzymes , as well as one cow, which responded inverse with all three enzymes , the other six cows showed no consistent pattern of response.

summary evaluation
to compare the individual enzyme values directly, a rf-transformation or standardization was made with the range as  <dig> units for each parameter. as sod runs like a mirror image to the horizontal compared to gsh-px and catalase, the inverse  of the rf-value has been used in the overall model for sod. the rf-data is normally distributed. the glm showed that the phases  differ significantly, but not the cows . the rf value of gsh-px, catalase and inverse sod differs between the pre-exposure and the exposure phase  and between the exposure and the post-exposure phase  in a factorial analysis of variance  with bonferroni test. no difference however between the pre-exposure and the post-exposure period  was found. the trend of the rf-value of gsh-px, catalase and inverse sod in the individual cows shows that seven cows  between pre-exposure and exposure show an increase of rf-values and a decrease of the same between exposure and post-exposure. three cows  showed no or an inverse effect  across the three phases. in this presentation each cow contributes  <dig> values for each phase  in accordance with the study protocol, which has massively increased the power of the last statistics.summarizing the findings of individual cows, a clear image corresponding to the statistical analysis is given. the combined rf-values of catalase, gsh and the inverse sod increased between pre-exposure and exposure and declined between exposure and post-exposure but not between cows .

discussion
in this study, nir has resulted in significant changes in the activities of the investigated redox enzymes. the activity of gsh-px increased significantly between pre-exposure and exposure period, whereas the sod recorded a significant decrease in the same trend in activity and is in accordance with eltiti  <cit> . the catalase activity increased only slightly between pre-exposure and exposure period. between exposure and post exposure period, the catalase activity showed a significant decrease, while the activities of gsh-px and sod remained largely constant. the individual cows showed only for sod a significant difference in activity. the phases had significant impact on the results in all three enzymes.

in sod, gsh-px and catalase a temporal trend is unlikely. if a temporal trend would be postulated, a continuous increase or decrease would have been observed over the three phases. it can be concluded with great probability that the exposure to non-ionizing radiation  has led to a significant increase of gsh-px activity and is in accordance with earlier findings by hässig et al.  <cit> . a seasonal time trend can be ruled out by the short alterations in the summary evaluation. the sod showed a significant reduction in activity. however, whether this change of enzyme activity is reversible or irreversible could not be determined conclusively on the basis of this data. the enzyme activities remained more or less unchanged during the post exposure period. to confirm this, the measurements of post-exposure must take place later.

no significant change in the catalase activity could be determined between pre-exposure and exposure. however, a significant decrease of the catalase activity is visible between exposure and post-exposure. a possible explanation for the different behavior of the measured enzymes is their respective up and down regulation of the ph, according to the pka formula .

a temporal trend can definitely be excluded based on the aggregated rf-values of catalase, gsh-px and the inverse rf-values of sod. it can be said with great probability that the exposure to non-ionizing radiation  has led to a significant change in the overall activity of the three measured redox enzymes.

confounders may be largely excluded. the cows were in a barn with low background radiation. the nir exposure has been standardized under controlled conditions. because the experiment was conducted in the winter, the animals spent most of the time in their cubicles in the barn and were fed uniformly. they were cared for by the usual staff and at the usual times. ambient conditions such as stable temperature and humidity were largely constant. the cows were healthy during the entire trial period, apart from two cases of mastitis. mastitis can lead to alterations in redox enzymes due to the higher production of free radicals  <cit> . collecting blood from the tail vein is also a low-stress method: most of the cows remained undisturbed during blood collection.

the test sequence and the study approach, ten cows during three phases to be sampled, has proved useful. only the post-exposure period should be extended in future trials, to allow more specific statements regarding reversibility. even if a significant difference between the exposure and the post-exposure phase was found in the comprehensive evaluation of all three enzymes, it must be remembered that catalase in the individual evaluation was the only enzyme, of which the activity has dropped significantly between the exposure and the post-exposure phase.

it is often heard in connection with the possible influence of nir on the health of humans and animals, that there are radiation-sensitive, as well as non-radiation-sensitive individuals. in humans, this phenomenon was studied already  <cit> . this controversial assertion could not be demonstrated in this experiment. although there were trends in cows, which reacted with all three appropriate enzymes , as well as one cow, which responded inversely with all three enzymes . a correlation between breed, age, reproductive status, and diseases with nir sensitivity was not found . the other six cows showed no consistent pattern of response. regarding nir sensitivity, a reliable statement cannot be made. more animals should be investigated to find a definite answer to this question. this could be the subject of a future study.

th
*dim: days in milk at beginning of first period, november 30th  <dig> .

**ai: artificial insemination.

***: infected quarter, bacteria.

ebl: enzootic bovine leucosis.

ibr: infectious bovine rhinotracheitis.

bvd: bovine virus diarrhea .

sbv: schmallenberg virus .

humans and animals interact constantly with the living and non-living environment, during which the individual tries to maintain its homeostasis. this happens for example when heat exposure through cooling mechanisms is controlled for temperature homeostasis. for nir exposure it is similar: the cow tries to counteract nis exposure, which affects their redox status, by regulating enzyme activity, to ensure homeostasis of the ph in the body. if the individual is able to hold the values to regulate within the physiological limits, the individual is not ill. if the regulatory functions of the body are overwhelmed, the individual gets ill. in our case, a range for gsh-px of  <dig>  to  <dig>  u/l was measured. the changes of gsh-px in our study are within the physiological range, as specified in the literature . useful values for comparison of sod and catalase were not found. thus, influences of nir are detectable in the presented study but no outliner could be determined for gsh-px in non-physiological areas at any time. further studies on bovines have to be blinded and even more standardized by means of breed and gestation synchronization. for such a study much more money must be available than for the presented one.

CONCLUSIONS
nir has resulted in changes in the enzyme activity in the presented study. certain enzymes are disabled others enabled by nir. the activity of gsh-px increased whereas the one of sod decreased. the present results coincide with the information from the literature that nir will lead to changes in redox proteins and that there are radiation-sensitive, as well as non-radiation-sensitive individuals.

the study approach with  <dig> blood samples per cow and phase  has proved appropriate.

to make a reliable statement regarding nir reactivity, more animals should be tested.

in future studies, the post exposure period should be extended, the exposure has to be blinded and even more standardized by means of breed and gestation synchronization.

