BACKGROUND
the stroop test  <cit>  is arguably the best-known neuropsychological test to tap attentional function. in the color words version of this test the instruction is to attend to the color of the ink in which a word is printed and name this color aloud. at the same time, the printed words may also read certain color names that are different from the color of the ink in which it is printed. as has been observed on numerous occasions, there is a strong tendency to respond to the content of the word, and not to the ink color. this is evidenced by an increase in response time and a decrease in accuracy relative to a neutral control condition.

the stroop test has been used both to tap fundamentals of human information processing , and as a clinical aid to assess attentional dysfunction, e.g., due to a frontal or fronto/parietal deficit. brain imaging and neurological studies consistently point to the prefrontal cortex  as the site involved in resolving the response conflict. as a consequence, people suffering from attentional impairments, caused by prefrontal abnormalities , tend to suffer more from stroop interference than controls. for example, the test succesfully differentiates unaffected controls from people suffering from schizophrenia . in a similar vein, people suffering from attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder  suffer from stroop interference , although a recent meta-analysis cast some doubt about the usefulness of the stroop task in differentiating people with adhd from controls  <cit> .

there now exist numerous versions of the stroop test. for example, instead of using color words, researchers have adopted more ecologically relevant items, such as emotion words, pictures of food items or of threatening objects, etc. in addition, it is now also common to use computerized versions of the stroop task, permitting a trial-by-trial analysis of performance. but what all these different stroop versions have in common is that the subject is always presented with a stimulus that simultaneously activates two conflicting response channels; one response is activated by the instructions, whereas the other response is activated by elements in the array that strongly invite an alternative – yet incorrect – response. in order to resolve this response conflict the subject has to direct attention to task relevant information and ignore information from the task irrelevant channel. the time needed to resolve this conflict is derived using subtractive logic, and can be used as an index of the efficiency of the attentional system under investigation.

a task that is less widely used in clinical circles, but that also indexes the efficiency of the frontal network is the eriksen flanker task. in the arrow version of this task, subjects have to respond to the direction of a left or right pointing arrow, and ignore flanking arrows that point in the opposite direction as the target arrow  <cit> . similar to the stroop task, there is a tendency to respond to the distracting flanker elements, and subjects have to resolve this response conflict prior to emitting the designated response. it is consistently found that response times are elevated due to the target-flanker incongruity, relative to a neutral control condition where target and flankers are congruent . there is evidence that the stroop task and the flanker task are supported by the same cognitive system. for example, using functional magnetic resonance imaging  it was found that both tasks activated largely overlapping brain regions, viz. the anterior cingulate cortex  and the left prefrontal cortex  <cit> . in addition, and similar to the stroop task, subjects with adhd spend more time resolving the conflict between the competing responses than controls . also, adult subjects with adhd showed consistent underactivation in the acc  during a counting version of the stroop task, compared to controls  <cit> .

the stroop task  has thus acquired a strong neuropsychological validation, and is nowadays widely used in clinical settings. however, studies adopting an individual differences paradigm have revealed that the time needed to resolve the response conflict in the stroop task does not predict the time needed to resolve the response conflict in the flanker task. in an earlier study we  <cit>  found that the interference scores between the tasks were uncorrelated. a similar finding was reported by  <cit>  using slightly different task versions.

further insight into the nature of these interference tasks might be gained by adopting a genetic perspective on normal and abnormal frontal functioning. a wealth of studies has now shown that many frontal psychopathologies are influenced by genes. for example, the heritability of adhd is estimated to be around 80% . in a similar vein, the heritability of attention problems as established by questionnaires is estimated to be around  <dig> – 90% . however, genetic studies are often hampered by the fact that psychopathologies are multifacetted and complex. a recent line of inquiry has started to use a 'bottom-up' approach, trying to decompose the complex phenotype  into a set of variables that are thought to represent more basic processes or traits. in this so-called endophenotypic approach the search is for neuro-behavioral vulnerability markers that are somewhere intermediate the genes and the disease  <cit> . endophenotypic measures gathered in children can be used to assess genetic vulnerability to adult psychiatric disorders  <cit> . in this paper we will try to assess whether, and to what extent stroop and/or flanker performance can qualify as genetic indicators for frontal abnormalities. the usesfulness of measures of stroop performance in a genetically informative design has recently been demonstrated in a study  <cit>  that compared stroop performance among children suffering from adhd, their unaffected sibs, and a group of controls. it was found that not only the children with adhd, but also their unaffected sibs suffered more from stroop interference than the controls. in a similar vein, it was found that not only euthymic bipolar and schizophrenic patients, but also their unaffected first-degree relatives suffered from increased stroop interference, relative to a healthy control group  <cit> . however, another study  <cit>  failed to find deteriorated stroop performance in unaffected adhd sibs.

the usefulness of measures of flanker performance in a genetically informative design was demonstrated by a series of studies conducted by fan and co-workers. using a sample of healthy monozygotic  and dizygotic  twins, it was tested whether genetic variation contributed to variations in performance on basic attentional tasks  <cit> . these tasks were designed to tap distinct attentional brain networks . of interest is performance on the flanker task, which was supposed to index the efficiency of the dopamine rich frontal executive network. performance on this task indeed showed evidence of heritability. in a follow-up study,  <dig> subjects were genotyped, and were tested on a range of attention tasks. modest associations were then found between genetic polymorphisms of several genes implicated in frontal function, such as drd <dig> and dat <dig>  and the efficiency of the frontal executive attention network  <cit> . using the same twin methodology, it was also found  <cit>  that performance on the flanker task was heritable. in addition, there was a correlation between flanker performance and iq, and this correlation was completely mediated by a common set of genes.

in this paper we ask whether variation in normal stroop and flanker performance is caused by genetic variation. by using monozygotic twins, who share all their genetic material, and dizygotic twins, who share on average half of their segregating genes, the influence of genetic factors and environmental factors can be teased apart. if genetic effects are important, then members of monozygotic twin pairs will be more similar than members of dizygotic twin pairs in test performance. conversely, if mz twins show the same degree of resemblance as dz twins, influences of environmental factors that are shared by both twins  will be important. the contributions of additive genetic factors, shared environmental factors and unique environmental factors for explaining the variance observed for these measures can be explored using this twin design. if stroop and/or flanker performance is found to be heritable, we will have a further genetic  validation of these tasks with respect to frontal dysfunction. furthermore, a high heritability of performance measures may ultimately help to unravel the genetic pathways of complex psychiatric traits.

this paper is a follow-up to a previous paper, where we reported behavioral data on stroop and flanker performance  <cit> . the current paper extends the previous one by investigating genetic effects on variation in performance.

RESULTS
for the stroop task, the data from  <dig> subjects  could not be analyzed because they failed to comply with the instructions. visual inspection of the data revealed that a few subjects had an extremely high stroop interference score. four subjects whose interference score was larger than  <dig> s were excluded from the analysis.

due to technical problems the data of  <dig> subjects for the flanker task were not stored or collected. furthermore, there were  <dig> subjects who had an extremely high error score . these subjects were excluded from the analyses.

descriptives
for the flanker task we found the following effects: for the first born twins the main effect of stimulus type was significant, f =  <dig> , p < . <dig>  congruent stimuli yielded faster rts than incongruent ones . the main effect of sex was not significant , nor its interaction with stimulus type. for the second born twin the main effect of stimulus type was significant, f =  <dig> , p < . <dig>  again, congruent stimuli yielded faster rts than incongruent ones . also, the main effect of sex was significant, f =  <dig> , p < . <dig>  boys were somewhat faster than girls .

the same analyses done on the error rates yielded a comparable pattern of results. for the first born twins the main effect of stimulus type was significant, f =  <dig> , p < . <dig>  congruent stimuli yielded more correct responses than incongruent ones . in addition, the main effect of sex was significant, f  =  <dig> , p < . <dig>  as was its interaction with stimulus type, f  =  <dig> , p < . <dig>  these effects indicate that boys tend to respond somewhat less accurate than girls on incongruent trials. for the second born twins also the main effect of stimulus type was significant, f =  <dig> , p < . <dig>  again, congruent stimuli yielded more correct responses than incongruent ones . the main effect of sex was not significant, but the interaction was significant, f =  <dig> , p < . <dig>  again, boys tended to respond somewhat less accurate than girls on incongruent trials.

in order to test whether for the flanker task there was a trade-off between response speed and accuracy, we simply correlated rts with accuracy, separately for the first born and second born twins. a possible speed-accuracy trade-off would manifest itself as a significant negative correlation between mean reaction time and percentage of errors. for the first born twins we found a significant positive correlation . but this correlation appeared to be due to a handful of subjects who were both quite slow and error prone. for the second born twins the correlation was small , and not significant. thus, we conclude that in our sample there was no evidence of a speed-accuracy trade-off.

a similar analysis was done for the stroop task. we correlated the average completion time of card  <dig> with the number of errors commited with card  <dig>  we did not correlate speed with the number of corrections, because these measures are not independent. for both the first born twins and the second born twins we found a significant positive correlation . thus, subjects who were slow also tended to be inaccurate. however, the distribution of the number of errors was rather skewed , which makes it difficult to interpret these correlations. so, similar to the flanker task, we conclude that there was no evidence of a speed-accuracy trade-off.

genetic analyses
the twin correlations obtained with the stroop task thus appeared strongly indicative of genetic effects. using structural equation modelling, these effects were formally tested. but prior to testing we had to establish whether there were significant differences in variances across sex and zygosity, since one of the assumptions underlying structural equation modelling is the assumption of homogeneity of variances. we conducted the levene test on all variables, separately for the first-born and the second born twins. for none of the variables the levene test yielded a significant effect, with the possible exception of the completion time of card  <dig> for the second born twins, f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> . so, we felt it was legitimate to use structural equation modelling to test for genetic effects.

additional file  <dig> shows the results. the full ace model, which allowed for sex differences in parameter estimates fitted well to the data , with the possible exception of card  <dig> , although the most parsimonious model for card  <dig> fitted slightly better . sex differences in parameter estimates could be discarded from the models, although they were almost significant for card  <dig> . common environmental influences were not necessary to describe the data, but additive genetic influences explained a significant part of the variance in all  <dig> variables. heritabilities for the  <dig> cards were 75%, 70% and 74% respectively, with confidence intervals indicating that these were well above half the variance. heritability of the interference effect was 49%, with a 95% confidence interval between  <dig> and 64%.

discussion
in this study we assessed the heritability of performance on two well-known response interference tasks: the color word stroop task and the eriksen flanker task, using a large sample of 12-year old twins. the aim was to test whether stroop performance and/or flanker performance could qualify as a suitable endophenotype for genetic frontal abnormalities, such as adhd. first, we found that the time to complete each of the three cards was highly heritable. this may represent a general factor related to processing speed and/or rapid naming speed. of greater importance was the finding that the interference score  was also heritable: nearly 50% of the variation in performance was due to genetic variation. thus, the efficiency of the network that deals with response conflict is -in part- under genetic influence.

for the theoretically similar flanker task, however, there was little evidence of genetic influences on performance. even though the mz twin correlations on response speed were higher than the dz correlations , the highest correlation was observed for the dos twins, for which we have no explanation. in addition, there was no evidence of genetic influences on variations in the size of the flanker effect. variation in performance thus simply appeared to be due to noise. this latter finding is at odds with a previous study where it was found that variation in the size of the flanker interference effect was 89% due to variations in genes  <cit> . this discrepancy could of course be due to minor differences between task versions. for example, the flanker test adopted by  <cit>  was embedded in a visual orienting paradigm. but it could also be the case that genetic effects on flanker performance are somehow age specific. our age group was  <dig> years old, whereas fan et al.'s  <cit>  age group was between  <dig> and  <dig> years of age. it is well known that heritabilities of different traits vary with age. for example, the heritability of iq is known to steadily increase with increasing age , and it could be the case that genetic effects on flanker performance only emerge at a later age. finally, it could be that fan et al.  <cit>  have obtained a false positive result, due to their somewhat modest sample size .

the question now is whether stroop and flanker performance can qualify as a suitable endophenotype of frontal pathologies. recently a list of  <dig> criteria was compiled that are ideally possessed by endophenotypes  <cit> . criteria  <dig> to  <dig> deal with the relationship between phenotype and endophenotype. in brief, there should be a high correlation between the phenotype and endophenotype, this correlation should be based in genetics, and the correlation should be theoretically meaningful. in our introduction we have briefly touched upon the relationship between performance on response interference tasks and high-level phenotypes, such as the efficiency of the frontal executive network. our selective review of the literature indicated that there was a clear genetic link between stroop performance and frontal pathologies, whereas evidence for a the genetic link between flanker performance and frontal pathologies was less conclusive.

criteria  <dig> and  <dig> of  <cit>  state that the endophenotype should be reliable and heritable. with respect to heritability, we have demonstrated that – at least for this age group – there is strong evidence for genetic influences on stroop performance, but not on flanker performance. with respect to reliability, we have no test-retest data but we can assess reliability by examining the mz correlations, because these correlations provide a lower limit to reliability  <cit> . inspection of table  <dig> reveals that the stroop performance measures are characterized by high mz correlations, which implies high reliabilities. the flanker performance measures reported in table  <dig>  however, revealed quite low mz correlations. this finding, in combination with a low split-half reliability  leads us to conclude that stroop performance provides a more reliable measure than flanker performance.

CONCLUSIONS
we have found evidence for the existence of strong genetic effects on conflict resolution, although the effects are task dependent. we conclude that performance on the stroop test yields a better endophenotype for frontal function than performance on the flanker task. so, despite the overlapping regions of brain activation in the stroop and flanker tasks, and despite their face-value similarity, we believe that these interference tasks differ in important, yet unknown ways.

