BACKGROUND
during foodborne salmonella enteritidis infection pathogens can pass the gut epithelial cell lining and translocate to extra-intestinal organs like the spleen and liver <cit> . in response to mucosal invasion of pathogens, epithelial cells and macrophages express pro-inflammatory cytokines, e.g. interleukin-1β , to recruit neutrophils <cit> . these efficient killers of translocating microbes  <cit>  contain high concentrations of the enzyme myeloperoxidase  <cit> , which participates in the innate immune defence through formation of powerful reactive oxidants <cit> . an unfortunate side-effect of this defence machinery is that the anti-bacterial reactive oxygen species produced also react with cellular organic molecules and have the potential to induce oxidative tissue damage  <cit> . for example, mpo is associated with oxidative stress-related damage  in the inflamed mucosa of ulcerative colitis patients <cit> . to reduce this damage, inhibition of mpo has even become a possible target of new drug development <cit> .

glutathione, a tripeptide composed of γ-glutamic acid, cysteine and glycine is quantitatively the most important low-molecular-weight  thiol in tissues <cit> . glutathione, synthesised by most mammalian cells but mainly in the liver <cit> , is an active free-radical-scavenging compound found in virtually all animal cells <cit> . in comparison with a number of other tissues the liver has a particularly high content of glutathione <cit> . a relatively high concentration of glutathione is also detected in the intestinal epithelium <cit> . here glutathione has been shown to play an important role in the protection of the intestinal mucosa against oxidative stress both in vitro  <cit>  and in vivo <cit> . for example, glutathione depletion in newborn rats leads to increased nitrosative stress during necrotising enterocolitis <cit> . furthermore, salmonella infection decreases enterocyte glutathione levels in mouse ileal loops and this reduction increases the susceptibility of epithelial cells to oxidative damage <cit> . this oxidative damage in its turn might impair barrier function. as well as the gut microbiota <cit> , mucus <cit>  and the immune system <cit> , intestinal glutathione is suggested to be important for intestinal barrier function <cit> . many studies on the role of glutathione in prevention of oxidative damage in the intestinal mucosa have been performed  <cit> . however, actual in vivo proof that intestinal glutathione is important for gut barrier function is lacking. we therefore investigated the role of glutathione in intestinal barrier function and infection-induced mucosal inflammation.

buthionine sulfoximine  is a specific inhibitor of γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase , which is the rate-limiting enzyme of glutathione synthesis <cit> . this chemical causes glutathione-deficiency in animals <cit>  and enables us to investigate the role of this tripeptide in animal models. besides glutathione depletion, stimulation of synthesis is interesting for that purpose as well. cysteine is known to stimulate glutathione synthesis <cit> , and cysteine availability is often the limiting factor for intracellular glutathione synthesis <cit> . for example, intraperitoneally administered n-acetylcysteine was shown to increase hepatic and intestinal glutathione levels in bile-duct ligated rats <cit> . therefore, dietary supplementation with cysteine, or the more stable variant cystine, can potentially maintain or increase hepatic and intestinal glutathione levels during oxidative stress.

our aim was to determine whether depletion of glutathione by bso affects gut barrier function and increases susceptibility of rats to salmonella infection and the associated inflammation. in addition, the effect of dietary cystine on glutathione levels in the intestinal mucosa and consequences for the resistance to infection were investigated.

RESULTS
animals and food intake
at the start of the study, mean body weight of the animals was  <dig> g. average food intake before infection was  <dig> g/d in the control and cystine group, and  <dig> g/d in the bso group . post infection, food intake was  <dig> g/d in all groups. mean body weight gain prior to infection was  <dig> g/d. after infection, average body weight gain was  <dig> g/d in all groups.

bso decreases the glutathione content in liver and ileum mucosa
bso decreased hepatic glutathione by 48% in the infected animals in comparison with the control group . cystine supplementation did not significantly affect liver glutathione of non-infected rats. post-infection levels were 21% higher in cystine-fed animals, although this increase did not reach statistical significance. bso decreased ileal mucosal glutathione by ≥ 98% in non-infected and infected rats . dietary cystine did not increase ileal glutathione in non-infected or infected rats.

bso is a competitive inhibitor of gamma-gcs and could possibly cause an accumulation of cysteine in the ileum mucosa. however, mucosal cysteine levels were decreased in bso treated animals .

diarrhoea, faecal excretion and translocation of salmonella
glutathione depletion increased relative faecal wet weight in non-infected animals whereas cystine had no effect . after infection, there was no difference in diarrhoea between the control and bso group or between the control and cystine group.

faecal salmonella excretion was similar in all diet groups on the first and third day after salmonella infection /g faeces, respectively), indicating identical intestinal colonisation levels in all groups. furthermore, depletion of mucosal glutathione did not affect salmonella translocation to liver and spleen . in contrast, cystine decreased the number of salmonella in both tissues , pointing to a protective effect of cystine on salmonella translocation to extra-intestinal organs.

mucosal antioxidant capacity
in response to a serious decrease of glutathione, the body could compensate by increasing other  antioxidants. therefore we investigated the total mucosal antioxidant capacity of non-thiols by determining the ferric reducing ability of mucosal tissue. neither bso nor cystine changed the mucosal non-thiol antioxidant capacity before infection. the same results were found in infected rats .

mucosal inflammation and oxidative damage
despite identical colonisation levels, the glutathione-depleted rats, presumably with lower antioxidant capacity, had increased ileal mucosal il-1β levels . this coincided with a more intensive inflammatory response in this group as measured by ileal mpo . however, this did not increase oxidative-stress related mucosal damage like protein carbonyls  and mucosal lipid peroxidation, measured by thiobarbituric acid reactive substances . despite protective effects of cystine on salmonella translocation and maintenance of glutathione levels, intestinal inflammation and oxidative damage markers were not decreased in this group .

intestinal permeability
in general, the salmonella infection increased paracellular intestinal permeability with time . despite increased mucosal inflammation in bso treated animals, intestinal permeability was not aggravated. in contrast, the results suggest a decrease in comparison with the control group . moreover, cystine partially restored infection-induced intestinal permeability to basal  levels, suggesting a beneficial effect of cystine on gut barrier function. neither bso nor cystine supplementation affected intestinal permeability in non-infected rats .

nitric oxide response is not affected by the cystine diet
since diet composition can affect the inducible nitric oxide  production capacity in response to microbial stimuli, the effect of dietary cystine was investigated in an lps experiment. urinary nox  excretion in response to intraperitoneally administered lipopolysaccharide  was identical in the control and cystine group , demonstrating equal host capacity to produce no.

discussion
the present study shows that depletion of glutathione during salmonella infection results in increased mucosal inflammation. however, as salmonella translocation was not affected by bso treatment, glutathione depletion obviously does not affect mucosal barrier function. also, urinary excretion of the paracellular permeability marker chromium ethylenediamine-tetraacetic acid  was not increased in comparison with infected rats fed the control diet. on the other hand, cystine supplementation resulted in improved barrier function and decreased salmonella counts in extra-intestinal organs. however, the subsequent ileal inflammation was not reduced. since cystine did not significantly increase glutathione and inflammation was not reduced the results suggest that the protective mechanism of cystine supplementation is not related to mucosal glutathione levels. most likely other host defences than glutathione are strengthened by cystine.

in line with other studies, oral administration of bso, a selective inhibitor of glutathione synthesis, decreased hepatic glutathione levels <cit> . nearly complete depletion was observed in ileal mucosa of both infected and non-infected animals. a decrease of intestinal glutathione is shown during necrotising enterocolitis in rats <cit>  and in mouse ileal loops exposed to salmonella typhimurium <cit> . this decrease is suggested to contribute to pathogenesis of disease and subsequent failure of barrier integrity <cit> . our results now show that depletion of glutathione does not necessarily lead to impaired intestinal barrier function. a study with mice indicated that glutathione-depletion by bso caused mucosal damage in the jejunum and colon <cit> . however, a much higher dose of bso was applied, increasing the risk of pharmacological side-effects of bso in that study. the lower dose used in our study, nearly depleted intestinal mucosal glutathione but hardly affected body weight gain and did not result in histological mucosal damage in haematoxylin- and eosin-stained ileum sections .

the oral salmonella infection in our experiment had no or little effect on liver and ileal mucosal glutathione at  <dig> days post infection, indicating that the organ-specific capacity to synthesise glutathione was adequate or that infection-induced oxidative stress was absent in normally fed rats . in previous studies we  and others <cit>  detected a temporarily decrease of intestinal glutathione after an intestinal insult. so, intestinal glutathione levels may differ depending on the time point studied, which may result in seemingly contrasting results. for example, in our in-vivo study, glutathione was determined at  <dig> days after infection and levels were not  decreased. however, a reduction in glutathione was reported in an ileal loop study at  <dig> hrs after salmonella introduction  <cit> . furthermore, studies limited to specific cell types, for example enterocytes isolated from infected animals <cit> , may show different results from in vivo studies investigating complete mucosa. specifically, during infection t lymphocytes and macrophages migrate into the intestinal mucosa and these cells are also able to synthesise glutathione and thus contribute to mucosal glutathione  <cit> . in our study, oxidative damage in the form of intestinal protein carbonyls or tbars was not detected when intestinal glutathione was depleted . oxidative damage induced by glutathione depletion has been shown in plasma lipids  <cit>  and liver  <cit> , however those studies did not investigate the intestine.

supplementation of cystine maintained intestinal glutathione levels similar to the control diet group. surprisingly, inflammation was not reduced despite a decrease in intestinal permeability and significant inhibition of salmonella translocation. improvement of gut barrier function has also been described for intraperitoneally administered n-acetylcysteine in partially hepatectomised rats <cit> . the reduced viable salmonella counts in liver and spleen of the cystine-fed rats in our study may have resulted from decreased salmonella translocation from the gut or from enhanced killing of translocated pathogens by the innate immune system, e.g. by increased production of nitric oxide  <cit> . n-acetylcysteine can enhance this no defence <cit> , but the effect of cystine was unknown. our lps experiment revealed that rats fed the control and cystine diet responded identically to an intraperitoneal lps challenge, excluding differences in the no-based capacity of the host to kill bacterial invaders. therefore, the lower salmonella counts in liver and spleen observed here probably reflect reduced translocation of this pathogen from the gut lumen.

surprisingly, infection-induced intestinal permeability of bso-treated animals seemed lower than that of the control group  but the effect was not significant. one could hypothesize that competitive inhibition of gamma-gcs may cause accumulation of cysteine in the mucosa, resulting in protective effects as seen on the cystine diet. however, mucosal cysteine levels were decreased in bso treated animals. furthermore, in contrast to the cystine fed rats, no protective effect against salmonella translocation was observed in these animals.

the mucosal barrier enhancing effect of cystine requires further investigation. results need to be reproduced and the mechanism behind the protective effect should be explored. cysteine can play a role in various host defences. for instance, trefoil peptides, which stabilise mucosal glycoproteins and protect the mucosa from various insults, e g bacterial toxins <cit> , contain several cysteine-rich domains <cit> . in addition, defensins, which are antimicrobial peptides secreted by human and rodent ileal paneth cells, contain  <dig> conserved cysteines <cit>  and are important for intestinal resistance to salmonella infection <cit> . although, cysteine is not an essential amino acid and can be synthesised from methionine, it might be conditionally essential like suggested for glutamine <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, intestinal depletion of glutathione is not as detrimental for maintenance of the gut barrier as often presumed. neither paracellular intestinal permeability nor salmonella translocation were promoted at very low mucosal glutathione levels, despite increased infection-induced ileal inflammation. on the other hand, dietary cystine did not reduce infection-associated inflammation but decreased intestinal permeability and salmonella translocation to extra-intestinal organs by a mechanism unlikely related to glutathione. follow-up studies are needed to elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying the protective effect of cystine supplementation on gut barrier function and to address human relevance.

