BACKGROUND
listeria monocytogenes is an intracellular pathogen of humans and animals  <cit> , and has been implicated in several foodborne outbreaks as well as sporadic cases of disease during the last ten to fifteen years  <cit> . it is known that differences between strains as well as differences in environmental conditions affect the invasive potential of this pathogen  <cit> . virulence models allowing comparison of the pathogenic potency of different cultures of listeria are therefore essential tools in the study of bacteria within this genus. additionally, such models are needed to study the role of specific genes in the process of infection.

virulence models most commonly applied include cell-line based assays and various animal models. however, a number of obstacles are associated with the use of such models for comparative studies of the infectivity of listeria. despite efforts to optimize reproducibility in cell line based in vitro studies, well to well variation is difficult to avoid  <cit> . likewise, in animal models, regardless of the employment of well-characterised laboratory animal strains, variations between individual animals commonly occur. the lack of accurate reproducibility in existing virulence models means that it is often difficult to compare the virulence of two different listeria strains in a quantitative manner. a solution to this problem is to carry out virulence studies as competition assays between two or more strains. this approach has been applied with success by use of listeria carrying resistance markers to various antibiotics  <cit> . an attractive alternative is to use fluorescent protein markers. the green fluorescent protein  was introduced approximately ten years ago as a convenient tool for studies of the pathogenesis of e.g. salmonella typhimurium and yersenia paratuberculosis  <cit> . more recently, this protein has been applied in studies of gram-positive bacteria including streptococcus suis  <cit> , and listeria monocytogenes  <cit> . the advantage of fluorescent markers, when compared to resistance gene markers, is that they allow direct visualization and real-time studies of tagged bacteria. furthermore, they allow certain identification of the tagged strains in un-sterile systems such as the mammalian gastrointestinal tract, where naturally occurring resistant bacteria may be difficult to distinguish from resistance-tagged strains. the disadvantage of fluorescence tagging is that small, tagged subpopulations can be difficult to quantify, since selection for fluorescence is not possible. this disadvantage may be overcome by combining fluorescent markers with antibiotic resistance markers.

we have developed a fluorescent marker system that allows identification of single listeria cells as well as colonies in a non-destructive manner, and demonstrate its use in a traditional caco- <dig> cell invasion assay.

RESULTS
a multicolour tagging system based on the synthesis of cyan fluorescent protein , green fluorescent protein , yellow fluorescent protein , dsredexpress or hcred
fluorescent microscopy at 16× magnification revealed that l. monocytogenes scotta harbouring either pnf <dig> , pjeban <dig> , pjeban <dig> , pjeban <dig>  and pjeban <dig>  all gave rise to easily detectable fluorescent colonies of the expected colour, demonstrating that a heterolog expression of green fluorescent protein , cyan fluorescent protein , yellow fluorescent protein , or the red fluorescent markers hcred and dsredexpress had successfully been established in l. monocytogenes scotta. the labelling system was tested and shown to confer the expected fluorescence also to other strains of l. monocytogenes, including egde and lo <dig> .

l. monocytogenes cells tagged with any of the fluorescent proteins could be detected at the single cell level by fluorescence microscopy . by employment of appropriate combinations of different excitation wavelength and different filtersets, spectral discrimination between strains wt-cfp, wt-yfp and wt-dsredex mixed in a ratio of 1:1: <dig> was obtained at the single cell level . although cfp, yfp and dsredexpress are not maximally excitated by uv-light, visual inspection revealed that colonies of wt-cfp, wt-yfp and wt-dsredex could be discriminated when placed on a  <dig> nmuv-table . gfp tagged listeria also gave rise to fluorescent colonies when excitated at  <dig> nm, however as expected from the similar spectral properties of gfp , and yfp , visual differentiation between gfp-tagged and yfp-tagged l. monocytogenes at the colony level was not possible. similarly, visual discrimination between colonies of gfp- and cfp-tagged cells was difficult.

listerial growth and plasmid stability in batch cultures
no difference in growth rate between the labelled strains was observed during exponential growth in erythromycin-supplemented bhi of l. monocytogenes scotta tagged with plasmids carrying cfp, gfp, yfp, dsredex or hcred. this observation is important for the utility of the tagged stains in comparative co-inoculation studies, where biases in growth could obscure the results.

propagation of the five labelled strains for  <dig> generations without erythromycin revealed that within the first  <dig> generations, more than  <dig> % of the bacteria in any of the five cultures still carried the plasmid. no significant differences in the fraction of plasmid harbouring cells were observed among the five cultures during this period, clearly demonstration that the segregational stability of pnf <dig>  pjeban <dig>  pjeban <dig>  pjeban <dig> and pjeban <dig> was the same for all plasmids during the first  <dig> generations . throughout the experiment, the fraction of plasmid harbouring bacteria as a function of the number of cell divisions was similar for cultures of l. monocytogenes tagged with cfp, gfp, and yfp, reaching a value of approximately  <dig> % following propagation for  <dig> generations in the absence of selective pressure. likewise, the fraction of plasmid harbouring bacteria as a function of generation number was observed to be similar in cultures of hcred- and dsredex-tagged cells, however more than 50% of these bacteria still carried the plasmid at the end of the experiment . this group of plasmids was thus slightly more stably maintained than the plasmids tagged with cfp, gfp and yfp, which are all derivatives of the same green fluorescent protein isolated from the jellyfish aequorea victoria  <cit> . the sequences of the red fluorescent proteins, which are obtained from the sea anemone heteractis crispa  <cit>  and the coral discosoma  <cit> , respectively, are shorter than the gfp-derived proteins, which may mean that they impose a smaller cell burden on the tagged listeria, thus explaining the better stability. the observed differences in maintenance should be taken into consideration when applying the constructed plasmids  for comparison experiments where fluorescence tagged bacteria are quantified after more than  <dig> bacterial generations.

non-fluorescent, erythromycin resistant colonies were never observed in any of the  <dig> cultures investigated, confirming that all the constructed plasmids were  <dig> % structurally stable.

invasion assays with fluorescence-tagged bacteria
exposure of caco- <dig> cells to the fluorescence tagged strains of l. monocytogenes scotta at an infection multiplicity of approximately  <dig> bacteria per cell showed that infection potentials of these strains were not different  from that of the un-tagged parent strain . expression of the fluorescent proteins thus did not affect the infection potential of the investigated strain. additionally, when wt strains with three different fluorescent tags were mixed in a ratio of 1:1: <dig> prior to invasion in caco- <dig> cells, almost the same ratio was found between the tagged listeria that had invaded the cells, showing that differently labelled strains were equally virulent . caco- <dig> assays performed with the l. monocytogenes strains egde and lo <dig> tagged with either cfp or yfp showed that the invasion frequency was independent of these two fluorescent tags also in other strain backgrounds .

it should be noted, that infection of mammalian cells does not give full information about infection at the levels of complex tissues and individuals. however, unpublished data from our lab indicated that also in a guinea-pig model, the virulence of listeria was unaffected by the fluorescent labels . this is in accordance with previous studies showing that gfp-tagging did not affect the virulence of listeria in a murine model  <cit> .

an l. monocytogenes scotta strain carrying a mutation in the inla gene, encoding internalina which is known to be necessary for listerial epithelial invasion  <cit>  was constructed and designated inla'. the infection potential of the inla' mutant was more than  <dig> fold lower than observed for the wt strains , which is in accordance with previous reports  <cit> .

when fluorescence-tagged l. monocytogenes wt strains were mixed with the fluorescence-tagged invasion-impaired inla' mutant, the difference in invasion capacity observed for the individual strains was reflected also in the mixed infections . however, since it was not possible to select for the mutant strain, the detection limit was increased by the presence of the wt strain, which outnumbered the mutant about  <dig> fold as expected from the separate invasion assays .

this demonstrates that co-invasion assays may be a useful method for rapid screening of differences in infection potentials between different strains of l. monocytogenes when a fluorescent labelling system is used for discrimination between the strains. additionally, it shows that the presence of the wt strain does not mediate passive uptake of the inla' mutant. fluorescent bacteria were easily visualized and distinguished from each other inside the caco- <dig> cells by fluorescence microscopy .

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a stable fluorescent labelling system for use in l. monocytogenes, and demonstrate that the labels do not affect the invasion potential of l. monocytogenes scotta nor of an invasion-impaired mutant of this strain. the fluorescent labels allows easy discrimination between tagged cells and other bacteria in un-sterile systems, as well as discrimination between strains carrying different fluorescent markers, and provides a highly useful tool for researchers addressing virulence mechanisms of listeria. additionally, the labelling system allows real-time studies and visualization of bacteria internalized in eukaryotic cells, and is an optimal tool for comparative co-infection studies between up to three listeria strains. however, for comparison of strains with highly different infection potentials, such as a wt listeria and its inla mutant, it should be taken into account that it is not possible to select for fluorescence, and that visualization of a strain constituting a very small minority might therefore be difficult. one solution to this would be to equip the less virulent strain with a distinct antibiotic resistance.

