BACKGROUND
despite the fundamental role of chromosomal change in eukaryotic evolution, the mechanisms related to this process are still poorly known. main karyotypic features of organisms, such as the number of chromosomes, are usually stable within species  <cit> . this stability is in good correspondence with the fact that new chromosomal rearrangements usually originate as heterozygotes and are often - although not always - associated with heterozygote disadvantage . therefore, their spread to fixation within a large population has low probability  <cit> . at the same time, differences in karyotype characters between species, including diploid chromosome number , are extremely common. numerous cases of extraordinary differences in chromosome number, especially in plants, are due to polyploidy  <cit> . even when excluding polyploidy, interspecific variation remains very frequent, and many closely related species often have substantially different chromosome numbers. in metazoan animals, the greatest range of within-genus karyotype variation not related to polyploidy is found in agrodiaetus blue butterflies, where diploid chromosome number ranges between species from 2n =  <dig> to 2n =  <dig> in spite of morphological similarity and very recent time of species divergence  <cit> . interestingly, agrodiaetus also tends to demonstrate the greatest karyotype difference between very closely related species, e.g. sister species a. biruni and a. posthumus have 2n =  <dig> and 2n =  <dig> respectively with no intermediates between them.

in vertebrates, the range of chromosome number variation between closely related species is smaller, yet still impressive. for example, the analysis of  <dig> species of the catfish genus corydoras revealed that they have karyotypes ranging from 2n =  <dig> to 2n =  <dig>  <cit> . the tuco-tucos, south american rodents of the genus ctenomys, show chromosomal variation with diploid numbers varying from 2n =  <dig> to 2n =  <dig> among the  <dig> species described  <cit> . the deer genus muntiacus includes species with different karyotypes, ranging from 2n =  <dig> to 2n =  <dig>  <cit> . in plants, the greatest range of within-genus karyotype variation not related to polyploidy is found in carex, where diploid chromosome number ranges from 2n =  <dig> to 2n =  <dig>  <cit> .

the discrepancy between intra- and interspecific variability in chromosome numbers poses a serious evolutionary problem. how can numerous species with extremely diverse karyotypes evolve in a relatively short period of time, if major chromosomal rearrangements changing the number of chromosomes are mostly underdominant and, consequently, intraspecific variations are rare and their range is limited?

one possible explanation is that extremely different chromosome numbers evolve gradually through multiple speciation/raciation events, each involving the fixation of a single  chromosomal rearrangement, and followed by the subsequent extinction of species or races with intermediate karyotypes. this step-by-step mechanism of karyotype evolution seems to be common in nature, and its initial phase can be observed in some chromosomally polymorphic organisms such as the mouse mus musculus domesticus and the shrew sorex araneus  <cit> . it has been recently demonstrated that the reduction in fertility of hybrids between the house mouse races separated by fixed monobrachial differences is not so pronounced as previously supposed  <cit> . nevertheless, this study generally supported the chromosomally-based monobrachial speciation model as a process that accelerates the acquisition of reproductive isolation in the house mouse  <cit> . in the step-by-step process, the transitional forms are expected to demonstrate a chromosomal fusion/fission polymorphism and, accordingly, numerous examples are known where single or few chromosomal fusions exist in the polymorphic phase, e.g., robertsonian fusions in drosophila americana  <cit> , melanopline grasshoppers  <cit>  and rodents of the genus ctenomys  <cit> .

an alternative hypothesis is that dramatic changes in chromosome number appear as a consequence of a within-species accumulation of numerous chromosomal rearrangements, resulting in highly polymorphic systems with the subsequent extinction of intermediate karyomorphs. a necessary precondition for this mechanism is that major chromosomal rearrangements changing the number of chromosomes are not strongly underdominant. this seems to hold true for different groups such as butterflies, flies, grasshoppers, spiders, fishes and mammals  <cit> .

while the within-species mechanism of explosive chromosome number evolution is possible in theory, it has been less well documented compared to the evolution through multiple speciation/raciation events. in practice, it is difficult to record such an extensive within-species accumulation for two reasons. first, the transition from one chromosomal form to another may be very fast compared to the species lifespan. the only exception is the chromosomal evolution operated by balancing selection. however, this mechanism seems to be rare, except in the case of inversions . second, even if polymorphism for multiple chromosomal rearrangements is found, it may be difficult to distinguish between a polymorphic system primarily evolved within a species and a polymorphism resulting from hybridization between different, chromosomally diverged species. for example, in the hybridization zones between low and high chromosome number species of the rodent genus ellobius, there is a so-called "chromosomal fan" including all chromosome numbers from 2n =  <dig> to 2n =  <dig>  <cit> . in fact, this case does not represent evidence for within-species accumulation of chromosomal changes, but simply represents the outcome of secondary parapatry by previously isolated chromosomal races.

furthermore, the clinal geographical distribution of chromosomal races observed in some organisms  <cit> , apparently compatible with gradual within-species accumulation of chromosomal changes, may be better explained by the multiple speciation mechanism. for example, in butterflies of the erebia tyndarus complex there are several geographically isolate chromosomal races   <cit> , and in fossorial mole rats of the spalax ehrenbergi complex four linearly distributed chromosomal races exist   <cit> . in these cases, intrapopulation chromosomal polymorphism is absent and differences between neighbouring chromosomal races, although minor, are fixed. detailed molecular and morphological studies provide evidence for non-conspecificity of the e. tyndarus and s. ehrenbergi forms, and several distinct species were identified and formally described  <cit> .

in this study we describe a chromosomal cline in the wood white butterfly, leptidea sinapis  that provides strong evidence for rapid and extensive within-species chromosome number evolution through accumulation of multiple chromosomal changes. this cline is exceptional in the geographic area that it covers  and in its range of within-species chromosome number variation . excluding polyploidy, this is the widest known within-species chromosome number range for any animal or plant, and it is comparable with the highest known level of within-genus karyotype variability.

RESULTS
we analyzed the karyotype, mitochondrial and nuclear genetic markers, and the morphology of the wood white butterfly l. sinapis. this is a common species widely distributed from portugal and spain in the west to siberia in the east  <cit> . from this territory different chromosome numbers have been reported in literature ranging from n =  <dig> to n =  <dig>  <cit> . however, these results are impossible to interpret in practice because of the discovery in  <dig> of a cryptic sympatric species  in europe and asia  <cit> . as all karyotype data for l. sinapis were published before this date, it is unclear whether reported chromosome numbers reflect inter- or intraspecific variability.

our study covers populations from different parts of the l. sinapis distribution , as well as the closely related species l. reali and l. morsei as comparison. we discovered that diploid chromosome number ranges in l. sinapis from 2n =  <dig> in spain to 2n =  <dig> in eastern kazakhstan in a longitudinal cline . these findings are based on the examination of  <dig> male specimens, with metaphase plates observed in  <dig> individuals, out of which  <dig> had unambiguous chromosome number counts . we also found that chromosome numbers are not stable within some populations from italy, romania and kazakhstan. specimens with different chromosome numbers were found within each of these populations, and the great majority of the individuals were chromosomal heterozygotes displaying from one to six multivalents in metaphase i of meiosis . in the heterozygotes, we observed no abnormalities in the anaphase i stage of meiosis, and the first division of meiosis resulted in normal haploid metaphase ii cells where, as expected, two types of metaphase plates with different chromosome numbers were observed. therefore we conclude that chromosomal rearrangements are not fixed in several of the populations studied, and there seems to be no strong selection against chromosomal heterozygotes. interestingly, chromosome number range overlaps between some studied populations separated by hundreds of kilometers, e.g. in kazakhstan between the population from landman  and the population from saur .

in certain species, variation in chromosome number may be caused by the presence of so-called b-chromosomes   <cit> . b-chromosomes consist mainly of repetitive dna and can be usually found in low numbers  in a percentage of the individuals of a given population. although they are dispensable, they can sometimes accumulate through processes of mitotic or meiotic drive  <cit> . b-chromosomes can be distinguished from normal a-chromosomes because they are usually smaller and can be seen as additional chromosomes present in only some of the individuals in a population. the best diagnostic feature is their identity at meiosis, where they may be found as univalents, or in various pairing configurations , but never pairing with a-chromosomes. thus, meiotic analysis is critical to distinguish between b-chromosomes and normal a-chromosomes  <cit> . although we cannot totally exclude that b-chromosomes can be found in l. sinapis, especially taking into account that they are known in other genera of the family pieridae  <cit> , there is good evidence that b-chromosomes are not a valid explanation for the chromosome number cline found in l. sinapis. this is due to the fact that in the spanish population, where the number of chromosomes is maximal , they seem to be completely absent: the chromosome number is stable within as well as between individuals, and no univalents have been observed during meiosis. moreover, no univalents have been observed during meiosis in any of the other populations studied. additionally, the following clear pattern was observed: the higher the chromosome numbers in a population, the smaller the size of chromosomes, and vice versa . this regularity indicates that chromosomal fusions/fissions  were the main mechanism of karyotype evolution.

leptidea sinapis can be distinguished from its closest relative l. reali by the length of the phallus, saccus and vinculum  or of the ductus bursae   <cit>  as well as by molecular markers  <cit> . therefore, to exclude the possibility of cryptic species involved in the formation of the extraordinarily high chromosomal variability and to demonstrate the conspecificity of the populations studied, we performed morphological and molecular analysis of each studied individual.

the measured variables of the male genitalia showed no significant difference or apparent trend between chromosomal races according to one-way anova  and to discriminant analysis  . 100% of the l. reali were correctly classified to species with the da, but within l. sinapis, between  <dig>  and  <dig> %  of specimens were correctly assigned to region .

the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase i  and nuclear carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase 2/aspartate transcarbamylase/dihydroorotase  and internal transcribed spacer  <dig>  markers analyzed did not reveal deep intraspecific levels of divergence  suggesting the absence of cryptic species . the coi haplotype network  shows that the maximum connection steps are only four, and that the most common haplotype is found in all the studied regions. the observed genetic variability is rather low for an almost pan-palaearctic species , even more so since l. sinapis is considered a non-migratory poor flyer. the fact that the same low variability is shown by several independent markers rejects a recent mitochondrial genetic sweep and strongly suggests a very recent geographic expansion. coalescence-based dating with each marker and with all the markers combined estimates that the time to the most recent common ancestor of all the populations is only  <dig>  to  <dig>  years. thus, we conclude that there is no evidence for multiple species involved in the formation of the discovered cline, and that its origin is very recent.

it is known that in some systems, variation in chromosome number may be a result of ongoing hybridization between different, chromosomally diverged species  <cit> . therefore, the chromosome number variability discovered may be a consequence of hybridization between l. sinapis and its sibling species l. reali. this explanation may seem possible given that the presence of putative f <dig> hybrids between l. sinapis and l. reali was suggested  <cit> . however, these results  <cit>  were based on some apparent mismatches between dna-based identifications  and morphometry of the male genitalia. the classification of the sequenced specimens based on their genitalia was made by employing a bivariate plot, which took into account only the lengths of the phallus and saccus. a recent comprehensive morphometrical study on l. sinapis and l. reali from central italy  <cit>  highlighted the limitation of the "phallus and saccus" approach, which can lead to ambiguous classifications. the same study showed that this limitation can be corrected when using additional genitalic characters  and performing multivariate analyses. therefore, the report of possible hybrids between l. reali and l. sinapis requires confirmation since it may actually represent an artifact caused by the interpretation of insufficient morphological traits. moreover, in case of interspecific hybridization we can expect that some individuals would be heterozygous for species-specific nuclear molecular markers and specimens with intermediate morphology of genitalia should be found. none of the specimens studied in our work has shown these characteristics . due to genitalic morphological constraints between the two species, introgression is likely to be unidirectional with female l. sinapis potentially inseminated by male l. reali  <cit> . finally, several studies dealing with the mating behaviour of l. sinapis and l. reali reported that females of both species exclusively mated with conspecific males, suggesting the presence of strong precopulatory barriers  <cit> . therefore, we can conclude that interspecific hybridization is an unlikely explanation for the origin of the discovered chromosomal cline.

the clinal distribution of chromosome numbers in l. sinapis is statistically significant  and it is very unlikely to have arisen by chance . interestingly, the cline is longitudinally oriented , indicating either the direction of selective pressure involved in its formation, or the direction of population dispersal, or both of these processes. according to our dating, the moment of this dispersal would correspond to the upper pleistocene and the holocene, a period characterized by a strong glaciation in northern europe and the alps  <cit> . thus, our estimates indicate that the dispersal of l. sinapis could have occurred before or after the last glacial maximum .

several other cases of broad intraspecific chromosomal polymorphism have been described in animals  <cit>  and plants  <cit> . however, all these cases differ from the cline found in l. sinapis by the essentially smaller range of karyotype variability and by the possible existence of two or more cryptic species involved in the formation of the polymorphic chromosomal system. in order to demonstrate the intraspecific nature of karyotype variability, the following three criteria should be met simultaneously: 1) segregating chromosomal polymorphism within a population should be demonstrated, 2) molecular markers should not suggest the presence of potential cryptic species, and 3) species-diagnostic morphological differences should be lacking. to our knowledge, only studies on the common shrew and the house mouse have met all these criteria, but chromosomal races within these mammals have essentially smaller differences in chromosome number and apparently evolved through a step-by-step accumulation of single chromosomal rearrangements  <cit>  rather than through wide intraspecific and intrapopulation chromosome number polymorphism.

CONCLUSIONS
given that  chromosomal races of l. sinapis belong to the same species,  intrapopulation chromosome number polymorphism exists,  the chromosome number range overlaps between some populations separated by hundreds of kilometers,  the species has broad ecological preferences and is widely distributed,  the species has a rather homogenous genetic structure, and  chromosomal heterozygotes are abundant, this represents a clearly documented case of rapid and massive within-species accumulation of multiple chromosomal rearrangements affecting the number of chromosomes.

the chromosomal rearrangements discovered in our investigation display segregating polymorphism that seems not to strongly affect reproductive fitness within the populations studied. however, these rearrangements are not necessarily irrelevant to the process of formation of reproductive isolation . it is well known that robertsonian rearrangements , have the potential to limit gene flow and drive speciation  <cit> . the wood white butterfly, like other lepidoptera and some other insects, has holokinetic chromosomes in which the centromere is not localized and centromeric activity is distributed along the length of the chromosome  <cit> . it has been recently demonstrated that fusions/fissions of holokinetic chromosomes restrict gene flow too, and that this effect is cumulative   <cit> . in the case of l. sinapis all evidence suggests that neighbour populations with relatively low differences in chromosome number are reproductively compatible. we cannot exclude that geographically distant and chromosomally divergent populations would display reduced fertility if crossed, although they are connected by a chain of compatible populations that should allow gene flow. therefore, the discovered system opens the possibility to study clinal speciation, a process that is theoretically possible but difficult to document .

chromosomal rearrangements are known to limit introgression in parapatry or sympatry with regard to isolation genes, thus facilitating the maintenance of incipient species boundaries  <cit> , and serving as regions where isolation genes can accumulate  <cit> . the preservation and/or accumulation of isolation genes protected by chromosomal rearrangements could represent a prerequisite for speciation by means of suppressed-recombination mechanisms  <cit> .

in conclusion, the l. sinapis chromosomal cline seems to represent a narrow time-window of the very first steps of species formation linked to multiple chromosomal changes that have occurred explosively. this case offers a rare opportunity to study this process before drift, dispersal, selection, extinction and speciation erase the traces of microevolutionary events and just leave the final picture of a pronounced interspecific chromosomal difference.

