BACKGROUND
patterns of mate acquisition and reproduction are fundamentally important to the study of behavioural ecology and evolutionary biology. behavioural observations and molecular analysis have revealed a diversity of reproductive modes and mating systems within natural populations of vertebrates  <cit> . studies of this nature have provided insight into mechanisms for pre- and post-copulatory mating behaviours, alternative mating tactics, sexual selection, and the evolution of traits related to reproduction  <cit> . despite these advances, it is often not known why some species display alternative mating tactics such as sneaking, female mimicry and egg piracy, while closely related species do not  <cit> . however, recent comparative analyses have shed some light on the evolution of alternative reproductive tactics. for example, alternative reproductive tactics likely arise within species with territory defence and/or mate monopolization, such that individuals that would normally be excluded from mating enjoy some reproductive success by using an alternative strategy  <cit> .

once an alternative reproductive tactic invades a population, either a mixed evolutionary stable strategy or a conditional strategy in which the alternative reproductive tactic is physiologically or environmentally determined maintains the polymorphism  <cit> . for a few species scattered throughout the animal kingdom such as certain isopods  <cit> , fishes  <cit> , lizards  <cit>  and birds  <cit> , alternative reproductive tactics have a substantial genetic component. however the occurrence of alternative reproductive tactics appears to be phenotypically plastic in most species  <cit> . alternative mating tactics may switch from one state to another based on characteristics of the environment or individual. for example, nest site availability  <cit> , an individual's age  <cit> , or body size  <cit>  may affect the probability of adopting an alternative mating tactic. additionally, the observation that populations and closely related species sometimes differ with respect to alternative mating tactics suggests that these behaviours can vary on a macroevolutionary scale  <cit> .

fishes display a staggering array of reproductive behaviours, so they are ideally suited for behavioural studies  <cit> . male alternative reproductive tactics are common among fishes and range from parasitic spawning behaviours such as sneaking, egg piracy and female mimicry to cooperative breeding between satellite and territorial males . it appears that male alternative reproductive tactics have evolved from mate monopolization and back again multiple times in several groups of fishes, suggesting that the invasion and loss of male alternative reproductive tactics is a frequent and rapid occurrence  <cit> . it also appears that the evolution of male alternative reproductive tactics in certain lineages is aided by the presence of hormonal biochemical pathways that facilitate their evolution  <cit> . although male alternative reproductive tactics are common in species of fishes with male parental care  <cit> , the presence of male parental care appears not to be significantly correlated with the evolution of alternative reproductive tactics  <cit> . rather, strong sexual selection on males likely drives the evolution of male alternative reproductive tactics as evidenced by the significant correlation between male sexually selected traits and the presence of male alternative reproductive tactics  <cit> .

the present paper details the genetic mating system of the two-spotted goby, gobiusculus flavescens . male alternative reproductive tactics including sneaking and female mimicry occur frequently in gobies, making them good candidates for the study of alternative reproductive tactics . recent behavioural studies within the pomatoschistus clade or "sand goby group"  suggests a high degree of diversity in male alternative reproductive tactics, ranging from sneaking in common  and sand gobies  to the absence of sneaking in the marbled goby   <cit> . it is unclear to what extent sneaking plays a role in the mating behaviour of g. flavescens. the two-spotted goby has recently become established as a model for the study of factors affecting the intensity of sexual selection  <cit> , but genetic mating patterns, including the prevalence of alternative mating strategies, have not yet been characterized. a detailed genetic characterization of the two-spotted goby mating system hence will contribute to progress in understanding sexual selection in this species and to comparative studies of two-spotted gobies and other related taxa.

in this study, we applied microsatellite-based parentage analysis to two-spotted gobies to address several questions of potential importance to the study of sexual selection in this species. first, are male two-spotted gobies similar to other gobies in caring for eggs from multiple females simultaneously within nests? second, does the genetic mating system of two-spotted gobies reveal evidence of alternative male mating strategies? third, is there evidence of sexual selection among males, as evidenced by correlations between body size and male mating success or reproductive success?

RESULTS
microsatellite analyses
the four microsatellites developed in this study were polymorphic with 13– <dig> alleles per locus . heterozygosities were high for all loci and ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . we found no evidence of genotypic disequilibrium  and all loci except 2sg <dig> were in hardy-weinberg equilibrium after bonferroni adjustment  <cit> . locus 2sg <dig> displayed a significant deficit of heterozygotes  suggesting the presence of a null allele. exclusion probabilities for parentage analysis ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for each locus and the exclusion probability for all loci combined was high at  <dig>  for one parent known with certainty and the second parent unknown .

aactual sequence = 4gtat223

name of locus, primer sequence of the original cloned microsatellite, pcr reannealing temperature , number of adults assayed , number of alleles per locus , observed  and expected heterozygosity  and exclusion probabilities  are listed for each locus.

the departure of locus 2sg <dig> from hardy-weinberg equilibrium was corroborated by the detection of a null allele in the nest holding males of c <dig>  c <dig> and c <dig>  the null allele occurred infrequently  in all adult fish genotyped. the null allele manifested itself clearly as sets of embryos homozygous for each maternal allele with an absence of embryos possessing the expected heterozygous genotype comprised of both parental alleles. paternal null alleles did not compromise the interpretation of the parentage data as they were easy to detect within the progeny arrays. null alleles present in maternal lines would be less obvious to detect. maternal nulls, if present, could result in an overestimation of multiple maternal genotypes in a nest. however, such misdiagnoses would be based on a single locus and would invariably involve homozygous offspring genotypes. in the present analysis, all inferences of multiple maternal genotypes in a nest were corroborated by at least three loci, thereby minimizing overestimation of mothers based on null alleles. de novo mutations and genotyping errors were relatively infrequent; occurring in only one offspring in each of seven nests .

mating behaviour
twenty-two nests and attendant males were collected during sampling. twenty of the nests were in or on blue mussel  shells. the other two nests collected consisted of eggs laid in a crevice made by three small rocks  and one artificial nest . because only one out of  <dig> artificial nests was occupied, it appears that the addition of artificial nests prior to the study did not affect the natural mating dynamics.

clutches of eggs in collected nests were at all stages of development, ranging from recently laid , eyed , to larvae hatching at the time of collection. the time it took for eggs to hatch after they were brought back to the lab ranged from 0– <dig> days, with an average of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  days from the date of collection. from the onset of hatching, nearly all larvae in a nest hatched within a  <dig> hour period.

nests contained an estimated mean of  <dig> ±  <dig> hatching larvae per nest . actual clutch sizes were slightly larger due to the presence of undeveloped eggs and the potential of larvae to be lost during collection and rearing. the three nests that were in the process of hatching at time of collection , the artificial nest , and the rock nest  were excluded from the analyses involving nest  size. with two exceptions, nests in mussel shells were nearly full  with little extra room for additional eggs . the number of offspring per nest was significantly correlated with the mean mussel shell length . however, one nest where the male was spawning at the time of collection  had particularly high leverage  due to the low number of eggs in the nest at the time. removing this data point revealed an even stronger relationship between mussel length and number of offspring . male size, on the other hand, was not significantly related to mean mussel shell length .

anest fullness was not estimated in non-mussel nests  or in nests hatching at time of collection .

bparentage analysis could not be completed on nest c <dig> due to poor pcr amplification.

total length  and wet body mass  are shown for each male surveyed and the nest id, percent fullness of the nest , number of offspring per nest , number of offspring genotyped , number of unique reconstructed female genotypes , the number of sneaker males detected  and the number of assayed larva that were fertilized by sneakers .

parentage analysis was conducted on a sample of 26– <dig>  larvae per nest, in order to estimate the mating and reproductive success of males and to detect the presence of male alternative reproductive tactics . we detected an average of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mothers for each nest  with a range from 2– <dig> females per nest . the number of mothers was positively related to the number of offspring in a nest . for this analysis, nests that were in the process of hatching  were excluded as some offspring may have been lost. one nest  appeared to have two attendant males but only one of the males' genotypes matched all offspring, so the matching male was assigned as the father for that particular nest. the same nest  contained two broods of eggs that hatched nearly  <dig> hours apart. in this nest, we detected six maternal genotypes; three females with shared genotypes between the two broods, two unique female genotypes from the early brood, and one unique female genotype from the late brood . undeveloped eggs accounted for a small proportion of the total number of eggs within each nest. the number of undeveloped eggs ranged from 0– <dig> % with a mean of  <dig>  ±  <dig> % per nest.

in the  <dig> nests surveyed, only one genotyped embryo within one nest satisfied our criteria for a sneaked copulation . in this instance, the genotype of the sire was not consistent with three of the four possible paternal alleles, but the larva's genotype was an exact four locus match to a particular reconstructed female genotype for that nest. the one larval allele that matched an allele of the collected father is common  and therefore the probability that the sneaker shared this allele with the resident male is relatively high. the sneaked copulation constituted  <dig> % of the examined larvae in that nest, corresponding to an estimate of  <dig> larvae, in total. in all other nests, the genotypes of attendant males were consistent with all offspring surveyed. thus successful sneaking appears to be a rare event during the sampled time period.

attendant males had a mean total length  of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm and had a mean wet body mass  of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  g . male tl was significantly related with wm . neither of the two proxies of male fitness, tl nor wm, were correlated with either male reproductive or mating success at the sampled time period. male mating success was not related to either male tl  or wm . likewise, male reproductive success was not related to either male tl  or wm .

females mothered between 48– <dig> larvae per nest with an average of  <dig> ±  <dig> larvae. gerud found  <dig> unique female genotypes reconstructed from progeny arrays and no reconstructed genotype was an exact four locus match for another reconstructed genotype. the probability of identity of females was low , indicating that the likelihood of sampling two unrelated females sharing an exact four locus genotype would be extremely small. the lack of matching female genotypes suggests that the local breeding population of g. flavescens at this site is quite large, such that the chance of encountering the same female mated to more than one male is low.

discussion
this study provides the first insights into the genetic mating system of the two-spotted goby. based on microsatellite dna analyses, we detected multiple female partners for all nest-holding males, with typically four females spawning with each male. the results of this study also demonstrate that g. flavescens males enjoy a high confidence of paternity with only one case of low frequency  sneaking discovered in the  <dig> nests surveyed. although sneaking may be possible in g. flavescens below our threshold of detection, it would amount to a very small proportion of total offspring per nest. this very low frequency of sneaking is interesting given that several closely related species commonly display male sneaking behaviour  <cit> .

in addition to sneaking, multiple paternity within two-spotted goby nests may also be caused by nest takeovers, a common phenomenon in closely related gobies such as sand gobies  <cit> . however, a nest takeover is an unlikely explanation for our data. first, the number of offspring sired by the non-resident male was very low. second, the maternal genotype of the sneaked offspring matched other offspring of that nest, which were sired by the resident male. although females are potentially capable of dividing their eggs between different nests , we never found the same reconstructed female genotypes in more than one nest. this suggests that finding the same female mating with a different male would be highly unlikely within this population.

what might account for the low rate of cuckoldry in two-spotted gobies relative to close relatives? one possibility is that two-spotted gobies exhibit temporal variation in rates of alternative mating strategies and that we happened to sample during a period of exceptionally low sneaking. this explanation may be especially germane to two-spotted gobies, as their sex roles have been documented to reverse during the breeding season  <cit> . although the positive correlation between number of mates and reproductive success strongly suggest sexual selection occurs between males, two-spotted goby males are unlikely to compete strongly for mates during sex-role reversal  <cit> . two lines of evidence from our data support the previous finding  <cit>  that male mating competition is weak during the late part of the breeding season. first, the vast majority of nests maintained in mussel shells were nearly full suggesting that most males are not limited by access to mature females during this time. second, there was no significant relationship between nest size and male body size, suggesting that males of any size may occupy nests. it then appears that male reproductive success is mainly limited by space within the nest, as evidenced by the strong correlation between shell size and the number of offspring produced. thus, an interesting question, beyond the scope of the current study, is whether or not male reproductive behaviours we observed in the latter part of the mating season are similar to mating patterns in the early part of the breeding season.

male nest size
in this study, male size was unrelated to mussel shell size even though larger mussel shells were clearly advantageous with respect to mating and reproductive success of the resident males. thus, all else being equal, we would expect males to prefer large mussel shells in order to maximize their fitness, similar to studies that have shown a clear relationship between male size and nest size in other gobies  <cit> . we can envision at least two scenarios that may explain the lack of a relationship between male size and mussel size. first, suitable mussel shells may be limiting, thereby forcing males to take up the first available nest they find, irrespective of size of nest. second, males may simply not have a preference for large mussel shells, or any such preference may be trumped by more important nest characteristics. for example, gap of the opening between mussel shell halves may be important in g. flavescens. in a related species, pomatoschistus minutus , females prefer males with the smaller nest openings as it likely deters predation and potential sneaking  <cit> . this second hypothesis suggests that there is a trade off between nest size and other environmental variables related to fitness. additional studies are needed to elucidate what factors contribute to male nest choice in male g. flavescens.

female clutch size
the maximum reproductive success of an individual female was  <dig> larvae, which is similar to a maximum of  <dig> eggs reported in a previous laboratory study  <cit> . however, the average reproductive success was much lower than in earlier studies. when wild-caught females are placed with a single male in a laboratory setting, they laid on average  <dig> ±  <dig>  <cit>  and  <dig> ±  <dig> eggs  <cit> , compared to  <dig> ±  <dig> larvae per female in this study. thus, there is a nearly three fold reduction in the mean number of offspring per female in this study compared to earlier studies. because this difference in mean female reproductive contribution may lead to different interpretations of the genetic mating system, we explore potential causes of this discrepancy here.

eggs failing to develop are unlikely to explain this discrepancy, as our nests had a low proportion of undeveloped eggs , on par with earlier investigations showing high hatching success  when the male is excluded from tending the nest  <cit> . clutches harvested in the field contained eggs from several females laid in an asynchronous manner. in this way, some eggs from older clutches may have hatched prior to collection, underestimating a female's reproductive contribution to a particular clutch of eggs. however, since most eggs in nests hatched within  <dig> hours of each other, the potential for partially hatched clutches does not appear to play a major role in the small clutch sizes of individual females. paternal filial cannibalism, i.e. predation by males on a portion of the eggs in the nest, may also partly explain the low mean female reproductive success. in the laboratory, g. flavescens males typically consume slightly less than a third of the eggs in their nest  <cit> . however, the degree of filial cannibalism under presumably harsher natural conditions is currently unknown for this species. other environmental influences, such as disease and egg predation, may also influence female reproductive success, but the frequency and severity of these events are unknown in the wild.

another possible contributor to the clutch size discrepancy is physical interference between females during mating. such physical female interference during copulation is known in fish  and may be common in polygynous mating systems  <cit> . in the field, there is the potential for physical competition between g. flavescens females, especially late in the breeding season when males are often courted by as many as  <dig> females simultaneously  <cit> . it is important to note that the laboratory studies reporting large clutch sizes by females mated single males with a single female  <cit> . thus, there was no potential for interference from other females during spawning. competition for egg-laying space within the nest may be another important factor in reducing the mean female reproductive contribution. as a nest becomes increasingly full, a female would face the choice of either contributing only few eggs in the remaining spaces, or clearing an area by cannibalizing the eggs of a previous female. most nests collected were either completely filled with eggs, or nearly so , indicating that competition for suitable egg-laying substrate within a male's nest is high.

male alternative reproductive tactics in the "sand goby" group
gobiusculus flavescens belongs to the pomastoschistus clade or "sand goby" group, a monophyletic group of gobies common in the eastern atlantic ocean and the baltic and mediterranean seas  <cit> . molecular clock estimations suggest that this group diversified in a fairly short time period during or after the messinian salinity crisis at the end of the miocene . members of this clade likely evolved from a single common ancestor that occupied a benthic marine lifestyle.

for species investigated within the sand goby group, there appears to be a wide range of behaviours associated with sneaking and male alternative reproductive tactics. at least two species display male alternative reproductive tactics in the form of sneaked copulations, p. microps   <cit>  and p. minutus  <cit>  and at least one species, the marbled goby p. marmoratus, appears to lack male alternative reproductive tactics as judged by gonadal analyses  <cit> . sexual selection regimes vary in both the common goby and the sand goby as a result of differences in nest-site availability, the operational sex ratio, and temperature  <cit> . a study of male alternative reproductive tactics in p. minutus revealed that sneaker males parasitized approximately 50% of nests surveyed amounting to nearly 11% of all fertilizations on average  <cit> . a second study revealed surprisingly similar sneaking rates between populations of p. minutus that had a large difference in the availability of suitable nest sites  <cit> . similarly, experimental manipulations of nest-site availability in p. minutus showed that male sneaking behaviour occurred frequently and was resilient to changes in nest-site availability  <cit> . unlike the sand and common goby, the marbled goby, p. marmoratus, is speculated to lack male alternative reproductive behaviours based on estimated gonadosomatic and seminal vesicle somatic indices  <cit> . both of these measures suggest that investment in gonads relative to body size is constant, suggesting that males lack sneaker morphology. although conclusive parentage analysis have not yet been performed for the marbled goby or the common goby, these observations hint at an interesting scenario in which male alternative reproductive tactics are important and maintained in certain lineages  but not in other lineages such as the two-spotted goby and the marbled goby. the resolution of this question awaits a systematic classification of the genetic mating system of all members of the pomatoschistus clade and a comparison of the ecological and evolutionary factors that may influence male alternative reproductive tactics within individual species such as g. flavescens.

CONCLUSIONS
understanding the evolutionary consequences of alternative reproductive behaviours is a fundamental goal of evolutionary biology. in this study we characterized the genetic mating system of a species that serves as a model species for behavioural ecology. our results demonstrate a high incidence of multiple mating and a remarkably low sneaking rate among nest-holding males in comparison with closely related species. additional investigations of the genetic mating system in this and other lineages are clearly warranted to elucidate the relationship between the strength of sexual selection and the evolution of male alternative reproductive tactics.

