BACKGROUND
since their discovery in central west africa in the 1940s, rodent malaria parasites - plasmodium berghei, p. chabaudi, p. vinckei and p. yoelii – have become the de facto animal models for the study of plasmodium biology
 <cit> . these parasites have proven useful to investigate diverse aspects of host-parasite-vector interactions, evaluate potential interventions for malaria control, and to generate and test hypothesis about the biology of human malaria
 <cit> . although, no single species of rodent plasmodium is the perfect model for human parasites, different species have proven useful for different aspects of biology
 <cit> . for example, while p. chabaudi is a good model for the study of infection dynamics and immune responses
 <cit> , p. berghei is a better model for studying the biology of transmission
 <cit> . nevertheless, while the rodent malarias are well studied in the lab, much less is known about their natural history and evolutionary genetics. this is in sharp contrast to human pathogens, where evolutionary genetics plays an important role, particularly in explaining the evolution of drug resistance and patterns of natural selection at target antigens
 <cit> .

rodent malaria parasites were isolated from the wild between  <dig> and  <dig>  from  <dig> different countries 
 <cit> . during this period, four species were described, encompassing  <dig> subspecies. the ‘thicket rats’ thamnomys rutilans  and grammomys surdaster 
 <cit>  were found to be the most common vertebrate hosts and whilst anopheles dureni millecampsi was frequently infected by rodent malaria parasites, the vector for some of these parasite species remains unknown . although only a handful of genotypes are regularly used in the lab, the world health organization  registry of standard malaria parasites  contains over  <dig> field isolates of rodent plasmodium. the availability of multiple isolates means that multi-locus sequence data and modern phylogenetic methods can be used to improve understanding of many aspects of the natural history of rodent malaria parasites. this includes identifying lineages that are independently evolving , estimating the ‘species tree’ , divergence times, and population sizes
 <cit> . additionally, an improved phylogeny enables the better application of molecular evolution methods, as these often depend on an understanding of the species tree .

despite the variety of papers on plasmodium phylogeny, only one has addressed the phylogeny of rodent malaria parasites . perkins et al. sequenced fragments of  <dig> loci from the nuclear, mitochondrial and apicoplast genomes for  <dig> parasite genotypes covering all the species and  <dig> of the subspecies of rodent plasmodium. their results were consistent with the original species descriptions based on morphological and isozyme characteristics, but revealed inconsistencies in the level of genetic divergence between genotypes, subspecies and species 
 <cit> . here, we collect the largest rodent malaria sequence dataset to date, to resolve these inconsistencies, improve the phylogeny and generate a resource for future population genetic and experimental studies in these important model species.

we revived  <dig> rodent plasmodium genotypes  from cryopreservation, representing  <dig> subspecies across four species and sequenced  <dig> ‘house-keeping’ nuclear loci. we use these data to understand species delimitation and generate a multi-locus phylogeny. we infer the relative effective population sizes, generate hypotheses for the divergence times and describe the patterns of selection and constraint in these loci. first, our results suggest that all rodent malaria subspecies are sufficiently genetically isolated that they could be considered species. second, we estimate the species tree, divergence times and population sizes, under two different time-calibrations. the two alternative calibrations we used reflect current uncertainty in plasmodium evolution and, as expected, resulted in very different divergence times. finally, we estimate levels of polymorphism and calculate summary statistics that reflect the form and strength of natural selection . our results show that polymorphism is low and reveal that most loci are under purifying selection.

RESULTS
we obtained  <dig> rodent malaria genotypes from the who registry of standard malaria parasites  and collected dna sequence data for  <dig> nuclear loci , across  <dig> chromosomes, mainly coding for ‘house-keeping’ functions . additionally, where explicitly mentioned, our analysis incorporated publically available data for cytochrome b  and cytochrome oxidase i .

the number of genotypes we used from each species/subspecies and their country of origin is shown . p. c. subsp., p. v. subsp. and p. y. subsp. refer to previously recognized, but as yet unnamed subspecies. car – central african republic, drc – democratic republic of the congo.

gene id and predicted function were obtained from plasmodb. maximum sequence length ; chromosome .

species delimitation
to better understand the status of the subspecies we used the following two methods for species delimitation: bayesian species delimitation as described in
 <cit>  and genealogical sorting index, described in
 <cit> .

bayesian species delimitation
we used the program bayesian phylogenetics and phylogeography v <dig>   to perform species delimitation analysis. this implements a coalescent-based method that uses the concordance of gene trees across multiple loci as evidence for a particular species delimitation model, but does not rely on reciprocal monophyly for each individual locus. it uses a reversible-jump markov chain monte carlo  algorithm to calculate the posterior distributions of different species delimitation models. the method is based on the biological species concept, assuming no migration following speciation and allowing for stochastic fluctuations in the coalescent process and lineage sorting due to ancestral polymorphism
 <cit> .

bpp requires a user-specified guide tree as input to constrain the phylogeny and species delimitation space. the guide tree is a fully resolved tree, representing the most subdivided species delimitation model that is biologically plausible. the rjmcmc algorithm then evaluates the posterior probabilities of speciation models created by collapsing or splitting nodes on the guide tree
 <cit> . given that we wanted to test for the status of the rodent malaria subspecies and that these have been previously defined on the basis of morphological characters and isozyme polymorphism
 <cit> , we considered all the subspecies as operational taxonomic units and constructed the guide tree with *beast . the topology of the guide tree generated by *beast is that in figure 
 <dig>  with p. chabaudi and p. vinckei forming a clade, p. berghei and p. yoelii forming another clade, and all the subspecies nesting within their corresponding species.
 <dig>  the topology of this tree was the same as the guide tree for bpp.

using the guide tree obtained from *beast, we then performed the bpp analysis. to verify the stability of our results, we set up alternative models that tested for the effects of:  algorithm and fine-tuning parameters and  population size  prior . in all cases, bpp overwhelmingly supported the fully-resolved guide tree  with posterior support very close to  <dig> . moreover, in all analyses, the secondary sampled models consistently collapsed nodes e or h in figure 
 <dig> . thus, our results were consistent across replicate runs and with different algorithms , indicating that mixing of the bpp rjmcmc algorithms was good.

genealogical sorting index 
we used the genealogical sorting index
 <cit>  to validate the results from bpp. this method quantifies exclusive ancestry on a scale of  <dig> to  <dig>  where  <dig> represents complete monophyly
 <cit> . gsi can be calculated for single or multiple genes. as we wanted to test for the overall extent of exclusive ancestry for the rodent malaria subspecies, we computed gsi for multiple genes  for each of the subspecies, using the genealogical sorting index web interface . the input for this software are gene trees, which we generated in beast as described in the methods. the great majority of gsit are above  <dig> ,  with all but two  being significant . this suggests a high level of exclusive ancestry for the majority of the subspecies . therefore, the results from bpp and gsi are robust and generally in agreement, suggesting that all  <dig> of the rodent malaria subspecies are independently evolving lineages.

divergence times and population sizes
as the fully resolved subspecies tree, preferred by bpp and gsi, reveals a high level of exclusive ancestry for the subspecies, we used the different subspecies as the operational taxonomic units for estimating a time-calibrated multi-locus species tree in *beast and obtained estimates for the effective population sizes through the same method.

a variety of approaches have been used to estimate divergence times in malaria parasites, and as yet there seems to be little consensus on the age of key divergences
 <cit> . to reflect this uncertainty, we selected two calibrations as alternative priors for dates of common ancestry in rodent plasmodium. the two calibrations we use are estimates for the root height of rodent malaria parasites and were published in
 <cit> . in this paper, pacheco et al. suggested a most recent common ancestor for the mitochondrial dna of all rodent malaria at  <dig>  million years ago  and  <dig>  mya . for simplicity, we denote the two calibrations as pacheco2011-a and pacheco2011-b, respectively. from these estimates, we derived gamma-distributed priors for the root of coi and cytb . importantly, these estimates are consistent with the occurrence of malaria in lemurs in madagascar, which could not have been acquired after the last terrestrial mammal colonization event 
 <cit>  . we also used a third calibration using the cytb molecular clock inferred in
 <cit> , but estimates from this calibration fall within the pacheco2011-a hpds. thus, we present results only for the pacheco <dig> calibrations.

*our posterior for the basal split of rodent plasmodium  differs slightly from our priors. this is because we set up calibrations on the root height of the linked mitochondrial gene tree, rather than on the root height of the species tree .

the combined 95% hpd for the pacheco <dig> calibrations represent our best divergence time estimates. nodes are labeled as in figure 
 <dig>  values in brackets represent 95% hpd.

table 
 <dig> shows the inferred divergence times depending on the different calibrations we used. as expected, the pacheco2011-a resulted in younger estimates than pacheco2011-b, with point estimates for the major splits between p. berghei – p. yoelii and between p. chabaudi – p. vinckei ranging from 1– <dig> and 3- <dig> mya, respectively. from all analyses, it is clear that p. chabaudi and p. vinckei diverged much earlier than p. berghei and p. yoelii, with the latter divergence occurring simultaneously or after the divergence of the subspecies p. v. brucechwatti, p. v. lentum and p. v. vinckei.

we also used *beast to estimate the effective population sizes under the different calibrations. while the effective population sizes under the *beast model generally mixed well, the effective sample sizes  were often below  <dig> for the end population sizes , suggesting poor mixing of the mcmc algorithm. thus, we treat these results with caution and discuss the population sizes only from a qualitative perspective for the tips of the tree  and not for the ancestral nodes. as expected, relative *beast estimates of effective population sizes generally reflect estimates of neutral genetic diversity , and suggest that p. berghei and p. v. vinckei have the smallest population sizes, whereas p. c. chabaudi, p. c. adami and p. y. yoelii have the largest .

molecular evolution
to better understand how selection is shaping the evolution of the genomes of rodent malaria parasites, we computed the following statistics for each gene : mcdonald-kreitman  tests 
 <cit> ; tajima’s d at synonymous sites
 <cit> , polymorphism  and divergence 
 <cit> . to infer patterns of substitution independently for each lineage, we measured divergence from a putative ancestral sequence inferred by maximum likelihood for the p. bergheip. yoelii and p. chabaudi-p. vinckei nodes, under a codon model using paml v <dig> 
 <cit> . in this analysis we used either the species or the subspecies with the most genotypes  as the intraspecific groups. we also performed this analysis for p. v. petteri because this subspecies was isolated from the same location as p. c. chabaudi and p. y. yoelii and tested for significant differences between taxa in πa, πs, πa/πs, ka, ks and ka/ks, using pair wise wilcoxon rank sum tests .

for both α and tajima’s d at silent sites, there was only one result significantly incompatible with a standard neutral model: cyspro in p. chabaudi  and hsp <dig> in p. yoelii , respectively. the distribution of divergence  is similar across lineages with no significant differences between them. although there were some neutrally evolving lineage-specific exceptions, ka/ks is generally low , suggesting that these loci are under purifying selection across most parasite lineages. neutral polymorphism  was generally between  <dig>  and 3%, reaching 10% only if πs was measured for p. vinckei. additionally, polymorphism varies between lineages and significant differences could be detected, particularly for p. vinckei . as other researchers have shown
 <cit> , polymorphism in p. berghei was extremely low and we only detected two non-synonymous snps in cyspro for the k <dig> and k173n genotypes .

finally, we used a maximum likelihood version of the mk test
 <cit>  to further test for variation in α between loci and/or lineages and to estimate mean α from multi-locus data. this software implements several likelihood models, which can be used to test different hypotheses about selection at loci of interest. we set up three models, in which:  α is constrained to zero at all loci, i.e. no adaptive evolution;  α is a free-parameter common to all loci; and  α can take a different value at each locus. we compared models using akaike weights and estimated –α and 95% bootstrap intervals across loci as described in the methods. compared to other loci, cyspro in p. c. chabaudi and p. v. subsp. shows extremely high divergence. this may reflect a substantial underlying change in its biology, and we therefore performed the analysis both including and excluding this locus.

we show that variation in α between loci is restricted to p. c. chabaudi and p. v. subsp. and is influenced by the presence of cyspro . in the absence of cyspro, the best models always include α constrained to zero  or as a free-parameter common to all loci , with model i having substantially higher akaike weights for p. v. subsp. and p. y. yoelii, indicating there is little support for positive selection in these lineages. additionally, the 95% bootstrap intervals for α were wide, and α did not vary significantly between lineages. therefore, our results indicate that most loci either neutrally evolving or under purifying selection.

discussion
by sequencing multiple loci from  <dig> genotypes across four species of rodent plasmodium, we clarify the evolutionary context for studying both the population genetics and the functional biology of this group of organisms. first, our results suggest that all subspecies are independently evolving lineages and that the number of rodent malaria species may be underestimated. second, we suggest two different timelines for the evolution of rodent malaria parasites . third, we find that most of the  <dig> nuclear loci used are under purifying selection, although there is some evidence that a potential vaccine candidate  may evolve under positive selection. in agreement with other studies, we show that polymorphism is almost absent  in isolates of p. berghei.

all analyses suggest that the rodent malaria subspecies could be considered species . however, this fine-scale division corresponds exactly to their geographic sampling ranges . since the species delimitation approaches assume random mating within the delimited lineages and that this assumption is not met in the presence of population structure, we suggest that this conclusion be treated with caution
 <cit> . zhang et al. <cit>  recently used simulated data to test the effect of migration on the inferred species delimitation model, and showed that for sample sizes similar to ours, bpp will tend to infer a model with two species when migration between the populations is low  and a single species when migration is high , with the posterior probability of inferring the two-species model decreasing sharply when 1 < m <  <dig>  thus, the migration parameter space for which we could have erroneously inferred multiple species appears to be rather reduced. moreover, the extreme divergence between some subspecies, especially those within p. vinckei , clearly warrants careful attention, as these lineages are at least as divergent as p. berghei and p. yoelii . treating p. vinckei subspecies as species would also resolve the inconsistency between level of divergence and taxonomic rank of p. v. vinckei first detected in
 <cit> . regardless of taxonomy, these deep divergences need to be taken into careful consideration in experimental studies with p. vinckei. more broadly, the correct identification of independently evolving lineages  is of critical epidemiological relevance, as it can enable interbreeding populations to be identified, which is essential for the management of disease
 <cit> .

perkins et al. <cit>  provided an earlier rodent malaria phylogeny, based on  <dig> loci and  <dig> genotypes. our analyses, based on  <dig> loci and  <dig> genotypes, similarly confirms the original morphological and isozyme-based species classification
 <cit> . the topology of our species tree broadly matches that of perkins et al. <cit> , suggesting a robust rodent malaria phylogeny. we used two time-calibrations to estimate the divergence times of rodent plasmodium. however, given we have little information about the divergence process of rodent malaria parasites or their hosts, we consider the full span of the combined 95% hpds for both pacheco <dig> calibrations as the estimates which best reflect the available knowledge, i.e. the major splits in the rodent phylogeny occurred at roughly 4– <dig> , 1– <dig>  and 3– <dig> mya . these estimates coincide with a recent estimate for the divergence of the grammomys genus 
 <cit> .

whilst polymorphism was generally low, p. vinckei displayed significantly more diversity than other taxa. however, this is because divergence between p. vinckei’s subspecies is much greater than for the p. chabaudi and p. yoelii subspecies. accordingly, the level of polymorphism within p. v. subsp.  is within the range of the other taxa. this suggests that, at least for p. vinckei, molecular evolution tools should be applied at the subspecies, rather than the species level, due to the deep divergences of its subspecies. given this, care should be taken when generalizing observations from a single p. vinckei subspecies to the species level.

in contrast to p. vinckei, our analysis confirms previous reports that genetic diversity for p. berghei is very low, but not zero
 <cit> . based on the apparently low diversity in p. berghei, it has been suggested that the diversity detected in the past could have arisen in the laboratory . we identified  <dig> polymorphisms across  <dig> observed sites in p. berghei, which is much higher than the expected value  if these mutations had been acquired after isolation . this suggests that the observed mutations were probably present in the natural populations. despite p. berghei’s key role as a model for the study of functional genomics
 <cit> , this near absence of polymorphism limits its utility for understanding the functional consequences of genetic variation. at the subspecies level, p. c. chabaudi, p. y. yoelii and p. v. subsp. show the highest diversity , making these the best rodent models for the identification of genetic markers for quantitative-trait loci analysis. whilst genotypes of p. c. chabaudi and p. y. yoelii have been used to identify drug resistance and virulence loci
 <cit> , p. v. subsp. has not been used in this type of study. however, given that average πs for this species is twice that of p. y. yoelii and almost as high as for p. c. chabaudi, this subspecies may provide an alternative model for such studies.

the relative rates of protein evolution  did not differ between species/subspecies and suggest that almost all loci analyzed are evolving under some constraint, as would be expected for house-keeping loci. however, some loci do show very low levels of constraint in particular lineages , possibly suggesting functional differences between lineages . accordingly, a comparison of bootstrap intervals failed to detect significant differences between lineages in maximum-likelihood estimates of α, and overall there is little evidence for positive selection. the lack of variation in mean α and ka/ks between lineages is perhaps surprising given the apparently large differences seen in effective population size 
 <cit> . however, this may mostly reflect lack of power, as both the estimates of mean α and ka/ks present large confidence intervals . nevertheless, our mean estimates of α do increase with effective population size 
 <cit> . additionally, using individual gene-wise mk analysis, we identified a single potential candidate for the action of strong positive selection: cyspro in p. chabaudi. as no correction for multiple tests was made, we treat this result with caution. nevertheless, given that the p. falciparum ortholog of cyspro  has been proposed as a possible vaccine candidate
 <cit> , if the functional role and selective patterns of cyspro are similar in p. chabaudi and p. falciparum, p. chabaudi could be a useful model to test the efficacy of vaccines targeting this locus and understand potential evolutionary responses by the parasite.

CONCLUSIONS
the work here presented improves the utility of rodent plasmodium as models for the study of malaria as it provides a much-needed evolutionary context for understanding biological aspects as the cross-reactivity of immune responses or parasite mating patterns. moreover, while evolutionary genetics tools have rarely been used to study rodent plasmodium, this approach has great utility for understanding the selective pressures shaping the evolution of malaria parasites and for generating hypotheses about the molecular interactions between parasites, hosts, and vectors.

