BACKGROUND
researchers in cancer biology are well aware of the possibilities that big data can offer and there are already several efforts underway to generate relevant large-scale cancer genomics data  <cit> . international and national networks of collaboration, such as international cancer genome consortium   <cit> , global cancer genomics consortium   <cit> , early detection research network   <cit>  and other nci programs   <cit> ), are generating increasingly large amounts of data, the vast majority of which is from next-generation sequencing  technologies. tcga data is expected to surpass  <dig> petabytes by the completion of the project. in a recent survey of the files generated by the tcga initiative we found that its file count has been doubling every  <dig> months since  <dig>  with a total count above  <dig>  files. although, it is desirable that cancer biologists will use this data to develop and test hypotheses, realistically, few wet-laboratory researchers have the infrastructure or knowledge regarding scores of complex bioinformatics tools to glean a higher understanding from the disparate sequence files and complex, scattered annotations. these challenges are leading to the development of tools and secondary databases which are expected to democratize big data use  <cit> , and initiatives such as the human variome project has started playing an important role by providing guidelines that encourage standardizing and sharing of information related to human genetic variation  <cit> .

biological information is usually concentrated in databases mainly of two types: primary databases comprised of raw data submitted by researchers, and secondary databases that extract and filter the information available from the primary databases and add additional annotations generated either manually or automatically through the efforts of biocurators  <cit> . one of the problems often faced by end users of big data is the lack of curated information in primary ngs data repositories such as the ncbi short read archive   <cit>  and the cancer genomics hub   <cit> . it is expected that curated secondary databases will help organize the big data and make it more user-friendly, similar to what secondary database development efforts like refseq  <cit>  and uniprotkb/swiss-prot  <cit>  have done and are still doing for genbank  <cit> . additional higher level databases like pfam  <cit> , pirsfs  <cit> , kegg  <cit>  and others organize objects into functional groups and provide information on biological function, networks and processes. it is clear that knowledge can be gained when raw data moves in a vertical fashion, from millions of bases of dna or rna into proteins, then to protein families, and finally into networks of interrelated biological processes. currently, ngs data in public repositories are not well connected to molecular biology resources and reference datasets, and validated methods for data processing and filtering are not always available, necessitating significant bioinformatics expertise to use and analyze such information. in this paper, we describe a workflow to curate and analyze ngs data from control  and case  samples derived from cancer patients. we chose to curate publicly available ngs data to provide users an unbiased view of variation that is present at the individual person level and is not yet completely captured in dbsnp, thereby providing a better understanding of the human variome. additionally, based on our previous work on functional analysis of non-synonymous single nucleotide variations  from dbsnp  <cit> , uniprot  <cit>  and cosmic  <cit>  we show how proteome-wide analysis of variation can provide a detailed view of the distribution of variation and possible functional impact  <cit> .

currently, there are thousands of large-scale sequence data from cancer case and control samples that are available from primary short read data repositories such as ncbi sra and tcga. it is expected that comprehensive and integrated analysis of this data will lead to novel discoveries. we believe that computational and manual curation of this data will provide unprecedented value in cancer research that will eventually lead to better cancer detection, therapies, and care. as proof-of-concept, we have analyzed nssnvs from  <dig> samples  obtained from  <dig> breast cancer patients and have recorded the analysis results in curated short read  archive. the samples provide a rich source of sequence data that can be mined to extend and compliment mutation and single-nucleotide polymorphism  information available from dbsnp  <cit> , uniprot  <cit> , cosmic  <cit>  and other variation databases. we intend to curate and analyze representative samples from all datasets that are available through tcga. for our initial study, through focused analysis of the breast cancer samples, we show how a workflow that identifies novel variations, explores the effects of nssnvs on the human proteome and classification of patients based on single nucleotide variations  can provide a higher level of information that can be used by researchers to evaluate experimental targets and also to generate and test hypothesis related to personalized medicine. to facilitate implementation of this workflow by other users, we provide nssnv analysis tool - snvdis that can be used by researchers or biocurators interested in evaluating the effects of variation. with large-scale informatics fast becoming an integral component of cancer research, the workflow described here can be easily applied to other datasets.

methods
architecture and computational environment
all data displayed on the website as well as any data or references used in the analysis are stored in the high-performance integrated virtual environment  server   <cit> . the results are searchable and are also available as tab-delimited files. users can either browse the curated data or search for specific genes or proteins using refseq accession number as the query. searches with tcga ids and uniprotkb accession numbers are also supported. hive provides the storage and analysis computational infrastructure for this project. resources include six dell servers, an integrated computational environment, and 10gb 48port ethernet switch and control servers. the workflow is also incorporated within the cloudbiolinux  <cit>  environment . cloud biolinux vm can be downloaded from https://s <dig> amazonaws.com/cloudbiolinuxvms/cloudbiolinuxsra/cloudbiolinuxsra.ova. installation instructions are available at http://www.cloudbiolinux.org and http://www.virtualbox.org/manual/ch <dig> html#ovf.

datasets
short read data is obtained from the cancer genome atlas  via the cghub data portal . the reference used in the alignment is the hg <dig> 

grch <dig> genome reference consortium human reference  <dig>  downloaded from ucsc . uniprotkb protein amino acid position and id mapping is done using snvdis and id mapping services  <cit> . functional and sequence information is obtained from refseq  <cit> , conserved domain database  <cit> , uniprotkb/swiss-prot  <cit>  and ccds  <cit> .

data selection criteria
for this study, we concentrate on sequence data from breast cancer cases and controls. data sets derived from twenty patients are selected for analysis. the criterion for selection is based on the availability of clinical information, race, paired case and control samples. in addition to this, the presence of both exome and rna-seq data from the same patient is also included as a criterion for selection because they are deemed to be high-priority datasets by our users because many hypothesis driven questions can be answered through the comparative analysis of these datasets. information is retrieved using the data matrix available at https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/dataaccessmatrix.htm. “brca-breast invasive carcinoma” is selected as “disease type” and “clinical” from the “data type”. patients from three different races are included: three patients from african-american, one asian, and the rest white. all patients are females and had no previous history of malignancy. the tumor and the matched control samples can be identified by the tcga barcode associated with each sample. a tcga barcode is a collection of identifiers such as in the sample id , where  <dig> is the participant number,  <dig> is the sample type. tumor sample range from 01– <dig> and matched normal from  <dig> –  <dig> depending on the type of tumor and normal sample. the short reads are then mapped to the human reference sequence and further analyzed to identify variations.

snv filtration and annotation
after the raw snv data is generated using bowtie  <cit>  and samtools  <cit> , filters are used to select high quality snvs which are of desirable coverage  and quality score . the filtration process also rejects detected snvs falling out of the exome regions, which may be caused by non-unique regions in the genome.

nssnv distribution on functional sites
experimental post translational modification  sites are obtained from uniprotkb/swiss-prot  <cit>  and dbptm  <dig>   <cit> , which provides experimentally verified ptm sites. python scripts are used to remove the redundancy from the nssnvs dataset, map the resulting unique nssnvs to ptm motifs in uniprotkb proteins, and calculate how many ptm sites are detected to have nssnv. any nssnv derived unacceptable change on the given ptm motif is considered as a loss of ptm site. to evaluate the effects of nssnvs obtained from case and control samples, statistics were generated and heatmap was constructed using r package  <cit> . to obtain the heatmap, the binary matrix data of presence or absence of snv in a particular position is loaded into r and using the packages ggplot <dig> and reshape, the binary heatmap is obtained by converting the values of each cell into either red ‘present in only case or control’ or green ‘present in both case and control’. this information is then plotted with the amino acid positions across the vertical axis.

tools
the cgquery and gene torrent utilities  are used to search for and retrieve bam files from cghub. alignment is performed using bowtie version  <dig> . <dig>  <cit> . snvs are calculated using samtools version  <dig> . <dig> and bcftools version  <dig> . <dig>  <cit> . the pipeline consists of a series of perl scripts and the above-mentioned software which are called using a wrapper script. the wrapper is accessed via the command line and accepts two arguments, a list of fastq files that needs to be analyzed and the location where the output should be placed. the statistics are generated with r  <cit> .

phylogenetic analysis and snv visualization
a novel algorithm  has been developed to create snv-based phylogentic trees. the first step involves creating an alignment that contains genomic sequence around snvs. for this study we chose to include zero, one and two nucleotides upstream and downstream of every snv to create snv-shrunk genome. more specifically, the snv-shrunk genome alignments are created using phylosnp  by concatenating regions of the genome that has snv for each sample. if one sample has a snv in a particular position then all of the other snv-shrunk genomes from the other samples include that region in their snv-shrunk genome. therefore the output of all snv-shrunk genomes is an alignment. this alignment is then used to generate neighbor joining phylogenetic trees using clustal with  <dig> bootstrap values  <cit> . bootstrap values indicate the confidence of the branches in the estimated trees. the trees are viewed in treeview  <cit> .

functional analysis
filtered snvs are submitted to seattleseq  <dig> annotation service  <cit>  to get positional and functional annotation. additional functional analysis of proteins affected by nssnvs is performed based on methods described earlier  <cit> . briefly, nssnv data is uploaded into snvdis database and integrated with protein sequence features obtained from uniprotkb/swiss-prot  <cit> , conserved domain database  and refseq of ncbi  <cit> . snvdis provides graphical and tabular output of variations that affect functionally annotated sequence sites. additionally, snvdis also provides information if there is an over- or under-representation of certain pathways and domains that are affected by nssnvs. gene ontology analysis of genes affected by rare variants is performed using panther tools  <cit> .

key definitions
case and control – samples derived from paired tumor  and normal  tissue; dbsnp overlap – snvs that are also found in dbsnp; novel snv – found only in the analyzed dataset; rare snv – found in less than 10% of the samples analyzed; common snv – found in 90% of the samples analyzed.

RESULTS
snvs are widely used to identify disease causing genes and history of populations  <cit> . many advances in the diagnosis and treatment of cancers have been made through such mutation discovery and analysis  <cit> . combining the results of several studies  can increase the power of the analysis  <cit> . these meta-analyses combine the results  from multiple studies and, using different statistical tools, identify the snvs most associated with a specific disease or phenotype. analysis of samples across different studies would provide a glimpse of the heterogeneity that is present in the population and this information can then be used by researchers to connect genomic changes to diseases. additionally, availability of variation data from control samples can provide a more comprehensive understanding of the human variome in addition to what has been determined by projects such as the  <dig> genomes project  <cit> . the effects that a specific variation has on a protein function have been the focus of studies for quite some time with several tools that predict snv effects  <cit> . proteome-wide analysis of variation that affects known functional sites  <cit>  is another way of estimating how variation can affect function at a system level and if there are specific domains or pathways that are more prone to having variations.

in this study, we analyze patient derived samples to identify nssnvs that are in concordance with dbsnp and also novel variations, determine the effect of nssnvs on the proteome and classify the patients based on phylogentic analysis of the nssnvs. figure  <dig> provides a flowchart of the workflow that involves retrieving sequence data from tcga followed by mapping the short sequence reads to human reference genome and identification of snvs. subsequently, snvs are mapped to protein sequences and the proteome-wide distribution of snv is investigated. all of the nssnv data and sample-specific annotations are then recorded and is made available at the curated short-read database . users studying specific cancer genes or proteins or the entire patient proteome can query csr in addition to known variation databases such as dbsnp, cosmic and uniprot to get a comprehensive view of variation. additionally, because all of the data from this study, dbsnp, cosmic and uniprot are integrated into snvdis, users can evaluate the effects of all variations in addition to browsing them in csr.

metadata curation
there is a great need in biological research and discovery for curated metadata that is associated with short sequence reads. just like genbank, ncbi-sra and other public repository of short sequence reads around the world are all primary databases with minimal or no curation. this means that it is extremely difficult for users to search for and retrieve studies that can be used for additional analysis or browse analysis results that are associated with specific genes of interest.

sequencing has identified key disease specific mutations in many cancers where the authors filter variation information from dbsnp to identify cancer specific variations  <cit> . the data in dbsnp does not yet capture all possible individual level variation. hence we intend to focus on analyzing and curating samples which can be used in conjunction with dbsnp data to better understand the human variome. for comparison purposes both cases and controls are analyzed. the key fields that we focus our curation efforts on are as follows: 1) study, experiment and sample title, type, abstract and associated publications; 2) organism name and taxonomy id; 3) additional information wherever applicable such as sample type, tissue site, clinical status, age, gender, ethnicity and gleason score; 4) identification of nssnvs; 5) mapping of nssnvs to dbsnp. in this project for tasks one, two and three data is obtained from tcga files and manually verified. publications that use tcga data files are searched for in pubmed  <cit>  and manually checked to confirm that they report analysis of cancer specific data that is under consideration. for tasks four and five a computational approach that involves read mapping and snv calling followed by spot checks is performed. all metadata data in csr is manually verified and entered. samples which do not have the acceptable gc content of between 38-48% are not processed for curation.

the scientific name of the organism and the taxonomy id are based on ncbi taxonomy which are homo sapiens and  <dig> respectively. the analysis presented here includes  <dig> samples from  <dig> patients where experiment numbers ca00001bc - ca00022bc belong to cases and co00001bc - co00033bc to controls. case and control samples start with a prefix ca and co respectively, followed by numbers and ends with a prefix for the cancer type . each experiment accession number is associated with a unique sample accession number and belongs to same study. the experiment contains information regarding sequencing library strategy, source, selection, layout and platform, which are obtained from the metadata at cghub. the csr database provides easy access to gene specific nssnv variations found in specific samples and also downloads of nssnvs of case and control samples with mappings to dbsnp which can be used for additional analysis purposes. table  <dig> provides a snapshot of the information obtained when a protein or gene accession number is used to search the csr database. csr data is also integrated into snvdis for proteome-wide analysis as described in the functional analysis section below.

1
2
3
4
5
1position in refseq nucleotide entry.

2nucleotide change.

3position in refseq protein entry.

4uniprotkb/swiss-prot acceesion.

5position in uniprotkb/swiss-prot protein entry.

6whole exome sequencing.

variation statistics
after the snvs are called, filtering procedures as described in materials and methods are used to identify high-quality snvs. in order to investigate the distribution of the variants from  <dig> samples  derived from  <dig> patients, we perform two types of comparison: 1) we compare with dbsnp to calculate the proportion of known and novel variants that we identify through our pipeline. 2) within this study comparison is conducted by calculating the common and rare snvs and the concordance  between cases and control sets. it is possible that sequencing errors can lead to identification of snvs which in reality may not be present. liu et al.  <cit>  performed a comprehensive study where they showed that read preprocessing step did not improve the accuracy of variant calling but ability to flag duplication, local realignment and recalibration steps helped reduce false positive and also sequencing depth was important. the study also noticed samtools performed quite well in identifying snvs. nonetheless, validation of the novel nssnvs identified through ngs analysis can be performed using traditional sanger sequencing of pcr products. for example, novel variations found in this study if identified in the nci- <dig> exome samples for breast cancer cell lines  <cit>  can be easily validated using the procedure mentioned above. further validation can also be performed using peptide mass-spectrometry  <cit>  for the nssnvs. such validation will also become critical if any of the novel nssnvs that is identified through this study is found in several samples and is hypothesized to be related to the disease.

overlap with dbsnp and analysis of novel variations
regarding concordance with dbsnp, individual samples show over 98% overlap with snps present in dbsnp version  <dig>  in the total pool of the snvs , over 92% and 94% of snvs in cases and controls respectively are shared with dbsnp . the decrease in overlap percent when all the snvs are pooled compared to what is seen in individual samples is due to overlap of dbsnp overlapping snvs in multiple samples with the novel snvs remaining mostly unique. more specifically, we find snvs that are non-novel  in multiple samples while novel snvs found in individual samples are generally unique, thereby increasing the ratio of unique snvs when all samples and cases are considered together . if snvs that overlap in both case and control are considered then the concordance with dbsnp increases to 96% as seen in the last bar of the graph in figure 3a. this moderate increase is most likely because the mutations that overlap in case and control are most likely germline and are inherited and expected to be found in general population and hence in dbsnp.

the total pool of snvs is further grouped by their calculated frequency among samples in this study. the snvs with frequency higher than 10% are defined as common snvs while the snvs lower than this frequency are grouped into rare snvs. the different percentage between novel and known  snvs is illustrated in figure 3b. as shown, in both cases and control samples, the common snvs are more likely to have higher  overlap with dbsnp, while rare snvs, which are present in less than 10% of the samples, have around 90% overlap with dbsnp. it is indeed possible that some of the novel mutations identified can be cancer drivers as suggested in a recent paper by khurana et al.  <cit> .

in order to explore the distribution preference of snvs of novel and known snvs on genomic functional regions, all the snvs were annotated using seattleseq annotation  <dig> web service  <cit> . although not statistically significant, from our dataset it appears that novel snvs are more prone to affect protein coding regions such as missense, stop-gain, and splicing .

distribution of snvs in cases and controls
in terms of overlap of snvs in cases and controls- we find that majority of the snvs and nssnvs overlap in case and control samples with ~ 20% of such unique variations found in the nucleotide level and ~15% in amino acids . the correlation of snvs between the different data sets was further analyzed using phylogenetic analysis methods described later in this manuscript. comparing the number of snvs that appear in one or more of the samples shows that the largest percentage of snvs observed  in the total pool of snvs only appear in frequency of  <dig> % . this distribution shows the heterogeneity of the snvs in the samples and follows a trend similar to previous studies  <cit> . the graph  presents a visual representation of the data, showing that nearly 68% of all snvs in the data set appear in 10% or lower frequency of the total samples. in terms of novel variations for individuals they range from  <dig> %- <dig> % for control and  <dig> %- <dig> % for case. there is only once case sample  with  <dig> % novel snvs. based on the clinical data it is not clear why such a high number of snvs are found in this particular case. in tcga this same patient has another case sample where the numbers of novel snvs are within the range observed for other patients. the associated phylogentic analysis  provides an easy visualization and identification of samples that do not have a normal distribution of snvs and hence can be followed up during the csr curation process.

functional analysis
the methodology adopted for functional analysis is based on our earlier work  <cit> . in summary, we first evaluated the overall impact of the nssnvs from the case and control samples on the entire proteome  in terms of effects on functional sites such as active sites, binding sites, co- and post-translational modification sites. then we evaluate which domains and pathways are most affected by variation. additionally, we also perform gene ontology, pathway and keyword analysis of the novel nssnvs to better understand the effects of variations which are presumably rare.

proteome-wide analysis of the effects of nssnvs
a broad analysis of all identified nssnvs and also novel nssnvs  was undertaken get a comprehensive overview of the functional impact of variation. for this analysis all the nssnvs derived from the csr project are integrated into a proteome-wide analysis csr companion tool snvdis  <cit> . snvdis is integrated into a high performance integrated virtual environment   <cit>  that allows proteome-wide analysis of the nssnvs. the snvdis tool home page shows nine sources of variation data with two of them coming from this study . the default proteome that the analysis is performed on is uniprotkb/swiss-prot defined human proteome. in the analysis box in snvdis one can choose what type of analysis they wish to perform. for example, selecting tcga-breast-control and tcga-breast-case and binding site will retrieve all nssnvs that alter protein binding sites . this tool provides a comprehensive overview of how the nssnvs affects active sites, binding sites, n-linked glycosylation sites, protein domains and pathways. for example, selecting the active sites  that are affected by nssnvs from the breast cancer case and control samples retrieves  <dig> sites in  <dig> proteins.

for pathway and domain analysis snvdis estimates the number of expected variations to find in the domain or pathway based on uniform distribution of nssnvs. for pathway analysis the uniprotkb/swiss-prot is selected and from the ‘select dataset’ box tcga-breast-control and tcga-breast-cancer is selected and from the ‘nssnv analysis on’ box ‘pathways’ tab is selected followed by selected of the ‘by significance’ option. a p-value cutoff of  <dig>  is chosen. the top five pathways that are affected when both cases and controls are taken together are nicotine degradation , fas signaling pathway , dpp-scw signaling pathway , cadherin signaling pathway  and blood coagulation . no immediate correlation to cancer pathways can be drawn from this analysis other than the fact that changes to signaling pathways are considered to be important in cancer progression  <cit> .

using a similar protocol as described above the top five functional domains  that are affected in case and control samples are found to be almost identical: the transmembrane olfactory receptor , the cysteine rich domain that occurs alongside the til domain , the glycoprotein-fucosylgalactoside a-n-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase domain , a mammalian taste receptor protein domain  and a protein kinase domain  for the case sample and for the control samples instead of the kinase domain the glycoside hydrolase family  <dig> domain  has over-representation of nssnvs. interestingly the greatest difference observed between control and sample analysis was the fact that the hyaluronan/mrna binding domain  is significantly affected more in the case samples  than the control samples . increased levels of hyalunonan have already been correlated to breast cancer and often are used as a marker  <cit> . more samples would need to be analyzed to confirm this correlation.

as described earlier the number of case only or control only nssnvs are less than 20% of the total variations and analyzing for over- or under-representation for cases and controls separately did not result in any appreciable differences in the highly affected pathways and domains. therefore, a more detailed analysis of just the novel nssnvs and their effects on functional sites was undertaken, results of which are described in the next section.

enrichment analysis of novel nssnv affected proteins
in addition to the proteome-wide analysis of all nssnvs an analysis of genes that are impacted by novel nssnvs was also performed. for this analysis from case samples a total  <dig>  novel nssnvs containing gene accession numbers are mapped to  <dig>  uniprotkb/swiss-prot proteins and for novel nssnvs in controls  <dig>  gene identifiers are mapped to  <dig>  uniprotkb/swiss-prot proteins. a decrease in the number of proteins compared to the number of initial refseq gene identifiers is because uniprotkb/swiss-prot entries represent the canonical protein whereas the genes in refseq can represent different isoforms. an initial analysis using the uniprotkb/swiss-prot keyword ‘disease’ shows that the keyword is over-represented in the gene list having novel nssnvs from case . novel nssnvs in the controls also appear to be over-represented albeit with a less significant p-value . based on uniprotkb/swiss-prot protein entry annotations of genes that are considered oncogenes, proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressors; for novel nssnvs that are only found in case samples there seems to be a slight over-representation of tumor suppressor genes . it is important to note that cancer disease annotations in uniprotkb/swiss-prot  are far from being comprehensive. as more patient samples are analyzed and the disease specific annotations improve it will be possible to identify through this type of analysis if specific genes that are involved in cancer do indeed have higher level of mutations both in the controls and cases.

additional functional analysis of genes which novel nssnvs was performed to investigate if specific pathways, protein families or gene ontology  terms are over- or under-represented. pathway analysis shows that several of the top pathways  are known to be involved in cancer. other notable pathways known to be involved in cancer with less significant p-values include wnt signaling pathway , angiogenesis  and egf receptor signaling pathway .

over- and under-representation of gene ontology  terms, panther pathways and protein classification in the list of genes which have novel nssnvs provides an overview of what broad effects these novel variations might have. the major terms for gene ontology  biological processes that are highly over-represented  are metabolic process, cellular process and transport . table  <dig> provides a breakdown of the major terms. for go molecular function the major terms include catalytic activity, binding  and transporter activity . other notable go molecular function includes kinase activity  and ion channel activity . many of the pathways identified as over-represented in the gene list are associated with cancer  <cit> . for example, it is known that integrins and cadherins initiate signaling pathways that control the activity of rho family gtpases  <cit> . other terms that are over-represented are related to cell adhesion, cell communication, and signal transduction all of which are associated proteins that play active roles during tissue development and tumour metastasis  <cit> . additional over-represented go terms such as protein modification  and enzymatic activity was further investigated to see if any of the mutations were resulting in loss of function ptm motif or active or binding sites of proteins.

functional analysis of proteins with variations in functional sites. a more comprehensive analysis of the effects of nssnvs is undertaken to better understand how they affect the functional sites. for this analysis all nssnvs from case and control samples are mapped to uniprotkb ptm sequence features and dbptm entries to analyze the distribution of nssnvs on ptm sites. the database dbptm is a non-redundant collection of experimentally verified ptm sites extracted from various related databases and publications  <cit> . dbptm currently consists of  <dig> different types of ptms from related databases and publications. out of approximately  <dig>  nssnvs identified in case samples and similar numbers from controls the following functional sites were found to be affected: o-linked glycosylation , methylation , acetylation , n-linked glycosylation , phosphorylation , ubiquitylation , binding site , active site . protein accession numbers and amino acid position for this data is provided in additional file 1: table s <dig> and graphically represented in figure 5a and 5b. a search in uniprotkb/swiss-prot shows that several of these proteins that are affected by variation are implicated in cancer based on annotation in the comments section of the entry   <cit> . examples include, calcium-activated chloride channel regulator  <dig> , which is considered to act as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer  <cit> ; adamts-like protein  <dig>  is expressed by malignant epithelial cells in colon cancer, as well as breast, prostate, renal and skin tumors  <cit> ; clusterin is an anti-apoptotic protein associated with breast, prostate and other cancer types  <cit> ; aberrant expression of macrophage colony-stimulating factor  <dig>  can promote cancer cell proliferation, invasion and formation of metastases  <cit> .

based on our previous analysis results on the effects of variation on active sites of proteins and n-linked glycosylation  sites  <cit>  we here provide additional details on these two important functional sites. out of the four proteins whose active site is disrupted , chymase , kallikrein- <dig> , sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase  <dig> ) two of the proteins have them disrupted in both cases and controls. prmt <dig> active site variation is detected in  <dig> samples ; cma <dig> variation is detected in two case samples from same patient ; klk <dig> exists in 75% of the samples ; smpd <dig> exists in only one patient sample . klk <dig> and its trypsin-like serine protease paralogs have been associated with several cancers  <cit> . klk <dig> active site variation which possibly deactivates the enzyme in a high percent of samples  is most likely possible because one of the other paralogs  might have the ability to compensate for the loss of activity of one its members. for cma1and smpd <dig>  the active site disruptions are found only in cases. chymases are known to convert angiotensin i to angiotensin ii, and influences of angiotensin i-converting enzyme gene polymorphisms on gastric cancer risks has been proposed before  <cit> . finding this mutation in breast cancer tumor provides a novel target for further investigation on the role of this gene in breast cancer. similarly, smpd <dig> is known to catalyze the hydrolysis of sphingomyelin to form ceramide and phosphocholine and ceramide mediates cellular functions, such as apoptosis and growth arrest  <cit> . mutations in smpd <dig> have implicated the ceramide pathway in human leukemias  <cit> . identification of loss of function mutation of smpd <dig> due to a mutation in the active site of the enzyme in breast cancer tumor cells provides for the first time a potential association of this gene with breast cancer.

the asparagine-x-serine/threonine  motif, where x is any amino acid except proline, is the consensus motif for nlg. therefore, mutations in this motif can lead to loss of nlg. previously, we have shown through proteome-wide analysis how germline mutations can result in loss-of-glycosylation   <cit> . in analyzing the somatic mutations of breast cancer patients we find  <dig> such log mutations in cases and  <dig> logs in controls . out of these log sites  <dig> are unique to case samples . increasing the delta to  <dig> did not significantly improve the tree . a phylogenetic tree from the resulting genomic sequences was generated using clustalw <dig> with  <dig> bootstrap replicates . all the cases and controls from the same patient branch together. for one patient  there are  <dig> samples . one case groups with two other controls from the same patient and the other two cases groups with another control from the same patient. it is interesting to note that although the numbers of novel snvs are within  <dig> %- <dig> % for the sample a7-a0db-a <dig> case <dig> there is  <dig> % novel snvs. for case <dig> from this patient the number of nssnvs is within the accepted range. there is no information in the tcga patient annotation files which provides any additional information as to why there is such high number of variations in this particular case. more samples need to be analyzed before any specific classification related correlations with disease or therapy can be made. it is evident even from the small sample size that snv profiles are not always correlated with the ethnicity that was obtained from the sample annotations. it is our expectation that analysis of additional samples would allow us to create discrete bins which can then be used to categorize the samples, identify outgroups and even evaluate the quality of the sequence data. such classification can be of great use for biomarker discovery processes if they can be correlated with disease outcome or other phenotypic characteristics. for  <dig> patient samples we did not find any correlation with the two major branches that can be seen in figure  <dig> and clinical annotations available in the tcga data files. it is important to note that the amount of clinical information available in the tcga data files is limited and it is possible that with the availability of additional clinical or phenotypic data or through the analysis of data from additional patients we will be able to correlate classification results with specific clinical or phenotypic information.

web interface and usage
the csr metadata home page  contains all available data related to this study. refseq gene and protein accession numbers can be used to retrieve results for single genes and snv downloads are also available from the website. variation results for single proteins are integrated with variation data from dbsnp, cosmic and uniprot to easily identify variations that are sample specific and if they overlap with any known variations. additionally, there are links from the sample pages to cbio cancer genomics portal  <cit>  which provides additional information on the tcga samples. annotation data from tcga data portal files are manually checked and combined with computationally analyzed mapping and snv data and entered into csr database. clicking on the ‘reviewed short read data’ brings the user to the ‘curated sra browsing interface’ which contains headers linked to ‘study’, ‘experiment’ and ‘sample’. clicking on each of these links takes the user to the respective curated datasets which can be browsed. the study, experiment and samples are hierarchical. whenever possible, identifiers are inherited from the primary database  to ensure easy tracking of data. for the experiments new identifiers were created to indicate if the samples are cases on control.

the described approach can be used by others by to analyze and document variations from other individuals available from tcga and many other datasets available via dbgap  <cit>  thereby providing a better view of the human variome. it is expected that this type of bioinformatic analysis in conjunction with phenotypic information will allow researchers to correlate variation information with functional changes. additional immediate impact of the csr database will be providing access to variation data from individuals about specific genes. for example, a user studying the nm_ <dig>  gene  might be interested in knowing what variations are present in this gene. a survey of variations for this gene in dbsnp shows that there are  <dig> known snps. from our analysis we find an additional  <dig> snvs out of which there is one nssnv which results in the loss of a phosphorylation site . the protein is known to be expressed in breast cancer cell lines  <cit> . in studies such as these if a rare nssnv is observed in a critical functional site one would most likely try to estimate its impact through additional experimentation. an example of such follow up study where the variation impacts an active site of an enzyme could be assaying for buildup of substrate or decrease in the level of product  <cit> . if the nssnv affects a ptm site  <cit>  such as n-linked glycosylation then one would need to perform possibly additional analytical studies to evaluate the impact  <cit> . system level impact of nssnvs and additional network analysis can also be applied to such analysis to better understand the personal genome  <cit> . for additional proteome-wide analysis of the impact of nssnvs one can use snvdis  <cit>  as described in earlier sections.

cloudbiolinux
cloudbiolinux  <cit>  , is a bioinformatics virtual machine  that is implemented to run on amazon ec <dig>  on the open-source, private cloud platform eucalyptus , and on the desktop using virtualbox . a vm is a fully-featured unix server, in a format of a single, downloadable binary file that executes on clouds and desktop virtualization platforms. cloud biolinux includes a full ubuntu linux  and galaxy bioinformatics workbench interface  <cit> , while users can start the vms with a few clicks on the amazon ec <dig> cloud  <cit>  without the need for any advanced technical knowledge. the cloud biolinux vm includes a suite of bioinformatic programming libraries for r, perl, ruby, and python in addition to more than  <dig> pre-configured bioinformatics tools including blast, glimmer, hmmer, phylip, rasmol, genespring, clustalw, and the emboss analysis suite. given that the vm is accessible on the amazon cloud, it provides researchers with a large-scale, virtualized informatics infrastructure without the financial or time burden of owning and maintaining hardware and can therefore democratize access to computational resources for smaller laboratories which use ngs or other high throughput genomics technologies for biological experiments.

we leveraged the software libraries and tools that are available in the cloud biolinux vm, in order to install and run our pipeline with minimal effort as most dependencies were already available inside the vm. furthermore, the vm format allows us to distribute the pipelines pre-configured and ready to execute in a single binary vm file that users can download and run on their desktop computers. this allows other researchers in the community to utilize our pipelines for their data analysis needs, without being required to spend time performing installations of bioinformatics tools or software libraries to configure the dependencies of the pipeline. the vm is available for download at  and users can boot it on their desktop following the instructions on the virtualbox website , while technical help is available through the cloud biolinux user group forum .

this workflow takes an sra file and a reference sequence and calculates the coverage and snvs of the reads when aligned against the reference sequence. the program is run from the command line using perl and accepts as its parameters the base name and location of the reference index file, the name and location of the short read file; the name and location of the reference, and the output directory. the output will include a file containing putative snps, sequence coverage, and alignment statistics. the pipeline was run with a test input dataset from the ncbi-sra  and sample bowtie <dig> indexes of the reference genome. the total run-time using a cloud biolinux virtual machine  that use one cpu core out of four and two gigabytes  of memory on a laptop computer was approximately fifteen minutes.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we developed a workflow that involves identification and analysis of nssnvs and curation of the metadata associated with tcga samples. this information is available for browsing and downloads from csr database which we plan to continuously update with representative datasets from all types of cancer with initial focus on curation of data from patients with both exome and rna-sequencing data with matched cases and controls. we consider these datasets important and currently there are  <dig> such patients with all the data and sample types mentioned above. we plan to adhere to the evolving human variome project recommendations and guidelines in terms of data formats and sharing. we also provide a cloudbiolinux and proteome-wide analysis platform to allow users to analyze ngs data in their research or biocuration pipelines. it is our belief that as more datasets are curated by our group and others, we will get a better understanding of the variability in human populations. one limitation of adopting the workflow proposed here is the ability of individual researchers to have the resources and expertise to perform next-generation sequence analysis. to overcome this limitation our group in collaboration with us food and drug administration has been implementing the high-performance integrated virtual environment  which provides novel and known sequence read mapping and variation calling algorithms in a highly parallelized environment. it is our goal to provide both enterprise level hive for institutions and hive-in-a-box for individual users thereby democratizing the ability of scientists to work on big data.

availability
csr: https://hive.biochemistry.gwu.edu/dna.cgi?cmd=csr

snvdis: https://hive.biochemistry.gwu.edu/hive/snpdis.cgi?cmd=dmsnpdis.

cloudbiolinux: https://s <dig> amazonaws.com/cloudbiolinuxvms/cloudbiolinuxsra/cloudbiolinuxsra.ova.

abbreviations
ccds: consensus coding sequence; csr: curated short reads; go: gene ontology; tcga: the cancer genome atlas; snv: single-nucleotide variation; nssnv: non-synonymous single-nucleotide variation.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
rm conceived, designed and coordinated the study, developed a general outline for the algorithm and drafted the manuscript. cc developed the specific algorithm and was responsible for software design and implementation, and participated in the writing of the manuscript. ja, kkar and vs participated in the design and evaluation of the study and manuscript writing and algorithm design. kkra was responsible for implementing the workflow in cloud biolinux. wf participated in the phylogenetic and cluster analysis, mm and qw in biocuration, ag in database design and yp in comparative analysis. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1: table s1
list of proteins with loss of functional sites due to nssnvs in cancer case and control samples.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we want to thank p satti and jh yu for help with database and interface development. we thank the tcga tumor-specific groups for providing the data. we also thank robert foreman and garrett fields for providing hive system support. all computations were performed at high-performance integrated virtual environment  located at the george washington university and implemented/co-developed by drs. raja mazumder and vahan simonyan. this project is supported in part by u <dig> ca <dig> and research participation program at the center for biologics evaluation and research administered by the oak ridge institute for science and education through an interagency agreement between the u.s. department of energy and the u.s. food and drug administration.
