BACKGROUND
the oxidative phosphorylation system  is responsible for 90% of adenosine triphosphate  production in a respiring cell. five multi-subunit complexes, the respiratory chain complexes, and two additional electron carriers, coenzyme q <dig> and cytochrome c, participate in oxphos to generate atp  <cit> . the oxphos complexes consist of proteins encoded by both the nuclear  and the mitochondrial dna . complex i is apparently made up of  <dig> nuclear coded and  <dig> mtdna coded subunits,  <dig> ndna coded subunits make up mature complex ii, complex iii contains  <dig> subunits one of which is mtdna coded, complex iv contains  <dig> subunits,  <dig> are mtdna coded and complex v is made up of  <dig> mtdna coded and  <dig> ndna coded subunits . in addition, several nuclear-coded assembly factors that are not part of the mature complex and coded by the ndna, have been shown to be necessary for the proper assembly and function of the oxphos system. consequently, the correct function of the respiratory chain depends on an orchestrated crosstalk between the two genomes  <cit> .

microarray data have been widely used to study gene co-expression by studying genes with similar expression patterns across a set of samples. over the past few years, several lines of evidence suggest that co-expressed genes  amongst different expression experiments) are likely to encode proteins that participate in the same metabolic pathway, form a common structural complex, or might be regulated by the same mechanism  <cit> .

in eukaryotes, the regulatory mechanisms underlying co-regulation of multiple genes is extremely complex  <cit> . at the mrna level, co-expression of oxphos genes has become evident from recent studies of wide transcriptome analysis across and within different species. in humans, large-scale analysis across different tissues  and across multiple datasets and conditions  <cit>  have revealed a co-expression cluster significantly enriched in oxphos genes. in mouse, co-expression of oxphos genes across different tissues has been also described  <cit> . lastly, two macroevolutionary studies have also observed that several biological functional groups were repeatedly identified as co-expressed over large evolutionary distances and a wide variety of conditions. one of these clusters was significantly enriched in oxphos genes  <cit> . hence, it became apparent that a significant number of genes involved in the energy generation pathway, and in particular oxphos, not only share the same metabolic pathway  and interact at a protein-level, but also share tight co-expression at the mrna level within and across different conditions and organisms. this suggests that these genes might have a common regulatory mechanism that accounts for this striking pattern of co-expression.

energetic demands vary substantially between different cells and tissues of an organism. for example, in mammals, the mitochondrial content of cardiac myocytes or brown adipose cells is very high compared to skeletal muscle fibers type iib. in general, the energy demand of a specific tissue correlates with the level of expression of genes encoding components of the oxphos system  <cit> . the mechanisms controlling this nucleo-mitochondrial communication are just starting to emerge.

there are diverse regulatory mechanisms that may underlie co-expression. however, most studies have been devoted to the identification of proteins that regulate the transcription of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes as well as factors regulating mitochondrial transcription. recent evidence points to both transcription factors  and transcriptional coactivators as important players in the regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis. dna-binding tfs including nuclear-respiratory factor  <dig> and  <dig>  estrogen related receptor alpha , sp <dig>  ying yang  <dig> , creb and e-box factors have all been implicated in the expression of some nuclear-coded respiratory chain subunits, among other genes  <cit> . transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator- <dig>  and related family members  are coactivators known to interact with nrf <dig>  nrf <dig> and erra stimulating the expression of several oxphos genes  <cit> . pgc-1α was identified as a coactivator involved in mitochondrial gene regulation during adaptive thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue  <cit> . pgc-1α is mainly expressed in tissues with high energy demand and high mitochondrial content, such as heart, brain, kidney and brown fat, and is induced by fasting and exposure to cold  <cit> . overexpression of pgc-1α induces the expression of a vast amount of genes participating in mitochondrial metabolism including the tfs erra and nrf <dig>  <cit> . on the other hand, pgc-1β was shown to regulate the expression of various oxphos genes as well as nrf <dig> and erra  <cit> . therefore, pgc-1α and pgc-1β could play a role as master regulators of the respiratory capacity of a cell either by physically interacting with erra, nrf <dig> and nrf <dig> at the promoters of oxphos-related genes or by increasing the expression of these transcription factors. however, while these tfs and coactivators directly regulate oxphos genes, it is unclear how they are integrated in response to environmental cues.

the main conclusion we can draw from the above is that the expression of oxphos genes can be modulated at the transcriptional level. there is mounting evidence to show that tfs and coactivators, particularly pgc-1α, are able to cooperatively alter the expression of oxphos genes. although oxphos gene expression can be regulated at different levels, gene expression is likely to be a major determinant for coordinated expression. therefore, understanding the complete set of tfs and coactivators that regulate oxphos gene expression should yield insights into the control of oxphos gene expression regulation. although significant progress has been made in this respect, a complete list of factors regulating the expression of all oxphos genes remains incomplete, and how these regulators are integrated under physiological conditions is poorly understood.

in this study, oxphos gene co-expression across different tissues in humans and mice was confirmed in an independent large microarray dataset. detailed analyses showed that subunits of individual complexes co-express preferentially among each other than with subunits of other complexes. in addition, phylogenetic footprinting across human, mouse and rat, helped to define each oxphos gene core promoter, and resulted in a comprehensive list of factors that could participate in their transcriptional control.

RESULTS
most oxphos genes are co-expressed across humans and mouse normal tissues
from various genome wide expression studies, a significant group of oxphos genes appears to be co-expressed under various physiological conditions in several species. to identify which particular oxphos genes are co-expressed in different conditions/species, we obtained the complete microarray dataset of human and mouse from the genomics institute of the novartis research foundation  tissue compendium. using custom-designed whole-genome gene expression arrays from panels of mrnas derived from  <dig> human and  <dig> mouse tissues and cell types performed in duplicates, this compendium evaluates the relative expression of  <dig>  human and  <dig>  mouse transcripts  <cit> . analyzing all transcripts would incorporate significant noise to the analysis, thus data was subjected to global normalization and filtered for a compilation of mitochondria-related genes that contains all mitochondrial transcripts coding for mitochondrial proteins, as well as transcripts coding for oxphos related factors such as those involved in oxidative stress response, fatty acid biosynthesis and glycolysis .

in order to study co-expression of oxphos genes among all the human and mouse "mitochondrial genelists", an unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis was performed. this approach was used to visualize relationships among the expression patterns of oxphos genes and other groups of genes. figure 1b shows the result of the hierarchical clustering analysis using pearson correlation similarity measure of the filtered genes. genes are displayed on the horizontal axis and tissues on the vertical axis. the nodes that have genes that are enriched in a particular biological pathway are represented on the right side of each tree. the ordered list of genes based on figure 1b is described on additional file  <dig> 

in both mice and humans, the hierarchical tree cluster analysis resulted in a cluster of genes enriched in oxphos genes. these results confirm previous observations that a significant number of oxphos genes share a common pattern of gene expression across different tissues and this co-expression is conserved across different species. other gene groups that were significantly co-expressed among different tissues correspond to genes coding for fatty acid biosynthesis pathway, oxidative stress response, mitochondrial translation machinery, mitochondrial chaperone activity, glycolysis and calcium binding. tissue clustering showed that tissues with high or low expression of oxphos genes clustered together. tissues with known high energy consumption such as heart, skeletal muscle, kidney and liver displayed increased expression of oxphos genes compared to tissues with lower energy demand such as skin and lung. this pattern of expression was observed for other mitochondrial genes as well, which suggests that tissues with high energy demand have not only an increase in the expression of energy generating genes but also of other mitochondrial components. these proteins may be necessary to structurally and metabolically sustain increased energy production.

subunits of each complex tend to have tighter co-expression with subunits of the same complex than with subunits of other complexes
the above study suggests that a significant number of oxphos subunits co-express among different tissues in both mouse and humans. next, we studied if particular members of each respiratory complex co-express among each other preferentially over subunits/assembly factors of other oxphos complexes. to address this issue, an "oxphos correlation test" was designed . briefly, a similarity matrix was created for all oxphos genes . next, the correlation values were ordered vertically and assigned to each complex . a cutoff of the 30% highest ranking genes was set. next, for each gene , the percentage of factors belonging to each complex within the cutoff was calculated. lastly, a student's t-test was performed to test the null hypothesis that 'each gene has the same percentage of complex "x" factors within the cutoff'. figure 2b shows a graphical view in which genes coding for complex i subunits , have more genes with high correlation values belonging to complex i  than any other complex. the same positive correlation can be seen for complex v subunits . this method is somehow similar to the "mitochondrial neighborhood" index used by mootha and colleagues  <cit> . the similarity matrix is presented on additional file  <dig> 

we observed a co-expression for genes within the same complex at a tissue level. the table shows the results of the oxphos correlation test for different mouse and human tissue microarray datasets. 'all datasets' represent the results obtained by grouping all the datasets. t-test p-values represent the probability that genes within each complex do not preferentially co-express with genes of its same complex. 'complex' percentage values represent the average percentage of genes of each complex that have expression similarities within 30% cutoff to genes in the complex labeled above. 'all the rest' represent the average percentage of genes within each complex that have expression patterns within the first 30% similarity in genes of any other complex. the 'number of genes' represent the number of genes representing that complex in each microarray dataset. asterisks, show cases in which the statistical test did not reach the significant cutoff but showed a trend of higher average percentages in subunits of the same complex than all the rest.

this analysis showed that although oxphos subunits co-express among themselves within and across species, gene members coding for each multimeric complex also co-express preferentially with members of the same complex. this novel observation suggests that there is a higher degree of complexity in oxphos gene regulation than had been so far detected.

promoter analysis of oxphos genes
from the above study it is apparent that oxphos genes co-express at a tissue level. this raises the hypothesis that these genes have a common co-regulatory mechanism that allows co-expression among different tissues. previous studies suggest that transcriptional initiation is the most common form of gene regulation of oxphos genes  <cit> . however, a comprehensive study of transcriptional regulation of oxphos genes has not been performed until now. most studies concentrate on the characterization of one or a few number of oxphos gene promoters and are limited to only one species. therefore, in this study, an exhaustive analysis of all oxphos gene promoters in human, mouse and rat was performed. promoter analysis was performed for all known nuclear coded oxphos structural subunits and assembly factors, as well as  <dig> randomly selected mitochondrial genes. all available promoter sequences from human, mouse and rat were extracted for all genes analyzed. these species were chosen because their genomes are divergent enough for phylogenetic footprinting analysis to be performed, as they still display high sequence conservation and are the best annotated. an example of phylogenetic footprinting is described on the additional file  <dig>  for this study, core promoter regions were defined as dna sequences  <dig> bp upstream and downstream of the transcription start site . analyzing sequences that were larger than  <dig> bp around the tss resulted in a significant amount of noise related to promoters of neighboring genes. in addition, previous studies suggest that tfbs which are close to the tss , are more likely to participate in transcription initiation  <cit> . the complete phylogenetic footprinting alignments of the different oxphos polypeptides, highlighting the conserved regions, can be found in additional files .

respiration is a vital process in essentially every eukaryotic cell, thus oxphos genes are considered housekeeping genes and are expressed in all cell types. in vertebrates, cpg islands are usually associated with several housekeeping gene promoters. we tested for the presence of cpg islands in all human oxphos subunit promoters. overall, cpg islands are present in the promoter regions of  <dig> out of the  <dig> human oxphos genes analyzed. since during the course of evolution gc dinucleotides are usually lost, this analysis suggests that there is a high evolutionary pressure for sequence conservation of oxphos promoter sequences, and these conserved stretches of dna probably reflect important transcriptional regulatory elements, and possible nucleosome positioning that would contribute to transcriptional regulation  <cit> .

a hallmark of several oxphos promoters studied until now is the absence of a typical tata box adjacent to the tss. these promoters are called tata-less  <cit> . the tata box is recognized by the constitutive transcription factor tbp . therefore, in order to analyze all oxphos promoters for the presence of a tata box, all homologous promoters were aligned using dialigntf  and searched for conserved tbp binding sites within  <dig> bp of the tss. only 23% of oxphos promoters have conserved tbp binding sites in this region. these results confirm and extend previous observations that nuclear coded oxphos gene promoters are mostly tata-less.

oxphos genes have common tf binding sites in their promoters
from our studies as well as others previously published, the fact that oxphos genes are coregulated is clear. therefore, with the assumption that functionally important tfbs are conserved across evolution, searching for conserved tfbs in oxphos promoters would probably result in important information on the molecular basis of oxphos transcriptional regulation.

to search for conserved tfbs, phylogenetic footprinting was performed on human, mouse and rat orthologous promoters for all oxphos genes. using dialigntf , orthologue promoter sequences were aligned and strings of short-bp similarity  were searched against a database of known tfbs. the most abundant tfbs families identified belong to tfs previously linked to transcription of some oxphos genes: etsf  which includes nrf <dig>  sp1f , nrf <dig>  eref  which includes erra tfbs, creb  and yy1f . we also identified tfs known to regulate housekeeping genes, such as egrf , zbpf  and ebox  among others. please refer to supplementary material  for a complete list of results. etsf belongs to the ets family of transcription factors and participates in the transcriptional regulation of a myriad of genes  <cit> . nrf <dig> is a member of the ets family, however to differentiate true nrf <dig> binding sites in the promoters of oxphos genes, nrf <dig> was analyzed also as an independent tfbs. nrf <dig> and erra, as previously described, have been implicated in the regulation of transcription of various mitochondrial genes among others. sp <dig> is a ubiquitous transcription factor expressed in almost every cell. it has been shown to be necessary for the transcription of some tata-less promoters and is an important component of the eukaryotic cellular transcriptional machinery  <cit> . in human promoters, sp <dig> and ebox transcription factor binding sites are recognized by the transcription factors nf-y, sp <dig>  and usf which are known to be constitutive tfs participating in basal gene transcription  <cit> . our promoter analysis identified a high percentage of promoters with these tfbs conserved in oxphos genes. since oxphos genes are housekeeping genes, these tfbs might have a role in basal transcription initiation. egrf belongs to the family of tfs involved in the transcription of immediate-early gene products expressed in response to diverse stimuli  <cit> . yy <dig> is also a ubiquitous tf that has been implicated in the transcription of tata-less promoters and regulates the transcriptional initiation of several mitochondrial genes  <cit> . the transcriptional repressor, zbpf, binds elements found predominantly in genes that participate in lipid metabolism as well as several genes involved in processes related to energy metabolism and vascular disease  <cit> . creb family of tfbs belongs to the camp response element  , which are widely distributed tf families and known to regulate the expression of various unrelated genes. however, oxphos genes have been shown to be regulated by creb under certain physiological conditions  <cit> . therefore, an enrichment of this family of tfbs among oxphos subunits is not surprising.

nrf <dig>  nrf <dig>  yy <dig> and erra correspond to tfs that have been previously linked to the expression of some oxphos genes. to compare the data obtained by the in silico approach used in this study with experimentally verified tfbs, we searched for studies in which functional analysis of these tfbs were performed in oxphos promoters. in many cases, less stringent dialigntf parameters identified sites that showed a functional effect on transcription in the literature. for this reason, and only for this comparison, all promoters were analyzed using less stringent parameters .  <dig> out of  <dig> experimentally verified sites found in the literature could be predicted by our in silico analysis showing a high degree of concordance between both methods . this analysis showed that the in silico approach used in this study is able to identify functional tfbs studied in vivo.

in order to test if the most abundant tfbs identified are enriched in promoters of oxphos genes over other promoters, we tested if the presence of tfbss correlated with co-expressed oxphos genes. as a premise, we assumed that co-expression of genes should correlate with the presence of particular tfbs in their promoter. for this analysis, phylogenetic footprinting results from all oxphos subunits as well as other randomly selected mitochondrial genes participating in various metabolic processes were used. a nonparametric test was designed to check if genes with a particular conserved tfbs have a higher probability of having an 'oxphos expression pattern'. a p-value less than  <dig>  would suggest an association between that particular tfbs and oxphos expression pattern . nrf <dig>  erra, yy <dig> and creb tfbss showed a statistically significant enrichment in oxphos co-expressing gene promoters in both human and mouse tissues . a previous study, usinga different approach, identified erra and nrf <dig> as a regulator of oxphos genes through pgc-1α. in our study, nrf <dig> tfbs seemed to correlate with oxphos co-expressing genes in human tissues but did not reach statistical significance in mouse tissues using the datasets chosen . mostly, the tfbss identified in our study are associated to tfs that have previously been reported in promoters of some oxphos subunits  <cit> . furthermore, these tfbs might play a role in the differential expression of oxphos genes across different tissues.

overall, these results show that phylogenetic footprinting resulted in the detection of several tfbs that are enriched in oxphos gene promoters. some tfbs that displayed a high abundance in oxphos gene promoters, like sp1f, did not show an association with oxphos gene expression, which suggests that they might participate in non-specialized basal transcriptional initiation of these genes. the vast majority of the oxphos promoters analyzed have not been characterized previously. therefore, these results confirm that the unbiased computational approach chosen does lead to biologically relevant information.

conserved tfbs show positional bias around the tss
a fundamental question in a bioinformatics approach to promoter analysis is to determine which of the predicted tfbss are biologically relevant. in the above study, the presence of a tfbs conserved across human, mouse and rat was taken as a guide to answer this question. in addition, the relative position of each conserved tfbs to the corresponding tss can also be analyzed. previous studies have relied on this approach, and found that tfbs that cluster relative to the tss  have a high likelihood of being biologically significant  <cit> .

following this idea, the positional bias of each tfbs relative to the tss was recorded. although the analysis covered  <dig> bp surrounding the tss , the conserved tfbs identified by phylogenetic footprinting preferentially occur within ~ <dig> bases of the tss in all three organisms, consistent with the likelihood of these tfbs being involved in transcription initiation . previous studies performed in a whole genome approach have shown that nrf <dig>  ets, nrf <dig>  sp <dig>  ebox, ecat and creb tfbs cluster close to the promoter region in humans  <cit> . erra tfbs seemed to be present preferentially downstream of the tss in oxphos gene promoters. in addition, they tend to cluster around  <dig> and  <dig> bp downstream of the tss. previous studies had not been able to detect a positional bias for erra tfbs  <cit> . few conserved tfbs were observed outside  <dig> bp around the tss, confirming that a  <dig> bp around the tss has been a reasonable cutoff to obtain biologically relevant results with low noise.

taking a closer look around the tss it became apparent that yy1f tfbs are preferentially conserved at the tss or around  <dig> bp of it, suggesting a strong role in transcription initiation of oxphos genes . on the other hand, nrf <dig>  nrf <dig> and etsf and sp1f tfbss cluster slightly upstream of the tss . each tfbs clusters in slightly different positions within  <dig> bp upstream of the tss. this raises the possibility that these factors function together in transcriptional regulation.

in summary, there seems to be a clear positional bias around the tss for the most abundant tfbs identified by phylogenetic footprinting. in particular, known oxphos related tfs, nrf <dig>  nrf <dig> and yy1f  all cluster within ~ <dig> bp of the tss. this suggests that most conserved tfbs identified for oxphos promoters are probably transcriptionally functional in humans, mouse and rat, and raises the possibility that tfbs identified outside of this region might not be functional for the promoters of these ubiquitously expressed genes studied. these results further support the biological relevance of our in silico approach.

tfbs orientation on oxphos promoters
from previous studies, most tfs do not have a preferred orientation of binding in order to play a role in transcription initiation. to test this in oxphos promoters, tfbs orientation was recorded for all conserved tfbs detected in all three species. yy1f and egrf families of tfbs showed a statistically significant  bias towards one strand of dna . particularly, yy1f presented a clear bias to bind the negative strand. since yy1f tfbs also presents a strong positional bias to the tss , these results suggest that yy1f tfbss might play an important role in tss determination of these tata-less promoters as well as in transcriptional initiation. erra and nrf <dig> tfbss also seem to have a preferred orientation; however, they did not reach statistical significance. a strand bias for the two latter factors has previously been reported for mitochondrial genes  <cit> .

discussion
the coordinate regulation of the expression of gene groups can occur at different levels, such as transcription  <cit>  or translation  <cit> . in this study, we focused on the coordinated regulation of mrna levels of genes related to oxphos function. our results clearly show the power of in silico approach to define promoter regions and to study gene co-expression and co-regulation at a transcriptional level. combining high-throughput gene expression data with promoter analysis has enabled the detection of sites that are recognized by unique or families of tfs which might play an important role in the co-expression of oxphos genes. although previous studies have shown the co-expression and defined tfbs for genes coding for mitochondrial proteins  <cit> , in this study we focused on oxphos-related genes.

from our gene expression studies, we were able to confirm co-expression of oxphos genes at the mrna level. oxphos genes are known as housekeeping genes, and it would be expected that they are transcribed at similar levels in all cell types. however, there is a clear difference in relative mrna abundance of a significant number of these genes, mostly related to the energy requirements of each tissue. although differences in the number, size and protein content of mitochondria from different tissues is a recognized aspect in the field, differences in mrna levels is a relatively recent discovery. these findings suggest that there must be an intricate mechanism of co-regulation of these genes at the mrna level.

an unexpected finding was the significant tendency for genes within the oxphos complexes to co-express among each other than with genes of other complexes. this suggests that there is a coordinated control in the levels of mrnas of genes coding for each complex. it is well established that there is a tendency for genes participating in the same metabolic process, or interacting physically, to co-express  <cit> . therefore, these results suggest that, besides a master regulator of oxphos gene expression driving their co-expression at a tissue level, there is an underlying fine tuning mechanism regulating the expression of oxphos genes within each complex. in our studies, we did not detect a complex-specific pattern of tfbss. future studies will need to be designed to identify the mechanisms that are responsible for co-expression of genes within oxphos complexes. although this may be due to the low power of statistical analyses , it is possible that this "fine tuning" is orchestrated by cis elements relatively distant from the promoters or by mrna degradation.

previous studies have identified tfbs for nrf <dig>  nrf <dig>  erra, and yy <dig> in the promoters of some oxphos subunits  <cit> . although only a few of oxphos genes have previously been characterized for the functional role of these tfbs , these studies correlate extremely well with the predicted tfbs identified by our in silico approach. in this study, human, mouse and rat promoters of all known oxphos and accessory subunits were analyzed, whilst usually published data concentrates in the characterization of one promoter in one species. therefore, this study constitutes the first comprehensive analysis of all oxphos gene promoters, making a good case for unbiased computational approach resulting in biologically relevant data.

interestingly, statistical analysis of the most abundant tfbs identified showed that nrf <dig>  eref, yy1f and creb correlate significantly with oxphos gene expression pattern. these factors may act independently or synergistically in the transcriptional regulation of oxphos genes. the presence of multiple factors may serve to integrate diverse signals into mitochondrial biogenesis. in the mitochondrial field, these tfs were assumed to be master regulators of mitochondrial gene transcription  <cit> . the results obtained in this study extend this concept to a broader level. many of these tfs are not specific for oxphos-related genes  and are also common in the promoters associated with other metabolic networks, but other are more commonly found in oxphos-related genes . therefore, although the co-expression of genes coding for mitochondrial proteins can be explained by the presence of tfbs for tfs such as nrf <dig>  nrf <dig> and erra, both the specific combination of tfs as well as other events controlling mrna levels  may ultimately explain the co-regulation.

from analyzing the positional bias around the tss for the factors identified, it became apparent that most of the conserved tfbs identified cluster in specific positions close to the tss. this suggests that the tfbs identified by phylogenetic footprinting are likely to be biologically functional if present within these clusters.

CONCLUSIONS
we showed that the coordinated expression of known oxphos genes goes beyond a mitochondrial or even oxphos pattern, to the level of individual complexes. this finding implies that either common promoter elements or a feedback mechanism from the assembled complexes influences the levels of mrnas although the identification of the core promoters and their conserved tfbs of  <dig> oxphos genes provided the initial clues to understand this process, further work will be required to fully define the precise mechanisms responsible for this co-expression.

