BACKGROUND
conserved motifs in 3' untranslated regions  have been identified in several organisms, including vertebrates  <cit> , drosophila  <cit> , nematodes  <cit> , s. cerevisiae  <cit> , plants  <cit>  and protozoa  <cit> . the function of these preserved sequences has often been revealed and may vary, being for example associated with cytoplasmic localization of the motif-containing mrna and/or modulation of gene expression level. the regulatory aspect of conserved 3' utr sequences has received large attention in recent years, and it has become apparent that 3' utrs motifs often play a major role in post-transcriptional regulation  <cit> , via their binding with micrornas   <cit> . despite these crucial functions and some significant efforts to catalogue 3' utr signals  <cit> , we still know relatively little of the evolutionary dynamics of these cis-regulatory sequences.

in this article, we report the discovery of a conserved motif in the 3' utrs of genes in the ciliate paramecium tetraurelia and describe a number of features associated with this sequence . the detected motif--guacauua--and a number of its variants are also conserved in mammalian 3' utrs  <cit> . however, while no particular association with any gene class is reported for mammals, in p. tetraurelia both guacauua and several of its degenerate variants are most frequently contained in the 3' utrs of ribosomal protein genes.

RESULTS
previously described mammalian 3' utr motifs are found in the 3' utrs of p. tetraurelia ribosomal protein genes
we surveyed p. tetraurelia 3' utrs for the presence of conserved motifs. to this end, we did not take advantage of a motif-discovery computer program, instead we initially screened the untranslated regions for a set of 8-mers that have been found to be conserved in mammalian 3' utrs  <cit> . we found that  <dig>  of these motifs hit the set of the paramecium 3' utr sequences, with the vast majority of the 8-mers yielding only one or a few hits . among the motifs that most frequently hit the paramecium 3' utrs , several share sequence similarity and partially overlap with the motif guacauua, which yielded the highest number of hits, being detected in  <dig> 3' utrs.

sequences that overlap the most abundant motif  are underlined. the expected average number of hits  is obtained by screening  <dig> sets of randomly generated dna sequences, whose length and nucleotide composition are identical tothe 3' utrs sequences ofthe original dataset.  * = estimate based on genes with annotated function

the analysis of the function of the genes containing the most recurrent motifs revealed a pronounced association with ribosomal genes .  <dig> out of  <dig> genes with annotated functions that contain the sequence guacauua code for ribosomal protein-coding genes . in these genes, the start of the guacauua motif is positioned at an average distance of  <dig>  bp  from the translation termination codon. the function of the  <dig> remaining genes is provided in table 2; most of these genes code for proteins that are membrane-associated or involved in membrane biogenesis, and for factors that participate in transcription, rna processing and regulation, and translation.

we collected all genes that code for ribosome-associated proteins in p. tetraurelia , and used the program meme to screen their 3' utrs, to verify both that the most likely width of the conserved motif in the ciliate is eight bases as in mammals and that these 3' utrs contain no common motifs other than those we detected. the motif-discovering software found a single, highly conserved  motif of  <dig> nucleotides, which clearly contains a major 8-mer core, essentially reflecting the previously described mammalian motif we found in the initial screening .

we next investigated the number of ribosomal genes containing single-nucleotide degenerate variants of the motif guacauua and found that  <dig>  of the 3' utrs show a single mismatch to the motif. the average distance of the set of guacauua single-nucleotide variants from the translation termination codon, as calculated for  <dig> unique hits, is  <dig>  bp  but decreases to  <dig>  bp  when two outliers  are not accounted for in the analysis.

we noticed that only fifteen of the twenty-four possible single-nucleotide degenerate guacauua variants were contained in the ribosomal 3' utrs. in particular, we consistently detected 1) no motif variant with a base other than adenine at the third and fifth position, 2) no motif variant with either cytosine or guanine at the sixth position, and 3) a low frequency of adenine and cytosine as well as the absence of guanine at the seventh motif position .

we used the observations above, i.e., which nucleotides are either fixed or show highest frequency at each of the eight motif sites, to screen ribosomal 3' utrs that contain neither guacauua nor any of its single-degenerate variants, for a number of further degenerated, yet putatively functional, guacauua variants. specifically, we used the following degenerate motif uaau, where the most degenerate nucleotides are presented within brackets, while the fixed nucleotides are in bold. henceforth, we will refer to this set of motif variants using the consensus sequence duayawuw, according to the appropriate iupac annotation. the consensus motif is positioned at a distance of  <dig>  bp  from the translation termination codon. sixty-two ribosomal genes  did not contain the duayawuw motif in their 3' utr .

guacauua and its variants appear conserved in paramecium but not in other species
we examined the degree of conservation of the detected ribosomal 3' utr motif for four genes across multiple paramecium species and verified that the ribosomal motif is conserved at this level--the inter-specific degree of sequence divergence was relatively low across the whole 3' utrs however . to further characterize the motif conservation across paramecium species, we then blasted the motif-containing p. tetraurelia ribosomal 3' utrs against the unassembled contigs of the newly sequenced  paramecium biaurelia macronuclear dna. the net average pairwise divergence at nuclear silent sites between p. biaurelia and p. tetraurelia ranges between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . the analysis of the putative orthologous 3' utrs in p. biaurelia suggests that the exact motif guacauua is also conserved in this species. specifically, when we blast the  <dig> guacauua-containing ribosomal 3' utrs against the p. biaurelia macronuclear dna, we retrieve hits for  <dig> of them and in the  <dig> cases for which we could infer  orthology, the motif was virtually always completely conserved .

finally, we screened the ribosomal 3' utrs of four additional species, t. thermophila, h. sapiens, d. melanogaster and a. thaliana and found that none of these species contains an excess of the ribosomal motif conserved in p. tetraurelia . for each of these four species, we further verified whether the motif guacauua significantly hits 3' utr sequences of gene classes that are not ribosomal. gene ontology annotation tools, g:profiler  <cit>  and goeast  <cit> , and visual inspection hint at a slight enrichment for this motif in genes that code for proteins that are involved in: in h. sapiens, regulation of macromolecule biosynthesis and amino acid transport across the plasma membrane ; in d. melanogaster, cell projection organization ; in a. thaliana, binding . no clear enrichment in a particular gene classis observed for t. thermophila.

a motif is considered over- represented if its frequency in the set of ribosomal 3' utrs is significantly higher  than its frequency in the set of non-ribosomal 3' utrs. average numbers of hits expected by chance arein parentheses.  † = multiple hits are included

ribosomal genes that lack the motif or retain only uncommon 3' utr motif variants are lost more rapidly
the duayawuw motif may serve a significant role for the biological activity of ribosomal genes in p. tetraurelia. thus, we hypothesized that the protein-coding sequence of ribosomal genes that do not contain the 3' utr duayawuw motif may tend to show lower levels of evolutionary constraints compared to motif-containing ribosomal genes.

we tested this hypothesis by taking advantage of the most recent whole genome duplications detected in p. tetraurelia. this duplication event is thought to have occurred in p. aurelia before the emergence of the  <dig> species--one of which is p. tetraurelia--that today belong to the p. aurelia complex  <cit> . we found that the ka/ks ratio is comparable between motif-free and motif-containing genes. however, synonymous sites, but not non-synonymous sites, appear to evolve more rapidly between paralogous genes where at least one of the two genes lacks the 3' utr duayawuw motif  =  <dig> ) , and this faster sequence evolution extends to the 3' utr sequences  =  <dig> ). we also observed that in paralogous genes containing duayawuw, the motif sequence is highly conserved  and that no correlation exists between motif diversity and ks . also, motif-containing ribosomal genes appear to retain a larger number of paralogs and to be more highly expressed compared to genes that only contain the rarest motif variants or no motif at all  =  <dig> ; average ests number:  <dig>  vs.  <dig> , m-w test, p <  <dig> ). finally, the set of ribosomal genes that do not have a paralog that derives from the recent polyploidization event  is enriched with motif-free genes. specifically, the latter set contains  <dig>  motif-free genes and only  <dig>  motif-containing genes  =  <dig>  × 10-4).

can the detected conserved motif be a mirna target?
the conserved mammalian 3' utrs motifs described by xie et al.  <cit>  show a distinct bias in dna strand location, being preferentially conserved in the coding strand. this observation, jointly with both the 8-base motif length and the high frequency of an adenine as the ending nucleotide, led these authors to hypothesize a regulation activity associated with mirnas, a hypothesis subsequently confirmed by experiments for a number of these motifs.

when we studied the strand specificity of the ribosomal motif , we found a pronounced abundance of the motif on the coding strand . indeed, the frequencies we reported above only refer to the presence of both guacauua and its variants in the forward strand. when we searched for this motif on the complementary strand, we no longer observed an overrepresentation, and in fact we found no hits for the motif guacauua on the complementary strand. the strand specificity we observe suggests that this 3' utr motif acts at the rna rather than at the dna level and thus plays a role in post -transcriptional regulation.

how likely is it that the newly discovered motif is also a mirna target in paramecium? we addressed this question by taking advantage of some of the findings of a recent large-scale study of mirnas in metazoans  <cit> : 1) uracil  is the most frequent nucleotide in mature mirna sequences--being particularly enriched at the first and the ninth nucleotide positions, i.e., sites that immediately flank the mirna "seed" region, which is believed to have a critical role in binding the target sequences; and 2) guanine is significantly depleted at position one.

assuming that protozoans share the same or similar features with mirnas in metazoans, an initial inspection of the sequence that is reverse complementary to the conserved ribosomal motif, i.e., uaauguac , is broadly consistent with features that are reminiscent of mirna in metazoans . a closer analysis of the motif profile points to a higher level of resemblance. specifically, the pictogram representation of the consensus motif presented in figure  <dig> reveals the frequent occurrence of an a  upstream of the consensus ribosomal motif, at position nine; such an enrichment in as is illustrated by the high frequency  with which an a immediately precedes the  <dig> guacauua motifs that we found in the ribosomal 3' utrs of p. tetraurelia . this suggests that the putative complementary mirna sequence is likely to contain a u not only at position one but also at position nine, in agreement with what has been described for mirna in metazoans.

if the complementary uaauguac sequence is part of the mirna sequence that targets the conserved ribosomal motif, then one could expect to find a region of the macronuclear dna of p. tetraurelia containing this motif  and having a stable secondary structure that is typical of mirna precursors. alternatively the putative mirna sequence could be located in the micronuclear dna--in paramecium there are two nuclei, the macronucleus  and the micronucleus . in an attempt to identify a putative pre-mirna, we screened the available p. tetraurelia macronuclear genome  <cit>  for stem-loop structures containing the motif seed and its complementary version that are separated by up to  <dig> base pairs and flanked upstream and downstream by an arbitrary number of bases .

this screening yielded a total of  <dig> candidate pre-mirnas. for each of these candidate elements we assessed the stability of the secondary structure by measuring: 1) the minimum free energies , as predicted by the rnafold program  <cit> ; the parameter amfe ), which provides an estimate of stability that is not influenced by differences in rna sequences length; and mfei %), an index that appears to be valuable in distinguishing mirnas from other coding and non-coding rnas  <cit> , and whose absolute values are consistently close or higher than  <dig>  when experimentally confirmed mirnas in metazoans are examined  <cit> . the study of these parameters across the candidate pre-mirnas led to the identification of a putative pre-mirna that, irrespective of the arbitrary number of flanking bases, showed consistently both low amfe values , which are comparable to those detected for confirmed mirnas in metazoans  <cit> , and absolute values of mfei close to or higher than  <dig>  . this candidate pre-mirna, whose mfe structure is shown in figure 3a, matches none of the currently available p. tetraurelia ests, has a single hit in the p. tetraurelia genome and is located in a region that is devoid of genes.

it is worth noting that a screening of the p. tetraurelia est sequences led to the identification of an additional candidate pre-mirna. this further putative pre-mirna is detected in an est that only partly matches the 3' end of a 60s ribosomal protein-coding gene. specifically, while the 5' end sequence of this est matches the ribosomal gene sequence as well as the homologous region of other ests that have been mapped to this gene, its 3' end sequence shows a unique profile that differs both from the sequence of the genomic dna and the remaining ests that match this region. this est's peculiar 3' end sequence is capable to form an extremely stable structure  .

additional motifs in the 3' utrs of p. tetraurelia
we finally screened the p. tetraurelia 3' utrs for the presence of the hexanucleotide typically associated with polyadenylation in mammals , and k-mer motifs that were previously found to be highly conserved in worms  and flies   <cit> . the latter two sets of motifs include both verified and putative mirna targets as well as gu and au-rich elements and puf-binding sites. we found that the aauaaa motif hits the whole set of p. tetraurelia 3' utrs  <dig> times ), and is located an average distance of  <dig>  bp  from the translation termination codon. we also found that several u-rich k-mers that are conserved in worm and/or flies, appear to be overrepresented in p. tetraurelia 3' utrs. aside from the guacaau and uguacauu motifs--which resemble the guacauua sequence we describe above, and as such appear to be preferentially located in ribosomal 3' utrs --these overrepresented motifs are not clearly associated with a specific class of proteins, occur at various frequencies, and are located at different positions along the 3' utrs .

the list includes the top  <dig> k-mers for which the frequency of occurrence in p. tetraurelia 3' utrs most deviate from the corresponding frequency expected by chance. values in parentheses are standard deviations.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
a growing body of literature is providing critical information about innovative strategies for the identification of conserved cis-regulatory motifs  <cit>  and about the regulatory interactions between conserved utr sequences and mirnas  <cit> . however, the evolutionary dynamics of conserved utr motifs remain virtually unexplored.

in this article, we have reported the discovery and the characterization of a conserved 8-mer motif--guacauua--as well as several of this motif's degenerated variants, in the 3' utrs of p. tetraurelia ribosomal-protein genes. by studying the distribution frequency of guacauua single-nucleotide degenerated variants, we yielded the profile of the conserved consensus motif , where four nucleotides are perfectly conserved and nucleotide frequencies at the remaining four positions tend to be skewed toward a single nucleotide . the region occupied by the preserved ribosomal sequence has overall a narrow size and the motif is relatively close to the translation termination codon . both the positional range and the relative distance from the termination codon are smaller when compared to the corresponding values estimated for additional motifs we found to be overrepresented in p. tetraurelia3' utrs .

the study of the degree of conservation of the detected motif across paramecium and non-paramecium species shows that this motif is broadly conserved across multiple paramecium species but is typically absent from the ribosomal genes of three multicellular organisms and, most notably, from another ciliate species , which is distinct both morphologically and molecularly  <cit> , yet an oligohymenophoran like paramecium. unfortunately, the absence of genome sequence and est information for species that are phylogenetically closer to paramecium currently complicates the attempt to further trace back the evolutionary origin of the motif .

the hypothesis that the mere presence/lack of the motif can in some way influence  the rate of protein-coding sequence evolution is not supported by the similar levels of constraints at non-synonymous sites observed for motif-free and motif-containing ribosomal genes . however, the study of ks and 3' utr sequence variation between duplicated ribosomal genes reveals higher rates of nucleotide substitutions at silent and 3' utr sites in motif-free ribosomal genes compared with motif-containing genes. an explanation for the association between the lack of motif and the faster evolution at silent and 3' utr sites may be non-biological. specifically, the motif-free ribosomal genes we used to estimate nucleotide variation may not all be the most recent paralogs, as initially assumed. a number of gene duplicates in the set of motif-free genes could result from independent  events of wgd, but be considered as most recent copies if their true closely related copies have gone lost. consistent with this hypothesis, we find that motif-free ribosomal genes retain significantly fewer paralogs and are lost more often relative to motif-containing genes. also, ks estimates between motif-free gene copies tend to be high  when only two duplicates are detected in the genome, a condition that may more easily lead to classify incorrectly the gene copies as recent duplicates. finally, as the identification of the wgd paralogs involved also the study of the synteny between blocks of duplicated genes  <cit> , by visual inspection we find that similar features can be shared between motif-free ribosomal duplicates and their flanking genes, i.e., flanking genes retain also only one paralog and/or show comparable high levels of divergence at silent sites . the latter observation implies that the hypothetical incorrect assignment of recent paralogy could not only involve the motif-free ribosomal genes but extend also to their flanking genes.

finally, the observation that the guacauua sequence is typically located on the forward dna strand is consistent with the idea that this motif is involved in post-transcriptional regulation--although the alternative explanation that the motif is a dna binding protein motif cannot be ruled out for now. three observations hint at the possibility that the newly described motif plays a role in modulating expression of the host gene. first, motif-containing and motif-free genes are differentially expressed, with motif-containing genes being more highly expressed compared to motif-free genes, a finding that along with the higher levels of retention described for motif-containing genes is reminiscent of the reported positive correlation between gene retention and gene expression in paramecium  <cit> . second, the guacauua sequence is reminiscent of the puf-binding site , and puf proteins--a family of mrna-binding proteins--are known to repress gene expression, either by inhibiting the translation or by enhancing the decay of target mrnas  <cit> . third, the guacauua sequence closely resembles a conserved 3' utr motif in yeast, uguauauua, that mediates the destabilization of the host mrna  <cit> . intriguingly, this yeast motif is also enriched in ribosomal genes, and has a mammalian counterpart that is the target of a mirna, mir- <dig>  <cit> . the implications of the latter observations are twofold: 1) the guacauua motif was probably not gained independently in mammals and paramecium but emerged in the common ancestor of the surveyed species and underwent either secondary loss or switches in expressed genes; the guacauua motif may too be a binding site for a mirna, which would be expected to have co-evolved with the core motif. while an experimental validation is clearly needed to provide any solid support for the latter hypothesis, the possibility of a connection between the motif and mirnas is twofold intriguing: 1) the putatively regulated genes  would not be lowly or only moderately expressed genes, as genes that are commonly thought to be typical targets of mirnas, and 2) aside from small rnas that are involved in the definition of the new macronucleus  <cit> , and a class of short rnas that are involved in post-transcriptional gene-silencing  <cit> , mirnas have never been described in ciliates.

