BACKGROUND
over a  <dig>  million year period in the pleistocene repeated patterns of expansion and recession of ice sheets from antarctica influenced globally the distribution of sea surface temperatures and the flow of ocean currents  <cit> . these historical geological events during the plio-pleistocene influenced contemporary patterns of genetic structure observed in marine organisms living in the southern hemisphere  <cit> . for example, small-bodied dolphins of the genera cephalorhynchus and lagenorynchus occupy temperate waters in the southern hemisphere and share similarities in their distribution and pattern of morphological and genetic  divergence that have been interpreted as being the result of dispersal corridors present during inter-glacial periods in the plio-pleistocene  <cit> . these contemporary patterns of divergence and distribution observed for these genera of dolphin inspired the west-wind drift hypothesis, which suggests an eastward dispersal of dolphins via a unidirectional, linear route with the temperate west-wind drift ocean current present during the plio-pleistocene. the west-wind drift hypothesis plus the preference for temperate waters purportedly explains the roughly concordant distribution of these dolphins in temperate, upwelling regions along coastal south africa, south america, and new zealand within 8°c and 16°c isotherms . as a result, the current ranges of these genera are large but discontinuous, separated by vast expanses of ocean and tropical waters between temperate regions.

lagenorhynchus obscurus  is the one of the most widely distributed dolphin species in the southern hemisphere, with a disjoint distribution restricted to temperate waters . as such, this species provides a model for testing several predictions explicit in the west-wind drift hypothesis. first, the west-wind drift hypothesis implies a peruvian origin of the dusky dolphin followed by eastward dispersal to other regions   <cit> . in support of this prediction molecular studies have proposed that the peruvian population was founded when l. obscurus and l. obliquidens, an anti-tropically distributed sister-species pair  <cit> , diverged during a southward equatorial transgression in the pacific ocean approximately  <dig> million years ago when tropical waters cooled  <cit> . in contrast, recent molecular studies with better geographic sampling and both nuclear and mitochondrial dna markers indicate a phylogeographic history of the dusky dolphin inconsistent with the west-wind drift hypothesis  <cit> . these studies suggest an alternative atlantic/indian ocean origin  <cit> , which is inconsistent with an anti-tropical speciation event in the pacific ocean and necessitates an alternative explanation for the transition between oceans.

second, dispersal via the west-wind drift should result in a pattern of genetic variation that is linear and unidirectional  <cit> . one molecular study  <cit>  suggests that argentina, south africa, and new zealand populations have experienced relatively recent contact, perhaps as a large ancestral atlantic/indian ocean population. therefore, the origin of the dusky dolphin and its phylogeographic history remain inconclusive.

finally, west-wind drift represents a passive dispersal mechanism that would result in a distributional pattern of the dusky dolphin that should be independent of changes in sea-surface temperatures, prey distribution, and correlated primary productivity. the dusky dolphin is concentrated in regions of high primary productivity, where cyclic upwelling supports an abundance of schooling anchovy , sardines , and other small fishes and squid limited in their distribution to temperate regions . the geographic association of these fishes and the dusky dolphin is not coincidental. stomach-content analysis and behavioral observations in argentina, peru, and new zealand indicate the diet of the dusky dolphin is comprised mainly of these prey items  <cit> , and that movements of dolphin populations are coincident with seasonal shifts in prey distribution  <cit> . the preference for temperate prey species is an ancestral characteristic of all members of the genus lagenorhynchus, including the pacific white-sided dolphin , whose distribution is correlated with that of north pacific anchovy . sardines and anchovy are regionally and physiologically bounded by 13°c and 25°c isotherms   <cit> . clearly, the phylogeographic history of the dusky dolphin and its temperate prey species are biologically linked, so that global climatic oscillations affecting temperate regions would produce a history correlated with the isolation of ocean basins, with the degree of regional genetic divergence concordant with the closure of temperate ocean corridors and the frequency and duration of fluctuations in sea surface temperatures that altered the distribution and availability of prey.

in this study, we use new nuclear and mitochondrial dna sequence data and complete geographic sampling to challenge the role that the west-wind drift played in the genetic structuring and dispersal of dusky dolphin populations. we provide a global phylogeographic perspective of the origin of the dusky dolphin, and assess the historical patterns of gene flow related to the location of temperate, up-welling coastal regions that are tightly linked to the distribution of prey species. in contrast to previous studies, our data support an alternative to the west-wind drift hypothesis, with a temporal and environmental correlation between the phylogeographic history of the dusky dolphin, its anchovy prey, and the plio-pleistocene paleoceanography of the southern ocean and eastern equatorial pacific.

RESULTS
diversity indices
*from cassens et al.  <cit> ; ar = argentina, sa = south africa, nz = new zealand, pe = peru. n = number of mitochondria or gametes examined. h = haplotypic diversity, π = nucleotide diversity. s = number of segregating sites for mtdna regions, or the number of actin alleles present in each geographic region. standard errors are in parentheses.

prediction 1: peruvian origin
the dusky dolphin d-loop and cyt b haplotype networks recovered a peru-specific lineage divergent from other geographic regions by several missing intermediate haplotypes . similarly, the bayesian analysis recovered a monophyletic clade of peruvian haplotypes with 100% posterior probability, and generally supported the phylogenetic pattern of the statistical parsimony networks . the bayesian analysis indicated with 96% posterior probability that the root of the dusky dolphin phylogeny was not the peruvian clade, but rather occurred along a lineage of south american and new zealand haplotypes .

prediction 2: linear dispersal route
for each of the mitochondrial and nuclear genetic markers, both an amova and fst values revealed significant partitioning of variation among peru, argentina, new zealand, and south africa . the high levels of divergence reflect the very low number of haplotypes found in more than one geographical region. for example, only  <dig> cyt b  and d-loop  haplotypes occurred in > <dig> geographic region. in no instance were peruvian mitochondrial haplotypes shared with any other locality. thus, the highest fst values were between peru and other localities, with the level of divergence between south africa and argentina considerably lower than either was to new zealand . despite the high degree of divergence between geographic regions, no apparent pattern of a linear, easterly increase in divergence was evident.

a) analysis of molecular variance for cyt b, control region, and actin intron sequence data. b) pair-wise fst values. nz = new zealand, ar = argentina, sa = south africa, pe = peru. * = p <  <dig> ; ** = p <  <dig> 

the geographic distribution of haplotypes within the statistical parsimony networks revealed a genetic signature inconsistent with a linear dispersal route. in both cyt b  and control region  networks, new zealand lineages were notably separated from the peruvian clade by a mixture of haplotypes from south africa, argentina, new zealand, and several missing haplotypes. with the exception of peru, at least one haplotype at the distal tip of each central haplotype group was from new zealand. both mitochondrial networks lacked a central haplotype in high frequency, with the majority of most frequent haplotypes clustered at the tips of the networks. the actin network  was dominated by three common alleles  at the center of the network present. these alleles varied in frequency in all four biogeographic regions and in the sister taxon, l. obliquidens. in  <dig> of the  <dig> tip clades, alleles were common to south africa and new zealand. the tips of the network contained alleles present in lower frequency and with more restricted geographic distributions. in one instance an allele from argentina was placed at the periphery of the network , and this allele was also sampled in new zealand.

the migrate analysis produced estimates of the amount of migration between geographical regions that suggests multiple east to west migrations dominated by dispersal from new zealand to south africa and argentina and an absence of migration from peru to other regions . the relative temporal shift in migration rates is evident in the comparison of the independent analyses of cyt b and the d-loop. the analysis of the cyt b gene suggests early high levels of migration from new zealand to south africa and argentina with weak or no migration from south africa or argentina to peru. the d-loop suggests a reduction in the rate of migration from new zealand to south africa and argentina when compared to cyt b. in the estimates from the d-loop a weak, but significant, migration is observed from argentina to south africa and new zealand. this was not represented in the cyt b results. overall, these results support: 1) early and continued isolation of peru from other regions; 2) at least  <dig>  and possibly  <dig>  periods of migration from new zealand to south africa, with the first migration period represented by cyt b suggesting a high, unidirectional migration rate; 3) the later onset of migration from argentina to south africa representing a possible 3rd period of migration into south africa; 4) a high rate of unidirectional migration from new zealand to argentina correlated with that of migration to south africa, suggesting an eastward dispersal event from new zealand, and 5) followed by a reduced migration rate between new zealand, argentina, and south africa, as would be expected of populations that gradually became genetically isolated.

prediction 3: dates of divergence
divergence times calculated from cyt b data indicated a divergence between l. obscurus and l. obliquidens of  <dig>   million years ago , and the peruvian lineage separated from other geographic regions  <dig>   mya.

comparative phylogeography of anchovy
the bayesian analysis recovered a phylogeny  that supported previously established relationships between new world species of engraulis with two major lineages, a "new world" clade with california  and a monophyletic south american  lineage in which e. ringens and e. anchoita are reciprocally monophyletic, and an "old world" clade comprised of a polyphyletic assemblage of e. australis, e. encrasicolus, e. capensis, and e. japonicus  <cit> . our results suggest a divergence between e. mordax and south american species at  <dig>   mya, with e. ringens and e. anchoita diverging at  <dig>   mya.

the parsimony network of anchovy cyt b sequences displayed similar geographical patterns in the distribution of genetic diversity as that of the dusky dolphin .

discussion
dusky dolphin phylogeography and the west-wind drift hypothesis
the overall pattern of genetic variation observed for the dusky dolphin in the southern hemisphere is not congruent with the west-wind drift hypothesis. bayesian analysis of mitochondrial dna sequences suggests the dusky dolphin diverged from l. obliquidens via a north to south equatorial transgression approximately  <dig> million years ago, with confidence intervals overlapping previously published estimates. however, the root of the dusky dolphin dispersal in the southern hemisphere was not peru as previously proposed  <cit> , but rather somewhere in the southern south pacific/indian ocean basins. this result is further supported by the divergence of peru from other regional populations relatively recently, and considerably later than the l. obliquidens/l. obscurus divergence  <dig>  million years ago . there are several lines of evidence from the distribution of genetic variation that support a larger, south pacific/atlantic ocean population as the source of dusky dolphin lineages. first, the presence of haplotypes from new zealand at both the center and the periphery of the actin network suggest an old new zealand population. second, the central cluster of haplotypes from new zealand, south africa, and argentina in low frequencies at the center of the mitochondrial dna haplotype networks  is indicative of the remnants of a historical population with a large geographical distribution that did not include peru. third, there are greater levels of genetic divergence between new zealand and other regions, and the lowest levels of divergence between south africa and argentina . this pattern of genetic divergence is consistent with an early transgression to the south pacific/indian ocean followed by expansion into the atlantic.

given that peru is not the probable root of dusky dolphin origin, there are two alternative scenarios to explain the marked isolation of peru from other geographical regions, both of which support a south pacific/indian ocean origin. first, the north to south transgression during the plio-pleistocene resulted in the formation of a large population of dusky dolphins that eventually extended from new zealand to australia, south africa, argentina, and dispersed through drake's passage between the antarctic peninsula and tierra del fuego into peru. there is evidence that glacial cycles had profound effects on the availability of a temperate dispersal corridor for the dusky dolphin from peru into the atlantic, both through the strait of magellan and drake's passage  <cit> . these alterations in the availability of a dispersal route may have resulted in the isolation of a peruvian population from other regions, and may explain the contemporary gap in the distribution of the dusky dolphin along the peruvian coast from the strait of magellan to southern tierra del fuego . second, equatorial transgression led to a large, cohesive population of dusky dolphins that extended from peru across the southern pacific and indian oceans. changes in migration patterns across the southern pacific, coupled with restricted dispersal through drake's passage and the strait of magellan resulted in the early isolation of peru from other geographic regions. although our data are insufficient to discriminate between these alternative hypotheses, neither is consistent with a peruvian origin.

our analysis of the phylogeography of the dusky dolphin does not support a linear, eastward dispersal route predicted by the west-wind drift hypothesis. our data do not show a pattern of isolation-by-distance from peru to new zealand. to the contrary, historical migration patterns suggest an alternative hypothesis of a founding population in the south pacific/indian ocean that expanded its geographic range to the atlantic via a temperate dispersal corridor . evidence from analysis of cyt b and d-loop sequences suggests that the migration rate per generation from new zealand westward was highest relatively early, followed by continued, but reduced, westward migration later in history. this reduction in westward migration was accompanied by weak, but potentially significant, migration from argentina eastward to south africa and new zealand . this hypothesis receives further support from the occurrence of very few haplotypes in more than one geographic region, and the relatively large number of missing intermediates between haplotypes typical of an old population subject to the effects of genetic drift. in the southern hemisphere, eastern south america, south africa, and new zealand are loosely connected by a series of small islands within a band of temperate sea surface temperatures . these islands are used at least periodically by the dusky dolphin  <cit>  and likely served as stepping-stones for reciprocal genetic exchange across the south pacific and indian oceans. although the dusky dolphin may have at one time dispersed via oceanic islands, a recent study of microsatellite variation between south africa and argentina found no evidence for contemporary dispersal of dusky dolphins between these regions  <cit> . the large cluster of new zealand-specific haplotypes at the periphery of the cyt b and control region networks , with large, mixed clusters of argentina/south africa haplotypes is indicative of the slow decay of contact between geographical regions over time with increased genetic distance. overall, this suggests that the observed pattern of genetic diversity in contemporary dusky dolphin populations is the relic of a historically large population that has since become isolated into  <dig> regional populations.

u = mutations per site per generation; m = number of migrants; ne = effective population size  <cit> . a plus sign  indicates the receiving population.

comparative phylogeography of the dusky dolphin and anchovy
the parsimony network of anchovy cyt b sequences displayed similar geographical patterns in the distribution of genetic diversity as that of the dusky dolphin . most notable similarities were:  marked divergence between south american haplotypes from those in the atlantic and indian oceans, and  north-south equatorial transgressions in the pacific ocean with  a putative ancestor in the north pacific. the correlation between the patterns of divergence between the dusky dolphin and anchovy species are likely related to paleoceanographic conditions during the pleistocene . in particular, the date of l. obliquidens/l. obscurus divergence is correlated with the cooling and subsequent warming of sea surface temperatures in the eep, with the point estimate of equatorial transgression occurring toward the end of the cooling period when primary productivity was well beyond its peak . the extension of nutrient rich waters in the eep likely offered an arena for the expansion of anchovy in the eep northward towards the equator into the tropics, and coincidentally, the cooling of tropical waters, combined with increased prey distribution and abundance, may have provided a natural conduit for the transgression of l. obliquidens from the atlantic into the pacific. the warming of sea surface temperatures and declining productivity in the eep coincides not only with the divergence of l. obliquidens/l. obscurus, but also with the divergence of e. ringens and e. anchoita . this suggests the warming of the eep and subsequent decline in productivity narrowed the distribution of e. ringens, which isolated eastern and western south american populations, and consequently resulted in an anti-tropical division of dolphin populations. based on our study, this founder dolphin population took refuge in the cooler south pacific/indian ocean.

approximately  <dig> million years after the equatorial transgression into the southern hemisphere, there is evidence for a relatively early founding of l. obscurus in new zealand followed by migration westward to argentina and south africa . in addition to the evidence from the distribution of genetic diversity, these migration events support a diffusion of the dusky dolphin through the indian ocean into the atlantic, followed by colonization and expansion of populations in coastal upwelling regions. there are several inferences from the history of anchovy  <cit>  that are correlated with the phylogeographic pattern observed in the dusky dolphin. first, anchovy species are extremely sensitive to variation in sea surface temperatures and current systems, and this has been especially true in south africa and australia where climate change has had a very dynamic history  <cit> . as a result, south african and australian species have suffered multiple extinctions, bottlenecks, and large-scale introgressions from other regions during plio-pleistocene climate change. the most recent colonization of australia was most likely via equatorial transgression from japan. second, there is evidence for two pleistocene dispersals across the indian ocean, one at  <dig>  and the other  <dig>  million years ago, between europe  and japan  via australia and south africa  "stepping stones"  <cit> . similar to anchovy, our data suggest that south africa experienced at least  <dig>  if not  <dig>  independent dusky dolphin colonization events. if we assume that the cyt b and d-loop provide some insight into the chronology of dusky dolphin dispersal events, our data suggest dusky dolphin migration events from new zealand and argentina to south africa  potentially coincide with the two anchovy dispersal events. the first was from new zealand , followed by a second weaker migration event from argentina and perhaps a third from new zealand . these colonization events are further supported by a lack of, or weak, migration to or from south africa during multiple periods , suggesting that dusky dolphins, similar to anchovy, were extirpated from south africa perhaps due to similar response to environmental change.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the phylogeographic history of the dusky dolphin and its anchovy prey are correlated, suggesting that passive dispersal via the west-wind drift did not play a role in the history of the dusky dolphin. instead, our data support the idea that changes in primary productivity and related abundance of prey played a key role in shaping the phylogeography of the dusky dolphin, with timing of oceanic change coincident with the dates of important events in the history of dolphin populations. given the wide-distribution and relatively recent contact between geographic regions, it is likely that the influence of paleoceanography of the southern hemisphere continued until recently, or perhaps continues, to play a role in the dispersal behavior of the dusky dolphin. the dynamic fluctuations in anchovy abundance on the order of decades demonstrate how moderate, short-term change in sea surface temperatures and current systems, such as during el nino years, are powerful enough to have dramatic effects relative to anchovy populations  <cit> . dolphins have the advantage of active dispersal, and are perhaps more flexible in to short-term changes in ocean conditions than anchovy with planktonic larva dispersal. yet in peru, the genetic variation is considerably lower than in other geographic regions. it may be that this is due to an historical founder effect followed by long-term isolation. however, it may be that population crashes in anchovy and other temperate fishes during el nino events, along with dolphin harvest practices, are responsible for low levels of genetic diversity in peru. on the scale of millennia, it is not infeasible that repeated fluctuations in the abundance and distribution of anchovy and other small schooling fishes in other regions have played an important role in the history of coastal dolphin populations.

