BACKGROUND
neisseria meningitidis and neisseria gonorrhoeae are closely related bacterial pathogens, which share many common genes with a high degree of sequence identity . dna relatedness studies cluster the commensal n. lactamica with the two pathogenic neisseria spp.  <cit> . sequence identity of housekeeping genes also clusters n. lactamica with the pathogens  <cit> . unlike n. meningitidis and n. gonorrhoeae, the rare cases of disease caused by n. lactamica are largely due to some compromise in the patient, and it is not normally pathogenic  <cit> .

the pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig> was designed so that common probes are used to address all coding regions thus far identified in the pathogenic neisseria spp., with  <dig> probes to all of the probable coding regions from the four complete neisserial genomes, plus  <dig> probes for additional neisserial genes  <cit> . the probes were designed, based upon a comparative genomic analysis, to the most conserved regions within the genes, to optimize the microarray for use in investigations of strains against which it was not designed. because the probes are minimally genome specific, being within the most conserved areas of the genes, it is possible to also use the pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig> to assess the gene complement of the related non-pathogenic species n. lactamica.

the range of tools available to address the similarities, differences, and evolutionary relationships between bacterial species has been extended with the availability of multiple genome sequences from within related species groups and the development of microarray-based comparative genome hybridization studies. while traditional methods of comparison and typing are based upon the comparison of divergence within genes that are common and highly conserved, the genomic approach facilitates a very different and complementary method of investigation that allows the commonality and flux of genes, and combinations of genes, within and between species to be addressed. methods such as mlee and mlst broadly address genes that are considered to be essential and under minimal functional selection, and are thus under sufficiently low selective pressure to show changes over a useful period of evolutionary time for the purposes of a particular study. it is also the case, however, that horizontal exchange of genes and gene-systems is occurring that directly affect behaviour and these are frequently directly under selection. in two recent studies of another relatively panmictic species, helicobacter pylori, findings relevant to this have recently been made. firstly, it was shown that rather than being relatively immune to recombination, exchange is polarized in both "highly conserved" genes associated with central metabolic processes as well as those associated with strain-dependent behaviour. the former is driven by homology-dependent recombination and their highly conserved nature, and the latter by functional selection  <cit> . secondly, it has been demonstrated that while differences in genes under selection broadly associate with the mlst-based population structure, clear examples of exchange occur between what the traditional relatedness trees consider to be very remote unrelated strains  . this highlights the need for, and the complementary nature of, comparative genome hybridization studies to determine gene complements in studies of population structures and their evolution. this is because this approach measures a different comparatively slow type of change  that is potentially directly related to behavior. this may be key to determining which changes underlie the emergence and relative success of different clonal clusters, especially within relatively panmictic populations. in the context of studies of bacterial pathogens this approach has the potential to identify those genes or gene combinations that are responsible for the periodic increases and decreases in strains with differing pathogenic potentials.

thirteen unrelated strains of n. lactamica were assessed through comparative genome hybridization to the pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig> to determine which genes thought to be associated with virulence traits of the pathogenic neisseria spp. are present in this non-pathogenic species. the pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig> contains probes for the genes from the genome sequences of n. gonorrhoeae strain fa <dig>  n. meningitidis strain mc <dig>  n. meningitidis strain z <dig>  n. meningitidis strain fam <dig>  and to the genes from the n. gonorrhoeae strain ms <dig> gonococcal genetic island, neisserial genes from genbank/embl that did not yet have probes, and newly identified genes from minimal mobile elements . while previously used subtractive methods  <cit>  have been able to identify some of the genes missing from a small number of n. lactamica strains, hybridization to the microarray probes provides positive identification of the sequences that are present in this species.

RESULTS
hybridization of n. lactamica to the pan-neisseria microarray-v2
the hybridization of the n. lactamica strains  to a large proportion of the probes of the pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig> is both a validation of the design strategy used for the microarray  and highlights the similarity of these species. this data can be easily visualized in its genomic context at , where gbrowse databases detail the n. gonorrhoeae strain fa <dig> and n. meningitidis strain mc <dig> and z <dig> genome sequences, their annotations, microarray probe locations and sequences, and indicate those probes that hybridize with n. lactamica in this study. in general, with n. lactamica neither the intensity of the hybridization signals nor the percentage of the microarray probes hybridized significantly differs from that seen in similar n. meningitidis or n. gonorrhoeae comparative genome hybridizations .

n. lactamica hybridizes to 'virulence gene' probes
a set of genes identified in the literature  <cit>  to be involved in the virulence or pathogenesis of the neisseria spp.  were specifically assessed through manual interpretation of the microarray image data. the microarray scan images of each spot feature were individually analyzed to determine hybridization to the probes for this subset of genes. most of these genes were identified in n. lactamica . of the  <dig> virulence-associated genes assessed ,  <dig> were present in at least one of the strains of n. lactamica. many of the  <dig> remaining pathogen-specific genes are not present in all of the pathogenic neisseria spp. genome sequences. based upon microarray hybridizations,  <dig> of these 'virulence-associated' genes that are universally present in the pathogen sequences did not produce hybridization signals from any of the n. lactamica strains tested . of these, analysis of the currently unpublished n. lactamica genome sequence of another strain of this species  indicates that divergent homologues of the pilus-associated genes pilc, pild, pgld, and pglf are present in this sequenced strain of n. lactamica, as is a divergent version of the antigen-encoding ssa <dig> gene. for the remaining  <dig> genes, the equivalent genomic region could be found in each case, yet these genes were absent, both here  and in the genome sequence as a whole. in the cases of dca, virg, and the nmb <dig> hemolysin gene, alternative genes are present in these locations . these results suggest that of the total number of currently recognized 'virulence genes', excluding the influence of allelic differences, the presence of only six can now be considered to be pathogen-specific. only two of these six genes, iga and dca, have previously been reported to be pathogen-specific  <cit> .

avirulence-associated genes that are present in all strains of the pathogenic neisseria spp., but did not produce positive microarray hybridizations with n. lactamica.

bapproximately half of these genes are present in the unpublished genome sequence of n. lactamica, where sequence divergence from the pathogenic sequence can be observed.

n. lactamica contains most of the genes in the pathogenic neisseria spp., including some previously reported as pathogen-specific
when the complete microarray dataset was interrogated,  <dig>  probes hybridized to at least one of the strains of n. lactamica . of these,  <dig> are strain specific, with the majority of these  being in the strain that was not part of the mlst set. the previously reported study of relatedness  <cit>  of the neisserial species is probably heavily influenced by the genes that are shared between n. lactamica and the pathogenic neisseria spp.

the n. lactamica strains used in this study possess several genes previously reported as pathogen-specific, including lipa, bioa, secy  <cit> , mafa  <cit> , and dsba  <cit> . of the  <dig>  probes on the pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig>   <dig>  will hybridize to orthologues present in all four of the pathogenic sequenced strains, and the remainder addresses strain- or species- specific genes or highly divergent alleles. of the  <dig>  probes to genes that are universally present in the four pathogens' genome sequences,  <dig>  hybridize with the n. lactamica strains tested.

comparison of our findings with those reported using the bμg@s neisseria microarray
following the design and public availability of the original pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig> in  <dig>   <cit> , the bacterial microarray group at st. george's  designed a second, independent multi-strain neisseria microarray that became available in  <dig>  during the time in which publication of this study was being pursued, the bacterial microarray group published a study of the hybridization of several different neisseria spp. to their microarray. readers of other reports of neisserial microarray-based studies should note that the investigators at bμg@s have also chosen to call their microarray the pan-neisseria microarray, but this is not the same microarray used in our study. in their study, stabler et al  <cit>  hybridized two n. lactamica strains  to their microarray. we have previously used these strains for other studies  <cit> , but they were not included in the current study because they do not currently form part of a collection of known diversity and on their own do not represent a sufficient sample to address our experimental question related to n. lactamica. we had instead chosen to evaluate the gene complements of  <dig> mlst analyzed strains to assess the genes present in n. lactamica. to this data we added one other n. lactamica strain that we had used previously  <cit> . in addition, our study sought to identify genes that are present in n. lactamica, not those that are absent from the commensal species, as was the goal of the stabler et al  <cit>  study.

several of the genes reported by stabler et al  <cit>  as being absent from the commensal neisseria spp., including their two strains of n. lactamica, are present in our n. lactamica hybridizations . whether these are due to differences in strain gene complement, microarray design, or data interpretation cannot be determined. in cases where the gene is present in only a few of our n. lactamica strains , the former may be the case, but where the gene probe hybridization is present in the majority of our strains, the later two points must be considered.

* 100% identical sequences are annotated as nma <dig>  nma <dig>  nmb <dig>  and nmb <dig> 

for purposes of comparing their findings with ours, the reported pile and associated silent pils cassettes were not evaluated, since the possession of type ii pili by n. lactamica  <cit>  and pathogenic neisseria strains such as n. meningitidis strain fam <dig>  <cit>  are well known and cannot be considered a differentiating factor between the pathogenic and commensal neisseria spp. in addition, the results presented in table  <dig> of absent genes in stabler et al  <cit>  includes separately listed copies of identical genes: nma <dig> and nma <dig> ; and  <dig> reported copies of is <dig>  discounting the additional copies of genes and the pile/pils sequences,  <dig> genes are reported to be absent in the commensal neisseria spp. by stabler et al  <cit> ; in contrast, we find that  <dig> of these are present in our hybridizations with n. lactamica, and a further  <dig> produced positive hybridizations to our pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig> with other commensal species . this highlights the problematic nature of reporting an absence based on a lack of hybridization in microarray and similar hybridization-based studies, which is why our study was focused in the genes present in n. lactamica.

of the remaining  <dig> genes reported by stabler et al. that also did not give positive hybridization results in our study, four are within minimal mobile elements , one  is lost upon the acquisition of xng <dig> to xng <dig>  eight  are associated with is elements, and one is is <dig>  this is consistent with these being genuinely strain and species differentiating genes based upon other evidence, reflecting their strain-specific and mobile nature. in summary, of the  <dig> genes reported as absent in the commensals by stabler et al.,  <dig> are present in our hybridizations and  <dig> are probably genuine differences, but are associated with strain-specific mobile elements.

it is interesting to note that of the  <dig> pathogen-specific genes identified in our study , iga, nmb <dig>  nmb <dig>  virg, and nmb <dig> are not reported as absent by stabler et al  <cit> , however their absence in our hybridizations is consistent with their absence in the n. lactamica genome sequence . the apparent presence of iga protease in their commensal neisseria collection is particularly of note, however this is not discussed in their manuscript. in light of the previously established absence of iga protease from n. lactamica  <cit> , this observation must be assumed to be false positive data, either due to cross-hybridization or data interpretation issues.

discussion
in this study we were able to determine that  <dig>  out of the  <dig>  pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig> probes hybridize in at least one strain of n. lactamica, that  <dig> of the  <dig> 'virulence genes' are present in this non-pathogen, and that  <dig>  of the  <dig>  probes  to genes common to all of the four pathogenic neisseria spp. genomes are present. the genomic locations of the hybridized probes can be visualized at , which presents this data in its genomic context relative to each of the published genome sequences. for the gonococcal database it also clearly relates the annotation used in this study, to that in genbank . the threshold for the interpretation of the microarray data was deliberately set to be highly stringent, so that a positive indication of gene presence could be reliably interpreted even in the context of the extension of this microarray to use on a species against which it was not designed. the data was then pooled, so that assay-to-assay variation in gene presence, hybridization, and divergence should not contribute to the overall gene presence results for the species.

although probes on the pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig> are designed to the most conserved regions of the genes from the pathogenic neisseria spp., where multiple sequences of individual genes are available, substantially divergent sequences will not hybridize to the probes on the microarray. there can be differences  between different allelic versions of genes that would lead to the lack of hybridization to the probes. indeed, there are relatively weak hybridizations to some of the probes for genes that are known to have multiple divergent alleles or undergo antigenic variation, most notably to the various opa probes. the sanger institute's annotation and publication of the complete genome of a different strain of n. lactamica may reveal that some particularly divergent gene families that appear to be absent by microarray hybridization are actually present in n. lactamica, but are too divergent to be detected by our microarray probes . it is therefore likely that some of the probes that did not hybridize will be revealed to be due to sequence divergence or other limitations of microarray methodology. however, such divergence is likely to be associated with functional differences between the encoded proteins. likewise, once complete, the genome sequence of n. lactamica will identify genes that are not in the pathogenic neisseria spp. strains studied to date and are not probed by the pan-neisseria microarray-v <dig>  such as the n. lactamica homologue of the haemophilus influenzae lica, which is responsible for the presence of phosphorylcholine on the lps of these commensal bacteria  <cit> . such genome-wide analysis of the unpublished n. lactamica data is beyond the permissions given by the sanger institute for the use of their data before publication, therefore a genome-wide comparison of these results with the n. lactamica genome sequence has not been performed.

due to the nature of microarray hybridizations, which are much like the interpretations of southern blot data  <cit> , only a positive hybridization can reliably be interpreted. the lack of hybridization to a probe spot is not interpretable data, since the negative result can arise from a number of factors that are not necessarily related to the absence of the gene. as can be seen in table  <dig>  the probes may not hybridize, although the gene sequence may be present. from a sequence standpoint, this can be due to divergence of the gene or absence of a portion of the gene that includes the gene probe. from a technology standpoint, some probes never function properly, due to secondary structures formed by the probe on the slide surface or the target in solution that prevent binding. also, signal can be lost due to too little probe material, failure of the probe to transfer to the slide surface, pin failure in printing, variations in the slide surface, and variations in target labeling using random primers. therefore, it is not possible to robustly interpret the lack of hybridization to the probes as a definitive indication of gene absence, which is why this study has focused on the identification of the genes present  in n. lactamica. if a reader so wishes, absent genes and regions can be easily inferred from the gbrowse databases, but the nature of this data should be carefully considered. comparison of our data to the report of gene absence from the microarray hybridizations of stabler et al  <cit>  highlights the problematic nature of reporting negative hybridization results. additionally, the genes with positive hybridizations indicate only that the sequence is present and cannot rule out frame-shifts or other inactivating mutations of these genes, which may become apparent from the n. lactamica genome sequence upon its completion. an investigation of the regions specific to the pathogens has already been conducted  <cit> , which this study complements.

the behaviors of n. gonorrhoeae, n. meningitidis, and n. lactamica are distinct and clearly differentiate these three species. in other bacterial species, the differentiation between pathogenic and non-pathogenic related bacteria has frequently been associated with the acquisition/presence of key 'virulence genes'. for example, the ctx prophage  <cit>  and vpi  <cit>  in vibrio cholera, which encode cholera-toxin and toxin coregulated pilus; the lee  <cit>  in e. coli responsible for the attaching and effacing effects in epec and ehec strains; and the species-defining spi <dig> and spi <dig> of salmonella  <cit> , which encode type iii secretion systems. in the neisseria spp., however, no such clear-cut event in the evolutionary history of these organisms has been identified to-date to account for the behavioural differences between these species, although the presence of the capsule locus is usually associated with disease-causing isolates of n. meningitidis. from the results presented here, it would appear that the events which lead to the evolution of the behaviors of the three closely related n. gonorrhoeae, n. meningitidis, and n. lactamica species have been far more subtle than in other pathogenic species groups, and that the basis for their behavioral differences may not be defined by a single event, a single set of genes, or loss of a single function. instead, a complex integrated network of genes, regulation, and diversity of function in common genes may be responsible. for example, there are links between the ability to phase vary the pgta gene in n. gonorrhoeae and the organism's ability to cause disseminated disease  <cit> . thus, two strains of n. gonorrhoeae may be nearly identical, but due to a few polymorphisms in the repeat tract of pgta they may have different disease potentials. as an example of differential regulation between the pathogenic species, the expression of the mtr efflux pump, which is important for n. gonorrhoeae survival in the female genital tract  <cit> , is not regulated by mtrr in n. meningitidis  <cit> . in addition, we have found that the marr regulator controls different genes in the two pathogenic neisseria spp. . the genetic similarities and differences between the pathogens and n. lactamica identified in this study provide an additional framework from which to pursue these issues.

from a practical perspective, because natural immunity can follow colonization with n. lactamica, it can be argued that an ideal vaccine would protect against both pathogenic species but not against n. lactamica. however, this study shows that the number of such candidates is very limited. modeling of meningococcal and n. lactamica carriage shows that colonization with the commensal provides some immunological protection against the pathogen. vaccination against something common to n. lactamica and the pathogens that reduces the carriage of n. lactamica is predicted to negatively impact the effectiveness of immunization programs  <cit> . this study shows that there may be as few as  <dig> potential candidates for such a vaccine , only a portion of which are likely to be suitable immunological targets.

CONCLUSIONS
most of the genes that are considered to be virulence genes in the pathogenic neisseria spp. are actually present within strains of n. lactamica, which is not pathogenic. the differences between these species, which make them pathogenic or not, are therefore not as great as might be supposed on the basis of their distinct behaviors and previous lists of virulence genes. aside from genes such as the capsule biosynthesis genes, which are also not present in pathogenic n. gonorrhoeae, n. lactamica seems to only be missing a few of the genes that have been considered to-date as virulence genes. the similarity between the gene complements of the commensals and pathogens suggests that the virulence of the pathogenic neisseria spp. may not lie within the genes they possess per se, but rather in a 'genetic personality' which is a result of the combinations of these genes, sequence variations that alter the function of gene products, the possession of genes for which a virulence phenotype has not yet been identified, and/or in differences in the regulation of genes between the species. we have recently shown that in n. gonorrhoeae the ability to cause disseminated gonococcal infections is dependent upon the specific combinations of genes present, rather than being due to a 'virulence' or 'invasion' gene  <cit> . the same may be true in the wider context of pathogenic potential and commensal colonization when n. meningitidis and n. gonorrhoeae are compared with n. lactamica. without the specific combination of pathogenic-potential genes, n. lactamica can possess the 'virulence genes' of the pathogens, yet remain a harmless commensal.

