BACKGROUND
human swallowing represents a complex coordinated function that is highly dependent on sensory feedback  <cit> . the afferent input from food or saliva is important in the initiation of swallowing  <cit> . characteristics of the bolus such as volume or viscosity lead to a modulation of the motion sequence during deglutition. a larger bolus leads to an earlier movement of hyoid and larynx as well as an earlier opening of the upper esophageal sphincter compared to a smaller bolus  <cit> . dysphagia, the difficulty in swallowing, can result from congenital abnormalities, structural damage, and psychiatric conditions. neurogenic dysphagia is caused by neurologic disorders affecting central nervous, peripheral nervous or muscular structures. a sensory deficit of the pharyngeal mucosa is one of the main causes of neurogenic dysphagia in stroke patients  <cit> . stroke related dysphagia causes aspiration and consecutive pneumonia, dehydration and malnutrition, and thereby increases mortality in these patients  <cit> .

topical anesthesia of the oropharynx causes a significant increase of swallowing duration  <cit> , and a decrease of the swallowed volume and swallowing capacity   <cit>  and sometimes even results in aspiration  <cit> . therefore, this intervention represents an ideal model of  dysphagia due to impaired sensory feedback.

magnetoencephalography  can monitor cortical activity with a high temporal and spatial resolution  <cit> . motor tasks have been shown to result in event-related desynchronisations  of the cortical beta rhythm in cortical motor areas  <cit> . in the last few years synthetic aperture magnetometry  based on whole-head meg has been demonstrated to be a reliable method to examine the complex function of swallowing in humans  <cit> . in the present study we employed whole-head meg to study cortical activity during self-paced volitional swallowing with and without topical oropharyngeal anesthesia to evaluate the impact of sensory input in healthy subjects. we hypothesize a decrease of cortical beta erd in swallowing related areas of the somatosensory system.

RESULTS
all participants tolerated the study. although oropharyngeal anesthesia caused short lasting dysphagia, no coughing and especially no signs of aspiration occurred during screening tests or measurements. the oropharyngeal application of lidocaine resulted in surface anesthesia of the oral cavity and the throat. all subjects stated that sensory stimulation with a swab was not sensed in this area after application.

the swallowing screening-test performed before each meg measurement revealed signs of dysphagia after local anesthesia in all subjects. compared to the screening-test without anesthesia, significant decrement of swallowing speed , reduced volume per swallow  and reduced swallowing capacity  were found .

the swallowing screening-test was performed with and without pharyngeal anesthesia. local application of lidocaine resulted in a significant increment of swallowing duration and a significant reduction of volume per swallow and swallowing capacity in healthy subjects.

the flow of the intraoral infusion and the amount of water swallowed during each measurement did not differ between the two conditions. regarding the emg data, number of swallows as well as duration per swallow did not differ between the two conditions . the rms of the emg amplitude across the whole swallow interval  showed significantly stronger emg power in the anaesthesia condition compared to the normal swallowing condition in all ten subjects  .

the submental emg was recorded during both meg measurements. the number of swallows and the duration per swallow did not differ between the normal swallowing condition and swallowing with pharyngeal anesthesia . the rms of the amplitude over the time interval between m <dig> und m <dig> was significantly higher in the anesthesia condition compared to normal swallowing .

in each individual subject, in both normal swallowing and anesthetized conditions event related desynchronisations  were found in the beta frequency band in the primary sensorimotor cortex. in the other frequency bands and other cortical areas no systematic activation was observed in either of the two conditions.

in group analysis of the single conditions, normal swallowing and anesthetized swallowing resulted in significant erd of rhythmic brain activity in the beta frequency band. in both conditions we found significant activation  in the primary sensorimotor cortex  in this frequency band . the maximum beta power was observed around  <dig> ms after the onset of swallowing related muscle activity  in both conditions. a reduction of the sensor level beta power was observed comparing the active and control time windows in both conditions. the beta power during the resting stage did not differ between conditions . the other frequency bands  showed no significant event-related cortical activation in the two examined conditions.

comparison of both swallowing conditions revealed significantly less activation  in the sensorimotor cortex in both hemispheres in anesthetized swallowing compared to the normal swallowing condition. the peak of the erd was located bilaterally in the same area around the central gyrus in both conditions. the maximum pseudo-t value in the anesthesia task was 35% lower than in the swallowing task without anesthesia in the left hemisphere. in the right hemisphere the maximum pseudo-t value was 28% lower in the anesthesia task. the decrement of activation was observed mainly in the primary sensory cortex. also the primary motor cortex was activated less in the anesthesia task compared to normal swallowing.

discussion
in this study we investigated the effect of functional oropharyngeal disruption on the cortical control of swallowing by means of meg and sam. the main finding of our study was that oropharyngeal anesthesia led to a pronounced decrease in cortical activation of the primary sensory and motor cortex as compared to volitional swallowing without anesthesia.

cortical activation during swallowing resulted in a movement related decrease of beta power in both conditions. the decrement of activation is known as event related desynchronisation  and has been observed not only in swallowing but in several previous motor experiments  <cit> . such movement related desynchronisations are typically observed within the range of the alpha and beta frequency band  and are somatotopically organized  <cit> . they usually occur before or during the execution of movement  <cit> .

changes of rhythmic brain activity were most pronounced in the pre- and postcentral gyri corresponding to ba  <dig> and ba  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> for normal as well as for the anesthetized swallowing conditions. these results are in line with previous studies done with meg  <cit> ; pet  <cit>  and fmri  <cit>  showing bilateral activation of the primary sensorimotor cortex during swallowing in healthy subjects, some additionally found a left hemispheric lateralization  <cit> . the locations of the activated cortical areas observed in this study correspond to those that have been shown by tms, fmri, and meg before. in a tms study by hamdy and coworkers, the cortical areas controlling the pharynx were located medially in the precentral gyrus . an increased regional cerebral blood flow in lateral somatosensory cortex as well as in parietal areas was found in a swallowing paradigm in a pet study  <cit> . a swallowing task in an meg study by furlong and coworkers resulted in widespread beta erd in somatosensory cortex  <cit> .

all these studies looking at cortical processing of swallowing examined physiological deglutition in healthy subjects. in contrast our study focused on the role of sensory input and the effect of functional disruption on swallowing in human subjects. we found a significant decrement of cortical activation as well as significant increase of swallowing muscle activation after sensory input of the oropharynx had been disturbed.

the results of this study suggest that sensory input is crucial for the cortical control of swallowing execution. thus, as mentioned above, oropharyngeal sensory deficits have been shown to cause dysphagia and aspiration in stroke patients  <cit> . furthermore, several clinical studies confirmed the impact of sensory feedback by using oropharyngeal anesthesia  <cit> . a study using flexible endoscopic evaluation of swallowing with sensory testing  in dysphagic patients showed that severe laryngopharyngeal sensory deficits resulted in aspiration of liquids regardless of the pharyngeal motor function  <cit> . this points to the outstanding role of sensory input in swallowing.

apart from a strongly reduced sensory representation we also found a decreased motor activation in this study. a close link between sensory and motor function in human swallowing has been shown before by another feest study of setzen and co-workers. they found a strong association between motor function deficits and hypopharyngeal sensory deficits in dysphagic patients  <cit> . in line with our results, aviv concludes that sensory deficits lead to dysphagia by reduction of stimulus detection in the laryngopharynx and indirectly by impairing the triggering of motor actions  <cit> . of special interest for our results are two further studies, one using video fluoroscopy  <cit>  and the other fiberoptic endoscopy  <cit>  in combination with local infiltration anesthesia. in both studies a significant increase in penetration and aspiration after administration of anesthesia was found. based on their observations jafari and co-workers assumed that this mainly was the result of a reduced laryngeal motor neuron drive, thereby proposing a link between impaired sensory input and disturbed motor-output. according to their suggestion, dysphagia after oropharyngeal anesthesia is not only caused by reduced sensory input directly leading to aspiration, but is also a consequence of impaired motor efferents. interestingly, this observation is mirrored in our study, which showed apart from a reduced sensory representation also a decreased motor activation.

the second finding of this study is the significantly increased swallowing related muscle activation during anesthesia condition compared to swallowing without anesthesia. until about  <dig> years ago swallowing was thought to be coordinated only by the brainstem. new functional brain imaging methods proved the influence of several cortical areas on deglutition  <cit> . we suppose that these findings can be explained as follows: the impairment of sensory information caused by oropharyngeal anaesthesia results in reduced cortical feedback and control, which could be shown in our study. due to this the central pattern generators in the brainstem possibly lose an important part of cortical modulation and therefore have to take over the major part in swallowing coordination. the increased emg-power during anaesthesia observed here might therefore reflect a less well-coordinated act of swallowing.

CONCLUSIONS
a short-term decrease in oropharyngeal sensory input leads to diminished cortical sensory activity and also reduces activation of the primary motor cortex. this underlines the important role of sensory information on the cortical coordination of human swallowing. the increased muscle activation during anesthetized swallowing gives hint for a less coordinated control by the brainstem when cortical feedback is missing. further studies have to show if an increased activation of distinct brainstem areas can be observed in human swallowing after oropharyngeal anesthesia.

