BACKGROUND
use of the dicot annual arabidopsis thaliana  as a model system continues to revolutionize our understanding of plant biology, but the development of alternative plant models promises to address numerous knowledge gaps. especially relevant is the development of additional models for the agriculturally important grasses. leading this charge is the emerging grass model system brachypodium distachyon . brachypodium is a monocotyledonous, c <dig> temperate grass genus in the family poaceae, subfamily pooideae, which is closely related to wheat, oats, and barley  <cit> . like arabidopsis, brachypodium has many advantageous features for genetic research, including small size, simple growth requirements, and a relatively small genome with diploid accessions  <cit> . while it would be preferable to directly study food crops  and biofuel crops , they are generally lacking in many of the desirable features that make brachypodium such an excellent model system. thus brachypodium offers a relatively non-demanding entry point to study the agriculturally important grasses.

from a small handful of highly engaged individuals to the formation of the international brachypodium initiative , interest in using brachypodium has steadily grown since it was first proposed in  <dig>  <cit> . a major achievement for the ibi was the recently completed sequence of the brachypodium distachyon  genome  <cit> . as happened with arabidopsis  <dig> years earlier  <cit> , completion of the brachypodium sequence placed this model system on the fast track for many exciting discoveries. to facilitate these discoveries, many labs are actively building publicly shared tools. for example, the brachypodium genome is well-annotated  <cit>  and can be readily queried at several online sites, such as http://www.brachypodium.org. numerous wild accessions have been collected and shared with the research community  <cit> . supported by the underlying bd <dig> genome sequence framework, these wild accessions represent abundant natural diversity for functional genetics studies. essential methods for utilizing the genetic potential of brachypodium are being rapidly developed and refined. for example, high efficiency agrobacterium-mediated transformation  <cit>  and optimized crossing techniques  were recently developed. additionally, rapidly growing numbers of sequence indexed t-dna insertion lines are now publicly available, allowing researchers to begin searching for loss of function alleles in specific gene targets . therefore, many researchers are simultaneously converging on brachypodium as a viable model system for studying the complex and agriculturally important grass lineage and most of the resource building efforts have resulted in publicly available tools that benefit the entire research community.

complementary dna  libraries are a particularly useful resource that have been developed for brachypodium  <cit> . cdna libraries are essential tools for developing expressed sequence tag  databases and exploring an organism's transcriptome. the development of highly efficient, in vitro recombination cloning technologies  recently made it possible to capture cdna libraries in entry vectors that allow easy shuttling to various downstream destination vectors  <cit> . in fact, the transfer and use of libraries originally cloned in recombination-ready entry vectors is only limited by the availability of suitable downstream destination vectors   <cit> . a previous study comparing the shuttling of libraries by conventional ligation-based techniques versus recombination-based techniques demonstrated several major advantages of the latter approach: simplified directional cloning, reductions of chimeric clones, less size bias, and improved cloning efficiency  <cit> . therefore, the use of recombination-based technologies to create cdna libraries can greatly improve user convenience, potential downstream uses, and outcome quality.

one published example of a recombination-based methodology was the creation of high quality arabidopsis cdna libraries and the subsequent transfer of those libraries to yeast two-hybrid  vectors  <cit> . y2h screens require high quality libraries and are one of the most effective methods of identifying novel protein-protein interactions  <cit> . most well established model systems have publicly or privately available y2h libraries. because the development of these libraries is time-consuming and technically difficult, labs may be precluded from attempting y2h screens in the absence of suitable cdna libraries in appropriate vectors. generally, suitable libraries  have large numbers of unique clones  and sufficient average clone lengths to ensure reasonable likelihoods of obtaining interacting partners with a variety of protein baits. because of the previously mentioned qualitative features associated with recombinant cloning, this methodology is well-suited to the creation of brachypodium cdna libraries and their downstream shuttling to y2h vectors.

similar to the approach for arabidopsis, we describe the creation of two gateway™-ready brachypodium cdna libraries suitable for various downstream applications, including y2h analyses. the two entry libraries represent brachypodium mrna populations collected from plants grown under different photoperiods  or after eight different hormone treatments . both libraries were cloned into the gateway™ entry vector pdonr <dig>  and were subsequently transferred to the y2h "prey" vector pdest <dig> . because our lab is interested in the functions of nuclear factor y  transcription factors  <cit>  and interactors are already described for a subset of these proteins  <cit> , we isolated a brachypodium nf-y ortholog and used this as "bait" to perform initial proof-of-concept screens with both y2h libraries. demonstrating that the y2h libraries perform very well, we were able to readily isolate known and novel interactors. therefore, the y2h libraries described here are immediately useful for protein-protein interaction studies and the cdna entry libraries can be shuttled and adapted for many other downstream uses. all libraries, in their entry and y2h vector forms, are available for free distribution to the research community.

RESULTS
library construction
both libraries were constructed with the goal of maximizing the number of unique clones as opposed to constructing more narrowly representative "boutique" libraries. we reasoned that performing screens against multiple boutique libraries was not practical for most groups. additionally, the actual creation and initial testing of each library is relatively complex and time consuming. therefore, we opted to build two libraries - photoperiod and hormone - that each captured a relatively wide range of mrna expression possibilities.

the photoperiod library represents mrna from both long day  and short day  grown shoots  of two week old plants collected over a ~ <dig> hour period. the ld cycle of 20/4-h was chosen because brachypodium is rapidly induced to flower under these conditions  <cit>  . the hormone library represents mrna from both roots and shoots of plants treated with eight different hormones , also collected over a 24-h post treatment period to ensure the capture of early and late response genes in the final library.

in addition to capturing brachypodium mrna from a range of times and treatments for each library, we also wished to maximize two important measures of library quality  <cit> : absolute numbers of independent clones and average clone length. to improve absolute numbers of primary clones, we used commercially available electrocompetent cells with transformation rates of > <dig> ×  <dig> cfu/μg. to maximize clone length, we used a combination of high quality reverse transcriptase enzyme  followed by column chromatography  to size fractionate the cdna population .

treatment confirmations
for each library, we confirmed that treatments correlated to expected transcriptional changes. for the photoperiod library, we examined the expression of brachypodium orthologs for the genes gigantea  and timing of cab  <dig> . these genes were chosen because they are either central to the circadian clock or act as markers for output from the clock - i.e., they are known to undergo differential peaks in expression throughout the circadian cycle  <cit> . as expected, both genes were expressed differentially during the sampled light conditions relative to an internal reference gene .

for the hormone library, we consulted the oryza sativa  literature  for appropriate hormone marker genes. after identifying promising rice marker genes for each hormone, we searched http://www.brachypodium.org for their respective brachypodium orthologs. after testing two or three candidates for each hormone, suitable  orthologous brachypodium marker genes were found . finally, we confirmed that all of these marker genes were activated  by the appropriate treatment for the tissue samples used to construct the hormone library . collectively, this data shows that the mrna isolated to construct the photoperiod and hormone libraries are representative of broad temporal and induced gene expression patterns.

where available, rice  and arabidopsis  orthologs, common names, and predicted functions are provided. see methods for primers, additional information regarding each marker gene, and literature references used to find each marker.

library quality
the heyl lab  previously created four arabidopsis gateway™-ready libraries with, on average, ~ <dig> ×  <dig> primary clones  <cit> . additionally, they reported the average clone length for one of their cdna entry libraries  as 947bp. because these arabidopsis libraries have previously been screened with excellent results   <cit> , we set these quantitative measures as the desired benchmarks for quality of the brachypodium libraries. the complete quality values for our hormone and photoperiod brachypodium libraries are summarized in table  <dig>  both brachypodium libraries had ~ <dig>  ×  <dig> total primary clones and average clone lengths of ~ <dig>   and ~ <dig> bp . the major increase in average clone length for our brachypodium libraries is likely partly due to significant improvements in reverse transcriptase enzymes over the past few years. in fact, we created an early test library using superscript™ ii  and our average clone lengths were considerably shorter than those of the previously reported arabidopsis libraries . further, we utilized column-based total rna purification procedures ; we find that columns generally give lower quantities, but higher quality rna than trizol®-based methods. based on our main two criteria, we conclude that these brachypodium primary libraries are high quality.

total primary clones were calculated from standard serial dilutions. for each library and vector, ~ <dig> colonies were randomly chosen for plasmid isolation. plasmids were digested and run on agarose gels to calculate respective insert sizes. clone size differences between libraries are not considered significant .

shuttling libraries by in vitro recombination
we next examined the results of transferring primary libraries to a downstream destination vector. this was a simple, single-tube, in vitro recombination reaction using lr clonase™ ii to drive the transfer of primary clones from the entry vector  to the y2h library destination vector . one major concern was the potential for size bias in these reactions - i.e., it was possible that larger, full length clones would be transferred with lower efficiency than less desirable, partial clones. it was previously demonstrated that the ability to capture larger clones in recombination-based cdna libraries can actually be improved relative to conventional ligation-based reactions  <cit> . additionally, for one of the previously described arabidopsis libraries, no significant size bias was measured between the entry and destination libraries following the in vitro transfer process  <cit> . because our average clone size was approximately 55% larger, we chose to reconfirm this finding for our brachypodium libraries. from table  <dig>  average clone lengths are not significantly different after recombinant transfer. we did not attempt to test the outer limits of transfer efficiency for very large clones, but we note that the largest transferred clone  was 8kb in length. thus, the efficiency of the reverse transcriptase reaction at amplifying longer templates might actually be the major concern where larger clones are highly desirable in a library.

our results both confirm previous studies and extend them to libraries with larger average clone lengths  <cit> . it remains unclear whether or not specific entry vector/destination vector recombination reactions might affect the efficiency of insert transfer, but this will need to be tested by the end user on a case-by-case basis. for the purposes of creating the y2h libraries described here, we demonstrate that there are no significant differences in the average clone lengths after recombination between pdonr <dig> cdna entry libraries and pdest <dig> destination vectors.

proof-of-concept library screens
although the quality features of both y2h libraries appear excellent, the most important measure is the ability to effectively isolate interacting proteins. the best protein choice for initial proof-of-concept screens is one with well-described interacting partners. in this way one can quickly determine whether or not screening each library yields expected interactors. for choosing such a candidate, there is currently very little published data regarding particular brachypodium proteins and their known interactors. nevertheless, we could infer likely protein-protein interactions from arabidopsis.

because our lab is particularly interested in the functions of nf-y proteins and we have developed arabidopsis y2h interaction datasets for several of these proteins, we decided to use their brachypodium orthologs for initial proof-of-concept screening. we have previously demonstrated that arabidopsis nf-y, subunit c <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  proteins readily interact with various nf-yb and cct  proteins in y2h screens and by in vivo immunoprecipitation  <cit> . additionally, using phylogenetic, genetic, and biochemical approaches, we and others have extended these results to demonstrate that nf-yb, nf-yc, and cct proteins cooperatively function in protein complexes to control photoperiod-dependent flowering  <cit> . therefore, using nf-yc as the bait protein fulfilled our criteria for good proof-of-concept screening material.

to perform this screen, we first used blast and phylogenetic analyses to identify three brachypodium orthologs of arabidopsis nf-yc3/4/ <dig> . to demonstrate that these proteins would, at least theoretically, be good choices to screen the brachypodium y2h libraries, we initially performed directed y2h tests against already cloned arabidopsis nf-yb  and cct  and toc1) proteins . from figure  <dig>  the brachypodium nf-yc orthologs all effectively interacted with a panel of previously cloned arabidopsis nf-yb and cct proteins. however, bradi1g <dig> and bradi1g <dig> both displayed low levels of autoactivation . because bradi3g <dig> did not display any obvious autoactivation, we chose this protein to perform the actual proof-of-concept screens against the brachypodium libraries.

using bradi3g <dig> as bait,  <dig> and  <dig> interacting clones were isolated from the brachypodium hormone and photoperiod libraries, respectively. as expected, we readily isolated bdnf-yb and cct protein interactors from both libraries . however, the distribution of interacting proteins was substantially different between libraries. only one cct protein  was isolated in the hormone library screen, while this same class represented 51% of the interactors from the photoperiod library. likewise, the bdnf-yb protein bradi3g <dig> represented 31% of the hormone library interactors, but was not isolated from the photoperiod library. while it is tempting to speculate about biological meanings for these types of results , caution is advisable as y2h results can be highly variable between screens. this can be true for the same bait sequentially screened against the same library  <cit> . the results here are similar to a screen we performed using nf-yc <dig> as bait against an arabidopsis library  <cit> , although we found a higher percentage of novel interactors with the brachypodium libraries . overall, these results clearly demonstrate that expected and novel interactors can be readily isolated from these two libraries.

*6/ <dig> blast hits for bradi3g <dig> were short  matches, but the other five were long matches .

annotations as nf-yb or cct proteins came from direct nucleotide blasts  of y2h bradi3g <dig> interactors at the brachypodium database  and/or blastx at the arabidopsis information resource .

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed two brachypodium gateway™ cdna entry libraries corresponding to both photoperiod and hormone treatment time courses. both libraries have the hallmarks of any high quality cdna library: many primary clones  and excellent average clone length . because these libraries were generated in a gateway™ vector, they have many potential downstream uses. the entry libraries were additionally transferred by recombination-based techniques to create two unique y2h libraries. proof-of-concept screens using the two y2h libraries demonstrate that expected interactors can be readily isolated against a known bait. we note that a subset of the novel interactors isolated in the brachypodium screen are likely to represent parallel interactions in arabidopsis and other plant species. therefore, researchers who do not work with brachypodium might also find generalizable value in screening these libraries with their favorite brachypodium ortholog.

all four libraries - i.e., the entry cdna libraries pdonr222-hormone and pdonr222-photoperiod and the y2h libraries pdest22-hormone and pdest22-photoperiod - have been carefully amplified using a reduced bias, semi-solid agarose method  <cit>  and are freely available for distribution to the research community . libraries will be mailed as lyophilized pellets with brief instructions on reconstitution, and the recommended screening procedure for y2h libraries. there is no mta associated with the distribution of these libraries, although end-users are requested to cite this publication if they use these libraries for published research. material requests should be addressed to the corresponding author, ben holt , with the email subject "brachypodium library request" and a short message stating which libraries you wish to receive. we encourage the recombination-based transfer of these gateway™ cdna entry libraries to unique vectors and request that any resulting libraries be freely shared with the community.

