BACKGROUND
the field of molecular phylogenetics is heading towards an exciting future. in this future, genomics will allow for the use of dozens of unlinked nuclear loci to estimate phylogenies . these data may then be analyzed using species-tree methods that use principles of population genetics to resolve incongruence among loci .

but even as the field of phylogenetics seems to be moving towards such a future, it is clearly not there yet. for example, in animals, many phylogenies continue to be estimated based on mitochondrial  data alone , or a combined  analysis of nuclear  and mtdna data . in many cases, these analyses of mtdna or concatenated data may be necessary because sampling many species makes it impractical to include many nuclear loci , and sampling many species and/or few loci makes it impractical to utilize explicit species-tree methods . many review papers have addressed the pros and cons of mtdna data , and many empirical studies have suggested the need for caution in their use . however, most reviews have focused on the use of mtdna in phylogeographic studies  and on the question of whether mtdna should be used in phylogenetics at all .

here, we address a somewhat different question. given that many systematists routinely estimate phylogenies using combined mtdna and nucdna, we ask: what are the consequences of the common practice of combining these two types of data? for example, will the combined-data tree tend to resemble the mtdna tree due to larger numbers of variable mtdna characters? or will the combined-data tree contain a mixture of clades favored by the separate data sets? are there any generalities that can be made about when mtdna or nucdna data will be favored in particular clades or data sets? these questions are particularly important because many published studies simply present trees from combined analyses of mtdna and nucdna, without any examination of whether the mtdna and nucdna trees are congruent, or to what extent the combined-data tree reflects the contributions of each data set . in fact, if combined-data trees are often discordant with trees from nucdna and largely reflect the mtdna data instead, there may be little to be gained by collecting and adding nucdna data in the first place . to our knowledge, these important questions have never been the subject of a focused study.

in this paper, we address these and related questions, by evaluating combined-data analyses that utilize both mtdna and nucdna data. we approach these questions using new data and analyses for plethodon salamanders, along with new analyses of existing data sets from  <dig> other vertebrate groups. below, we describe the four main questions  that we address. for each of the four main questions, we are attempting to discern if there are generalities that can be made regarding the interaction of mtdna and nucdna data sets in a combined-data analysis.

first, are there frequent conflicts between separate mtdna and nucdna trees, and are the conflicting clades strongly supported by each data set? weakly supported conflicts may be spurious and thus not problematic, whereas strongly supported conflicts may reflect more serious issues  that may confound combined analyses . as a working hypothesis, we predict that  discordance between mtdna and nucdna will generally be uncommon, and if found, will often be weakly supported by one or both data sets. this prediction is based on the simple expectation that both mitochondrial and nuclear genes will frequently share the same underlying phylogenetic history , and that incongruence may often be due to estimated phylogenies that do not fully match the underlying gene trees  <cit> .

second, are conflicts between the separate mtdna and nucdna trees generally resolved in favor of mtdna or nucdna in the combined-data tree? mitochondrial genes are generally thought to evolve more rapidly than nuclear genes, and so should have more variable characters but should also have more homoplasy . in general, we expect conflicts between data sets to be resolved in favor of the data set with more variable characters, but also with less homoplasy. a data set with extensive conflict among characters  may be less likely to overturn relationships inferred from a data set with less internal conflict among characters. thus, the resolution of conflicts between mtdna and nucdna data sets in the combined-data tree may vary from analysis to analysis, depending on the number of characters sampled in each data set and their levels of variability and homoplasy. we predict that  when mtdna dominates a combined-data tree, it will be due to larger numbers of variable characters compared to nucdna, and  when nucdna dominates a combined-data tree, it will be due to lower levels of homoplasy compared to mtdna.

we address these predictions by first comparing the number of nodes shared between trees from mtdna, nucdna, and the combined-data, across  <dig> vertebrate clades. next, we test if the proportion of nodes shared between the combined-data and mtdna trees is correlated with the overall proportion of the variable sites in the combined data that are from mtdna . we also test if the resolution of conflicts in the combined-data tree is related to the level of homoplasy in the mtdna versus nucdna data sets, given the prediction that the combined-data tree will be resolved in favor of the data set with less homoplasy  regardless of the relative numbers of variable sites.

third, what generalities, if any, can we make about which nodes of the combined-data tree are resolved in favor of mtdna vs. nucdna? we expect that the resolution of nodes in the combined-data tree may depend on the underlying branch lengths and the depth of those branches in the tree. we predict  mtdna and nucdna will be more congruent on longer branches, because allele histories should coalesce on longer branches, reducing discordance among genes due to incomplete lineage sorting  <cit> . furthermore, introgression is less likely among more distantly related species , due to the accumulation of reproductive isolating mechanisms over time  <cit> , which should also contribute to greater congruence between mtdna and nucdna on longer branches . longer branches may also be more congruent if they tend to be more strongly supported by each gene  <cit> , reducing spurious conflicts between mtdna and nucdna due to weak support. we expect shorter branches to be resolved in favor of mtdna, given that there may be too little time for mutations to accumulate on the shortest branches for slower-evolving nuclear genes. in addition, there may be extensive incongruence among nuclear genes on short branches due to incomplete lineage sorting, also leading to weaker branch support . in contrast, the mitochondrial genome is a single locus , and incomplete lineage sorting may be less problematic at the between-species level due to the generally smaller effective population size of the mitochondrial genome .

finally, when mtdna and nucdna trees conflict, we predict  that nucdna may be more likely to win conflicts deeper in the combined-data tree, while mtdna may win resolutions that are shallower . clades deep in the tree may be harder to resolve due to long-branch attraction  <cit> , and faster evolving genes  will likely exacerbate problems of long-branch attraction . the importance of tree depth may depend not only on the relative placement of branches in the tree, but also on overall branch lengths . the potential for nucdna data to better resolve deep branches may be an important justification for including these data in the first place, along with the desire to sample unlinked loci.

in summary, a consideration of general principles suggests conflicts between mtdna and nucdna may be uncommon and weakly supported, and that the resolution of conflicting nodes in the combined analysis  may vary based on the number of variable characters and level of homoplasy in each mtdna and nucdna data set, the lengths of branches, and the depths of branches in the tree. we test these predictions empirically here, using new data from plethodon salamanders and published data from  <dig> other vertebrate clades.

plethodon is the most species-rich genus of north american salamanders  <cit> . they are terrestrial, direct-developing salamanders that are generally common and diverse in north american forests  <cit> . plethodon have long interested evolutionary biologists and ecologists, and hundreds of papers have been published on plethodon in diverse areas, including studies of behavior, , community ecology , patterns of trait evolution , speciation and hybridization , and response to environmental change . many of these studies have used a phylogenetic approach, making a reliable phylogeny for plethodon particularly important.

earlier studies addressed plethodon phylogeny using data from allozymes  and mtdna , whereas more recent studies have combined mtdna and nucdna data . in general, these studies have yielded similar estimates of higher-level plethodon phylogeny . however, there have been substantive disagreements between studies regarding some species-level relationships . furthermore, all previous studies used relatively few nuclear loci . here we obtain new data from five nuclear loci and combine these with existing data from four nuclear genes and three mitochondrial genes, and use these data to address plethodon phylogeny and general questions about combining mtdna and nucdna in phylogenetic studies.

RESULTS
plethodon phylogeny
trees from bayesian analyses of the combined-data, mtdna, and nucdna for plethodon are summarized in figures  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  the separate data sets generally agree on the major clades  and species groups  recognized in previous studies . nevertheless, the mtdna and nucdna conflict with each other at  <dig> of  <dig> nodes, and conflicts at  <dig> of the  <dig> discordant nodes are strongly supported by both data types . in  <dig> of these  <dig> cases, these strongly supported conflicts are resolved in favor of the mtdna in the combined-data tree. of the remaining four strongly supported conflicts, three  have topologies unique to the combined-data tree, and one  is resolved in favor of the nucdna. the topology of the combined-data tree shares 73% of its nodes with the mitochondrial tree, and 27% with the nuclear tree . the mtdna data set has a greater number of variable characters and a higher level of homoplasy when compared to the nucdna .

mtdna,
murid rodents
each column reports the percentage of total nodes  that fall into the following categories:  concordant nodes are those present in the combined-data tree that are also present in both mtdna and nucdna trees;  discordant nodes are absent in one or both of the trees from the separate data sets;  strongly supported discordance indicates branches for which conflicting resolutions in mtdna and nucdna are strongly supported  by each one;  weak mtdna , strong nucdna  indicates branches for which conflicting resolutions were weakly supported by one  and strongly supported by the other;  weakly supported discordance indicates branches for which conflicting resolutions in mtdna and nucdna are weakly supported by both;  the far-right column gives the proportion of nodes with strongly supported discordance that are resolved in favor of the mtdna in the combined-data tree. p-values indicate whether the number of these resolutions favoring mtdna data are significantly different from random . significant p-values are bold faced.

the proportion of nodes shared between each pair of trees  for each clade. boldfaced proportion indicates which of the two data sets  the combined-data tree is more similar to.

a summary of the number of variable characters that each data type  contributes to each combined analysis and the amount of homoplasy in each data set . the consistency index excludes uninformative characters. outgroups were not included.

the mean branch lengths and node depths grouped by clade-resolution category are summarized in table  <dig>  and significance tests are summarized in additional file  <dig>  concordance between the nuclear and mitochondrial trees occurs on significantly longer branches in the combined-data tree . discordance occurs at intermediate branch lengths, and the branches resolved favoring mtdna are not significantly different in length from those favoring nucdna clades . clades found only in the combined-data tree are significantly shorter than clades that are concordant between mtdna and nucdna  and those that are discordant . nodes of the combined-data tree favoring the mtdna occur at shallower depths in the combined-data tree than those favoring the nucdna, but this trend was not significant .

a summary of the mean branch lengths and mean node depths of branches in the combined-data trees for each clade, grouped by how they are resolved. for the node depths, larger numbers indicate shallower nodes . the last row of pooled data reports mean relative branch lengths and mean relative node depths. significance testing is summarized in the results and more extensively in additional file  <dig> 

comparisons across clades
trees from bayesian analyses of the combined-data, mtdna, and nucdna for the other  <dig> vertebrate clades are summarized in additional file  <dig>  combining our results from plethodon with those from these  <dig> other clades, we find that discordance between trees from mtdna and nucdna is very common, with only 30-70%  of nodes concordant in each study. seven of the  <dig> data sets show extensive incongruence between mtdna and nucdna, with only a minority of nodes  in common between them in each data set. in addition, four of the remaining seven data sets show only a slight majority of congruent nodes between mtdna and nucdna . the final three data sets show more extensive congruence .

nevertheless, despite this widespread incongruence, in all clades except plethodon, only a minority of the conflicts between mtdna and nucdna are strongly supported . these strongly supported conflicts are often resolved in favor of mtdna , but the trend is not significant for most data sets, and in four out of  <dig> data sets, these strong conflicts are more often resolved in favor of nucdna . of the remaining conflicts, 0-46%  were weakly supported by both data sets, 0-56%  were strongly supported by nucdna, but weakly supported by mtdna, and 0-44%  were weakly supported by nucdna, but strongly supported by mtdna .

surprisingly, we find that the combined-data trees are more similar to the nucdna trees for eight of  <dig> data sets . four of those eight data sets have nearly equal numbers of variable characters between the mtdna and nucdna data sets ; table 3), but two actually have many more variable mtdna characters than nucdna characters . the remaining two data sets ; table 3), had substantially more variable nucdna characters than mtdna characters.

the ability of nucdna data to sometimes dominate more nodes of the combined-data tree with only a minority of variable characters is surprising. one obvious explanation for this pattern is that the mtdna characters have consistently higher levels of homoplasy than nucdna characters . however, the proportion of shared nodes between the combined-data tree and the mtdna tree  was not correlated with either of our indices of relative mtdna homoplasy . the proportion of shared nodes between the combined-data tree and the mtdna tree was not significantly correlated with the proportion of mtdna variable sites , although there is a trend in this direction. multiple regression of the proportion of nodes shared between the mtdna and combined-data trees on homoplasy and variability was not significant for either homoplasy index .

comparisons across all  <dig> data sets confirm our prediction that branches in the combined-data tree that are concordant between mtdna and nucdna are longer on average than other branches . however, contrary to our expectations, there is no support for the hypothesis that shorter branches tend to be resolved in favor of mtdna and longer branches in favor of nucdna . the only significant pattern is found in hylid frogs  and caprimulgid birds , in which clades resolved in favor of mtdna are significantly longer than those resolved in favor of nucdna .

thirteen out of  <dig> clades  show the predicted pattern in which deeper branches of the combined-data tree are resolved in favor of nucdna and shallower branches are resolved in favor of mtdna . although this pattern is only significant within hemiphractids , finding the same pattern in  <dig> of  <dig> clades is statistically significant . the lack of significant patterns within each clade may reflect limited sample size for significance testing . pooling relative node depths across clades shows that branches on which mtdna is favored are significantly shallower than branches on which nucdna is favored , and nodes that are concordant between mtdna and nucdna are significantly deeper than discordant clades . across all clades, relative node depth is negatively correlated with relative branch length , such that longer branches tend to be found deeper in the tree. the longer branches deeper in the tree may explain the greater concordance between mtdna and nucdna on deep branches.

discussion
consequences of combining mitochondrial and nuclear data for phylogenetic analysis
combining data from nucdna and mtdna is a common practice in phylogenetic studies, but one whose consequences have gone largely unstudied . this is surprising given the extensive debate about pros and cons of mtdna data for phylogenetic analysis , and about combining data in general . in this study, we test several key predictions about how mtdna and nucdna interact in combined-data analyses, using new data from plethodon salamanders and published data from  <dig> other vertebrate clades.

our results suggest that even though conflicts between mtdna and nucdna are widespread in these  <dig> groups, the general dominance of mtdna in combined-data trees is not supported, even in two clades in which the number of variable mtdna characters greatly outnumbers those from the nucdna . we find that discordance between mtdna and nucdna trees is common: across the  <dig> data sets, 30-70%  of nodes are concordant. this suggests that the issue of how these conflicts are resolved in the combined-data analysis is of critical importance. but we also find that many of these conflicts are only weakly supported by one or both data sets. strongly supported conflicts  tend to be uncommon , and may be resolved in favor of either mtdna or nucdna with almost equal frequency .

surprisingly, we find that in the majority of the  <dig> data sets, the combined-data tree is more similar to the nucdna tree than the mtdna tree . in fact, nucdna can dominate the combined-data tree even when the number of variable mtdna characters is 2- <dig> times that of the variable nucdna characters . the most obvious explanation for this pattern is that the lower homoplasy of nucdna characters may outweigh the influence of the larger numbers of variable mtdna characters. however, our analyses of the relationship between homoplasy levels and the dominance of the combined-data tree by mtdna do not support the idea that more homoplasy in mtdna necessarily leads to combined-data trees that more closely resemble the nucdna trees. there are several possible explanations for this unexpected combination of results. one is that the differences in homoplasy between mtdna and nucdna are primarily what matter, and that variation in levels of homoplasy among mtdna data sets  is relatively unimportant. another  possibility is that the conflicts between mtdna and nucdna occur because of processes that are not reflected by levels of homoplasy in the mtdna data .

contrary to our expectations, we find no evidence that shorter branches are generally resolved in favor of mtdna. in fact, among the  <dig> data sets, the only significant trend is for longer branches to be resolved in favor of mtdna, which occurs in hylid frogs and caprimulgid birds. we do find that within a given combined-data tree, there is a tendency for longer branches to be agreed upon by mtdna and nucdna. this result parallels the pattern seen among nuclear genes in some studies, where congruence between genes increases on longer branches, possibly due to fewer conflicts between gene and species trees associated with incomplete lineage sorting . the causes of discordance between mtdna and nucdna on shorter branches are not entirely clear. most of the conflicts  we uncovered between mtdna and nucdna are not strongly supported by one or both data sets. therefore, spurious resolution of weakly supported clades may be a major cause of disagreement. we also find that clades that are absent in both the separate mtdna and nucdna trees  tend to be the shortest branches in the combined-data tree, suggesting that they have few supporting characters from either data set.

finally, our prediction that deeper nodes tend to be resolved in favor of nucdna was supported in  <dig> out of  <dig> data sets, and when data were pooled across clades. interestingly, one clade  showed the opposite pattern, with deeper nodes typically resolved in favor of mtdna. in fact, the idea that mtdna and nucdna will resolve different portions of the phylogeny  may be one of the major motivations for obtaining and combining these data types in the first place. our prediction was based on the idea that long-branch attraction might be more common among deeper nodes, and that slow-evolving nucdna might help resolve such problems. this prediction is further supported by a significant negative correlation between branch length and node depth, suggesting that longer branches are indeed found deeper in the tree . our results here suggest that nucdna does indeed help to resolve deeper branches in the phylogeny , and for this reason, nucdna data are worth pursuing in clades for which phylogeny was previously estimated by mtdna only.

in summary, our results suggest that combined analyses of mtdna and nucdna are not necessarily dominated by mtdna, even though conflicts between mtdna and nucdna are indeed common. thus, both data sets typically contribute to resolution of combined-data trees, and the addition of nucdna data can be worthwhile. however, we do find considerable variation in these patterns among clades, which suggests the need for routine checking of incongruence between mtdna and nucdna and its impacts on combined analyses. for example, our results for plethodon show widespread, strongly-supported incongruence between mtdna and nucdna that is generally resolved in favor of mtdna . it should also be noted that we only considered data sets in which the overall taxon sampling of mtdna and nucdna was basically identical. cases in which one data set is more broadly sampled might certainly alter these dynamics . furthermore, dramatic differences in sampling of genes between these genomes could obviously influence the results . nevertheless, our results provide an initial baseline for understanding how mtdna and nucdna may typically interact to determine the results of combined analyses.

plethodon phylogeny
our survey of vertebrate clades shows that the results for plethodon are quite unusual, in both the preponderance of widespread, strongly supported incongruence between mtdna and nucdna, and the consistency with which the incongruence is resolved in favor of the mtdna. we speculate that mitochondrial introgression between young but distantly related species may be a major factor driving this pattern. for example, p. shermani has been previously classified as a member of the jordani species complex . all members of the jordani complex, except p. shermani, are placed in clade b in the combined-data tree . we find p. shermani in clade a in the mtdna  and combined-data  trees, where it is placed in a clade with p. aureolus, with which it is known to hybridize  <cit> . in contrast, in the nucdna tree , p. shermani is placed in clade b with strong support. this pattern suggests the possibility that p. shermani belongs to clade b, but mitochondrial introgression with p. aureolus leads to its placement in clade a in the mtdna and combined-data trees. placement of this species into these two different major clades by mtdna and nucdna contributes to the broad-scale incongruence between these data sets.

despite the widespread incongruence between mtdna and nucdna, we find some cases where the new nucdna data do appear to improve the combined-data results. for example, in the mtdna tree , p. jordani and p. metcalfi  are at the base of the glutinosus group, while the rest of the jordani complex  is within clade b . in the nucdna  and combined-data  analyses in the present study, p. jordani and p. metcalfi are placed in clade b with strong support.

despite these potential improvements, there are still many issues to be resolved with future work on plethodon systematics. many clades in the nucdna tree  are still weakly supported , especially in the rapid, recent radiation of the glutinosus complex. sequencing yet more nuclear loci may be helpful here. there also appear to be important taxonomic issues to resolve in the glutinosus complex, which will require sampling many populations as well as many loci. for example, individuals of p. aureolus and p. glutinosus are found in separate clades in both mtdna and nucdna, suggesting the presence of multiple species. sampling the same nuclear genes used here in individuals from many localities within the range of each species may be a useful next step for better resolving both species limits and the phylogeny.

CONCLUSIONS
combined analyses of mtdna and nucdna are common, but the consequences of combining these data are largely unexplored. this trend is somewhat unsettling given that use of mtdna is somewhat controversial, and given the possibility that mtdna might dominate combined analyses due to larger numbers of variable characters. our results here for  <dig> vertebrate clades show that even though conflicts between mtdna and nucdna are indeed widespread, they are typically weakly supported, and mtdna does not dominate combined-data trees in the majority of clades. instead, both data types often contribute to resolving the combined-data tree, with nucdna being particularly useful for deep branches. thus, even though nucdna data is traditionally more difficult to obtain in animals than mtdna , and typically yields fewer variable characters per base pair , our results suggest that the added cost and effort needed to obtain and add nucdna is not necessarily wasted in a combined analysis. however, our new results for plethodon show that, even with large numbers of nuclear loci, mtdna may still dominate a combined-data tree. therefore, testing for the congruence of mtdna and nucdna and the impact of each data set on combined analyses is an essential precaution.

