BACKGROUND
since the discovery of the set of biochemical transformations known as the embden-meyerhof-parnas glycolysis pathway in the early twentieth century, the concepts of pathways and networks have become useful and ubiquitous tools in the understanding of biochemical processes. biochemical pathways provide a qualitative representation of chains of molecular interactions and chemical reactions that are known to take place in cells. such interactions result in changes in the concentration, state or location of chemical entities. pathways aim at providing a detailed representation of this biochemical reality, based on observations of the reactions. as such, the elucidation of biochemical pathways is being dramatically sped up with the efforts of molecular biology and biochemistry research, and particularly with the recent appearance of high-throughput omics technologies.

the definition of biochemical pathways is largely arbitrary, as in practice they are interlinked and interdependent in the functioning cell. nevertheless, it is convenient to partition these pathways into different types such as signaling pathways, metabolic networks, gene regulatory networks, etc. with the growing number and complexity of biochemical pathways, a number of public databases have attempted to catalog them and provide access to their computational representation. these well-curated resources include metacyc  <cit> , kegg  <cit> , the nature pathway interaction database   <cit> , reactome  <cit>  and wikipathways  <cit> .

while such resources remain extremely useful, they provide purely qualitative, static, representations of molecular interactions. although such representations can be used in the context of experimental data mapping and interpretation  <cit> , they fail to provide a quantitative understanding of cellular mechanisms. a key to the understanding of biological processes is to go beyond mere accumulation of observations, even on the large scale as in multi-omics data collection, and to move towards their quantitative prediction. this understanding can in turn lead to the alteration of biological processes, for instance through pharmaceutical intervention, and even to the design of entirely novel processes in the fields of metabolic engineering and synthetic biology. accordingly, over the last decade and a half, the increased availability of quantitative experimental data has motivated scientists to develop predictive and quantitative representations of pathways and entire networks in the form of computational models.

computational models rely on mathematical frameworks to describe the structures and behaviors of systems. a model consists of variables, functions and constraints. different types of models exist, such as kinetic models, logical models, rule-based models, multi-agent models, statistical models and many more. in contrast to most pathways, which seek to provide detailed representations of biochemical knowledge, models can be more abstract representations of the reality, depending on the needs of the modeler, the experimental data available and the investigation being undertaken. models can therefore exhibit different levels of granularity for the variables and different degrees of precision for the mathematical functions. computational models of biochemical systems are shared through databases such as biomodels database  <cit>  and the cellml repository  <cit> , with their storage and exchange relying heavily on the adoption of standard formats such as the systems biology markup language  and the systems biology graphical notation .

different types of models can be generated from pathway databases. biochemistry, and in particular metabolism, is very often represented using process descriptions. processes are the biochemical reactions and transport processes between compartments that transform nominally homogeneous pools of biochemical entities into other pools of entities. in process descriptions, a pathway is a bipartite graph formed of the biochemical entities and the processes that consume or produce them. models based on process descriptions can be encoded with the elements of sbml core and represented in the process description language of sbgn  <cit> .

quantitative methods for modeling biological networks require accurate knowledge of the biochemical reactions, their stoichiometric and kinetic parameters, and in the case of metabolic pathway modeling  <cit> , initial concentrations of metabolites  <cit>  and enzymes  <cit> . in many cases, such experimentally derived parameters are unavailable. this has led to the development of several qualitative approaches, based on influence networks rather than process descriptions. examples are logical modeling in multiple variants, from boolean or multi-valued networks  <cit>  to discrete algebra  <cit>  and differential equations  <cit> , petri nets  <cit>  and predicate logic  <cit> . qualitative models typically refer to regulatory or signaling networks, and are based on the definition of an influence or signal-flow graph, rather than the depiction of consumption and production of pools of entities. these methods have proven useful in recent years in the interpretation of data from perturbation experiments, phosphoproteomics and gene expression studies  <cit> . sbml has recently been extended to support such logical models, which can be encoded with the newly introduced qualitative models package for sbml level  <dig>  and represented in the activity flow language of sbgn.

in addition to curated pathway databases, the availability of well-annotated entire genomes, together with methods for reconstructing and constraining large-scale biochemical networks, has led to the reconstruction of comprehensive metabolic pathways, including all enzymes known to be encoded by an organism. the development of these genome-scale metabolic network reconstructions, and their analysis through constraint-based modeling approaches, is becoming increasingly widespread in driving the understanding of metabolism in a diverse range of organisms. the number of such genome-scale metabolic reconstructions published over the last ten years has grown considerably, with over  <dig> such reconstructions recently reported  <cit> , covering a range of single- and multicellular organisms.

metabolic reconstructions attempt to provide a computational and mathematical representation of the metabolic capabilities of the cell. reconstructions have been used in a number of research topics including metabolic engineering, genome-annotation, evolutionary studies, network property analysis, and interpretation of omics datasets  <cit> . the development of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions typically involves a labor-intensive, manual process, with timescales of up to two years reported for their production  <cit> . while it is recognized that the development of high-quality metabolic reconstructions requires significant curation, and is dependent upon manual  <cit>  or semi-automated literature mining  <cit> , there have been notable recent steps towards semi-automation of the reconstruction process, which aim to reduce the number of tasks that must be performed manually.

traditionally, computational models have been painstakingly  built from primary information obtained from the literature and from dedicated experiments. because of the increasing size and complexity of these models, this approach is no longer sustainable. modelers have therefore begun to build models directly based on data imported from pathway databases. however, until recently, this has mostly been done on a tedious case-by-case basis and repeated separately by different researchers because the results were not shared in a consistent fashion. the path2models project attempts to mitigate this often duplicated initial modeling step by generating computational models from pathways on a large scale, applying consistent, community-developed and well-supported data formats, and to make the results available to the community as a whole.

this manuscript therefore describes the conversion of pathway information to computational models in a consistent and high-throughput manner. the path2models project has generated three types of models: quantitative, kinetic models of metabolic pathways; qualitative, logical models of non-metabolic  pathways; and genome-scale metabolic reconstructions. the models are generated in sbml, and in many cases are augmented with visual representations in the form of sbgn documents. all of the models share a consistent format and are semantically annotated according to the minimum information required in the annotation of models  specification  <cit> . in practice, this means that all components of the models  are tagged with unambiguous identifiers from publicly available, third party databases. the models can therefore be easily queried, compared, merged and expanded, and are immediately amenable to integration with experimental data  <cit> . the resulting models are made publicly available through biomodels database  <cit>  and can be used as starting point for further development.

RESULTS
workflow from biochemical pathways to computational models
in order to generate computational models from biological pathways on a large scale, a software pipeline composed of several steps that can be run sequentially or in parallel was developed . the pathways must first be converted from their original format to a standard computer-readable format, which will be used throughout all subsequent steps of the pipeline. this work describes the conversion of pathway information from kegg, metacyc, and biopax  <cit>  into sbml models, lacking both mathematics and numerical values. these preliminary networks were then processed to annotate, merge, extend and complete them with mathematical expressions where possible. all software modules utilized in this work are freely distributed, and readers can re-use them on their own or within their own workflows.

three parallel pipelines of data processing were implemented: 1) kinetic metabolic models represented by processes were encoded in sbml level  <dig> core format, enriched with modular rate-laws and depicted using sbgn process descriptions; 2) qualitative metabolic and non-metabolic  pathways, represented as influence diagrams, were encoded in sbml using the level  <dig> qual package, in a form ready for logical modeling and depicted using sbgn activity flows; 3) genome-scale metabolism reconstructions were similarly encoded in sbml, in a format amenable to constraint-based modeling.

generation of quantitative kinetic process models from metabolic pathways
the metabolic pathways distributed by kegg are described in terms of processes, and formed the basis of the process-based reconstructions.  <dig>  <dig> maps describing up to  <dig> metabolic pathways in  <dig>  <dig> organisms were converted into process description models encoded in sbml level  <dig> core. the resulting sbml documents were converted into sbgn process descriptions  maps, in order to provide defined graphical representations of all models .
process description 
map of a pathway, cutout of the pathway and parts of the sbml file describing the reactions shown in the cutout.

reconstructions of metabolic networks were completed by the addition of experimentally determined rate laws and parameter values from the sabio-rk database  <cit> . sabio-rk is a reaction-kinetics database that contains experimentally obtained rate laws for a large collection of  chemical reactions, including measured parameter values and experimental conditions, such as the ph value or the temperature, under which the rate was measured  <cit> . it was therefore desirable to extract as much information from sabio-rk as possible and relevant. for all reactions that lacked corresponding entries in sabio-rk, the kinetic rate laws were inferred ab initio . at the moment, the sabio-rk database mainly focuses on a selection of relevant model organisms, for which many rate laws can already be extracted , for instance, 12% for homo sapiens, 10% for rattus norvegicus, and 8% for escherichia coli. across the full range of organisms we considered,  <dig> reactions  could be equipped with rate laws from sabio-rk.

generation of qualitative models from signaling pathways
from the kegg pathway database,  <dig>  <dig> maps describing  <dig> non-metabolic pathways in  <dig>  <dig> organisms were converted into influence maps models encoded with the sbml level  <dig> qual package.

prior to our use to convert non-metabolic pathways, no attempt had been made to encode pathway models using the sbml qual syntax. we uncovered several aspects of the package specification that caused problems when applied to actual pathways and the project provided a valuable concrete situation to help resolve these issues. for example, the information available originally permitted the description of interaction graphs but was not sufficient to define logical rules specifying the effects of combined interactions. this led to the introduction of a sign attribute for indicating whether a given interaction has a positive, negative or unknown effect. this can then be used as a constraint to parameterize a logical model further. the project therefore accelerated the development and finalization of the sbml level  <dig> qual specification.

kegg relations sometimes consist exclusively of the subtypes phosphorylation, dephosphorylation, glycosylation, ubiquitination, or methylation. these relations cannot be interpreted in terms of positive or negative influences on a transition . in those cases, the sign attribute was initially set to unknown for the input element of the corresponding transition. whenever possible, the kegg pathways were augmented with interaction information imported from the biocarta pathways distributed by the nature pathway interaction database   <cit> . pid provides human pathways in the biopax format level  <dig>  which specifies a controltype attribute for each interaction. the controltype attribute determines whether the interaction represents activation or inhibition. with the additional information from the pid, it was possible to extend  <dig> human pathways.

genome-scale metabolic reconstructions
genome-scale metabolic reconstructions of  <dig>  <dig> organisms were generated through extraction of pathway data from the kegg and metacyc databases using an updated version of the pre-existing software libannotationsbml and the subliminal toolbox  <cit> . all reconstructions contain data from kegg, and many of these have been augmented with data from metacyc for the corresponding organism. in each case, mnxref was used to reconcile metabolite and reaction identifiers across the different data resources  <cit> . as well as providing mapping of kegg and metacyc identifiers, mnxref also applies a default metabolite formula and charge state according to an assumed ph of  <dig> , and ensures mass and charge balancing of reactions where possible. furthermore, mnxref provides mapping to additional identifiers, which have been extracted and incorporated into the collection of genome-scale reconstructions. as such, as well as ensuring consistent metabolite and reaction identifiers across all  <dig>  <dig> reconstructions, all models also contain identifier cross references to numerous commonly used resources, including bigg  <cit>  and the model seed  <cit> , further enhancing their interoperability.

a minimal growth medium , appropriate transport reactions, and  <dig> common biomass components were specified in each model, including all  <dig> amino acids, rna and dna nucleotide precursors, glycogen and atp . a default biomass objective function was added, containing these components, with the intention of facilitating subsequent analysis and curation. the models were then formatted such that they could be analyzed with a range of sbml-compatible software tools, including the cobra toolbox  <cit> . figure  <dig> describes the workflow that was used in the automated reconstruction process.

the resulting  <dig>  <dig> models range in size from the smallest, candidatus tremblaya princeps pcval, containing  <dig> metabolites and  <dig> metabolic reactions, to homo sapiens, with  <dig>  <dig> metabolites and  <dig>  <dig> metabolic reactions. all models were analyzed for their ability to synthesize each defined biomass precursor from the minimum growth medium, taking into account reaction directionalities specified in kegg and/or metacyc where available. of these, only the model of drosophila melanogaster was able to synthesize all specified  <dig> biomass components. the homo sapiens model was incapable of synthesizing the amino acids cysteine, histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, threonine, tryptophan and valine. of these, all but cysteine are known essential amino acids. additionally, the model is unexpectedly able to synthesize phenylalanine, an essential amino acid. nevertheless, these analysis results indicate that the draft model is largely predictive of the amino acid essentiality, with the anomalies of cysteine and phenylalanine synthesis pathways providing starting points for manual curation.

the full results of this study are provided in a definitive list of all models produced in additional file 1: table s <dig>  the results can also be viewed as a phylogenetic tree, generated by the integrated tree of life  web application  <cit> , at  <cit>  .

access to the resulting knowledge base
biomodels database is the reference repository of computational models of biological interest encoded in sbml. this resource allows biologists to store, search, retrieve and display mathematical models. one of the main qualities of the repository lies in its contents: all are distributed in standard formats and using a free license, allowing easy re-use. the models generated by the project have been made publicly available from biomodels database since release  <dig> under the name “path2models”  <cit> . the size of the distribution of all these models is presented in figure  <dig>  a new branch in the model-processing pipeline was created in order to accommodate those models, as they are not expected to go through the usual manual curation and annotation phases. a dedicated search infrastructure for the path2models branch was provided with release  <dig>  figure  <dig> presents the relative populations of the different topics, as compiled from the gene ontology annotation of the models. the path2models branch of biomodels database is not considered to be a frozen resource, and improved versions will be released as they are made available.

discussion
automatically generated models are only a starting point
the workflow described here enables the automatic generation of a large number of computational models from existing pathway data resources. the procedure is essentially the same as for building an individual model from the same data. however, instead of independent scientists enacting this procedure again and again as the needs arise, the initial data processing is performed in bulk. scientists can then focus on the more interesting tasks of adapting the models to their questions, adding initial conditions and parameter values, and running simulations to answer biological questions in the organisms and/or pathways in which they are interested.

the added value provided by the initial models to such research activities largely depends on the quality of those models. true errors, such as erroneous reactions, can produce misleading results. incompleteness increases the need for completion and refinement. incorrect syntax makes it more difficult to re-use the initial models with existing software tools. in the end, all of these issues translate into greater workload and time loss for the user. however, the quality of the models produced by the workflow crucially depends on the accuracy and completeness of the sources of information. if the pathway data are incorrect, there is little that an automatic conversion system can do beyond checking for feasible stoichiometries, mass and charge conservation and the like. similarly, if some biological information is missing, the pathway-to-model workflow cannot easily create it. an example of this is information about compartmentalization. if the localization of the pathway nodes is not specified in the initial data, the resulting models will have a single compartment containing all molecular species.

figure  <dig> presents the size of the models produced by the project, in terms of number of state variables and number of mathematical relationships . the whole genome reconstructions present similar distributions for variables and relationships . the situation is similar to the curated branch of biomodels database , which features models capable of numerical simulation. in contrast, the individual metabolic pathways  are severely underdetermined, with many more variables than relationships. a possible reason for this is that entities in kegg pathways are inferred by gene/enzyme homology, which can lead to missing reactions and therefore disconnected graphs.

systematic generation of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions from existing data resources
while the generation of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions typically relies upon time-consuming and manual efforts, techniques are being introduced which attempt to automate at least part of the process. one such approach to semi-automated reconstruction of such networks is that of the model seed  <cit> . this method provides a web-based resource for the generation of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions from assembled genome sequences. it has resulted in the generation of  <dig>  reconstructions of a range of bacterial species, and has the potential for generating many more. while an approach that allows for the automated generation of reconstructions directly from the genome will clearly grow in importance given the ever-increasing volume of sequencing data, it is also clear that existing, curated data resources such as metacyc and kegg still provide a great deal of biochemical knowledge that can be exploited in the metabolic reconstruction process. many reconstruction projects take existing pathway databases such as these as a starting point, and indeed, recently introduced software tools such as the raven toolbox  <cit>  have followed the examples set by the subliminal toolbox  <cit>  and keggtranslator  <cit>  in automating the generation of models from kegg.

this work describes the first example in which an automated model reconstruction tool has been systematically applied to a wide range of organisms on such a scale. the result of this is the largest collection of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions to date. due to their common formatting, use of identifiers and semantic annotations, the collection provides both a useful starting point for subsequent manual and semi-automated curation, and, as can be seen in the phylogenetic tree of figure  <dig>  a framework upon which metabolism can be systematically compared across species.

complementing pathway models with kinetic information
some aspects of the procedure described here compare with the work of li and colleagues  <cit> . for instance, both their workflow and ours extract kinetic data from sabio-rk. however, the aim of li et al. was to provide full models, including parameterization and initial conditions. their workflow could therefore plug in downstream of path2models’ workflow; starting from models containing tentative rate-laws rather than stoichiometric reactions alone.

even for the most extensively investigated organism, homo sapiens, kinetic data is only available for  <dig> % of its known metabolic reactions. much less information is available for other organisms. it should be noted that despite the wealth of pathways and reactions gathered in databases such as kegg or metacyc, they could still not claim to be comprehensive. the model presented here can therefore only reflect the knowledge available today in a re-usable form. since kinetic equations  have not been experimentally determined, there is a great interest in the application of generic approaches  <cit> . the modular rate laws suggested by liebermeister et al.  <cit>  have been specifically derived for cases in which more precise information remains elusive.

each modular rate law can be used in three different modes or versions, which increase in complexity from the explicit , through the haldane-compliant , to the wegscheider-compliant  version. these versions determine the form of the numerator in the equation . a parsimonious approach was chosen in this work, where only as much complexity as necessary was introduced. therefore, the most simple cat version of these rate laws was selected for all reversible reactions, even if this equation might not guarantee thermodynamic correctness. if the models created by this approach are used as the basis for subsequent calibration by experimental data, use of the cat version has two important advantages:  it contains a small number of parameters with uncertain values; and  it has a low complexity in comparison to the hal or the weg version, with consequences on runtime. it should be noted that liebermeister et al. have suggested an algorithm for transforming the parameter values of complex versions of the modular rate laws to the nearest simple form. it is possible to compute thermodynamically correct cat-parameters based on randomly selected weg-parameters through an intermediate step involving hal-parameters. however, application of this method would also require that all rate laws are re-created before and after parameter estimation.

since the modular rate laws can only be applied to reversible metabolic reactions, it was therefore necessary to select further generic rate equations for the large-scale approach described in this work. it can be hoped that the percentage of experimentally determined rate laws will increase in the future, but generic rate laws will still be required to complete the quantitative models.

scaffold of logic models from kegg signaling pathways
as mentioned above, the automatically generated models are only partially parameterized. in the case of kegg signaling pathways for which no mechanistic details are provided, the models  contain only topological relationships together with interaction signs. no logical rules specify the effects of  interactions, and these models should be seen as scaffolds to be further parameterized before use in simulation. this can be done either by considering default, yet biologically meaningful, logical functions   <cit> , by doing further manual refinement of the model , or by using dedicated experimental data to identify the functions  <cit> .

several simulation tools now support the sbml level  <dig> qual package, including ginsim  <cit> , cellnopt  <cit>  and the cell collective platform  <cit> . cellnopt provides a pipeline to generate logical rules by pruning a general scaffold with all possible rules so as to find the submodel that best describes the data. this can be done using various formalisms  <cit>  of increasing detail, depending of the data at hand. the cell collective platform includes bio-logic builder to facilitate the conversion of biological knowledge into a computational model  <cit> . ginsim provides complementary features that allow performing multiple analyses of logical models using powerful algorithms  <cit> . therefore, relying on a combined use of these tools, one could use the path2models qualitative models by training them against data of, for instance, a cell type of interest, and subsequently analyzing the resulting models.

creation of sbgn maps applying constraint-based layout
sbgn provides a uniform and unambiguous graphical representation of biological knowledge. providing models represented using this standard graphical format therefore facilitate visual human understanding. some tools provide translation of sbml files into sbgn maps. however, to improve readability of such maps an appropriate layout of its elements is necessary. here the initial positions of the model elements, extracted from the kegg database graphical pathway representations, were used to produce layout of the sbgn maps. although many general layout algorithms have been proposed in the last three decades  <cit> , almost none of them support additional constraints such as predefined positions and spatial relationships that would be necessary to preserve the essence of the original kegg maps. therefore a constraint-based layout approach  <cit>  in conjunction with orthogonal object-avoiding edge routing  <cit>  was used. this allowed us to generate layouts without node overlaps and with improved readability while still preserving the overall structure of the map. nevertheless, some open questions remain, such as the occasional presence of oversized labels in contrast to the uniform size of the glyphs, and long edges between glyphs. the impact of the latter issue could be reduced in subsequent versions by additional cloning of glyphs, involving the annotated multiplication of symbols representing the same entity, thus allowing this entity to be located at different points of the map.

CONCLUSIONS
all the software building blocks used in this project are freely available and can be used to build similar workflows. for instance, new modules can be used to read pathway information from other databases, as was shown for the entire pid  <cit> . as more sets of models are produced, they will be added to biomodels database, where they will be easily retrievable and accessible. the availability of models in standard formats facilitates their import, comparison, merging and re-use. automated development of models on the large scale will become crucial as automatic generation of pathways from genomics and metagenomics becomes common practise. ready-made models will also be accurate starting points for the development of mechanistic models of whole cell models  <cit>  where manual reconstruction is hardly an option.

