BACKGROUND
west nile virus was successfully introduced to the western hemisphere in  <dig> and has since spread westward across the united states, southward into central america and the caribbean and northward into canada  <cit> . west nile virus  is transmitted to humans by the bite of mosquitoes that previously acquired the virus by feeding on infected birds. since wnv was detected in new york in  <dig>  the cdc has reported over  <dig>  human cases  <cit>  and has been detected in  <dig> mosquito species throughout north america, although less than 10% are considered principal wnv vectors  <cit> . mosquitoes of the genus culex are the primary vectors of wnv in the us due to their vector competence and host preference  <cit> . there is geographic variation in culex wnv vectors, due to the presence of different, locally important culex spp.; such as culex pipiens pipiens in the northeast, cx. tarsalis in the west, and cx. p. quinquefasciatus and cx. nigripalpus in the south. additionally, refractoriness can be attributed to the type of virus and variation in the genetics of the virus, which can affect an individual mosquito or mosquito species. different populations of the same mosquito species may also show differential vector competence under similar environmental conditions  due to genetic differences contributing to vector competence  <cit> . several studies have shown that local populations of culex spp. vary in their capacity to transmit wnv  <cit> . recent studies have supported and extended the concept by investigating certain aspects of vector competence including susceptibility of different mosquito species to wnv, permissiveness of various mosquito tissues to infection, and release of virus from infected salivary glands into the saliva  <cit> . differences in vector competence could be attributed to barriers to infection, including midgut infection, midgut escape and salivary gland invasion barriers  <cit> , as well as the effects of extrinsic and intrinsic factors . vector competence is also likely affected by the innate immune response, which can result in gene expression differences .

although the work cited above proposes that vector competence involves complex interactions between arbovirus and mosquito, the differences in the ability of one population to disseminate wnv better than another population was not addressed nor was the modification in competence attributed to changes in the transcriptome. for example the work by sanders et al.  <cit>  reported alphavirus-induced mosquito midgut transcription changes in genes involved in vesicle transport and terminal kinase immune cascades, but stopped short at assigning them a role in alphavirus infection and/or dissemination. mercado-curiel et al.  <cit>  discovered two midgut cell proteins that bind all four serotypes of dengue virus. these proteins have been linked to aedes aegypti vector competence for dengue virus  <cit> . although these findings represent a step in understanding vector competence, the expression of these molecules post-virus exposure was not shown, and their potential as antiviral molecules was only shown in tissue culture.

the study demonstrates the relationship between the differing vector competence of two populations of culex p. quinquefasciatus and gene expression changes that result from exposure to wnv. we know that these populations differ in their dissemination rates for wnv even when infection rates are the same  <cit>  therefore changes in gene expression can be attributed to wnv infection processes after initial infection. findings such as these would support our hypothesis that the difference in dissemination rates may be due to one of the infection barriers, such as midgut escape, in the less competent population. however this study extends this theory to include differences in the mosquito body transcriptome that might influence antiviral immune response, transcription and translation machinery sequestration and which may ultimately lead to modification of dissemination and proposes the involvement of other organ-tissues in their vector competence differences. these findings are expected to help elucidate a potential arbovirus vector competence mechanism.

RESULTS
sample preparation and rna sequencing
the expression of genes from two culex pipiens quinquefasciatus populations  from florida with known differences in vector competence to west nile virus  were compared using high throughput sequencing. the previous vector competence study with the same wnv infected cqv and cqg populations indicated significant difference with 44% and 82% dissemination rate, respectively, after 12 days of exposure  <cit> . in this study, four-day-old female mosquitoes were fed a blood meal containing  <dig>  log <dig> pfu/ml of wnv. the titration of wnv in  <dig> mosquitoes in each population was tested . the titer of the freshly fed mosquitoes was significantly lower than in the blood meal, but was not significantly different between mosquito populations indicating that genes that are differentially expressed between the two mosquito populations will not be attributable to differences in the amount of virus imbibed . by  <dig> dpi, titer in the two populations increased to the same level as the blood meal, suggesting wnv replication. five days following infection, a time that falls within the extrinsic incubation period for wnv of 3- <dig> days  <cit> , rna from female mosquito bodies was extracted and sent for transcriptome analysis using illumina high throughput sequencing by the sequencing core in the hussman institute for human genomics, at the university of miami. a total six rna-seq libraries including triplication of each population were generated and sequenced . a total  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> reads were generated from vero beach and gainesville populations and a total of  <dig>  transcripts hit on annotated transcript sequences of cx. quinquefasciatus . the data from each replicate was combined for differential analyses.table  <dig> 
wnv titer in pooled mosquitoes from two populations  of
cx. quinquefasciatus


titers were determined in mosquitoes  that were either freshly fed or collected 5 days post-infection. wnv titer was also determined in the blood that was provided to the mosquitoes.
mapping summary


1
2

1total number of sequences reads.


2number of the annotated transcripts in culex quinquefasciatus  assembled with the sequence reads.



differential expression between wnv-infected cx. quinquefasciatusfemales from two florida populations
a total of  <dig>  transcripts were combined for comparison of expression differences between the two populations and  <dig> transcripts were differentially expressed  . of these,  <dig> transcripts showed decreased expression in cqg compared to cqv, and  <dig> transcripts increased abundance in cqg compared to cqv, 5 days after a wnv-infected blood meal. in order to validate the rnaseq data analysis, several genes were randomly selected and their gene expression level tested by quantitative real time pcr. all the selected genes showed significantly different expression levels between the two cq populations, supporting the rnaseq data analysis .table  <dig> 
list of differentially expressed genes between two populations related to wnv infection


*fold change is the gene expression level change in gainesville population after wnv infection compared to vero beach population log cqg/cqv.
validation of the expression of transcripts between two
cx. quinquefasciatus
populations by qrt-pcr. *<  <dig> . **<  <dig> .



comparison of the expression of the <dig> transcripts with significant expression differences revealed that only  <dig> genes were not expressed in the cqv but had greater than  <dig> fold change in expression in the cqg population; while only  <dig> of the  <dig> genes were not expressed in cqg and were down regulated between - <dig> and - <dig> fold. some of these genes were included in the validation by qrt-pcr .

investigation of transcripts with expression levels of less than  <dig> fold change in expression in either of the two cx. quinquefasciatus populations was performed to determine if the differences in dissemination was due to absence of expressed products. of the  <dig> transcripts expressed only in the more permissive population cqg, one transcript  codes for a ctl transporter and its functional parental attribute suggest it is a cellular component involved in membrane transport and is 4-fold more highly expressed. two transcription products, the first encoding a putative alpha-xylosidase  and the second of unknown function  have a role in catalysis and are 18-fold and 6-fold higher in expression in the cqg population, respectively. a transcript  involved in binding or interacting with zinc is 4-fold higher in expression. another transcript  is novel and does not match any functional groups but is 17-fold higher in expression in the cqg population. the three transcripts expressed only in the less permissive mosquito population, cqv , were novel and therefore functional parental group assignments could not be made.

functional analysis of differentially expressed transcripts by go
functional analysis using go terms was conducted on all  <dig> transcripts with significant expression difference between the cqg and cqv cx. quinquefasciatus populations. the largest proportion of the total number of differentially expressed transcripts  was of unknown function . of the transcripts that were up regulated in cqg, 31% were of unknown function; while 41% of the down-regulated transcripts were of unknown function. of the  <dig> transcripts, 22% had a role in catalysis, where a large majority  were up regulated in the more permissive mosquito population, cqg. gene products with catalytic activity included those involved in blood digestion such as trypsin  and chymotrypsin  both showing > <dig> fold change in expression in the cqg population. there were a number of transcripts encoding proteins such as carboxypeptidase and kinase present and the expression of an alpha- glucosidase, an enzyme involved in sugar feeding , was 6-fold higher in the cqg population. there were a number of transcripts encoding salivary gland catalytic enzymes, such as salivary lipase and alpha amylase. a number of transcripts encoding glutathione s-transferase, with roles in detoxification of xenobiotics, were present with fold expression changes ranging from  <dig> - <dig>  in the more wnv-permissive population.figure  <dig> 
functional characterization of significantly differentially expressed transcripts between two
cx. quinquefasciatus
populations. *up are up-regulated genes in cqg; down are down-regulated.



most of the transcripts involved in signal transduction, transporter activity and immune response were down regulated in the cqg population, 7%, 24%, 7%, respectively, compared to the cqv population. signal transduction pathways involve the binding of extracellular signaling molecules to receptors on the cell surface, which in turn activates intracellular molecules eliciting a physiological response. in mosquitoes, these pathways are integral parts of their physiology and include cascades that control the innate immune response, odorant detection, and gene activation. of the 5% transcripts with signal transduction activity, 3% had increased and 7% had decreased expression in the cqg population. of the transcripts with signaling function, three with up-regulated expression in the cqg population had fold change in expression ranging from  <dig>  –  <dig> , of these two were similar to hedgehog receptor activity proteins and one was similar to g-protein coupled receptor proteins. three transcripts had approximately - <dig> -fold change in expression and were involved in cell function or activity, such as regulation of transcription.

proteins with transporter activity are involved in the movement of ions and small molecules into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. of the transcripts differentially expressed between the two wnv-infected cx quinquefasciatus populations assigned the transporter activity go term, 24% were down-regulated in cqg and 6% were upregulated. transcripts with a 2- <dig> fold decrease in expression included those involved in lipid transport such as a vitellogenin precursor  and oxygen transport such as arylphorin subunit precursor  and larval serum protein  <dig> precursor . a number of transcripts with transport activity increased in expression, such as for transport of calcium, vacuolar and transmembrane transport, also a transcript involved in mitochondrial electron transport  showed a 5-fold increase in expression in the cqg population.

the immune response genes with fold change ranging from - <dig>  to - <dig> , are surprisingly all with similarity to the cecropin family of antimicrobial genes of the innate immune response pathway.

transcripts with binding, electron carrier, structural molecule activity, biosynthesis and cell adhesion go term assignments were also represented, with 11% of the total number of transcripts, and 12% of the up-regulated transcripts, involved in binding. the other transcripts made up only ≤ 4%. proteins involved in binding molecules could be used in transport of virus into cells  or in other molecular processes from blood detection to virus replication. of the 11% with binding capabilities, 12% were upregulated in the cqg population, while 7% were suppressed in this population.

there were  <dig> proteins  identified as having similarity to the salivary gland d <dig> precursor proteins with 1- <dig> fold increase in expression in the cqg population and similarity to odorant binding proteins . salivary gland products are known to be involved in defense mechanisms in mosquito biology and the  <dig> different salivary gland genes and immune response genes were differentially expressed in this study. two transcripts assigned to binding had the highest fold expression. one transcript  with a 4-fold expression change was similar to a family of zinc ion binding proteins and another transcript  showing a  <dig> fold increase in expression was similar to chitin binding proteins. the over represented functional terms were analyzed with hyper geometric analysis with bonferroni correction , supporting the proportional functional analysis in figure  <dig>  most of the go terms from the differentially expressed genes were over represented in the functional enrichment analysis. the immune response function was not over represented in the differentially expressed gene list compared to the genome-wide functions but the over represented functions of “detection of chemical stimulus involved in sensory perception of smell” and “odorant binding” identified in the dataset were associated with the immune response.table  <dig> 
over-represented functions in the differentially expressed genes between two populations




cufflinks and cuffdiff analyses measured the abundance of the expressed genes in each group and identified differences in transcript start site  and alternative splicing in the two cq populations . in both the cqv and cqg populations, a total of thirteen transcripts showed different tss. the expression ratio in different tss of each transcript was calculated in the two cq populations from florida and compared. the expression of these genes from different start sites, we suggest, may be influenced by infection with wnv, although the transcripts do not show differential expression, and have some role in vector competence. out of the total tss,  <dig> transcripts were not annotated and the other  <dig> annotated transcripts were mostly related to binding to nucleus structure.table  <dig> 
the list of isoform differences between two populations determined by transcript start site and splicing


tss: transcript start site.



three transcripts showed different isoforms in cqv and cqg but their expression levels were not significant. the transcripts encode vitellogenin , tripartite , and pdz . this vitellogenin is different from the other two vitellogenin precursors already identified in this study as significantly differentially down regulated but they all have the same lipid transport function. the tripartitie and pdz proteins play a role in pathogen recognition, including viruses, and cell signaling assembly, respectively.

as mentioned, there were two vitellogenin-a <dig> precursor genes differentially down regulated in cqg, - <dig>  and - <dig> . another vitellogenin transcript was spliced differently between the two culex populations. vitellogenin genes, including vitellogenin-a <dig> in mosquitoes are known as egg yolk precursor proteins, which are used in ovary development and are regulated by juvenile hormone. the mosquito is known to synthesize vitellogenin in the fat body after a blood meal  <cit> . the fat body is one of the tissues in the mosquito that is well known to play a role in defense mechanisms. results from this study suggest that the two populations showing different vectorial capacities appear to have functional differences in the lipid transport pathway between the fat body and ovary, and this difference might involve defense against wnv.

ovary development between the two cq populations
we identified a number of vitellogenin precursors as differentially expressed genes between the two populations and also found different splicing forms between cgv and cqg. generally vitellogenin is a precursor protein of lipoprotein and phospho protein in egg yolk and functions as a lipid transporter from fat body to ovary in invertebrates  <cit> . ovary development allows increased reproductive capacity but results in a trade-off with allocation of resources in the fat body, impacting production of molecules that are essential for defense functions in insects  <cit> . immune related genes and transport functions were enriched among differentially expressed genes in this study . because of the correlation between the expression of vitellogenin and other co-regulated genes involved in defense and signal transduction as revealed in the rnaseq data, the size of the ovary in female mosquitoes from each population was measured after providing a blood meal, with or without wnv .figure  <dig> 
ovary growth after blood feeding. standard deviation is calculated from replicated samples tested at each time point and shows significantly different growth rates . vero = cqv; gn = cqg; ctrl = control.



female mosquitoes from both the cqg and cqv population significantly lessen the rate of ovary development around 18 hour post wnv infection. in the normal condition without wnv, cqg population forms larger ovaries than cqv but after the wnv infectious bloodmeal there is no significant difference between the two populations . this result agrees with the rnaseq data, where transport functions including vitellogenin are significantly decreased in cqg. this observation showed that culex populations control the rate of ovary development when infected with wnv. also, the wnv permissive population, cqg, appears to contribute more energy to reproduction in general. once cqg is exposed to wnv, the cqg population alters the lipid transport to levels similar to the levels in cqv. although there is no evidence about whether immune response genes influence ovary development or ovary development affects immune response, this decreased ovary development suggests that in cq mosquitoes, vectorial capacity might result from the inability to properly route signals involved in lipid transport. the difference of ovary development rate before the wnv infection trial can be the influence of the vectorial capacity. also, the drastic change in ovary development can be due to defense against wnv. these conclusions are speculative, at best, as no experiments have been done to directly measure resource allocation in these populations. therefore there may be other underlying factors, such as a difference in dissemination rate, that contribute to the differences in ovary development in wnv infected mosquitoes in these populations.

CONCLUSIONS
this study suggests that a correlation exists between ovary development and vector competence to wnv. between two populations, the size of an ovary was significantly different 24 hours after bloodfeeding without the infection. this difference is almost impossible to notice when we observed these two populations during normal rearing under the same conditions. interestingly, the size of the ovaries after wnv exposure was not statistically different between the two populations, supporting the rnaseq data that showed two vitellogenin precursor genes down regulating after wnv exposure. in mosquitoes, fat body and salivary glands play important roles in several immune pathways and in antimicrobial peptide production controlling infection by pathogens including virus. it has been demonstrated that a change in gene expression related to fat body and salivary gland function affects vectorial capacity  <cit> . in the illumina data, a number of transcripts related to salivary proteins were also differentially expressed. this study suggests that energy allocation may affect defense mechanisms supported by transport function enrichment and warrants further study. the candidate genes including vitellogenin precursor, salivary protein, and immune response need to be tested by rnai to verify the involvement in vector competence and to discover the pathway responsible for vector competence.

these results will help elucidate potential arbovirus vector competence mechanisms that will enhance our understanding of the genetic interactions between wnv and culex spp. mosquitoes and help guide development of strategies for controlling the spread of vector-borne disease.

