BACKGROUND
conventional diagnosis of a bacterial infection mainly relies on culture-based testing. these cultivations usually yield diagnostic results in days or in some cases up to a week after sampling. furthermore, cultivation of bacteria is not always successful under laboratory conditions. such failures may occur due to unsuitable culturing conditions and methods for the bacterial species in question. alternatively, the particular patient under investigation may have received antimicrobial therapy before sampling. molecular methods based on nucleic acid amplification and hybridization aim to circumvent these problems and hasten diagnostic procedures. in such methods, the pathogen is simultaneously detected and identified, which results in more rapid diagnoses than those obtained by conventional culturing methods and obviates the need for additional culture tests. rapid diagnostics can also reduce the use of antimicrobial agents in addition to allowing a faster switch to the most optimum treatment, thus reducing both side-effects and costs  <cit> .

microarrays allow the hybridization-based detection of multiple targets in a single experiment. arrays have mostly been utilized in gene expression profiling. however, the use of microarrays in microbial diagnostics has been recently reviewed by bodrossy and sessitsch   <cit> . roth and co-workers   <cit>  described the diagnostic oligonucleotide array targeting species-specific variable regions of the topoisomerases genes gyrb and pare of respiratory bacterial pathogens. these authors used a broad-range polymerase chain reaction  method, which is based on the primers that recognize conserved sequences of genes that encode essential molecules. the most common bacterial broad-range pcr methods use primers that recognize conserved dna sequences of bacterial genes that encode ribosomal rna . however, resolution problems at the genus and/or species level occur when distinguishing between closely related bacterial species solely by their conserved 16s rdna sequences. moreover, the sequencing of the whole 16s rrna gene is recommended for reliable microbial speciation  <cit> . in comparison, the gyrb gene discriminates between related bacterial species more precisely than the 16s rrna gene, which makes it a more suitable gene for such species identification  <cit> .

in addition to identifying the causative pathogen of the infection, the rapid identification of antimicrobial resistance markers can further guide and, if necessary, re-direct the appropriate treatment. methicillin resistant staphylococcus aureus  is one of the common pathogens responsible for nosocomial infections. furthermore, among coagulase-negative staphylococci , methicillin resistance is prevalent  <cit> . methicillin resistance in staphylococcus species arises principally by the acquisition of a large genetic element, the staphylococcal cassette chromosome, sccmec  <cit> . the sccmec carries the meca gene, which encodes penicillin binding protein pbp2a, the main causal factor of methicillin resistance. different types of sccmec cassettes and their variants have been identified  <cit> . the current methods for mrsa detection are based on either the phenotypic expression such as oxacillin resistance, or genotypic characterization.

for this study, we used modified broad-range pcr primers that originate from the conserved regions of genes that encode the topoisomerases together with specific oligonucleotide probes located at hyper-variable regions flanked by the primers. using these primers and probes, single or even multiple infection-causing bacteria could be simultaneously detected and identified. the bacterial pathogen panel of the assay covered the following species: acinetobacter baumannii, enterococcus faecalis, enterococcus faecium, haemophilus influenzae, klebsiella pneumoniae, listeria monocytogenes, neisseria meningitidis, staphylococcus aureus, staphylococcus epidermidis, streptococcus agalactiae, streptococcus pneumoniae, streptococcus pyogenes and selected cns species. these bacteria are examples of highly virulent, potentially multi-antimicrobial resistant or the most common etiologic agents associated with various life-threatening conditions. such conditions include: sepsis, infective endocarditis and central nervous system infection. all these conditions necessitate rapid and accurate diagnostics to improve the chances of a positive outcome for the patient. we used the arraytube™ as a microarray platform for the probes. the arraytube™ has been demonstrated to detect and identify bacterial pathogens with a high degree of sensitivity  <cit> , differentiate between various pathotypes of the same bacterial species  <cit>  and to be capable of detecting antimicrobial resistance genes  <cit>  from an isolated dna sample. furthermore, by including specific primers and probes for the meca methicillin resistance gene in the same assay, we were able to associate the meca gene with a particular staphylococcus species present in the sample. the combination of broad-range pcr and array-based methods provided a sensitive and specific approach for detecting and identifying bacterial pathogens along with finding possible resistance markers.

RESULTS
assay design
first, we re-designed and modified the bacterial broad-range gyrb/pare primers  <cit>  by using inosines to reduce the level of degeneration. these modifications also facilitated the use of a novel pcr method for the assay . the pcr method had two distinct phases: a three-step pcr phase that exponentially produced dsdna, followed by a two-step pcr phase that took place under two different conditions and which produced ssdna in a linear manner. the method is based on partly overlapping annealing temperatures of the forward and reverse primers. after the pcr step, amplicons were directly, without any denaturation step, used in hybridization, due to the production of ssdna during the second pcr phase. this avoided the problems resulting from suboptimal or unreliable denaturation associated with standard pcr methods. the effectiveness of the re-designed gyrb/pare primers and the production of ssdna during the pcr step were assessed using dna extracts of various bacterial species. figure  <dig> shows the production of ssdna and the same or even improved sensitivity for bacteria included in the assay panel.

when designing the microarray probes for a. baumannii, e. faecalis, e. faecium, h. influenzae, k. pneumoniae, l. monocytogenes, n. meningitidis, s. aureus, s. epidermidis, s. agalactiae, s. pneumoniae, s. pyogenes, and the selected cns species, we used the gyrb and pare sequences of these bacteria together with those of other clinically relevant bacteria. the sequence alignments were used to maximize the specific hybridization of the consensus sequences of the targeted bacteria, while minimizing the cross-hybridization of sequences of any non-targeted bacteria. various in silico parameters were used in the design process to assess the accuracy of the oligonucleotide probes. annealing potential was predicted by calculating the thermodynamic factors, whereas sequence specificity was evaluated by sequence comparisons and homologue searches of the ebi and ncbi databases using the blast algorithm. the oligonucleotide probes for the final microarray layout  were chosen from a set of oligonucleotide probes tested in the laboratory.

if not otherwise stated, the presented sequence targets the gyrb gene.

melting temperature  is calculated using software available at http://www.basic.northwestern.edu/biotools/oligocalc.html.

we added an option for molecular identification of methicillin resistant staphylococcus species by including the methicillin resistance gene meca in the assay. the identification was based on multiplex pcr amplification of the gyrb/pare and meca gene fragments . we then detected the presence of amplified s. aureus or s. epidermidis dna on the microarray by using species-specific probes. the presence of coagulase negative staphylococcal dna other than that associated with s. epidermidis was detected by genus-specific probes. the presence of the ~ <dig> bp meca pcr product was indicated by the meca probes. thus, when the meca association was correlated with staphylococcus aureus, staphylococcus epidermidis, and cns detection, information about the methicillin resistance of staphylococci was provided.

analysis of staphylococcus species on the array
because the only probes covering multiple bacterial species in the assay were the cns probes, we investigated in detail the coverage and specificity of our staphylococcus panel including probes for staphylococcus aureus, staphylococcus epidermidis, and cns species . the cns-specific probes systematically detected specific staphylococcal species including s. xylosus, s. haemolyticus, s. saprophyticus, and s. lugdunensis. however, some other clinically relevant staphylococcal species, such as s. capitis, s. cohnii, s. hominis, s. schleiferi, and s. warnerii were not covered by the panel .

s. epidermidis had specific probes for identification, which functioned optimally. similarly, the specific probes for s. aureus functioned well, with the exception of one s. aureus sample, which was not detected because only one of a duplicate set of oligonucleotide probes was identified. in the dataset, the meca detection was associated with s. epidermidis and s. aureus. figure  <dig> shows the representative hybridization result of mrsa clinical isolates, and illustrates the simultaneous detection of the gyrb and meca targets. the hybridization results are displayed by the prove-it™ advisor software, which provides the original and analyzed array images, analyzed data and the accompanied statistics. the presence of s. epidermidis in a sample was reported by the prove-it™ advisor software when s. epidermidis specific probes were positive. according to the built-in identification rules of the software, a cns positive finding would be reported when s. epidermidis specific probes remained negative.

evaluation of the specificity of the probes
to determine the wet-lab specificity of the oligonucleotide probes and any possible cross-hybridization that might lead to false positive bacterial identification, the sample material containing  <dig> clinical isolates of  <dig> untargeted bacteria  were subjected to multiplex gyrb/pare/meca pcr and subsequent hybridization on the microarray. in addition, specificity of dsdna and ssdna amplification was verified by gel electrophoresis. the bacterial panel under test covered a large number of clinically relevant bacterial species related to the targeted bacteria, such as streptococcus mitis, a close relative of pneumococcus, and klebsiella oxytoca and klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. ozeanae, close relatives of k. pneumoniae, and also bacteria of normal flora, such as corynebacterium and stomatococcus species. no significant cross-hybridization occurred between any targets. only one cross-hybridization led to a false positive identification: klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. ozeanae was reported as klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae.

evaluation of the assay using the blood culture dataset
we received a randomly obtained set of  <dig> blood culture samples, including  <dig> blood culture positive and  <dig> blood culture negative samples, from the department of bacteriology, huslab  to compare the clinical applicability of the assay with the standard methodology. samples were analyzed using the following workflow: a) dna was extracted using the easymag extraction device, b) multiplex pcr amplification was performed in a standard thermal cycler and the success of amplification was verified by gel electrophoresis, c) subsequent hybridization was performed on the microarray, d) and finally the analyses of the hybridization images and result reporting were conducted using the prove-it™ advisor software. the assay time for one sample or  <dig> samples, excluding time required for sample preparation prior to dna extraction, was three or under four hours, respectively. the obtained results were compared to the blood culture results assessed by huslab.

the dna extraction and pcr controls included in each test series were required to be negative for the acceptance of a particular test series. negative controls gave negative hybridization results. however, two of these samples could not be analyzed by software due to automatic gridding problems. as a consequence, they were analyzed manually. the target identification was interpreted using the specific built-in rules and parameters of the prove-it™ advisor software. briefly, all oligonucleotide probes for the specific target including their duplicates were required to be positive, with the exception of the cns probes of which two out of four probes were required for reporting a positive finding. furthermore, if the threshold limits were not exceeded for the oligonucleotide probes being measured, the obtained negative result was considered as a true negative.

the identified bacteria are presented in table  <dig>  a total of  <dig> positive and  <dig> negative identifications were obtained. nine targets from the pathogen panel were detected in the samples of which s. aureus, e. faecalis, and s. epidermidis occurred with the highest incidences. the other identified bacteria were k. pneumoniae, s. pneumoniae, s. pyogenes, e. faecium, s. agalactiae and cns. bacterial species included in the pathogen panel, but not present in the samples were a. baumannii, h. influenzae, l. monocytogenes, and n. meningitidis. a total of  <dig> different microbes were present in the blood culture positive samples, and none of these microbes caused false positive identifications through cross-hybridization. the correct negative result was achieved for numerous different pathogens including bacillus sp., escherichia coli, enterobacter cloacae, salmonella enterica subsp. enterica, streptococcus sanguis, streptococcus bovis, and candida albicans . all of the  <dig> blood culture negative samples analyzed by our assay were reported as negative.

* the figures obtained after post hoc adjustments are presented in parentheses

when comparing our data with those of the blood culture results,  <dig> discrepant results were observed, of which  <dig> were false negatives and two false positives. six of the samples reported as false negatives contained s. agalactiae, s. epidermidis, s. pneumoniae, e. faecalis, e. faecium, and s. aureus as a causative agent. in these cases, the strict detection rules caused the final outcome to be below the level required for positive identification. these six false negatives were caused by either one completely missing or one low quality duplicated probe, giving results that were insufficient to meet the strict positive identification criteria. therefore these samples were reported as negative findings by the prove-it™ advisor, although other duplicates and probes were detected. we noticed that by using less strict identification rules, these samples were identified correctly. thus, these samples were considered to be true positives when calculating the final specificity and sensitivity values of the assay.

the other nine samples reported negative by the the prove-it™ advisor were: s. pyogenes, s. aureus, s. epidermidis, and six cns samples. we sequenced the cns samples using the 16s rrna gene. sequencing revealed that these unidentified cns samples contained s. pasteuri, s. capitis and s. hominis . the meca gene was identified in two of the cns samples. the two positive meca findings were associated with s. capitis and s. hominis. none of the species in the six cns samples was covered by the cns probes of the assay panel , thus these samples were considered to be true negatives. the reasons for the remaining three false negative samples  remained undetermined. the samples were not amplified by the 16s rrna pcr, suggesting that they could have contained pcr inhibitors or degraded dna.

two false positive results were observed due to the detection of the meca gene marker associated with the non-staphylococcus causative agent s. pneumoniae and e faecalis. the causative agent was in line with the corresponding blood culture result.

when the results of the assay were compared with the identification provided by huslab, a sensitivity of  <dig> percent and specificity of  <dig> percent were achieved. after the alterations presented above were implemented, the sensitivity increased to  <dig> percent while the specificity remained at  <dig> percent .

* calculations are conducted according to clsi recommendations.

# initial sensitivity of 82% was observed.

discussion
microarrays are widely used in gene expression and genotyping applications in research settings but their use in diagnostics is still rare. nevertheless, microarray technology and dna-based approaches are believed to have great clinical potential in the field of infectious diseases  <cit> . in this study, we described a combined pcr- and microarray-based assay for the rapid and reliable detection of a. baumannii, e. faecalis, e. faecium, h. influenzae, k. pneumoniae, l. monocytogenes, n. meningitidis, s. aureus, s. epidermidis, s. agalactiae, s. pneumoniae, s. pyogenes and selected cns  species.

in this study, we introduced a novel multiplex-pcr method that first produces dsdna exponentially, after which ssdna is produced in a linear manner. during the linear phase, the high annealing temperature allows only the reverse primer to function due to the tm difference between forward and reverse primers. thus the whole pcr procedure can be conveniently performed in a single multiplex pcr amplification reaction without manual involvement. in our method, sufficient quantities of ssdna are produced during the pcr reaction. consequently, the conventional methods such as alkali or heat treatment, or asymmetric pcr are rendered unnecessary for generating a single stranded target for microarray hybridization  <cit> . our method, therefore, enables a rapid protocol for assay as hybridization can be performed immediately after the pcr step. a similar type of pcr method has been developed by zhu et al.   <cit> . these authors used forward primers tagged with an unrelated universal sequence at the 5' end to create the necessary tm difference between the forward and reverse primer. in contrast to the method of zhu et al.   <cit>  the temperature difference in our method is achieved by target-specific primers that enable rapid pcr cycling. in this study, we used our method for the multiplex amplification of the gyrb and meca genes.

the gyrb gene region has been shown to be capable of discrimination when identifying closely related bacterial species  <cit> . when the specificity of our assay was evaluated using nucleic acid from  <dig> different untargeted bacteria, only one cross-reaction was observed: klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. ozeanae was reported as klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae. in addition to the gyrb gene, the 16s rrna gene has been used in bacterial speciation, partly due to the large number of microbial 16s rdna sequences available in the public databases  <cit> . in this study, the 16s rrna gene and the corresponding public databases were used to study objectively any discrepancies in bacterial identification between the compared methods.

despite the selected gene, designing discriminating probes between closely related species can be demanding. setting the appropriate threshold values and making identification rules for target detection are specific challenges, which can be overcome by the means of bioinformatics. in our study, the final identification of a bacterial pathogen was based on one to three different oligonucleotides on the microarray. all these were spotted as duplicates and all of which, with the exception of cns, were required to pass threshold values set for their positive identification. when more pathogens are included on the array, the designing of the probes, the setting of threshold values  <cit> , and formulation of identification rules will require intensive testing. the testing procedure can be enhanced by automated data analysis, which provides objective and reproducible interpretation of the results. in our study, the prove-it™ advisor software generated data analysis for reporting and allowed effective data management and tracking.

we evaluated the assay by comparing its results with those of sepsis diagnostics, although other applications using specimens from normally sterile site of the body are feasible as well. our sample material consisted of  <dig> blood culture samples and causative agents were identified originally in  <dig> of these samples. these positives corresponded to nine of the targets on the assay pathogen panel. however, some of the targets in the pathogen panel, a. baumannii, h. influenzae, l. monocytogenes, and n. meningitidis, were not present in any of the samples and no false identifications of these bacteria were made. when comparing these data with those of the blood culture results, discrepancies were observed due to the limited numbers of cns probes on the panel, or for unknown reasons. the cns probes on the panel were selected to cover the two most clinically prevalent cns species s. haemolyticus and s. saprophyticus, and the most virulent species s. lugdunensis. if more cns species were needed to be covered by the assay, their respective probes could be designed and added to the cns probe panel  <cit> . such species could be s. pasteuri, s. capitis and s. hominis all three of which were present in the blood cultures analyzed in our study.

we encountered some challenges with reconciling the microarray image analyses data and building optimal detection rules for the precise identification of all the pathogens. these specific problems are illustrated by missing or suboptimal duplicates causing false negative identifications. the microarray image and data analysis present commonly acknowledged challenges, especially when the microarray data quality is not optimal. for instance, the distinction between the actual spots and artifacts on the array, or the gridding of the image can be problematic  <cit> . these challenges in automated image and data analyses together with result reporting could be a reason for the current lack of available microarray-based diagnostics. in this study, a few microarray images and results were interpreted manually to overcome the technical problems encountered. of course, this would not be appropriate for a diagnostic assay, for which such post hoc adjustments could not be made.

in general, the adjusted results were in line with the conventional blood culturing method, regarded as a gold standard in sepsis diagnostics. our data had a specificity of  <dig> percent and sensitivity of  <dig> percent . similar results namely: a specificity of  <dig> percent for the genus level and  <dig> percent for the species level using reference strains and clinical isolates were reported by a comparable method  <cit> .

simultaneous early detection of antimicrobial resistance markers and the causative pathogen of an infection in a clinical setting can direct the antimicrobial treatment optimally  <cit> . in our study, we included the methicillin resistance gene meca in the assay. as a consequence, the meca findings were associated with the positive findings of s. epidermidis or other cns bacteria. two samples had non-staphylococci bacteria and these meca findings were later indicated as positive for cns . in finland, the prevalence of mrsa in bloodstream infections is low  <cit> . therefore, no mrsa samples were included in the clinical samples. for this reason, our data demonstrate the combined detection of s. aureus and the meca gene fragment with the clinical isolate of mrsa .

CONCLUSIONS
genotypic characterization of bacteria is advantageous when compared to phenotypic methods. the latter require a prolonged cultivation period for the suspected bacteria and pure bacterial cultures for various biochemical assays. the accurate detection of multiple pathogens and resistance markers simultaneously reduces the time needed to start effective antimicrobial treatment. we conclude that broad-range pcr amplification with subsequent hybridization on a microarray is a rapid diagnostic tool in identifying causative agents of bacterial infections in various specimens from normally sterile site of the body or non-cultured samples. in this study, we presented proof-of-concept for one combination of bacterial probes but depending on the clinical application, the assay could be modified to cover different species profiles.

