BACKGROUND
borrelia burgdorferi, the cause of lyme disease, is maintained in nature in a sylvatic cycle that includes its arthropod host, ixodes scapularis, and mammals such as deer and rodents  <cit> . the ability of b. burgdorferi to cycle successfully between different hosts, survive for prolonged periods of starvation in flat ticks and proliferate rapidly to reach sufficiently high numbers inside ticks taking a blood meal to permit transmission to mammals  <cit>  suggests that b. burgdorferi may display novel and finely tuned mechanisms to regulate its growth in response to nutrient composition and other environmental cues  <cit> . analysis of the genome of this bacterium, however, reveals a relative paucity of genes encoding regulatory molecules, suggesting that b. burgdorferi might control gene expression by ancillary methods such as growth rate-dependent control and the stringent response  <cit> .

it is generally accepted that the nutritional quality of the environment acting through changes in bacterial growth rate regulates ribosome biosynthesis and ribosome availability. this regulation results in changes in ribosomal rna  concentration. rrna molecules are thus the major factor regulating synthesis of ribosomes in escherichia coli  <cit>  and other prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms  <cit> . e. coli has seven operons encoding rrna genes; each operon contains genes for all three rrna species which are transcribed as a single transcript and then processed into 16s, 23s and 5s rrna  <cit> . this organization permits synthesis of equimolar amounts of each rrna species. in e. coli, rrna synthesis involves the transcription factor dksa  <cit> . it is negatively regulated by ppgpp , a global regulator involved in bacterial adaptation to many environmental stresses, and positively regulated by the concentration of the initiating nucleoside triphosphates acting in trans on the p <dig> and p <dig> rrna promoters  <cit> . the other major mechanism to control rrna synthesis in e. coli is growth rate-dependent control  <cit> . under this ppgpp-independent control mechanism, ribosome concentration in each cell is proportional to growth rate.

the b. burgdorferi chromosome contains a single 16s rrna gene and two tandem sets of 23s and 5s rrna genes located at nt435201- <dig>  as well as genes encoding transfer trnas for alanine  and isoleucine   <cit>  . all these genes except trnaile are present in the same orientation on the chromosome. not only are patterns of transcription and regulation of rrna genes uncharacterized in b. burgdorferi, but there is little information as to whether rrna synthesis in this bacterium is regulated by the stringent response, by growth rate, or by some other mechanism. we previously found that b. burgdorferi n <dig> co-cultured with tick cells down-modulated its levels of ppgpp and decreased relbbu expression while growing more slowly than in barbour-stoenner-kelly -h medium  <cit> . this simultaneous decrease in ppgpp and growth rate was associated with down-modulation of 16s rrna  <cit> , and suggested that growth rate but not ppgpp or the stringent response regulated rrna levels in b. burgdorferi. a b. burgdorferi  <dig> Δrelbbu deletion mutant lost both the ability to synthesize ppgpp and to reach stationary phase cell densities as high as those of its wild-type parent even though the parent and the mutant multiplied at similar rates during exponential phase of growth  <cit> .

we have now examined both the organization of transcription of b. burgdorferi rrna and the influence of growth phase and the stringent response on rrna synthesis. this information is especially critical to improving our understanding of the ability of b. burgdorferi to shift between the rapid growth of acute mammalian and arthropod infection and slow growth during persistence in these hosts  <cit> . although the incompletely defined nutritional requirements of b. burgdorferi prevented experimental determination of whether b. burgdorferi rrna synthesis was regulated by growth rate at a single temperature, we found that rrna transcription was regulated by growth phase and that relbbu was required for down-regulation of rrna at the entrance of b. burgdorferi to stationary phase.

RESULTS
transcription pattern of b. burgdorferi rrna
rt-pcr analysis of the region coding for b. burgdorferi n <dig> rrna using primers shown in table  <dig> and figure  <dig> demonstrated the presence of common transcripts  for 16s rrna and trnaala. the common transcripts detected for 23s and 5s rrna  and for 5s and 23s-rrla  show that the 23s-5s-23s-5s region is expressed as a single transcript . trnaile was transcribed independently of the upstream 16s rrna and the downstream 23s-5s rrna transcript since no amplicons were obtained with primers designed to amplify trnaala-trnaile and trnaile-23s rrna segments . however, pcr with these primers amplified products of the expected size  from genomic dna . transcripts consistent with expected sizes were also detected by rt-pcr for trna genes: trnaala  and trnaile  as well as for the three different rrna genes: 23s,  <dig> bp; 16s,  <dig> bp; 5s,  <dig> bp . identical results were obtained with b. burgdorferi b <dig> . these results confirm the prediction that the rrna containing region in b. burgdorferi is transcribed as three independent transcripts  <cit> .

growth rate of b. burgdorferi and synthesis of dna, rna and protein under different conditions of nutrition and temperature
to identify the effect of growth rate and ppgpp levels in b. burgdorferi, we examined growth and accumulation of dna, rna and protein in b. burgdorferi cultured at 34°c in bsk-h in the presence or absence of rabbit serum  and in b. burgdorferi cultured in bsk-h in the presence of rabbit serum at 34°c and 23°c . b. burgdorferi b <dig> was used for these experiments because the high cellular concentrations it reaches during in vitro culture  facilitated obtaining sufficient quantities of cells to permit measurement of dna, rna and protein by colorimetric assays  <cit> . because rrna constitutes more than 80% of total cellular rna  <cit> , rrna was estimated from measurements of total rna.

at 34°c, the growth rate of b. burgdorferi and synthesis of total dna, rna and protein were unaffected by the presence or absence of rabbit serum as spirochetes grew from  <dig> ×  <dig> to  <dig> ×  <dig> cells/ml . levels of rna and protein per cell in b. burgdorferi were similar to those in slow-growing e. coli  <cit> , while the level of dna per cell was similar to that of normally dividing e. coli  <cit> . at 23°c, there was a lag in increases in b. burgdorferi cell numbers and total dna, rna and protein; in addition growth rate was slower, final concentrations of cells were three times lower , as were total dna, rna and protein relative to those at 34°c . these differences did not appear to be due to triggering of the stringent response by these environmental variations, since similar amounts of ppgpp were detected in b. burgdorferi b <dig> grown in bsk-h in the presence or absence of rabbit serum at 34°c or in the presence of rabbit serum at 23°c . these results indicate that the absence of rabbit serum in bsk-h did not trigger slow growth at 34°c or changes in ppgpp levels at either temperature.

for calculation of dna, rna and protein on a per cell basis, data from washed exponential and stationary phase cells were analyzed separately . since we could not obtain sufficient amounts of material for analysis of exponential growth at 23°c because of the relative insensitivity of colorimetric assays and high costs of large volumes of bsk-h culture medium, only the data from day  <dig> were used for this condition. at 34°c, there was significantly more dna per cell in exponentially growing b. burgdorferi b <dig> cultures containing rabbit serum than at any of the other growth conditions  . there was significantly less rna per cell in stationary phase b. burgdorferi at 23°c than at 34°c  . there was no significant difference in protein per cell under any growth condition at any temperature . because precise correlation between corresponding points on growth curves for cultures growing at different rates is difficult, it was therefore still unclear whether rrna levels were regulated by growth rate or growth phase in b. burgdorferi b <dig> 

effect of growth rate and stringent response on accumulation of 16s and 23s rrna in b. burgdorferi
the apparent effect of growth rate on rrna synthesis could be influenced by sampling b. burgdorferi that were in different growth phases at the two temperatures. direct analysis of 16s and 23s rrna levels in b. burgdorferi b <dig> grown in bsk-h containing serum at 34°c and 23°c revealed no difference in the levels of normalized 16s rrna expression in cells grown at different temperatures when the cells were at similar points in the growth phase . examination of rrna in the 23°c culture was begun at lower cell concentrations since this culture reached stationary phase at about 3-fold lower cell densities than cultures grown at 34°c . even though the average doubling time for b. burgdorferi b <dig> was  <dig> h at 34°c and  <dig> h at 23°c , rrna levels decreased significantly under both culture conditions with entry into stationary phase . a similar result was observed with 23s rrna . these results indicate that the apparent down-regulation of total rna per cell in cultures grown at 23°c compared to cultures grown at 34°c  was in fact due to comparing cells that had spent a longer time in stationary phase at 23°c than those growing at 34°c, and was not the result of the decreased growth rate at the lower temperature.

to examine if the stringent response regulated rrna levels in this bacterium, b. burgdorferi  <dig> and its Δrelbbu derivative that could not synthesize ppgpp were used  <cit> . both strains multiplied at a similar rate in exponential phase in bsk-h at 34°c  but the deletion mutant stopped dividing after day four of culture while densities of the wild-type strain continued to increase . in wild-type b. burgdorferi, 16s and 23s rrna levels were very similar at  <dig> to  <dig> days of culture and decreased only slightly toward the end of the growth curve when the culture was reaching its maximum density and increased its doubling time . in contrast, rrna levels in b. burgdorferi Δrelbbu peaked at day five for both rrna species, the first day of culture when cell densities of Δrelbbu did not increase . the reverse correlation between cell division and rrna accumulation in b. burgdorferi Δrelbbu strongly suggests that relbbu is necessary for stringent control of rrna synthesis in b. burgdorferi. this accumulation of rrna is reminiscent of what occurs in the relaxed phenotype of e. coli rela mutants  <cit> .

discussion
we have demonstrated the existence of three different transcripts from the dna region of b. burgdorferi coding for ribosomal rna. one transcript contained 16s rrna and trnaala, a second contained only trnaile, and a third contained both sets of 23s-5s rrna genes in tandem. these results confirm previous predictions that b. burgdorferi rrna genes were not transcribed as a single unit  <cit> . b. burgdorferi is not the only spirochete in which rrna genes are not organized into operons containing 16s-23s-5s genes in tandem  <cit> . the b. garinii genome encodes one copy of 16s and two copies each of 23s and 5s rrna genes organized similarly to those of b. burgdorferi  <cit> , while b. japonica ika <dig> has only a single copy of the 23s-5s rrna gene  <cit> . other spirochetes also have a limited number of rrna genes which are often not organized in operons containing 16s-23s-5s genes in tandem. an early report indicated that the spirochete leptospira interrogans had two copies of 16s and single copies of 5s and 23s rrna genes located far from each other and most probably not expressed together  <cit> . more recent whole genome sequencing has shown that the number of rrna genes differs between two l. interrogans serovars. l. interrogans sv. copenhageni has two copies of 23s, two copies of 16s, and one copy of 5s rrna genes, while l. interrogans sv. lai has one copy of 23s rrna, two copies of 16s rrna, and one copy of 5s rrna genes  <cit> . the rrna genes of both l. interrogans serovars are physically separated from each other and do not appear to form operons. however, not every spirochetal genome codes for individual rrna genes that are not organized into operons. treponema pallidum and t. denticola have two operons each coding for one copy of 16s, 23s and 5s rrna  <cit> . this variation in copy number and location of rrna genes suggests that rrna synthesis is controlled differently in different spirochetes.

it has been assumed that the presence of multiple copies of transcriptional units of rrna in the order 16s, 23s and 5s rrna facilitates the adaptation of bacteria to conditions that rapidly change their growth rate because they permit rapid changes in ribosomal synthesis  <cit> . in e. coli, sequential deletion of rrna genes is accompanied by a decrease in the ability of the mutants to accelerate their growth rate under changing media conditions  <cit> . the location of rrna genes close to the origin of replication in e. coli insures parallelism between replication and rrna gene transcription and results in their high gene dosage in rapidly replicating cells  <cit> . that slow-growing bacteria such as spirochetes, mycoplasma and mycobacteria have a reduced number of rrna gene copies could be intuitively related to a decreased adaptability resulting from their low numbers of rrna copies and to a lack of coordinate transcription of the three rna populations and dna replication  <cit> . we have previously shown that inactivation of one of the 23s rna genes in b. burgdorferi does not have any apparent effect on its adaptability to different growth conditions  <cit> . moreover, a similar experiment has been performed in nature because b. japonica strain ika <dig> lacks a second copy of the 23s-5s rrna gene cluster without any apparent adverse effects  <cit> . this suggests that b. burgdorferi has already adapted its growth rate to that permitted by its reduced number of rrna genes. it thus appears that ascertainment of the biological role of differences in rrna gene copy number in various bacterial species will require an extensive comparative analysis of the adaptability of bacteria with high and low numbers of rrna genes to different growth conditions before any clear cut conclusions can be drawn.

two major mechanisms regulating rrna synthesis in e. coli are growth rate and the stringent response  <cit> . our efforts to determine if b. burgdorferi rrna synthesis was controlled by growth rate at a single temperature have been repeatedly frustrated by the still undefined nutritional requirements of b. burgdorferi and the lack of simple culture media for this organism  <cit> . we previously reported that ppgpp levels in b. burgdorferi grown in bsk did not vary despite 10-fold reductions of yeastolate, neopeptone or rabbit serum  <cit> . we have now found that complete omission of rabbit serum from bsk-h did not affect growth of b. burgdorferi b <dig> at 34°c  or ppgpp levels at 34°c or 23°c . it was thus not possible to alter b. burgdorferi growth rate at a given temperature by changing the composition of its culture medium  <cit> .

the slower growth of b. burgdorferi b <dig> at 23°c compared to 34°c correlated well with slower accumulation of total dna, rna and protein. although there was a lag in cell number, total dna and total protein in cells grown at the lower temperature, the amounts of dna and protein per cell were similar at both temperatures. as expected, the amount of dna per rapidly dividing exponential phase cells was higher than in more slowly dividing stationary phase cells. the slower rate of increase in total rna in stationary phase cultures at the lower temperature also resulted in a significant difference in rna per cell under these two conditions. although these results were in agreement with the hypothesis that growth rate regulates rrna synthesis in b. burgdorferi, further investigation determined that growth phase and not growth rate regulated rrna levels under these conditions . importantly, even though b. burgdorferi was grown for up to  <dig> days in 34°c culture and for  <dig> days in 23°c culture in our experiments, about 80% of all cells at this stationary phase stage are viable , and non-viability cannot therefore account for the large decrease in rrna levels in stationary phase in these cultures.

amounts of 16s and 23s rrna that were first normalized to mrna amounts for constitutively expressed flab and then additionally normalized to levels at 23°c and  <dig> cells/ml were similar in rapidly growing  and slowly growing  cultures when compared at the same growth phase; both rna species decreased as the cultures progressed toward stationary phase . production of constant levels of rrna in exponentially growing b. burgdorferi that were independent of bacterial doubling time and the down-regulation of rrna during stationary phase is similar to results obtained with salmonella enterica sv. typhimurium cultured in the same medium at different temperatures  <cit> . while cellular contents of dna, rna, and protein in cultures of s. typhimurium grown in media of different nutritional content at a given temperature depended on growth rate, dna, rna, and protein per cell were nearly constant in cultures grown in the same medium at different temperatures and did not depend on growth rate  <cit> .

we have previously shown that ppgpp is necessary for the transition between exponential and stationary phase in b. burgdorferi  <cit> , suggesting that rrna synthesis may not be totally independent of ppgpp, and that rrna levels may be determined by interplay between two factors in this organism, growth phase and ppgpp levels. in the present study, we found that both b. burgdorferi rrna operons were misregulated in the absence of ppgpp, and failed to down-regulate 16s and 23s rrna levels during the transition to the stationary phase. although our previous experiments with tick cell cultures suggested that growth-related mechanisms other than ppgpp modulated rrna synthesis in b. burgdorferi  <cit> , it is evident that the stringent response is also important for regulation of rrna synthesis.

the mechanism by which ppgpp regulates rrna synthesis in b. burgdorferi during the transition phase and what other factors might be involved in this regulation is not yet clear. the accumulation of rrna in b. burgdorferi Δrelbbu suggests that this mutant behaves similarly to a relaxed phenotype rela mutant of e. coli   <cit> . this unbalanced growth may be responsible for the lack of cell division of the b. burgdorferi Δrelbbu mutant in the stationary phase of growth . b. burgdorferi has no homolog to the transcription factor dksa that acts as a cofactor in the repression of rrna genes by ppgpp in e. coli  <cit> . even though b. burgdorferi codes for a homolog to the gtp-binding protein gene cgta   <cit> , this gtpase regulates ppgpp levels only during exponential growth and does not have an effect during the stringent response  <cit> . although not fully characterized, the role of the stringent response in the regulation of rrna levels during stationary phase might have an effect on the ability of b. burgdorferi to survive in flat ticks or persist in animals. this might be accomplished perhaps by slowing down protein synthesis and conserving resources until nutritional conditions improve  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have confirmed the prediction that b. burgdorferi rrna genes are transcribed into three separate transcripts. we have also found that differences in expression of the rrna operons associated with b. burgdorferi growth at different temperatures is regulated by growth phase rather than by growth rate, and that relbbu and its product ppgpp is required for this regulation. these findings suggest that this bacterium has mechanisms for coordinated regulation of rrna gene synthesis perhaps in response to metabolic changes triggered by entry into the stationary phase. identification of these mechanisms is likely to be relevant to understanding the ability of b. burgdorferi to persist in the tick vector and the mammalian host.

