BACKGROUND
tuberculosis in wildlife, caused by mycobacterium bovis, has emerged as an increasingly important disease of free-ranging wildlife populations  <cit> . the african buffalo  has established itself as a maintenance host for m. bovis in two of south africa's largest conservation areas, namely the kruger national park  and the hluhluwe imfolozi park   <cit> . transmission of m. bovis between herd members occurs most frequently by aerosol, whereas spillover to other species requires different modes of transmission  <cit> . predators and scavengers alike contract the infection commonly by ingestion of infected tissues  <cit> . other pathways may apply only to particular animal species. the secretion of infectious pus from draining fistulae of parotid lymph glands, for example, has been suggested as a mode of transmission between greater kudu   <cit> , as well as between cattle and kudu  <cit> . contaminated faeces have been implicated in the spread of bovine tuberculosis  within a troop of baboons   <cit> . hence, environmental m. bovis contamination may be a side effect of events leading to spillover or it may be the cause of spillover itself. if pathogenic microorganisms can retain their viability for some time outside the animal host, environmental sources could play a significant role in their spread to a wide range of animal species from different habitats and ecological niches. to this effect, it has been shown that m. bovis can survive for  <dig> days in tissues with lesions and up to four weeks in faecal material from buffalo  <cit> . the tenacity of tubercle bacilli in effluents from sanatoria and dairies and its significance in the spread of infection to cattle were major public health concerns prior to eradication of btb in europe  <cit> .

no information is, however, available on the role of surface water in the epidemiology of bovine tuberculosis in an endemically infected ecosystem, especially where limited water sources cause a variety of animal species to gather in high densities for most of the year.

the present study was conducted during a bcg vaccination trial in buffalo involving m. bovis challenge. we used this opportunity to determine whether naturally and/or experimentally infected buffalo were shedding detectable levels of m. bovis into the drinking water, and if so, to provide an estimate of the organism's tenacity.

RESULTS
animals
the results of macroscopic and culture examination of all surviving study animals are summarised in table  <dig>  m. bovis infection was confirmed by culture and subsequent pcr identification of acid-fast isolates in  <dig> of the  <dig> surviving in-contact buffalo cows. three culture positive buffalo did not yield macroscopic lesions and two buffalo with lesions in a single lymph node were culture negative. a total of  <dig> buffaloes presented with macroscopic lesions, two of which had lesions restricted to lymph nodes. eleven cows presented with macroscopic lung lesions varying from pinpoint foci in two cases, to disseminated tuberculous pneumonia in nine animals .

*one calf which died before the end of the study presented with lesions consistent with pneumonia and yielded m. bovis on culture of lung tissue

from the experimental group, fourteen buffaloes showed visible lesions in mainly the lymph nodes of the head, with only three having secondary spread to thoracic lymph nodes. one additional buffalo had a single lung lesion. however,  <dig> buffaloes yielded m. bovis on culture. m. bovis infection was confirmed in two out of the ten surviving calves, both showed involvement of the thoracic lymph nodes. another calf, which died a few weeks after birth, yielded m. bovis from lung tissue.

isolation and identification of mycobacterium spp. by polymerase chain reaction 
in contrast to the tissue samples, m. bovis was not cultured from any of the water samples except the spiked water used for quality control. four inoculated trough water samples containing m. bovis concentrations ranging from 2· <dig> to 2·102/ml yielded abundant growth of m. bovis after three weeks for the highest and after eight weeks for the lowest concentration.

however,  <dig> other mycobacterial isolates were recovered from water samples  and two others were cultured from lymph nodes of vaccinated buffalo. these  <dig> mycobacterium spp. isolates were acid-fast on microscopic smear examination but failed to amplify the expected  <dig> bp product in the pcr protocol used to identify m. tuberculosis complex bacteria . subsequent analysis using 5'-16s rdna pcr-sequencing revealed that these mycobacterium spp. belonged to the species m. terrae, m. engbaekii, m. vaccae  and two previously unidentified species closely related to m. moriokaense and m. kansasii , respectively . the mycobacterial species isolated from the buffalo tissues were identified as m. thermoresistibile and an unidentified species closely related to m. moriokaense . three ntm isolates could not be further identified to species level.

* non-tuberculous mycobacterial species not further identified

p/c: cultures partially contaminated

c: cultures contaminated

n: negative culture result

discussion
to assess the risk of m. bovis spillover from buffalo to other species it is critical to determine the mode, frequency and level of shedding by infected buffalo herds. neill et al.  <cit> , concluded from experimental infections in calves that excretion of m. bovis in nasal mucus is a consistent feature in all infected cattle and can continue for weeks and even months. furthermore, shedding rates ranging from 6% to 20% were found among naturally infected, tuberculous cattle in different countries, whereby the occurrence of lung lesions may be very low  <cit> . if the same was true for african buffalo, for which lesion types and distribution are generally comparable to those in cattle, they could possibly spread bovine tuberculosis by contaminating surface water such as water holes, dams and pools formed in stagnant rivers, as they commonly spend extended periods in and along the various water points. especially large buffalo herds with high m. bovis infection rates as documented for the southern region of the kruger national park  <cit> , could pose a significant risk to all susceptible species in the area.

based on the abovementioned shedding rate for cattle, our study could have contained at least two to six shedders among the  <dig> tuberculous buffalo at any time during the study . the actual conditions for shedding in buffalo were, however, more favorable than reported for cattle  <cit> , since our study population included nine in-contact buffalo cows with advanced  lung lesions, which is considered a sign of infectiousness in cattle  <cit> . if m. bovis shedding was an intermittent but common feature in infected buffalo, we had expected the m. bovis load in the trough water to be well above the confirmed detection limit of bacterial culture.

our study did, however, not provide any indication of detectable amounts of m. bovis being present in the water troughs. despite a degree of sampling uncertainty e.g. mycobacteria trapped in sediments or biofilms may have escaped sampling, we believe that the culture method used was suitable since it supported isolation of  <dig> mycobacterium spp. isolates and of m. bovis from all spiked water samples. we are therefore of the opinion that shedding of m. bovis in nasal and oral discharges is an infrequent event in african buffalo, possibly limited to animals with clinical signs or to very low bacterial loads below the detection limit. this finding suggests a low to negligible risk for buffalo to serve as transmitters of m. bovis via water under free-ranging conditions.

our conclusions are furthermore supported by the fact that no evidence of horizontal transmission of m. bovis between in-contact cows and the experimental buffalo could be demonstrated . this includes potential spread by water or aerosolised droplets. spread by aerosolised droplets may be dependent on frequent, close physical contact and social interactions, which, although well described characteristics in buffalo behaviour, were not observed between the two study groups. the in-contact and experimental buffalo had been sourced from different herds. apart from grazing and resting in relative proximity to each other, the two groups remained separate social entities throughout the vaccination trial. this observation is important as it may indicate that social and behavioural patterns are key determinants in driving transmission within and between buffalo herds and warrants more in-depth investigations.

unlike members of the m. tuberculosis complex, ntms are rarely associated with invasive disease, but they may temporarily colonise the host and cause transient infection accompanied by non-specific stimulation of the host's immune system  <cit> . in our study we isolated an unidentified mycobacterium species closely related to m. moriokaense from both the trough water and lymph node tissue from one of the buffalos, suggesting the environment as the source of infection.

the specific effect of this particular, or other, ntm species on the immune response of buffalo is unknown at this stage. in both, cattle and buffalo, environmental mycobacteria have been suspected to cause non-specific sensitisation to the tuberculin skin test  <cit> . corner et al.  <cit>  showed that cattle inoculated with atypical mycobacteria isolated from either soil or bovine origin developed a significant level of sensitivity to both bovine and avian ppd in the tuberculin skin test, the immune response lasted for between four and ten weeks and was generally higher for avian ppd than bovine ppd. demangel et al.  <cit>  have implied a potential adverse effect of environmental mycobacteria on vaccination efficacy of bcg, depending on the extent to which these mycobacteria share cross-reacting antigens with the vaccine. in calves, sensitisation with environmental mycobacteria prior to vaccination had an antagonistic effect on bcg efficacy  <cit> . initial vaccination trials using bcg in buffalo did not yield a significant reduction of infection, questioning the efficacy of bcg in these animals  and raising the question whether this effect might be due to the presence of ntms. our microbiological examination of water, pumped from a tributary of the sabie river into the water trough for the study buffaloes, yielded five species of ntm, including two previously unidentified species . m. vaccae and m. terrae are reportedly among the most frequently isolated organisms from fresh water  <cit> , along with m. engbaekii and a number of unclassified mycobacteria  <cit> . their natural habitat, however, is more likely to be wet soil  <cit> , which may suggest that the ntms, especially m. terrae, did not all originate from the river water but could have been introduced via the soiled muzzles or feet of the buffalo while drinking. favourable water temperatures throughout the experiments  and the presence of sufficient nutrients in river water are known to facilitate replication of mycobacteria  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the findings of this study suggest that contamination of surface water by infected buffalo may not be likely to play a significant role in the spread of m. bovis in a free-ranging ecosystem. the study also demonstrated that buffalo were exposed to different environmental ntms in river-water without producing any signs of infection or disease.

further studies will be required to investigate the potential effects of these and other ntm species on the immune response of buffalo especially in the context of btb control strategies involving vaccination and diagnostics.

