BACKGROUND
fruit-bearing crop species are an important component of the human diet providing nutrition, dietary diversity and pleasure. fruit are typically considered an enlarged organ that surrounds the developing seeds of a plant, or the ripened ovary of a flower together with any associated accessory parts  <cit> . the development and final form of the fruiting body is widely varied, ranging from minimally expanded simple dehiscent  fruit of the model plant arabidopsis, through expanded ovaries of tomato, to complex fruiting organs with several different expanded tissues, such as found in the pome fruit  <cit> . common to all fruit is the developmental process that results in expansion of tissue near the seed in a coordinated manner with seed development . at early stages during development  the fruit tissue undergoes several rounds of cell division, followed  by cell expansion during which the fruit stores metabolites and energy, in the form of starch or sugars . subsequently, usually after the seeds mature, the fruit undergoes a series of biochemical changes that convert starches into more available and attractive compounds, such as sugars, as well as producing volatile secondary metabolites that are thought to function as attractants for animals or insects which disperse the seed.

morphological and physiological studies of fruit have led to considerable understanding of the physical and biochemical events that occur as fruit mature and ripen  <cit> , however it is only relatively recently that genomic approaches have been used to investigate fruit development  <cit> . as a result of excellent genetic resources and the application of molecular and genomic approaches, tomato has become the best studied indehiscent fruit. domestication of tomatoes has resulted in the increase of fruit size from a few grams to varieties 1000-fold larger  <cit> . the physiological events leading to the expansion of the ovary wall of the tomato flower and in particular the events that occur around tomato ripening have been well described . more recently, molecular approaches have been used to study global gene expression in tomato  <cit>  allowing identification of large numbers of genes potentially involved in fruit development and ripening.

in other fruit crops, microarrays have been used to examine gene expression during the development and in particular the ripening of fruits such as strawberry  <cit> , peach  <cit> , pear  <cit> , and grape  <cit> . these studies have identified genes involved in fruit flavour and genes associated with distinct stages of fruit development.

apples  are members of the rosaceae family, sub family pomoideae, which includes crop species such as pear, rose and quince. members of the pomoideae have a fruit that consists of two distinct parts: an expanded ovary corresponding to the "core" which is homologous to the tomato fruit; and the cortex or edible portion of the fruit which is derived from the fused base of stamens, petals and sepals  <cit> , which expands to surround the ovary. fruit develop over a period of  <dig> days from pollination to full tree ripeness with a simple sigmoidal growth curve  <cit> . physiological studies of apple fruit development have focused on measures of ripeness such as colour changes and breakdown of starch to form the palatable sugars. from such studies, it has been shown that floral buds contain a small amount of starch that is metabolized quickly after pollination. starch levels then build up in fruit coordinate with cell expansion. at about  <dig> days after pollination starch levels begin to decline again and fruit sugars increase, until the fruit are fully ripe  <cit> . like tomato, apple undergoes an ethylene-dependent ripening stage  <cit>  and transgenic apples with reduced ethylene production fail to produce skin colour changes and appear to lack production of volatile compounds typically associated with apples  <cit> .

apple is functionally a diploid with 2n =  <dig> and a genome of moderate size  making genomic approaches to the study of its biology reasonable. recently an est sequencing approach has been used to identify apple genes  <cit> ; unigenes derived from this sequencing project were used to design the oligonucleotides used in this work. two groups have published apple microarray analyses  <cit> . lee et al.  <cit>  used a  <dig> feature cdna array to identify  <dig> apple cdnas for which expression changes during early fruit development. using the same ~ <dig> gene  apple oligonucleotide array described in this paper, schaffer et al.  <cit>  identified  <dig> genes in fruit that respond to ethylene treatment and associated changes in gene expression with changes in fruit volatiles.

in the work described in this paper, microarrays have been used to study the developmental processes occurring during fruit formation from pollination to full tree ripeness. in pome fruit both core  and cortex  tissues expand. understanding the regulation of the events required to produce a complex apple fruit, including the division and expansion of cells from different floral structures is the ultimate aim of this work. using microarrays we show that large groups of genes are co-ordinately expressed at specific stages of fruit development. we have identified cell division genes for which expression coincides with the period of cell division in apple fruit and have identified starch metabolic enzymes likely to be involved as fruit store and then metabolize starch. using a comparative approach we have identified a number of genes for which expression patterns are similar in both apple and tomato fruit development and may be involved in similar fundamental processes in fruit development.

RESULTS
microarray analysis of apple fruit development
when apple trees  were at full bloom  individual fully open flowers were tagged and trees separated into two biological replicates . based on physiological and morphological studies of apple fruit development  <cit>  eight time points were selected for sampling . the first sample  <dig> days after anthesis  was taken at the same time that fully open flowers were tagged. the  <dig> and  <dig> daa sampling time points coincide with the period of cell division that occurs after pollination. at  <dig> daa cell division has ceased, the rate of cell expansion increases and starch accumulation begins.  <dig> daa coincides with the greatest rate of cell expansion and starch accumulation. by  <dig> daa the rate of cell expansion has declined but cell expansion continues at a reduced rate until full ripeness, starch levels peak shortly after this timepoint. in the year in which the samples were taken harvest ripeness was at  <dig> daa, at this stage starch levels are rapidly declining and fruit sugars increasing, skin colour is still changing and while some flavour compounds are present full "apple flavour" has not yet developed. by  <dig> daa fruit were "tree ripe" at this stage fruit have strong colour and have fully developed flavour, almost all the starch present has been converted into fruit sugars and some flesh softening has occurred. while developmental events that occur prior to full bloom are significant in the developmental program leading to the final fruit, samples prior to full bloom were not considered in this work. rna was extracted from samples from both replicates, labelled and hybridized to an array of  <dig> oligonucleotides  designed from  <dig> unigenes representing approximately  <dig> genes. all samples were compared  to genomic dna  as a common reference, making samples directly comparable, the absolute expression of all the samples is shown in additional file  <dig> 

four major groups of co-ordinately expressed genes during fruit development
to examine global changes in gene expression,  <dig> genes which changed in expression during fruit development  were grouped using hierarchical clustering and visualized by plotting expression in 3-dimensional space . this global analysis of the microarray shows four major patterns of coordinated gene expression. a group of genes was identified with expression in floral buds but are down-regulated throughout fruit development, a second group of genes was up-regulated early in development and down-regulated later, two additional groups of genes were up-regulated during the middle stages of development and during ripening. by contrast with the results seen for tomato  <cit> , there was no sharp change in global expression patterns at ripening, but this difference is likely to reflect differences in sampling.

to identify those genes that changed expression significantly, a one way anova  was applied to the entire dataset. using a non-adaptive false discovery rate  control  <cit>  of  <dig> ,  <dig> features were identified  where gene expression changed significantly during fruit development. hierarchical clustering identified four groups of genes with similar patterns of expression during fruit development . the full bloom  cluster contained  <dig> genes  with high expression at  <dig> daa and then low expression during the rest of fruit development. the early fruit development  cluster contained  <dig> genes  where expression peaked between  <dig> and  <dig> daa. the efd cluster consisted of two weaker sub-clusters: efd <dig>  a group of  <dig> genes  which had high expression early and then very low expression later in development; and efd <dig> a group of  <dig> genes  with high expression early and moderate expression later in development. the mid development cluster  contained  <dig> genes  with expression peaking at  <dig> and  <dig> daa and low expression at other stages of development. the ripening cluster  contains  <dig> genes  with expression low initially and eventually peaking late in fruit development. the r cluster could be clustered into three further sub-clusters: r <dig>  <dig> genes  where expression peaked at harvest ripe  and was low at other stages of development; r <dig>  <dig> genes  where expression was very low throughout development until tree ripe ; and r <dig>  <dig> genes  where expression peaked at tree ripe  but some expression was present at earlier stages of development. both approaches to clustering identified four major groups of co-ordinately expressed genes suggesting these correspond to major phases of fruit development.

validation of microarray expression by quantitative rt-pcr
to examine the reliability of gene expression patterns identified from the microarray we used quantitative reverse transcriptase-pcr  to examine steady-state rna levels during fruit development. genes for qrt-pcr were initially selected from the list of genes that significantly changed their expression during fruit development. the list of regulated genes was ordered from most significant to least significant and genes for qrt-pcr selected at regular intervals from this list . several genes were also chosen for qrt-pcr to confirm expression patterns of genes in particular pathways . three housekeeping genes were used to normalize qrt-pcr results: an actin gene ; a gapdh gene  and a gene of unknown function which was selected on the basis of low variability in microarray experiments . qrt-pcr expression profiles were compared with microarray expression profiles  and scored as matching if they agreed at all developmental stages or if the majority of stages were in agreement and the significant changes in expression also agreed. by these criteria 74%  of genes had the same pattern of expression in the microarray experiment as in the qrt-pcr experiment. interestingly no relationship was observed between the reproducibility of the expression pattern and the significance of the microarray data as determined by anova.

genes in different functional classes are expressed at different times during fruit development
to examine the changes in gene function that were occurring during fruit development, functional classes for the apple genes were identified using the arabidopsis protein function classification defined by the munich information center for protein sequences . for all the apple genes represented on the array, the arabidopsis gene with the best sequence similarity based on blast analysis was selected  <cit> , with a threshold expect value of  <dig> × e- <dig>  and mips functional categories for that arabidopsis gene assigned to the apple gene. this relatively non-stringent threshold was chosen in order to obtain functional classifications for the majority of apple genes on the array. table  <dig> shows the number of apple genes, the number of genes with arabidopsis matches, the number of matches to unique arabidopsis genes and the number of mips functional categories for the entire array, for the  <dig> features selected as changing during fruit development, and for the clusters and sub-clusters.

the table shows the number of genes on the whole array and within the clusters as well as the number of arabidopsis homologues and the number of mips function classifications identified.

a fb = full bloom; efd = early fruit development; md = mid-development; r = ripening; r <dig>  r <dig>  r <dig> = ripening subclusters  <dig>   <dig> and 3; efd <dig>  efd <dig> = early fruit development subclusters  <dig> and  <dig> 

b the number of apple ests represented by the features on the array.

c the number of apple genes, tentative contigs or singletons identified by the ests on the array.

d apple genes were compared with the arabidopsis predicted protein set using blastx to identify similar arabidopsis genes, the best match  was used for subsequent functional analysis.

e the number of unique arabidopsis genes identified by blastx using the apple genes, in many cases multiple apple genes had strongest similarity to the same arabidopsis gene, thus fewer arabidopsis genes were identified than apple genes.

f functional categories found for the arabidopsis genes were identified using the mips dataset funcat  <dig> .

the distribution of functional categories for the entire array is shown in table  <dig> and compared with the distribution of the  <dig> genes selected as changing significantly during fruit development, the major clusters and the sub-clusters. the distribution of mips functional categories changes between the whole array and the genes selected as changing during fruit development suggest that the genes selected are not a random selection from the array as a whole. for example, there appears to be a higher representation of genes associated with metabolism in the fruit development genes  suggesting developing fruit are more active metabolically. interestingly, there is a slight increase in the unclassified category in the selected fruit development genes  <dig> % vs  <dig> % for the whole array, while in the ripening cluster the unclassified category is under-represented compared to other clusters , which may reflect the amount of research focused on identifying and characterizing genes involved in the late stages of ripening as compared with early events in fruit development.

the table shows the distribution of classifications as a percentage of the total number of classifications.

a apple genes for each est on the array were used to identify arabidopsis homologues using blast with a cutoff of  <dig> e- <dig>  where a putative homologue was identified, the arabidopsis mips  classification for that gene were applied to the apple est.

b for the whole array, for the features selected as changing during fruit development, and for each of the clusters and sub-clusters the frequency of occurrence for each functional category is shown as a percentage of the total number of functional categories for that cluster . fb = full bloom; efd = early fruit development; md = mid-development; r = ripening; r <dig>  r <dig>  r <dig> = the  <dig> ripening sub-clusters; efd <dig>  efd <dig> = the  <dig> early fruit development sub-clusters.

within the four major clusters, the genes with peak expression in mid-development have a reduced representation of genes associated with metabolism  suggesting this stage of fruit development might be less metabolically active or use fewer different metabolic genes. in contrast, cellular transport and transport mechanism functions are more highly represented in the mid-development cluster  at the time when fruit are taking up nutrients and water most rapidly.

control of cellular organization functions are represented more in the efd and md clusters  consistent with this period being a stage of fruit development where the structure of the fruit cells is changing rapidly. in the ripening cluster there is an over-representation of genes in the "energy" category  with the lowest representation in mid-development . in addition the r <dig>  sub-cluster is over-represented  in the "metabolism" category  correlating with changes in energy and metabolism during late ripening.

one feature of note was the higher proportion of genes with a cell cycle classification in the efd cluster . the efd cluster contains genes for which expression peaks in the first  <dig> days of fruit development, the stage of development when cells are dividing  <cit> . this developmental period involves the division of specific cells to form the final apple fruit shape and since there appeared to be an increase in cell cycle associated genes during this period we identified the genes associated with the cell cycle classification for each cluster  and their annotations . these lists are likely to include those genes important in the regulation of fruit size and shape. for example, analysis of these lists identified three core cell cycle genes , which will be the focus of future research.

a ests that change during fruit development were used to identify apple genes and the best arabidopsis homolog  was found for that apple gene. where a sequence similarity was better than  <dig> × e- <dig> the mips functional category for that arabidopsis gene was determined.

b genes with the functional category "cell cycle and dna processing" were identified in each array cluster and ests in those clusters and the annotation of the arabidopsis homolog is shown.

expression of core cell cycle genes
from morphological studies apple fruit cells go through at least four rounds of cell division during the first  <dig> days after pollination with total cell number increasing  <dig> fold  <cit> . at around  <dig> daa the cells that make up the core and cortex of the mature fruit stop dividing and the rate of cell expansion increases. the control of cell division and cell expansion is a key part of the developmental regulation of fruit and is likely to affect final fruit size as well as texture and the balance between tissue types.

using an analysis of the arabidopsis genome sequence, vanderpoele et al.  <cit>  identified  <dig> core cell cycle genes; this list has been expanded to  <dig> genes, including several previously unrecognized groups  <cit> . expression analysis in arabidopsis has demonstrated that many of these core cell cycle genes have regulated steady state rna levels  <cit> . to determine if any of these core cell cycle genes were regulated in fruit development, we identified apple homologues and examined their expression. as fruit samples were pooled from multiple fruit and because within a fruit cell division is unlikely to be synchronized, we would not expect to be able to detect variation of expression during the cell cycle. however any core cell cycle gene that varied developmentally might be associated with the control of cell division rates during fruit formation and development.

thirty-eight apple genes represented on the apple array have strong sequence similarity to the  <dig> arabidopsis cell cycle genes identified by menges et al.  <cit> , using blastx and manual examination of protein sequence alignments . of these  <dig> apple genes, only three were in the  <dig> genes selected by anova as changing significantly during fruit development . ests  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  all had high levels of expression early in development which declined to relatively low levels after  <dig> daa. the three genes have sequence similarity to the arabidopsis genes at2g <dig> , at1g <dig>  and at2g <dig> . at2g <dig>  is a cdkb1; <dig> homologue, at1g <dig>  is a cdkb2; <dig> homologue and at2g <dig> is a cks <dig> homologue, the two cdkb genes play roles in progression of the cell cycle and the cks gene is a mitosis specific scaffold protein. at this level of sequence similarity it is not possible to determine if the apple genes represent orthologues of these genes, although similarity of function is likely.

expression of genes associated with starch metabolism
starch metabolism in apple fruit is a physiological process with a well-defined developmental pattern  <cit> . however, the mechanism by which starch levels are regulated in plants is complex and little is known about how the activity and turnover of starch synthesis and degradation enzymes are mediated in storage tissues such as fruits . to investigate whether there is some regulation of starch metabolic enzymes at the level of transcription in apple fruit, we examined the patterns of expression for several enzymes involved in starch metabolism. arabidopsis enzymes involved in starch turnover were identified from the starch and sucrose metabolic pathway in the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  database  <cit> . apple genes with significant sequence similarity to the arabidopsis starch turnover genes  were included in the analysis .

starch metabolism genes were identified and the expression of putative apple starch metabolism genes confirmed by qrt-pcr.

a the representative est on the array is shown for the best apple gene match to the arabidopsis gene.

b the significance of the blast comparison between the arabidopsis gene and the best apple gene.

c the degree of correspondence between pattern of gene expression by microarray and the pattern by qpcr. - = no correspondence; + = more than two points of divergence; ++ = good correspondence but some differences; +++ = strong correspondence

genes which had constant expression during apple fruit development, and hence did not show transcriptional regulation in this developmental process were not studied further. those with low-level expression were also excluded due to the high variability observed where the targets have low signal intensity on the microarray. α-amylase is one example of an enzyme for which the transcript level detected was below the cut off value and consequently was not analysed further. in total, ests for  <dig> apple genes with homology to starch metabolic enzymes were identified with microarray expression profiles that varied during fruit development  and qrt-pcr was performed to confirm these profiles. for nine of the  <dig> enzymes, the qrt-pcr analysis produced expression profiles that strongly supported the patterns seen in the microarray data . for the remaining six enzymes the qrt-pcr pattern differed from the microarray pattern possibly because the rt-pcr primers were amplifying different alleles or genes than those detected by the microarray oligo.

four distinct expression profiles were observed: i) for a β-amylase gene , transcript levels were high at anthesis and low for the rest of fruit development, sucrose synthase  had a similar pattern of expression although with a less rapid decline in expression; ii) for sucrose phosphatase  and a sucrose-phosphate synthase gene , transcript levels peaked at the earliest and latest time points; iii) for adp-glucose phosphorylase  and udp-glucose pyrophosphorylase , transcript levels were lowest in the bud and increased during fruit development to reach a maximum in tree ripe apple; iv) for an α-glucosidase  and a starch synthase  transcript levels were low both early and late in apple development and peaked during early and mid development, respectively.

microarray data can potentially be used to identify regulatory genes associated with coordinating expression of pathways such as starch metabolism. the similarity of the profiles for sucrose phosphatase and sucrose-phosphate synthase  suggested coordination of expression. using cluster analysis, a single domain myb transcription factor  was identified with a similar expression pattern to sucrose phosphatase and sucrose-phosphate synthase. preliminary transient expression studies in nicotiana benthamiana leaves did not show activation of promoter regions of the two starch metabolic genes using this myb gene alone . further analysis using larger promoter regions and possible binding partners for the myb protein may identify a regulatory role for this gene.

expression of candidate fruit development genes in apple
while arabidopsis does not produce a large fleshy fruit and the post-pollination development of the fruiting body is limited, the availability of excellent genetic resources and genomic tools such as a complete genome sequence and whole genome microarrays has allowed identification of many important genes involved in floral and fruit development. the development of floral organs and the genes involved in production of mature carpels prior to fertilization have been the subject of several reviews  <cit> . post-pollination development of the arabidopsis fruit is limited, and while it serves as a good model for dehiscent fruit, it is not clear whether the genes involved in arabidopsis fruit development are important in the development of fleshy fruit. in spite of this reservation, the importance of transcription factors such as agamous, fruitful, agl1/agl <dig>  spatula, crabs claw, and ettin in specification of carpel identity and silique development suggests that transcription factors such as these may play significant roles in the development of fleshy fruit  <cit> . blast searches identified apple genes that had oligos on the apple microarray for a spatula homologue ; ettin/arf <dig> ; a fruitful/agl <dig> homologue  and a crabs claw homologue  and expression patterns for these genes were plotted . the expression of the fruitful/agl <dig> homologue , which has more similarity to ap <dig> than fruitful, increases at the time when apple fruit are enlarging  which is interesting given the short compact silique of the fruitful mutant.

comparison of apple and tomato fruit development
a recent study by alba et al.  <cit>  used an array of  <dig> est clones representing ~ <dig> tomato genes to examine fruit development and ripening, with a particular focus on the events occurring around ripening. while this study did not include floral buds or the stages of tomato development, where cell division is most active, it is the most complete fruit development data set to date. in order to identify genes involved in both apple and tomato fruit development, we used the list of genes that change during tomato fruit development to find apple genes on our microarray.

using megablast  the list of  <dig> genes that change during tomato fruit development from alba et al.  <cit>  was used to identify homologous apple genes that were present on the array used in this work. three hundred and thirty-six unique tomato genes had homology to  <dig> unique apple genes by these criteria. of these apple genes,  <dig> were identified as having significant changes in expression during apple fruit development and hence are transcriptionally regulated in both apple and tomato. we further filtered the list to include only those genes in the apple efd , md  and r  clusters . an additional  <dig> apple genes in the fb cluster were also identified by homology with the developmentally regulated tomato genes but not examined further since the tomato microarray did not include a floral bud sample.

genes identified as changing during tomato fruit development were used to identify apple genes present on the array that were also changing during fruit development.

a gene identifier for the tomato gene containing the sequence on the tom <dig> array, from  <cit> 

b micrarray feature identifier from alba et al.  <cit> .

c annotation of both the apple and tomato genes, based on blast comparison of genes with public databases.

d e value for the megablast comparison between the tomato gene and the apple gene that contain the sequence on the array.

e annotation for tomato gene is: plastocyanin, chloroplast precursor.

f annotation for tomato gene is: histone h <dig> 

g annotation for tomato gene is: protein transporter.

the expression data from both the apple and tomato microarrays was plotted for several of the genes identified. the top five genes in each cluster by quality of the blast match between apple and tomato were plotted. several genes possibly involved in processes occurring during early fruit development, mid development and ripening were also plotted. and because microarrays have the potential to identify genes involved in processes without prior information, all the genes without annotation were also plotted.

the development of apple and tomato fruit, from anthesis to mature fruit differs in length, however we compared patterns of expression during similar phases of development, in particular the mid development phase when cells are expanding in both apple and tomato  and the ripening phase . of the  <dig> genes for which expression patterns were compared,  <dig> had similar patterns of expression in both apple and tomato and are shown in figure  <dig>  with the cell expansion and ripening stages highlighted. a further five genes had some similarity of expression but  <dig> had little or no similarity of expression .

for genes such as tubulin , sam synthase  and an expansin homologue  more than one tomato sequence had homology to an apple gene and in the case of the tubulin genes to three apple genes. for the tubulin genes the patterns of expression mostly differed between apple and tomato but one of the tomato genes showed a steady decrease in expression during cell expansion similar to the apple genes. for the three tomato sam synthase genes only one  had a pattern of expression similar to the apple gene suggesting this tomato gene may have a similar function in apple and tomato. for the two tomato expansin homologues with similarity to apple, sgn-u <dig> increased in expression during ripening whereas sgn-u <dig> and the apple expansin homologue both increased during cell expansion and declined in ripening, suggesting these genes may be orthologues and have a role during cell enlargement but not in fruit softening. four genes without annotation were identified as having similar patterns of expression in apple and tomato fruit. further bioinformatic analysis suggests that, cn <dig> may be a pgr <dig> homologue involved in photosynthesis, cn <dig> is likely to be an f-box protein, and cn <dig> which is expressed during cell expansion is similar to sec5a and may be involved in exocytosis. however cn <dig> still remains unannotated. the role of these genes in fruit development remains to be determined.

comparison of gene expression between apple cultivars
a recent report has examined expression of apple genes early in fruit development using an array of  <dig> cdnas  <cit> . these authors identified  <dig> unique apple genes expressed more in whole young fruit  than in whole mature fruit  in the cultivar fuji. eighty-four homologues of these genes were identified in our est database,  <dig> of these were represented on our microarray. of these  <dig> genes,  <dig> were selected as changing significantly during fruit development,  <dig> in the efd cluster and four in the md cluster .

genes identified by  <cit>  as up-regulated during efd were used to identify apple genes present on the array.

a genbank accession for those genes identified in lee at al as up regulated in early fruit development with homologues present on our array.

b expect value for the blast comparison between the fuji gene and the apple gene which contains the array oligo.

since the criteria used to select significantly changing genes was fairly stringent we plotted expression patterns for all the matches between our data and the selected early fruit development genes from lee et al.  <cit>  in order to identify any additional genes with similar patterns of expression . eighteen genes identified by lee et al.  <cit>  as being up-regulated were not confirmed in our microarray, however, an additional  <dig> genes were identified with high expression early in royal gala fruit development, and low expression in ripening .

identification of ethylene responsive fruit development genes
the hormone ethylene plays a major role in fruit ripening in many fruit, including apple, leading to the respiratory burst and final fruit softening  <cit> . recent work has used a transgenic apple tree  which produces no detectable ethylene to examine gene expression changes and production of volatile compounds associated with apple aroma  <cit> . fruit from this tree mature, but do not ripen or soften, unless treated with exogenous ethylene. schaffer et al.  <cit>  used the apple oligonucleotide array described here to identify  <dig> apple cortex and skin genes that respond to ethylene. because the ripe fruit samples in the fruit development experiment consisted of cortex tissue only we identified only those genes that change by at least 2-fold in cortex , giving a list of  <dig> genes that respond strongly to ethylene in fruit cortex. of these  <dig> ethylene-responsive genes,  <dig> also changed significantly during the ripening phase of normal fruit development. these ethylene-responsive fruit-cortex ripening genes are shown in table  <dig> and are grouped by ripening sub-cluster. the distribution of the genes was uneven between the three clusters with a greater percentage of the r <dig> cluster also identified as ethylene responsive  in r <dig>   <dig> of  <dig> genes  in r <dig> and  <dig> of  <dig> genes  in r3). included amongst these genes was one gene identified as a putative ethylene receptor, most similar to the etr2/ein <dig> receptors from arabidopsis . the apple microarray also contains oligonucleotide probes for four additional putative ethylene receptor genes. expression of three of these genes was not significantly changed during the ethylene microarray experiment or during normal fruit ripening . the fourth gene  was selected as induced by ethylene, and although it was not selected as significantly changing during fruit development, it does show some induction in normal fruit ripening.

apple genes for which expression changed in response to ethylene treatment of mature apple fruit from an acc oxidase knockout plant  <cit>  which also had significantly altered expression during fruit ripening in the fruit development array.

a annotation of the apple genes, based on blast comparison of genes with public databases.

discussion
confirmation of microarray expression patterns by qrt-pcr
at each of the steps used to produce microarray data, variability can be introduced leading to potential errors. we used qrtpcr of cdna from the same samples of rna used in the microarray experiment itself to estimate the overall accuracy of our data. overall we found good correlation between qrt-pcr and microarray results with 75% of microarray expression patterns reproducible by qrt-pcr. however, 25% of expression patterns for which the qrt-pcr results did not match the microarray result. in some cases , this difference seems to be associated with genes where the genomic dna reference sample gave very high intensity binding. it is possible that this high level of gdna binding distorted the ratios observed or the gdna binding may have interfered with cdna binding for those genes. another possible explanation for qrt-pcr results disagreeing with microarray results is that the oligo on the microarray was able to hybridise to more than one allele of a gene in the sample, and qrt-pcr primer binding was more specific. alternatively the microarray oligo may be hybridizing to more than one member of a gene family. these results would suggest that hybridization conditions on the microarray are not stringent enough, however during initial optimization of the methods any increase in stringency resulted in a large loss of signal intensity . furthermore, we have approximately  <dig> oligos on the array that were designed to est sequences which when re-sequenced were shown to have a single base mismatch to the consensus sequence, these oligos do not bind labelled targets whereas perfect match oligos to the same targets do produce good signal  suggesting hybridization stringencies are close to optimal.

different functional classes of genes are expressed at different times during fruit growth
a comparison between the whole array and the selected  <dig> genes identified differences in distribution of functional categories, suggests that the genes selected as changing significantly is a non-random selection from the whole array. the increases in "metabolism" and "energy" classes as compared with the whole array are not unreasonable given the large changes occurring in organ development and the accumulation of starch and sugar and later in ripening and production of flavour compounds. the remaining functional classes show only minor differences between the whole array and the selected  <dig> and this may reflect some bias in the est sequences  <cit> . since the majority of libraries used in the original est sequencing were from fruit or floral buds, it is reasonable to expect functional classification of the whole array to be similar to the classification for those genes regulated in fruit development.

when the functional classifications for the four major clusters are compared, some interesting changes in the proportions of genes in each category are observed, although interpretation of these changes must be made with caution since each cluster represents a different set of genes. the proportion of metabolic and energy gene functions is high in buds and declines during development and then increases in ripening fruit. this late increase may reflect an increase in secondary metabolite gene expression as flavour compounds are produced during ripening. an indication of this can been seen when the functional categories are examined in more detail. while the overall "metabolism" classifications are similar for fb and ripening clusters  the mips category  <dig>  for lipid, fatty-acid and isoprenoid metabolism, which include the known flavour components such as terpenes, shifts from  <dig> % in fb to  <dig> % in the ripening cluster .

a limitation of functional analysis is that it can only provide information about genes for which some function has been previously identified. while functional classification of genes is a useful approach to analysis of microarrays it is the combination of functional classification with other approaches  that allows information to be more easily identified in the data, for example identifying genes associated with cell division that are most highly expressed early in development.

cell cycle genes are regulated at the transcriptional level early in fruit development
the development of apple fruit involves an early period of cell division that lasts for approximately  <dig> days after pollination  <cit> . regulation of cell cycle genes is complex however it is possible that transcriptional regulation of some of the core cell cycle genes are involved in the control of cell division during fruit development. control of the core plant cell cycle genes at the transcriptional level has been associated with regulation of the cell cycle in synchronised arabidopsis and tobacco by <dig> cell cultures  <cit> . because of the nature of our samples, we would not be able to detect such cycle-dependent transcriptional regulation. however, at least one of the core cell cycle genes has been shown to be regulated developmentally in plants; cdkb1; <dig> has been associated with control of cell division in arabidopsis leaf development, and expression of cdkb1; <dig> declines as arabidopsis leaves get older  <cit> . alteration of cdkb1; <dig> activity in leaves by expression of a modified form of cdkb1; <dig> changes cell size and endoreduplication. two putative cdkb homologues in the apple fruit development microarray changed significantly, both of these apple genes decline in expression at the time that apple cell division stops suggesting a role for these genes in the regulation of this process. the third core cell cycle gene that changed significantly during fruit development is a cks <dig> homologue. cks <dig> has been shown to associate with cdkb proteins and has been proposed to act as a docking protein for regulators of cdk activity  <cit>  and also has been shown to associate with the scf complex involved in degradation of kinase inhibitor proteins . the expression of these three cell cycle associated genes at the time when apple fruit are undergoing cell division suggests they are important developmental regulators in apple. altering expression of these genes would allow elucidation of their function and perhaps lead to fruit with altered cell numbers leading to changes in fruit texture and size.

the g <dig> to s transition is an important control point in the plant cell cycle and the cycd3; <dig> gene has been shown to be limiting for this transition in arabidopsis  <cit> . no orthologue for this gene has been identified in apple although three homologous genes are represented on the array. none of these homologues varied significantly during development but one  declined approximately 2-fold late in apple fruit development.

endoreduplication has been associated with increases in cell size in many plants  <cit> . studies in arabidopsis suggest that inhibition of mitotic cdk complexes by the kinase inhibitors krp <dig>  <cit>  and krp <dig>  <cit>  and the kinase wee <dig>  <cit>  can lead to increased endoreduplication. interestingly, a recent report suggests there is no endoreduplication in mature apple fruit  <cit> . perhaps not surprisingly then, apple homologues of these genes were not selected as having changed significantly during fruit development, however the apple wee <dig> homologue does show some increase in expression immediately after cell division ceases. the role of these genes in regulation of endoreduplication in apple, if any, is not clear but it may be possible to induce endoreduplication in apples by altering expression of these genes.

starch metabolism is regulated at the transcriptional level in fruit
although the biochemical activities of many starch enzymes have been defined, it is difficult to assign the roles of different enzyme pathways in the regulation of starch levels in fruit. matching the gene expression profiles produced in this study to known changes in starch content throughout apple development is one approach, implicating certain pathways in these processes. while we did not observe coordinated expression of complete pathways, there was co-expression of several genes in one pathway. for example, the expression profiles of sucrose phosphatase  and a sucrose-phosphate synthase  mirrored the reduction in apple starch content during both early fruit development and during ripening  <cit> , suggesting that these enzymes may be components of the starch degradation pathway in fruit development. however, it is also possible that distinct pathways are responsible for these early and late starch degradation events. the high transcript levels of β-amylase  and α-glucosidase  early in development but not during ripening are evidence of a starch degradation pathway that may be specific to early development and not active in late development. these results suggest that distinct starch metabolic pathways are important and are regulated at the transcriptional level in apple fruit development.

one observation made during the analysis of the starch metabolism pathways was that for any given step there were usually several candidate genes for a particular enzyme. for example there are two plastidic starch synthases in the arabidopsis databases. both have homologues in the apple est database, and one has homology to two apple genes. expression of only one of these candidate starch synthase genes in apple fruit  peaked at  <dig> daa, just prior to the peak in fruit starch content at  <dig> daa  <cit> . this correlation of expression data with the pattern of starch accumulation during development suggests that this particular starch synthase gene is involved in regulation of starch levels during fruit development. these results show that microarrays can be used to correlate transcript levels with physiological and biochemical observations to identify which member of a gene family, or even perhaps which allele, is likely to be involved in the process of interest.

the expression profiles of nine starch enzymes  showed that developmental regulation of the transcription of these genes corresponds to observed changes in starch levels throughout apple development. in a similar study, smith et al.  <cit>  used affymetrix microarrays to observe εchanges in the expression of starch enzymes over a diurnal cycle in arabidopsis leaves. in leaves, starch is synthesised in the light and degraded in the dark. these authors observed distinct changes in the transcript levels of enzymes such as starch synthase and β-amylase. it is interesting that there is evidence of transcriptional regulation of starch in both arabidopsis leaves where light- and sugar-regulated changes in starch occur over a 24-hr period, and in apple fruit where developmental regulation of starch takes place over a 146-day period. this transcriptional regulation of starch in both source and sink tissues may be required to coordinate the partitioning of carbohydrates throughout a plant.

comparison of microarray experiments examining fruit development
comparison of microarray experiments from different species targeted to the same developmental process offers the opportunity to compare gene expression patterns for a large number of genes. the attraction of such a comparison is that it may identify processes common to different fruit and hence important in the fundamental processes occurring in all fruit. for some published studies however, the size of the datasets and/or differences in samples studied make comparisons of limited value  <cit> . for example, specific searches of the tomato microarray results given by lemaire-chamley et al.  <cit>  for genes expressed in both apple  and tomato  <cit>  early in fruit development did not identify similar genes, probably because these genes were not included in the lemaire-chamley array of  <dig> tomato cdnas e.g. ipp isomerase homologues , catalase homologues  and histone 2b homologues . where the apple microarray identified a cdkb <dig> gene as up-regulated early in fruit development , a comparison of tomato locular  and tomato pericarp  identified a cdkb2; <dig> homologue as up-regulated in locular tissue  <cit> .

a microarray experiment using apple  compared  <dig> daa with fully ripe fruit  <cit> . comparing our data with that of lee et al.  <cit>  allows identification of regulated genes that may be otherwise excluded as not significantly changing in one of the two experiments. one such gene is eb <dig> an α-expansin homologue, identified as highly expressed in  <dig> daa fruit in the fuji microarray, was excluded from the royal gala microarray by anova analysis because two samples  had no detectable expression. in the royal gala microarray this α-expansin had strongest expression at  <dig> daa and maintains expression through to  <dig> daa and then has no detectable expression, making it a good candidate for an expansin involved in the formation and expansion of the fruit cells. without the comparative analysis with the data from the fuji microarray this gene would not have been identified.

using a microarray containing  <dig> ests representing ~ <dig> tomato genes alba et al.  <cit>  studied gene expression through tomato fruit development, focusing predominantly on ripening. it was perhaps surprising to find only  <dig> genes in common between the tomato fruit development microarray and the apple data presented here. the differences in experimental design may be one reason for this small overlap, with the tomato microarray having more sampling around ripening and the apple microarray more sampling of the floral bud and early fruit development. it may also be an indicator of the differences between apple and tomato fruit development.

when expression patterns for the similar apple and tomato genes were compared, only  <dig> out of  <dig> genes studied had similar patterns of expression in both apple and tomato. since approximately 75% of apple microarray expression patterns are reproducible in qrt-pcr, and presumably the same is true for the tomato microarray, for each pair of genes there is only an approximately 56% chance that both patterns are reproducible. thus at best we would expect only  <dig> pairs to have the same pattern of expression. in addition, since the sequence similarity threshold used was fairly low it is also likely that some of the pairs of genes examined are not orthologous genes. nevertheless it is likely that identifying only  <dig> pairs of genes with similar expression patterns in both apple and tomato is an underestimate of the actual similarity between the fruit. where patterns of expression do have similarity between apple and tomato it is probable that the microarray pattern of expression represents the actual pattern of expression for those genes, since the expression pattern has effectively been confirmed in another species. it is probable that when more complete whole genome arrays are used and when more closely matched sampling is carried out, many more genes with similar expression will be identified. as further microarray experiments are performed in other fruiting species the inclusion of samples at standardized developmental stages will allow better comparison of datasets and more common fundamental processes to be identified.

of the  <dig> pairs of tomato and apple genes identified, seven show up-regulation in ripening and four showed down-regulation. this almost certainly reflects the emphasis on ripening samples in the tomato microarray. homologues of β-carotene hydroxylase, alcohol dehydrogenase and phytoene synthase are all up-regulated during ripening in both apple and tomato, suggesting these enzymes play significant roles in formation of the colour and flavour compounds associated with ripening fruit. however, carotenoids are not typically high in apple fruit flesh  <cit>  suggesting either that production of carotenoids in apples is blocked at another step in the biosynthetic pathway or that the products of these enzymes are further processed into forms that have not yet been measured in apples. while homologues of ipp isomerase, catalase, histone 2b and the rin mads-box gene are all up-regulated in ripening in both apple and tomato they were all also selected in the apple microarray as up-regulated early in fruit development, although for the mads-box gene the up-regulation may be more associated with high expression in floral buds. the role of this early expression for these genes is uncertain but it would be interesting to see if they were also highly expressed early in tomato fruit development. one integral plasma membrane protein homologue and one expansin homologue showed similar patterns of expression in both apple and tomato and were selected in the mid development cluster in the apple microarray. this result suggests these two genes play important roles in cell expansion during fruit development. we also identified genes without annotation that have similar patterns of expression in both apple and tomato fruit. such comparisons are valuable in order to find genes for which the function is conserved for a particular process that may not be identified by other methods. further work will allow us to determine whether these genes indeed play an important role in fruit development.

intersections between different apple microarray experiments
a comparison between two apple experiments using the same microarray was useful to identify genes involved in both fruit ripening and the ethylene response. the combination of the two datasets provides more information than each experiment on its own. the importance of ethylene in apple fruit ripening is demonstrated by the lack of ripening in acc oxidase knockout fruit  <cit> . when we compared datasets from the ethylene induction and the fruit development microarray,  <dig> of the ethylene induced genes  were found in the ripening cluster  of the developmental microarray. the observation that  <dig> of the ethylene induced genes were not identified as having altered expression during the endogenous ripening process implies that these genes do not have roles in normal fruit ripening, or that the induction of these genes is below the level of significance used to select genes in this work. these results suggest that while ethylene is a major regulator of gene expression in fruit ripening, a large portion of fruit ripening occurs in the absence of ethylene. using this comparative approach it is possible to identify fruit ripening events that are both ethylene dependent and independent.

CONCLUSIONS
the data presented here provide a picture of the molecular events occurring throughout the development of the apple fruit and provide a resource for future study of fruit development. we have identified genes that are likely to be important in some of the major processes. comparison of the apple data with other fruiting plants identified  <dig> genes that may play fundamental roles in fruit development. comparisons between experiments in apple allows differentiation between ethylene dependent and independent ripening. future work will determine the specific function of these genes. functional analysis of cdkb and cks expression in fruit tissue early in development may reveal the mechanisms that control the growth of the cortex tissue to surround the core. manipulation of expression of these genes may alter cell size and number in fruit, perhaps affecting fruit shape, size and texture. these data allow us to begin to develop an understanding of the molecular events that lead to the division and expansion of tissues surrounding a developing seed to form a fruit.

