BACKGROUND
evolutionary theory predicts that costly structures must convey a fitness advantage to their bearers in order to be maintained over evolutionary time  <cit> . flightlessness in birds and insects, limblessness in lizards and sightlessness in cave-dwelling organisms are some prominent examples of phenotypic regression due to the loss of adaptive function . molluscs in general and gastropods in particular display a fascinating diversity of elaborate shell structures  <cit>  and have attracted considerable research efforts to explain them in adaptive terms  <cit> . the proposed roles invoked mechanical stability  <cit> , defence against predators  <cit> , sexual selection  <cit>  and climatic selection  <cit> . however, the potential selective advantage of hair-like shell ornamentation of certain land snail species remains unknown.

these hairs can reach varying densities  and lengths . in some cases hardly visible, they confer an almost furry impression to the shell in others. these semi-rigid structures are part of the periostracum, a thin protein layer  secreted by the snail to cover the calcareous shell  <cit> . building hairs requires the snail to have specialised glandular tissue and complex strategies to form them. consequently, this trait can be assumed to be costly and should thus present a selective advantage to its bearers in order to be conserved.

haired shells occur in several species of the stylommatophoran families polygyridae, helicidae and hygromiidae. these families are only distantly related  <cit> , suggesting that this features has evolved several times independently. haired shells are almost exclusively observed in species living in moist microhabitats, like layers of fallen leaves, broad-leaved vegetation, damp meadows or wet scree  <cit> . such a correlation suggests an adaptive significance of the trait in such a habitat  <cit> ; it was thus speculated that the hygrophobic hairs facilitate the movement in wet environments by relieving surface tension  <cit> . a correlation between haired shells and humid habitats is thus expected. in order to test this, we employed the recent bayesian extensions of the comparative method, allowing to take mapping and phylogenetic uncertainty simultaneously into account  <cit> . with a diversity hotspot in south germany, eastern france and switzerland, the land snail genus trochulus s. str.  is particularly suited to address our question: its species exhibit variability in both hairiness and ecology. this study present the first comprehensive molecular phylogeny for the genus trochulus chemnitz,  <dig>  based on mitochondrial and nuclear loci. finally, we tested experimentally whether the possession of haired shells indeed facilitates locomotion.

RESULTS
lineage identification and phylogenetic relations
the initial phylogenetic analysis on a coi data set of the presumed trochulus species resolved  <dig> terminal clades, each with  <dig>  posterior probabilities or higher . the uncorrected sequence divergence among those clades ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . out of these lineages, nine could be assigned to existing taxa, because the species were sampled from the type locality and/or were morphologically unmistakable. the nine remaining clades, however, could not be unequivocally attributed to a taxonomic name. all eighteen identified lineages were used as molecularly defined operational taxonomic units in the subsequent analyses  <cit> .

the bayesian phylogenetic analysis of the entire data set  showed the monophyly of the genus trochulus within the hygromiinae with high posterior probability, except for t. lubomirskii, which seems to be only distantly related to this genus . in addition to the early branching t. villosus/alpicolus clade, the genus is composed of three well supported subclades: first, a clade containing the t. striolatus/plebeius-like lineages together with t. villosulus, a second clade with ecologically divers species confined to the jura mountains and the neighbouring mittelland-plain and finally, a t. hispidus/sericeus-like clade, containing also t. biconicus and a new species.

correlation of shell hairiness with habitat
the pca on habitat humidity describing variables resulted in two meaningful axes, representing  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the total variation. the first component opposed sampling sites in shady woods and sites in sun exposed, open areas. this axis can therefore be interpreted as an evaporation gradient. the second axis is a gradient of the summer precipitation on one hand and the humidity demand of the vegetation on the other . it can thus be considered as a humidity gradient. the sampling sites appear as two distinct clusters that could be classified as either moist or dry . the outlier  was also considered to be humid, according to its high humidity levels. for each population, at least ten adult individuals were scored for the presence or absence of hairs . non-haired populations exclusively corresponded to species described in the literature as having smooth shells . when plotting the hairiness of each population on the pca, a complete congruence between humidity and hairiness became apparent: haired shells tended to occur at sites with low evaporation and/or high precipitation while smooth shells were found at places with high evaporation and/or lower precipitation .

character state evolution
as the occurrence in moist habitats was systematically linked to the presence of hairs in trochulus s.str., only a single analysis was necessary for both characters. the bayesian analysis of character evolution suggested with high posterior probability that the most recent common ancestor of the genus trochulus most likely possessed hairs and lived in a moist habitat . the analysis also revealed considerable mapping- and/or phylogenetic uncertainty in the reconstruction of crucial ancestral nodes . the average bayesian parameter estimate for the character change ratio was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , indicating that a loss of hairs associated with a transition from wet to dry habitats occurred more frequently than vice versa. this was in concordance with the parsimony reconstruction of character state changes on all different topologies of the 99% credibility set of trees. a minimum number of three independent losses of hairs / habitat transitions had a higher probability  than the only other observed pattern of two losses/one gain or three losses/no gain .

functional analysis
the analysis of variance showed that on a water-covered leaf surface, hairy shells required a significantly higher minimum force to overcome the adhesion . there was no difference on a dry surface .

discussion
considering the limited number of sites sampled, we found a relatively large number of lineages, most of which could not be attributed to described species. this suggests that many other more or less morphologically similar entities may exist throughout the range of the genus. the existence of cryptic lineages could explain at least in part the current taxonomic uncertainty in trochulus  <cit> . for example, several subspecies have been described for t. striolatus  <cit> , which may well represent distinct evolutionary lineages such as described here. given that the sequence divergence among the nine unidentified lineages is of the same magnitude as among described, morphologically and ecologically distinct species , it can be reasonably assumed that the cryptic lineages within the striolatus/plebeius and hispidus/sericeus clades correspond to good species. even under the assumption of an exceptionally fast molecular clock in land snails of up to 5% sequence divergence per one million years  <cit> , the lineages in the striolatus/plebeius clade, for example, persisted for at least two million years as independent evolutionary entities. the existence of more or less cryptic lineages or species is not an unusual finding in land snails  <cit> . in contrast to the high divergence of the unidentified lineages, the comparatively small genetic distance between t. villosus and t. alpicolus indicated a questionable specific distinction between these two taxa. detailed phylogeographic analyses in addition to morphometric and ecological studies will be necessary to disentangle the species limits of these cryptic trochulus complexes, clarify the taxonomy and reveal their evolutionary history. in addition, the species t. lubomirskii, which was placed by schileyko  <cit>  into the subgenus plicuteria, may not belong to the genus trochulus at all.

a haired shell appears as the ancestral state in the genus trochulus. this inference is strengthened by the observation that some of the hair-less species do possess some as juveniles. during the evolutionary history of the genus trochulus, hairs appear to have been lost several times independently  and this was always correlated with a shift in habitat . this suggests that hairs potentially have an adaptive function in humid habitats and once the presumed selective pressure for the maintenance of these costly protein structures is relieved, they are lost. such a correlation makes certain potential adaptive explanations for hairiness unlikely: defence against predators or mechanical stability have no obvious reasons to co-vary with the humidity characteristics of a habitat.

the facilitation of locomotion by decreasing the adhesion to water films in humid environments had been previously hypothesised to be the selective advantage of a haired shell  <cit> . however, the results of our experiments have shown that the opposite is true. the presence of hairs significantly increased the minimum force necessary to move shells over wet surfaces. having thus shown that the initial hypothesis  <cit>  is at least in this case not applicable, we propose an alternative: haired shells may confer an selective advantage by increasing the adhesion to the water film on the unstable, moving leaves of their feeding plants during foraging . indeed, snails are mostly active during phases of high ambient humidity  <cit>  when leaves are covered with a water film due to rain, fog or dew. this water film is usually in contact with the shell during locomotion . observation shows that trochulus species in moist habitats preferentially forage on large-leaved herbaceous plants like adenostyles, urtica, homogyne or tussilago  <cit> . hence, falling off the leaf and needing to crawl up again to this feeding site  represents a considerable effort given the exceedingly costly and ineffective locomotion of land snails  <cit> . in dry habitats on the contrary, snail species avoid the hard plant matter typical for this habitat and preferentially feed on dead material lying on the ground  <cit> , where a mechanism increasing shell adhesion offers no obvious advantage to its bearer. this interpretation is supported by the fact that phylogenetically distantly related haired species, such as helicodonta obvoluta and isognomostoma isognomostoma, are found in the same habitats and have in general similar life-styles  <cit> . however, as long as the positive effect of increased adherence to food plants on the individual fitness is not proven, this remains a hypothesis and does not preclude additional or even other adaptive functions of haired shells.

CONCLUSIONS
the present comparative analysis suggested that hairs on the shell confer a selective advantage in humid habitats only and are thus lost in drier habitats. in other words, the variability of hairiness within the genus trochulus could be explained in terms the loss of its adaptive function in a selectively different environment.

