BACKGROUND
just as animals harbor a complex microbiome, plants are increasingly being recognized as having a diverse bacterial community associated with them
 <cit> . bacterial communities associated with the aboveground portion of plants can be found on both the leaf surface  and within plant tissues as endophytes. these endophytic bacteria are present within both vascular tissue and intercellular spaces, can be diverse, and likely originate from soil around plant roots or from the leaf surface
 <cit> . virtually every plant studied has yielded isolates of endophytic bacteria, suggesting that all plant species are probably colonized by some endophytic populations
 <cit> . while some plant-associated bacteria may be plant pathogens, others may act as commensals or symbionts, potentially playing roles in plant growth or disease resistance
 <cit> . some plant associated bacteria may also be human pathogens, and pathogenic bacteria can exist as endophytes having entered the host plant through the root system or via wounds, lenticels, and stomata
 <cit> . such endophytic pathogen populations have been linked to food-borne disease outbreaks involving bagged spinach and lettuce
 <cit> .

most studies identifying human pathogens in plants have been field or greenhouse studies, or have sampled freshly harvested crops
 <cit> . few studies have examined the presence of endophytes or surface associated bacteria from the perspective of human consumption, by sampling minimally processed vegetables such as ready-to-eat salad produce. similarly, few studies have focused on the entire endophyte community, rather than just potential pathogens, even though native endophytic bacterial populations could potentially serve as competitors to such organisms
 <cit> . a more diverse community of endophytes has been linked to reduced levels of internal salmonella colonization in lettuce
 <cit> , likely because a higher diversity of endophytes means that there is a greater chance of bacteria that are antagonistic to pathogen colonization being present. thus, determining the composition of endophytic communities in pre-packaged salad produce could provide insights into outbreaks of produce-related illness and lead to the development of more powerful predictive tools for food-borne disease outbreaks.

endophytic and phyllosphere bacteria have typically been characterized and enumerated using traditional culture based approaches, although such methods are highly dependent on the medium used for isolation and the incubation conditions
 <cit> . in contrast, culture-independent 16s rrna-based methods can detect unculturable bacterial colonizers of plants, as well as those bacteria that are in such low abundance or grow so slowly that they are missed by traditional culture based protocols. next generation pyrosequencing of 16s rrna genes provides a high resolution approach to assess these plant-associated communities and is beginning to be applied to studies of the phyllosphere in environmental systems
 <cit>  or to the surface of produce
 <cit> . however, such studies have generally just characterized the composition of the bacterial community on the leaf surface rather than the entire plant-associated bacterial community, which would include endophytic populations.

the aim of the current study was to determine the bacterial community composition of leafy salad vegetables at the point of consumption. to that end, ten types of commercial, ready-to-eat salad leaf vegetables were sampled, representing five different vegetables each of organically grown and conventionally grown varieties. culturable bacteria were enumerated and identified, and the total plant-associated and endophytic bacterial community structure was analysed using culture-independent next generation pyrosequencing of 16s rrna gene amplicons.

RESULTS
culturable bacterial plate counts
samples of ten different leafy salad vegetables  obtained from a grocery store were analysed by culture-dependent  and independent  approaches. each sample was analysed in an intact, non-surface sterilized form, and also following surface-sterilization. plates from non-surface sterilized samples yielded substantial numbers of culturable bacteria associated with leafy salad vegetables, ranging from  <dig>  ×  <dig> cfus g- <dig> for the organic iceberg lettuce sample on r2a agar to  <dig>  × 108 cfu g- <dig> for the baby spinach sample on tsa. plate counts for surface-sterilized samples were consistently lower than non-sterilized samples , a difference that was statistically significant . for most samples, surface sterilization reduced plate counts by at least two orders or magnitude, regardless of the growth medium used. however, the reduction in counts following surface sterilization varied by sample, with the surface sterilized sample of organic baby spinach having just  <dig> % of the cfus of the unsterilized sample, while the surface sterilized sample of conventional romaine lettuce still yielded counts that were 67% of the non-sterilized subsample. other samples that still showed appreciable counts  following surface sterilization included the conventional and organic samples of iceberg lettuce , and the conventional sample of green leaf lettuce , suggesting that these samples had large endophytic bacterial populations. all surface sterilized samples still harbored substantial numbers of bacteria, with colony counts ranging from  <dig>  ×  <dig>  to  <dig>  ×  <dig>  cfus g- <dig> leaf material, a range typical of the culturable population densities of endophytic bacteria
 <cit> . while counts for individual samples differed slightly when grown on tsa or r2a agar, there was no consistent pattern in terms of one growth medium yielding more colonies than the other , and counts on the two media were highly correlated . the conventionally and organically grown samples of baby spinach and red leaf lettuce yielded the highest cfus, but there was no pattern of organically grown produce always giving higher or lower microbial counts than the equivalent conventionally grown variety .

identity of cultured isolates
across all samples, a total of  <dig> isolates were obtained, which corresponded to  <dig> different bacterial taxa, representing six different major phyla of bacteria . four of these taxa were species of pseudomonas  and this genus was the most ubiquitous, being isolated from every sample other than the surface sterilized organic and conventional iceberg lettuce. given that the particular pseudomonads obtained are recognized as being endophytes or plant pathogens
 <cit> , their presence in a wide variety of salad vegetables is not surprising. other taxa that were isolated from a variety of samples included species of pantoea , chryseobacterium , and flavobacterium . none of these showed distinct patterns in their distribution , and as with pseudomonas, these genera contain species that have been detected in or on plants. the isolation of pantoea species from at least one sample of all of the salad vegetable types  is interesting, as while species of pantoea are typically plant commensals or even pathogens, some strains can also be opportunistic human pathogens
 <cit> .

samples are baby spinach, romaine lettuce, red leaf lettuce, iceberg lettuce, and green leaf lettuce in conventional  and organic  varieties. each was also subject to surface sterilization  to examine just the endophytic community. + indicates if an isolate of that taxa was obtained from a specific sample.

other taxa were isolated from 20% or less of the samples plated  and included various genera that are known plant pathogens  or non-pathogenic symbionts 
 <cit> . as with pantoea, these taxa are likely to be specific plant-associated strains, although some of these lineages  can include potential human pathogens. other culturable bacteria are probably also present in these samples, given that our isolation strategy focused only on the numerically dominant colonies , and only on those that appeared morphologically distinct. use of additional media types may also have led to a greater number of distinct isolates, although the two types of growth medium used represent both a rich, general purpose media  and one more commonly used on nutrient poor environmental samples 
 <cit> . that said, while approximately half of the isolates were obtained on r2a agar, all of them were capable of growth on tsa and this medium was eventually used for the maintenance of all cultures.

culture independent analyses
a total of  <dig>  non-chimeric partial 16s rrna gene sequences of >200 bp were obtained from community dna  <dig> pyrosequencing. with the use of primers designed to avoid chloroplasts, just  <dig> of these sequences proved to be chloroplast derived and an additional  <dig> could not be grouped to any recognized bacterial phylum, leaving  <dig>  for subsequent analyses, or a mean of  <dig>  per sample. across all samples, a total of  <dig> otus were detected, representing  <dig> different bacterial phyla . gammaproteobacteria and betaproteobacteria were the dominant lineages in almost all leaf vegetable samples, regardless of surface sterilization or agricultural type, and accounted for at least 90% of the sequences obtained in all but three samples . exceptions were the sample of unsterilized organically grown red leaf lettuce , and the samples of both unsterilized and surface sterilized organically grown baby spinach . in each of these three cases, sequences from the phylum bacteroidetes were more prevalent, and were actually the most prevalent lineage detected in the surface sterilized organically grown baby spinach . other major bacterial lineages that were prevalent in multiple samples were the firmicutes, alphaproteobacteria, acidobacteria, and actinobacteria, although each of these lineages accounted for an average of less than 1% of the sequences obtained. sequences affiliated with the epsilonproteobacteria , fusobacteria , deferribacteres , and candidate division tm <dig>  were detected in very low amounts in just one sample each. by comparison, rastogi et al.
 <cit>  found that proteobacteria, firmicutes, and bacteroidetes were the most abundant phyla in the romaine lettuce phyllosphere, and lopez-velasco et al.
 <cit>  found that proteobacteria and firmicutes were the dominant phyla in the phyllosphere of spinach. as in this study, gammaproteobacteria were recently reported as the most prevalent lineage present on the surface of a variety of produce types
 <cit> , and were primarily identified as members of the enterobacteriaceae.

at a finer taxonomic level,  <dig> different taxa were identified that accounted for >  <dig> % of the sequences detected across all samples . definitive identification to the species level was not possible given the short sequence length , but identification to genus was generally possible. pseudomonas  was the most prevalent genus in eight of the  <dig> samples, and has been reported by others to be the most prevalent genus in the phyllosphere of spinach and lettuce when analysed by culture-independent techniques
 <cit> . ralstonia  was the most numerous genus in six samples , xanthomonas  in two , and flavobacterium , stenotrophomonas , serratia , and erwinia  in one each . taxa identified by this culture-independent approach included widely recognized plant pathogens or symbionts , but also some genera that contain species that are potential human pathogens . only two taxa showed statistically significant  differences in their prevalence when all vegetable types were compared in terms of organic versus conventionally grown, or non-sterilized versus surface sterilized. ralstonia accounted for a significantly greater proportion of the bacterial community in the surface sterilized samples, implying that it was largely endophytic, and was also a significantly lower proportion of the community in the samples from organically grown varieties. acinetobacter accounted for a significantly lower proportion of the community in surface sterilized samples, suggesting that it was primarily associated with the leaf surface.

samples are baby spinach, romaine lettuce, red leaf lettuce, iceberg lettuce, and green leaf lettuce in conventional  and organic  varieties. each was also subject to surface sterilization  to determine just the endophytic community. numbers are the % of the total number of sequences  for each sample that were classified as a particular taxa, and only taxa accounting for >  <dig> % of the sequences across all samples are shown. *indicates taxa that accounted for significantly different  percentages of the total community between either sterilized and non-sterilized samples  or conventional versus organic production .

while sequences corresponding to  <dig> taxa were detected at a frequency that was >  <dig> % of all of the sequences examined, other “rare” otus were detected at low levels. of the  <dig> different otus recognized,  <dig> were represented by just one sequence read in a single sample, and a further  <dig> by just two sequence reads. the number of otus detected in each sample, when standardized to the same number of reads, was used as a simple measure of bacterial community diversity. an average of  <dig> otus were detected in each sample, but this varied from  <dig>  to  <dig> . these values are in the same range as those reported for the leaf surface bacterial communities on store-bought lettuce and spinach
 <cit> , and are similar or slightly lower than diversity estimates reported for stems and leaves of alfalfa
 <cit> . however, they are an order of magnitude lower than estimates of bacterial endophyte diversity derived from pyrosequencing of potato roots
 <cit> , although that study relied on diversity statistics  rather than directly assessing the number of distinct otus. bacterial densities in leaves are also thought to be lower than those in roots or the rhizosphere
 <cit> , which may account for less diverse bacterial communities in above-ground plant structures. there were no consistent patterns in otu richness in regards to organic versus conventional produce or in terms of surface-sterilized versus non-sterilized samples , but surface-sterilized  diversity was moderately correlated with overall bacterial diversity determined from the non-sterilized samples . it should be noted, that these diversity estimates are likely to be low given that sequences were grouped into otus based on the more conservative 97% similarity criterion and that rarefaction curves  did not always reach an asymptote.

samples are baby spinach, romaine lettuce, red leaf lettuce, iceberg lettuce, and green leaf lettuce in conventional  and organic  varieties. each was also subject to surface sterilization  to determine just the endophytic community. values are derived from a standardized  <dig>  otu sequences per sample.

nmds was used to ordinate each sample in order to evaluate community similarity, i.e. to determine if similar endophytic or overall bacterial populations were associated with the different leaf vegetables or sampling treatments. two dimensional nmds based on theta dissimilarity scores was sufficient to account for community differences , but yielded few consistent patterns in regards to vegetable type, surface sterilization, and organic or conventional production . amova confirmed this, with there being no statistically significant differences between samples based on groupings of organic versus conventional , or surface sterilized versus non-sterilized . date of sample purchase was likewise not related to community composition . vegetable type did result in significantly different groupings of samples , however no individual comparisons between pairs of salad vegetable types were significant following the bonferroni correction . this pattern based on salad vegetable type was largely driven by the bacterial community associated with the samples of romaine lettuce, which while not statistically significantly different from that on any other individual lettuce type, had a low probability of occurring by chance . the dendrogram of community similarity  also showed no consistent separation of endophyte  assemblages from overall plant associated bacterial communities, a finding that was confirmed by the unifrac analysis . the unifrac metric did suggest a marginally significant difference between organic and conventionally grown samples , but no overall effect of lettuce type . a survey of native plants on a prairie reserve found that host plant species did have a significant effect on the leaf endophyte community
 <cit> , although that study examined five quite different plant species, rather than the five similar varieties of salad vegetables sampled in this study. different types of produce ranging from mushrooms to apples have been found to have distinct bacterial communities on their surface, although certain produce types  may have more similar phyllosphere communities
 <cit> , as reported here.

comparing the culture dependent and culture independent approaches
a paradigm in microbial ecology is that culture-based techniques only recover 1-10% of the true bacterial diversity within an environment
 <cit>  and that molecular surveys of bacterial communities yield dramatically different results than traditional culture approaches. comparing the number of different isolated bacterial species  obtained in this study to the overall number of otus  obtained from pyrosequencing would initially seem to confirm this concept. however, many of the proportionally dominant taxa identified by the pyrosequencing approach were actually represented by isolates . a similar outcome has been reported for arabidopsis thaliana, in that many of the endophytic populations detected by pyrosequencing were related to culturable species
 <cit> . in the current study, pseudomonas spp. were the most prevalent taxa in the majority of samples according to the molecular approach, and strains of pseudomonas were isolated from all but two samples . other taxa that were proportionally dominant in some samples according to community sequencing included flavobacterium, stenotrophomonas, serratia, erwinia, xanthomonas, and pantoea; all of which were also obtained as isolates, often from samples that showed higher proportions of that taxa in the sequence collection. our culture approach was by no means exhaustive , suggesting that compared to other environmental samples it may be relatively easy to isolate the more dominant members of some plant-associated bacterial communities, or at least those associated with salad produce. a notable exception was ralstonia which, while absent from nine samples, was the most abundant sequence type detected in six samples but was not obtained as an isolate. species of ralstonia are typically capable of growth on tsa, but colonies are commonly small
 <cit>  so may have not been chosen during our isolate selection. ralstonia was, however, one of the few taxa to show significant differences between samples, being present in greater proportions in surface sterilized and/or conventionally grown samples. it’s omission from detection by the culture dependent procedure meant that solely using that approach would have missed one of the few patterns in the distribution of bacterial populations between these samples. while the pyrosequencing approach yielded much greater diversity estimates, much of that diversity came from otus that were present as low numbers of sequence reads in few samples, and these are unlikely to represent major endophytic or phyllosphere populations.

broader implications
the broader public is likely unaware that most, if not all, plant species contain endophytic populations. while the vast majority of endophytes are likely to be harmless to a typical consumer, internalization of pathogens within produce is a critical issue as these internalized, endophytic bacteria have essentially no chance of being removed from salad produce during post-harvest or consumer processing
 <cit> . based on the enumeration of culturable bacteria from surface sterilized produce in the current study, consumers could be consuming up to  <dig>  ×  <dig> endophytic bacteria in a typical serving  of salad, even if all surface-associated bacteria could be removed by aggressive washing and surface sterilization techniques. a more typical pre-consumption washing procedure would result in the consumption almost 100× more bacteria  in a salad serving, a mixture of endophytes and surface-associated cells. as such, enumerating and identifying the microbial community within minimally processed plant crops is of potential concern from a health safety standpoint, either for the direct detection of internalized pathogens, or because some native endophytic populations may serve as antagonists to pathogen growth and survival.

molecular studies of the phyllosphere and endophytes have lagged behind those of soils and waters. traditionally, studies of plant-associated bacteria have used culture-based methods, although culture-independent methods to analyse endophyte and phyllosphere bacterial diversity are now being utilized with greater frequency e.g.
 <cit> . pyrosequencing has begun to be employed to investigate plant-associated bacterial communities, such as those colonizing the roots and leaves of arabidopsis thaliana <cit> , and phyllosphere populations on the surface of various leaves
 <cit> . studies of bacterial communities in vegetable produce at the time of consumption are much less common, a recent exception being the study by leff and fierer
 <cit> , who used pyrosequencing to survey the bacteria associated with eleven produce types. however, even that study was limited to surface populations and did not address the presence of endophytes. other studies have sampled immediately postharvest or during the growing period
 <cit>  and the bacterial communities in these plants may have changed over the time period from harvesting to consumer purchase. extended storage at 4°c has been found to decrease the richness and diversity of bacteria in the phyllosphere
 <cit>  although it is unclear what effect refrigerator storage has on the endophytic component of the microbial community. regardless, analysis of store bought vegetables more truly represents what microorganisms are likely to be consumed by the typical consumer.

a recent study examining store bought lettuce found that  <dig> out of  <dig> leaves had internalized bacteria; although this conclusion was based solely on culture-dependent methods
 <cit> . a few other studies have used pyrosequencing to analyse the phyllosphere bacterial community on lettuce and spinach
 <cit> , although those studies retrieved the phyllosphere community from washes from leaves and thus exclude endophytes, as well as any bacteria that adhere tightly to the leaf surface. we used a different approach, in which we surface-sterilized the surface, killing the bacterial populations associated with the leaf surface. thus our non-sterilized samples include all leaf-associated populations , while our surface sterilized samples represent just the endophytes. to our knowledge, the study presented here is the first report of pyrosequencing analysis of the endophytic bacterial community associated with store bought, ready-to-eat produce.

CONCLUSIONS
commercial ready-to-eat salad leaf vegetables harbor an array of endophytic and surface associated bacteria. culture-independent analysis using pyrosequencing indicated that the majority of leaf vegetable-associated bacteria were members of the proteobacteria and bacteroidetes. dominant bacterial taxa identified by pyrosequencing were also identified as culturable isolates. however, the use of pyrosequencing also allowed for the identification of numerous low abundance bacteria that would not have been identified otherwise by culture dependent methods. whether vegetables were cultivated under conventional or organic agricultural systems appeared to have little consistent impact on the microbial community composition. while surface sterilization significantly decreased the number of bacteria, surface sterilized salad vegetables still contained at least  <dig>  ×  <dig> to  <dig>  ×  <dig> culturable endophytic cells per gram of leaf material. even the most extreme washing would not remove these cells, so that consumers are constantly exposed to appreciable levels of plant-associated microorganisms.

