BACKGROUND
white matter hyperintensities , especially when severe, can be associated with cognitive impairment and dementia   <cit> . however, since they are also very frequently seen on cerebral magnetic resonance imaging  of subjects without cognitive impairment, one of the challenges is to understand when and how these lesions lead to dementia. analysis of brain activity may prove to be a useful additive tool in addition to neuropsychological and radiological examinations. neuronal oscillatory activity, as recorded with electroencephalography , reflects local synaptic activity  <cit> . changes in relative power of this activity  are seen in several types of dementia, such as alzheimer’s disease   <cit> , and dementia with lewy bodies and parkinson’s dementia  <cit> . in most eeg studies on vascular dementia , subjects with subcortical dementia as well as dementia after cortical stroke were analysed together  <cit> . in these studies, slowing of posterior dominant activity was the main finding. only few studies concentrated on sivd only, but these included wmh as well as lacunar infarcts. gawel et al.  <cit>  reported a reduction in alpha power and increase in theta and delta power as expressed as lower alpha/slow wave ratio, and this ratio also had a correlation with mini mental state examination . another study found a lower peak frequency with spectral analysis in subjects with subcortical vad compared to controls  <cit> . the slowing was comparable or less pronounced than that observed in alzheimer’s disease. the proportion of subjects with wmh only was not mentioned in these studies, and therefore the relative contribution of wmh cannot be appreciated. as far as we are aware, no study has focused on  eeg analysis in sivd-wmh only.

hypothetically, wmh can disturb the functional connections by impairment of the anatomical connections , globally as well as regionally. we therefore set out to find differences in power spectra as a measure of local synaptic processing and connectivity in subjects with sivd-wmh, compared to cognitively intact individuals.

RESULTS
demographic data and mean relative power
values are expressed as mean ± sd unless otherwise indicated.

differences in relative powers between groups were large and statistically significant in all frequency bands . in patients, a decrease in faster activity was found  and an increase in relative power of slow activity . four subjects in the control group had a wmh fazekas score > <dig>  when those were left out of the analysis, the control group had a higher alpha power and lower theta and delta power . the p-values were mostly unchanged, however in the delta band p-value went up to  <dig> .

regional relative power
the results of anova are shown in table  <dig>  for all frequency bands, main effects of group and brain region were found on relative power. in addition, an interaction between group and brain region was found in the alpha band, indicating that the differences between the groups differed significantly for different brain regions. figure  <dig> shows the regional differences between groups in the alpha band. the largest difference between the patients and the controls was in the posterior brain regions, demonstrating that the decrease in alpha power in patients is most pronounced in these areas. in the beta band, the interaction effect nearly reached statistical significance, with highest loss of relative power in the frontal and parieto-occipital regions.

* p< <dig> .

degrees of freedom are printed between square brackets.

relationship to cognitive measures
as can be expected, patients performed worse on the cognitive tests. to relate eeg activity to cognition, regression analysis was performed in this group. a significant relationship was found between mmse and ravlt delayed recall, and beta power: lower relative beta power was predictive of lower mmse  and lower score on the rey auditory verbal learning test  delayed recall . interestingly, we found no relationship between eeg measures and the executive measures . also, no effect was found of power of other frequency bands on mmse.

discriminative power
overall, discriminative power was high for all frequency bands, reflecting the large differences between the groups. highest percentage of correctly classified subjects was found in the beta band. a cut-off value of  <dig>  resulted in a sensitivity of  <dig>  and a specificity of  <dig>  . for the relative theta power optimal cut-off was  <dig>  with an area-under-the-curve of  <dig> , sensitivity of  <dig>  and specificity of  <dig> . for the relative alpha and delta powers most favourable cut-off values were  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively with an area-under-the-curve of  <dig>  and  <dig> , sensitivity of  <dig>  and  <dig> , and specificity of  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively.

discussion
we found large differences in relative power between sivd-wmh patients and controls. eegs of patients had a larger percentage of slow  oscillatory activity and a clear reduction of the faster  power. the findings were significant for the global relative powers as well as for several brain regions separately. however, differences were not equal for each brain region: differences in relative alpha power were significantly larger in the parieto-occipital regions. the extent of the differences between the groups was also illustrated by the large area-under-the-curve of the roc curves . furthermore, a positive relationship was found between relative beta power and mmse. relative powers had otherwise no significant relationship with the other cognitive measures that are usually found affected in sivd . the findings are in line with previous research  <cit> .

the strength of the current study is the relatively pure group of subjects with sivd-wmh. previous eeg studies on small vessel disease included subjects with lacunar infarcts as well as wmh. since these lesions have a different clinical and radiological appearance, it can be hypothesized that they, or their underlying cause, may exert a different effect on electrical activity of the brain as well, and may have a different relationship to cognitive deficits. in this study, the conservative national institute of neurological disorders and stroke and association internationale pour la recherché et l’enseignement en neurosciences  criteria were applied for diagnosing vad, securing a high specificity  <cit> . moreover, all subjects were thoroughly examined and the results multidisciplinary evaluated to exclude other or concomitant causes of dementia, especially ad, as much as possible. the design of this study was cross-sectional and retrospective. this has some well-known drawbacks, and remarks on causation of eeg slowing by wmh are thus speculative. the control group cannot be regarded as completely healthy because subjective memory complaints are a risk factor for the development of dementia in the future. the choice for these controls might have lead to underestimation of the results increasing the risk of type ii error. however, significant differences were found between the groups, so that we feel that the analysis was powerful enough. additionally, we felt that this group of subjects is clinically relevant since this is the group that needs to be distinguished from individuals with dementia in a memory clinic setting. furthermore, the controls were not totally free of wmh. these lesions were found to be very common in the elderly with 8% of a general elderly population having no wmh at all . we therefore regarded the lesion load  of the controls not out of proportion. in a sub-analysis, we compared the patients to controls with none or only mild wmh  and we found that the differences between the groups were larger, with the control group having a larger proportion of faster activity. this gives some strength to the hypothesis that wmh has an effect on brain activity, although numbers are too small for definitive conclusions.

relative power of eeg oscillatory activity is likely reflecting the level of coupling between local groups of excitatory and inhibitory neurons. the exact characteristics and direction of interactions cannot be assessed. however, oscillations in the highest frequency bands  have been reported to be mainly mediated by reciprocal cortico-cortical connections, especially, but not exclusively, of neurons in the same cortical area and are associated with several cognitive processes   <cit> . lower frequency oscillations appear to be dominantly generated by subcortical structures  and interactions between cortical and subcortical structures. they tend to occur at longer distances than the fast oscillations  <cit> . we found a decrease in relative beta power and an increase of the slower frequencies in the patients globally as well as in the regional calculations. this implies that at least shorter distance synchrony of faster oscillations is diminished. to what extent the long distance functional connections are compromised in sivd-wmh remains to be studied.

we found no relationship between relative power and executive function and speed . lack of sensitivity of the tests can play a role. on the other hand, our results suggest that these cognitive processes might be mediated differently, with less effect on local connectivity. other processes than local dysfunction only seem to play a role in executive function. in brain tumors, a global effect on executive function was found, irrespective of the site of the lesion  <cit> . we speculate that this might also be the case in wmh to some extent.

regional analyses revealed statistically significant differences between groups for all brain regions, with a very symmetrical distribution between the hemispheres. an interaction was found between group and brain region for the alpha band. the difference in relative alpha power between patient and control group was more outspoken in the posterior and temporal regions. the posterior alpha oscillations are a reflection of the posterior dominant rhythm of the visual system, usually referred to as a ‘stand-by’ state rather than activation. the eeg findings are not specific for sivd-wmh. slowing of the dominant rhythm is found in many other neurological conditions, including other types of dementia  and encephalopathy   <cit> . the disappearance of faster oscillations and increase of slow activity reflects some universal mechanism that in modelling studies could be replicated by reducing coupling strength between neuronal units. weakening of the negative feedback loop of inhibitory and excitatory neurons could underly this general phenomenon  <cit> . it might be hypothesized that in our group of subjects with sivd-wmh, the vascular lesions are involved in the causal mechanisms of loss of connectivity, explaining the slowing of the eeg activity, although this remains to be studied. of interest is that sivd-wmh, with lesions located in the regions of white matter tracts , seemingly have a measurable effect on eeg oscillatory activity as a reflection of local cortical function. this finding leads on one hand to the question how this effect is established. on the other hand might this give directions to a possible mechanism underlying the cognitive deficits in this type of dementia. these results suggest that future studies, also on long distance connectivity, are therefore needed.

CONCLUSIONS
wmh-based vascular dementia patients show a marked slowing of oscillatory activity, as measured with eeg. this type of dementia, that is characterized by widespread subcortical lesions, is therefore associated with changes in local cortical neuronal function. relationships with neuropsychological function is known to be only weak. however, decrease of faster oscillations was associated to worse cognitive performance in this group of subjects. this may be a step in the understanding how subcortical lesions lead to cortical dysfunction in sivd-wmh.

