BACKGROUND
cold acclimation  allows hardy plants to develop the efficient freezing tolerance  mechanisms needed for winter survival. during the period of exposure to low temperature , numerous biochemical, physiological and metabolic functions are altered in plants, and these changes are regulated by lt mostly at the gene expression level. the identification of lt-responsive genes is therefore required to understand the molecular basis of ca. cold-induced genes and their products have been isolated and characterized in many species. in wheat and other cereals, the expression of several genes during cold acclimation was found to be positively correlated with the capacity of each genotype and tissue to develop ft  <cit> . furthermore, abiotic stresses that have a dehydrative component  share some responses. it is therefore expected that, in addition to the genes regulated specifically by each stress, some genes will be regulated by multiple stresses. the availability of wheat genotypes with varying degree of ft makes this species an excellent model to study freezing tolerance and other abiotic stresses. the identification of new genes involved in the cold response will provide invaluable tools to further our understanding of the metabolic pathways of cold acclimation and the acquisition of superior freezing tolerance of hardy genotypes.

major genomics initiatives have generated valuable data for the elucidation of the expressed portion of the genomes of higher plants. the genome sequencing of arabidopsis thaliana was completed in  <dig>  <cit>  while the finished sequence for rice was recently published  <cit> . the relatively small genome size of these model organisms was a key element in their selection as the first plant genomes to be sequenced with extensive coverage. on the other hand, the allohexaploid wheat genome is one of the largest among crop species with a haploid size of  <dig>  billion bp  <cit> , which is  <dig> and  <dig> times larger than arabidopsis and rice respectively  <cit> . the large size, combined with the high percentage  of repetitive non-coding dna, presents a major challenge for comprehensive sequencing of the wheat genome. however, a significant insight into the expressed portion of the wheat genome can be gained through large-scale generation and analysis of ests. cdna libraries prepared from different tissues exposed to various stress conditions and developmental stages are valuable tools to obtain the expressed and stress-regulated portion of the genome. this approach was used in several species such as oat  <cit> , barley  <cit> , tomato  <cit>  and poplar  <cit> . the sequencing of cdnas gives direct information on the mature transcripts for the coding portion of the genome that can subsequently be used for gene identification and functional studies. the availability of wheat genomics data in the public datasets has grown rapidly through major initiatives  <cit> . however, additional ests are needed to complete the identification of the expressed genes under different growth conditions and from different genotypes. this will contribute to a more complete representation of the genome through identification of new genes and extension of contigs for the majority of genes that have incomplete sequence coverage. towards this goal, the functional genomics of abiotic stress  program initiated an est sequencing effort directed toward the study of abiotic stress, with an emphasis on cold acclimation  <cit> . to increase gene diversity in the est population and increase the probability of identifying those associated with freezing tolerance, different cdna libraries were prepared from winter wheat tissues exposed for various times to low temperature, together with select libraries derived from tissues exposed to other stresses or at different developmental stages. in this report, we describe the generation of  <dig>  high quality ests from wheat stress-associated cdna libraries. in order to perform the assembly and digital expression analyses, these ests were supplemented with wheat ests for which sequence quality data was available. these include the nsf  <cit>  and dupont datasets, which will be referred to as the 'nsf-dupont' dataset in this report. digital expression analyses identified a large number of genes that were associated with cold acclimation and other stresses. expression analyses and functional classification provided important information about the different metabolic and regulatory pathways that are possibly associated with cellular adjustment to environmental stresses. these new est resources are an important addition to publicly available resources especially in relation to the study of abiotic stresses in cereals.

RESULTS
the large-scale fgas wheat est sequencing project was undertaken to identify new genes associated with abiotic stress and to provide physical resources for functional studies. we have developed a unique wheat est resource from eleven cdna libraries prepared from tissues at different developmental stages and exposed to different stress conditions . the est collections from fgas, nsf and dupont were analyzed and classified into functional categories.

assembly and identification of new wheat genes
we have used est sequences and quality values from the corresponding tracefiles of large datasets  to assemble  <dig>  different wheat sequences . among these datasets, the fgas project produced  <dig>  unique sequences  indicating that the fgas ests encompass a large subset of unique transcripts. these sequences were analyzed using blastn on the db_est database and filtered for wheat sequences with two different cut-off e-values to identify new wheat genes. with an e- <dig> cut-off value, we found that  <dig>  genes had no homologous wheat ests . after filtering these genes against the wheat protein database with tblastx, there were still  <dig>  proteins showing no homology to known proteins. with an e- <dig> cut-off,  <dig>  genes had no homologs in wheat. after filtering these against the protein database,  <dig>  non-homologous sequences remained. these unique wheat sequences were then blasted against arabidopsis, rice, and finally nr db est . in arabidopsis, we found that only  <dig> of the remaining fgas wheat sequences had a strong  similarity using blastn while  <dig> of the remaining sequences had homologs when filtered with the arabidopsis protein database . a similar trend was found in arabidopsis using a lower sequence similarity cut-off . the remaining unique gene count was reduced by several hundred after comparing protein homologs in rice  demonstrating that several genes common between rice and wheat are absent in arabidopsis . the remaining unique ests were blasted against the non redundant database to determine whether homologs were present in other organisms. at an e- <dig>  there were  <dig> ests showing no significant similarity to known domains in genes from other species. it is possible that some of these genes derive from unknown micro-organisms contaminating the plant tissues, and/or from residual genomic dna in the rna samples used for cdna synthesis. however, the majority of these sequences have orfs encoding proteins larger than  <dig> amino acids, with an average predicted protein size of over  <dig> amino acids. this suggests that the unidentified genes do represent novel wheat genes.

the institute for genomic research  wheat gene index  shows that only  <dig>  of the  <dig>  wheat contigs  were successfully allocated a known molecular function using gene ontology, compared to the classification done for arabidopsis in which  <dig>  of the  <dig>  contigs  have a known molecular function. therefore, prior to this report, arabidopsis had almost twice as many genes annotated with at least one defined function compared to wheat . the classification of the complete dataset  allowed the tentative annotation of  <dig> % of the genes. as expected, most of the annotated sequences were in contigs  while the percentage of annotated singletons/singlets was much lower . we have thus been able to functionally annotate  <dig>  different sequences, an almost 5-fold increase in annotated sequences compared to tigr. this is a significant contribution that broadens the available wheat public annotation dataset for downstream functional studies. these results demonstrate that a large number of wheat genes are poorly characterized and stress the fact that major efforts in functional analyses are needed.

enrichment for stress-regulated genes in the fgas dataset
comparative analysis of the fgas ests and nsf-dupont ests based on gene ontology  showed that several go classes are more represented in fgas than in the nsf-dupont dataset . when general go classes are compared , no major differences in the number of ests were found. similarly, most goslim classes showed less than 25% difference between the two datasets. however, gos  <dig> and  <dig>  had a lower representation while gos  <dig> to  <dig>  were more abundant in the fgas dataset .

to identify genes that are differentially represented between the two datasets, the relative abundance of ests was analyzed and referred to as digital expression analysis. for each contig, the number of ests from fgas  was divided by the number of ests from nsf-dupont and the ratio was normalized to correct for the difference in size between the two datasets . thus, after normalization, the relative expression level for a contig having  <dig> est from each dataset would result in a relative expression of  <dig> x in fgas compared to nsf-dupont . since the ssh technique aims to enrich differentially expressed cdnas, the ests derived from the ssh libraries were analysed separately to avoid a bias in the number of ests in a contig, which could invalidate the digital expression analysis approach.

the data indicated that over 75% of the contigs have ratios that vary by less than two-fold, suggesting a similar representation of ests between the fgas  and the nsf-dupont datasets. the remaining 25% of contigs showed more than two-fold difference in abundance  in the fgas dataset. when 5- and 10-fold ratios are used as cut-off,  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the contigs are retained respectively. most of the differences are due to genes that are over-represented in the fgas dataset . with a higher cut-off , only  <dig> contigs are over expressed and  <dig> are under-expressed. an analysis of these highly over-represented contigs showed that a good proportion  of these show homology to genes that were previously reported to be over-expressed under stress . this high percentage of positive identification suggests that the nsf-dupont collection was a good reference dataset for digital expression analysis of the fgas dataset.

our digital expression analysis relies on the presence of ests from both datasets in a same contig . we have also identified  <dig> contigs that contained at least  <dig> ests from fgas but none from the nsf-dupont dataset . table  <dig> lists the  <dig> genes that contain at least  <dig> ests unique to fgas, and many of these are similar to genes that have previously been reported to be over-expressed under stress. although the unique contigs in the fgas dataset may represent transcripts that are specific to the cultivar used in our study, there is a possibility that they may represent novel genes that are induced by environmental stress.

in arabidopsis, microarray experiments have shown that about 10% of the genes are over-or under-expressed by at least two-fold upon exposure to cold acclimation conditions  <cit> . based on our previous northern and microarray analyses, we have estimated that the same proportion of wheat genes is cold-regulated . if we consider a conservative estimate of  <dig>  wheat genes , this means that around  <dig>  genes would be cold-regulated. a similar number of genes was identified when we used a 5-fold cut-off differential expression  and added the  <dig> contigs having at least  <dig> ests that are unique to the fgas dataset. using these criteria, our analyses resulted in a total of  <dig>  contigs or  <dig> % of the contigs generated in our assembly . considering that 95% of the est sequences were derived from libraries constructed from cold-acclimated plants, these genes represent candidate genes likely regulated by low temperature and other stresses. however, many of these may be differentially expressed as a consequence of the temperature shift and metabolic adjustment and might not be involved in conferring or regulating increased tolerance to stress. it would be of interest to analyse these  <dig>  genes to identify those relevant to lt tolerance and other stresses in cereals. to verify the conservation of the stress response between wheat and arabidopsis, we first identified the arabidopsis proteins having homology  to the  <dig>  wheat proteins identified in our study, using the tair protein database. the homology search resulted in the identification of  <dig>  arabidopsis proteins. most of the genes encoding these proteins are represented on the affymetrix and mwg microarrays. this allowed us to obtain their expression profiles from the available public data  <cit> . our analysis indicated that  <dig> genes are cold-regulated and  <dig> are drought-regulated . there are  <dig> genes regulated by both stresses, with a total of  <dig> different arabidopsis genes that are stress-regulated. therefore, there are over 44% of the  <dig>  putative wheat stress-regulated genes that have a homolog regulated by stress in arabidopsis, suggesting overlapping responses between the two species.

as a complementary approach to identifying new wheat genes that may be differentially expressed, different ssh libraries were produced to identify genes over-expressed after brief  or long  periods of cold acclimation. different cultivars that may help to identify other components of freezing tolerance such as pathogen resistance to snow molds were used for these analyses. a total of  <dig>  contigs containing  <dig>  ssh ests were obtained with  <dig>  contigs  tentatively annotated. unique contigs from ssh libraries are potentially a good source to mine for new genes associated with cold acclimation. overall,  <dig> contigs unique to the ssh libraries  were identified, among which  <dig> were annotated . we found that  <dig> of the  <dig> annotated ssh contigs  have corresponding genes  that are over-expressed more than 5-fold in the differentially-expressed fgas contigs. these results suggest that unique ssh contigs contain candidate genes that could be involved in abiotic stress tolerance.

metabolic pathways associated with differentially expressed genes
go slim annotation was used to subdivide the  <dig>  stress-regulated genes into function categories to gain insight into their putative role during cold acclimation and abiotic stresses. the results show that a large proportion of these contigs were annotated under a limited number of go classes . over  <dig> % of the contigs were grouped into  <dig> go categories while  <dig> % of the contigs were designated "no gene ontology" and  <dig> % were classified as "hypothetical protein", a term used to designate open reading frames predicted from the arabidopsis or rice genomic dna. the remaining contigs with other go categories were grouped together in one category .

a plethora of physiological and metabolic adjustments occur during cold acclimation and in response to other stresses. the regulation of genes involved in temperature, drought and salt stresses is known to reflect the cross-talk between different signalling pathways  <cit> . however, few studies have identified multiple genes that are stress-regulated and that belong to a same metabolic pathway. our analyses enabled us to position several genes in their respective metabolic pathway, suggesting that these pathways are involved in stress responses. since it is beyond the scope of this report to cover all possible pathways involved, we highlight some of the key elements that likely contribute to the stress response and tolerance. unless specifically indicated, all enzymes discussed are encoded by transcripts that are over-represented by at least 5-fold in the fgas dataset.

amino acid metabolism
genes encoding proteins involved in primary metabolism pathways have been identified in the contigs with an over-representation of fgas ests and cover several aspects of plant metabolic adjustments. amino acid metabolism and the tca cycle are the major pathways that generate precursors for various biological molecules. ests encoding several enzymes that are involved in the synthesis of arginine, cysteine, lysine, methionine, serine, phenylalanine, proline and tryptophan are over-represented by more than 5-fold. these amino acids are precursors for the synthesis of several specialized metabolites. two contigs encode the enzyme delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase that is involved in proline biosynthesis, a metabolite that was found to increase during cold acclimation and drought stress  <cit> . similarly, two contigs encode glutamate decarboxylase , which is involved in the synthesis of gamma-aminobutyric acid , a non protein amino acid known to accumulate during cold acclimation and proposed to function in oxidative stress tolerance  <cit> . several contigs encode enzymes involved in the metabolism of cysteine, an important precursor of glutathione involved in the modulation of oxidative stress. these include two different cysteine synthases and a putative o-acetylserine  synthase . over-expression of different isoforms of oastl can increase thiol content in different transgenic plants and increase tolerance to abiotic stress such as exposure to elevated levels of cadmium  <cit> .

lipid metabolism
ests encoding different putative lipases and other proteins involved in lipid oxidation  are over-represented in the fgas dataset while the acyl-carrier protein iii involved in lipid synthesis is under-represented. these results suggest that lipid degradation occurs concomitantly with a reduction in the synthesis of short chain lipids. on the other hand, ests encoding enzymes involved in the synthesis of specialized lipids such as atp citrate lyase α-subunit and the long chain fatty acid enzyme acetyl-coa carboxylase are more abundant among fgas ests. ests corresponding to several enzymes involved in sterol metabolism are also over-represented, suggesting major lipid modifications in membranes during cold acclimation. ests encoding three enzymes involved in the alternate pathway of isopentenyl pyrophosphate and squalene synthesis , three key enzymes of the sterol pathways , and 24-methylenelophenol methyltransferase) , and other enzymes such as sterol 4-alpha-methyl-oxidase, which can add to the variety of sterols produced, are also over-represented. the putative over-expression of several enzymes in the sterol pathway supports the previous observation of an increased production of membrane sterols  <cit> . these authors showed that the concentration of membrane sterols increases during cold acclimation and that this effect is more prominent in tolerant rye cultivars. interestingly, sitosterol increases while campesterol decreases during acclimation, suggesting that the c <dig> methyltransferase that is putatively over-expressed in the fgas dataset may be the smt- <dig> transferase that diverts the methylenelophenol into the sitosterol pathway . a search through the protein database has shown that the c <dig> methyltransferase has a much greater homology with smt <dig>  than with smt <dig>  supporting that the c <dig> methyltransferase is smt <dig>  the over-representation of fgas ests in two contigs encoding stearoyl-acyl-carrier protein desaturase and two contigs encoding cdp-diacylglycerol synthase suggests that other important lipid modifying activities also occur in response to cold acclimation. stearoyl-acyl-carrier protein desaturase is involved in the desaturation of existing lipids to form double bonds rendering the lipids more fluid at low temperature. this is an important adjustment associated with membrane stability at low temperature  <cit> . the over-expression of cdp-diacylglycerol synthase was previously shown to favour the synthesis of phosphatidylinositol  <cit> . in addition, one contig encodes a phosphoethanolamine n-methyltransferase. this enzyme is induced by low temperature and catalyzes the three sequential methylation steps to form phosphocholine, a key precursor of phosphatidylcholine and glycinebetaine in plants – metabolites known to be important in conferring tolerance to osmotic stresses such as low temperature, drought and salinity  <cit> .

secondary metabolism
several contigs encode key enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites such as phenylalanine ammonia lyase, cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase, and caffeoyl-coa o-methyltransferase. several enzymes are involved in the synthesis of methionine and its derivatives. the digital expression data suggest that the s-adenosylmethionine  cycle becomes more active during stress since contigs encoding three major enzymes of the cycle  are over-represented in fgas. this pathway can provide sam, the precursor molecule needed for nicotianamine biosynthesis. four different contigs encoding nicotianamine synthase or nicotianamine aminotransferase are over-represented in fgas. these enzymes are involved in nicotianamine and phytosiderophores synthesis and were found to be induced under iron deficiency  <cit> . the sam cycle also provides the one carbon precursor for the methylation steps required for methyltransferase activities. at least  <dig> different contigs encoding methyltransferases contain ests that are over-represented in fgas.

transport activity
during cold acclimation, the cell mobilizes several transport systems to adapt to cold conditions. one of the major effects of extracellular freezing is the reduced apoplastic water pressure and the rapid flow of water from the intracellular compartment to the apoplasm. some of the consequences include the need for water and ion regulation as well as protection against dehydration. two different contigs encoding aquaporins are highly abundant in fgas . these proteins likely play an important role in the regulation of the outward water flow. similarly, several contigs associated with transport of ions or other small solutes are more highly represented, such as anion/sugar transporters, major facilitator superfamily antiporters, mate efflux family transporters, nitrate transporters, cation exchangers, calcium and zinc transporters, betaine/proline transporters, and amino acid transporters. these different transporters are potential regulators controlling the flow of ions and other solutes that become more concentrated as water is drawn out of the cell during freezing. an interesting transporter activity is the phosphatidylinositol-phosphatidylcholine transfer protein which can contribute to the turnover of these lipids in the membrane. this pathway is involved in the accumulation of the compatible solute betaine that was reported to increase tolerance to drought and freezing  <cit> . another mechanism involved in cell protection against higher ionic content include the replacement of water with compatible solutes such glycerol, glucose, sorbitol, proline and betaine. ests encoding hydroquinone glucosyltransferase, an interesting enzyme responsible for the synthesis of arbutin, are over-represented over 7-fold in the fgas dataset. glycosylated hydroquinone is very abundant in freezing and desiccation tolerant plants. it was suggested to accumulate up to  <dig> mm in the resurrection plant myrothamnus flabellifolia and to increase membrane stability of artificial liposomes and thylakoids, possibly through the insertion of the phenol moiety in the phospholipid bilayer  <cit> . these authors showed that the lipid membrane composition is an important element for the cryoprotective effect of arbutin. in support of this observation, several contigs with an over-representation of fgas ests encoding transporters of compatible solutes and lipid modifying enzymes were identified.

proteins involved in cryoprotection
one strategy that hardy plants such as wheat use to tolerate subzero temperatures is the accumulation of freezing tolerance associated proteins such as antifreeze proteins  and dehydrins  <cit> . afps exhibit two related activities in vitro. the first is to increase the difference between the freezing and melting temperatures of aqueous solutions, a property known as thermal hysteresis. the second is ice recrystallization inhibition , where the growth of large ice crystals is inhibited, thus reducing the possibility of physical damage within frozen tissues  <cit> . in winter wheat and rye, several afps similar to pathogenesis-related proteins such as chitinases, glucanases, thaumatins and ice recrystallization inhibition proteins were identified  <cit> . many contigs encoding chitinases, β- <dig> -glucanases and thaumatin-like proteins contain ests that are over-represented in fgas. hincha et al.  <cit>  reported that different cryoprotective proteins were able to protect thylakoids from freezing injury in vitro. wheat ice recrystallization inhibition proteins are partly homologous to, and were annotated as, phytosulfokine receptors and were present in several contigs containing ests over-expressed in fgas.

the dehydrins are hydrophilic proteins resistant to heat denaturation composed largely of repeated amino acid sequence motifs. they possess regions capable of forming an amphipathic α-helix. these properties may enable them to protect cells against freezing damage by stabilizing proteins and membranes during conditions of dehydration  <cit> . the most studied dehydrins are the wcs <dig> family, the wcor <dig> and the chloroplastic wcs <dig> dehydrins. genes encoding these proteins are highly over-represented in the fgas dataset .

photosynthesis
during cold acclimation, the chloroplast continues to receive as much light as at normal temperature but its thermal biochemical reactions are reduced. this results in an excess of light energy whereby electrons accumulate mostly in qa  <cit> . the reduced capacity to transfer electrons through psii requires metabolic adjustments on a short term basis through redox balance, and communication between the chloroplast and the nucleus to modify gene expression for adaptation on a longer term basis. freezing tolerant plants were previously shown to better cope with photoinhibition than less tolerant cultivars  <cit> . although the number of genes classified under the go "thylakoids" is only  <dig>  the genes identified indicate that putative changes in expression occur for genes encoding components of both the photosystem i  and the photosystem ii . several studies have reported changes in psii during cold acclimation  <cit> , the d <dig> and d <dig> proteins were shown to be sensitive to excess energy and to turn over more rapidly at low temperature and high light  <cit> . ests encoding the d <dig> protein are over-expressed by  <dig> -fold in fgas suggesting that the psii adapts to low temperature conditions. on the other hand, the transcript encoding psii z is less represented in fgas. a reduced amount of this protein may lead to a reduction in active antennas and allow a reduction in electron flow towards the psii. ests encoding two other proteins of the psii complex are over-represented . these proteins belong to the same psbp protein family which has  <dig> members in arabidopsis. recent results using rnai have shown that this lumen protein is both essential and quantitatively related to psii efficiency and stability. this suggests that their over-expression could improve electron flow through psii  <cit> . another limiting factor in the electron flow is the availability of co <dig>  several contigs with over-represented ests in the fgas dataset encode carbonic anhydrase . this enzyme is known in c <dig> plants to concentrate co <dig> at its site of fixation. in the c <dig> plant wheat, this enzyme was previously shown to be modulated by nitrogen deficiency to maintain optimal co <dig> concentrations  <cit> . the over-expression of this enzyme could thus help to efficiently use the co <dig> and available light energy at low temperature. failure to dissipate excess light energy could lead to oxidative stress, which needs to be controlled. a contig encoding a putative serine hydroxymethyltransferase is over-represented in the fgas dataset. hydroxymethyltransferases play a critical role in controlling the cell damage caused by abiotic stresses such as high light and salt, supporting the notion that photorespiration forms part of the dissipatory mechanisms of plants to minimize production of reactive oxygen species  in the chloroplast and to mitigate oxidative damage  <cit> .

very few studies have documented the modulation of psi under stress conditions. the excess light or low temperature can decrease stromal nadp/nadph ratio and it has been proposed that the cytochrome b6f complex can be regulated by the stromal redox potential possibly via a thioredoxin mediated mechanism . the psi components are largely integrated and composed of many subunits making it energetically expensive for the cell to produce. it has been suggested that cells might modulate psi activity by varying the amount of the small and mobile plastocyanin protein carrying the reducing power  <cit> . the over-representation of ests encoding this protein in fgas  suggests that this psi electron relay component becomes more active during cold acclimation and may be important in relieving the pressure caused by electrons accumulating in qb. the mobile plastocyanin molecule is a limiting factor in the electron transfer from psii to psi. the increased expression of plastocyanin may result in an increased activity of psi under low temperature and may help freezing tolerant plants maintain their energy balance compared to less tolerant plants. we have previously shown that several proteins involved in improving photosynthesis, including plastocyanin, are expressed at low levels under low excitation pressure  but markedly accumulate when transferred to 5°c under the same light regime  <cit> . a mutation in the psi-e subunit was also shown to have a great impact on psii as it becomes easily affected by photoinhibition even under low light  <cit> . similarly mutants in the psi-n subunit, which participates in the docking of pc, are impaired in psi activity  <cit> . the over-representation of ests encoding the psi-e and psi-n subunits in the fgas dataset could thus provide an integrated response to reduce photoinhibition. in order to maintain a proper nadp/nadph ratio, the malate valve could be activated to transfer excess reducing power to the cytoplasm  <cit> . ests encoding two psi components are less abundant in fgas. one of these is a subunit of the chloroplastic nadh dehydrogenase equivalent to the mitochondrial enzyme. interestingly, the fro <dig> gene was recently shown to encode the mitochondrial nadh dehydrogenase counterpart which plays a role in controlling ros and the ability of arabidopsis to respond to low temperature  <cit> . an excess of ros in mitochondria was proposed to affect the induction of cbf transcription factors and cold acclimation. the chloroplastic nadh dehydrogenase may also affect the ability to induce cbf if the ros that accumulate during photoinhibition at low temperature are not detoxified. tolerant plants may adapt their photosystems to avoid the accumulation of ros in chloroplasts, thus allowing a strong cbf response and a stable induction of downstream cold-regulated genes. this hypothesis may explain why tolerant plants are able to maintain a strong expression of several freezing tolerance-associated genes while less tolerant plants show transient, reduced expression of these genes at low temperature  <cit> .

signalling cascades and transcription factors
among the contigs with an over-representation in fgas ests, we identified several proteins involved in the synthesis or perception of different hormones. these include enzymes of the ethylene, auxin and jasmonic acid metabolism; brassinosteroid lrr receptor, receptor-like kinases clavata <dig> and perk <dig>  and phytosulfokine receptor. contigs encoding several proteins involved in signalling cascades were also found such as calcium binding proteins, diacylglycerol kinase, lipid phosphate phosphatase- <dig>  inositol 1-monophosphatase, gtp-binding proteins, map kinases and mapkk, serine/threonine kinase, cipk-like protein- <dig>  histidine kinase- <dig>  and protein phosphatases 2a and 2c.

the potentially increased activity of the various signalling pathways is associated with a differential expression of many families of transcription factors . the results show that at least  <dig> contigs contain ests encoding tf that are over- or under-represented more than two-fold in the fgas dataset. using a more stringent cut-off excludes some tf that may not be strongly regulated, but should also reduce the number of false positives. with a 5-fold cut-off,  <dig> tf were identified, with  <dig> of them being contigs unique to fgas. the most highly represented tf families are the zinc fingers, wrky, ap <dig>  myb and nac. several members of these families were previously identified as being responsive to various stresses. the most studied members are those of the ap <dig> family, in particular the cbf/dreb subfamily. cbf members are involved in the cold/drought responses  <cit> . we have identified  <dig> different contigs, with a 5-fold over-representation in the fgas dataset, that contain cbf-like binding factors and  <dig> unique fgas contigs containing at least  <dig> ests . expression profiling using qrt-pcr has confirmed that transcripts corresponding to  <dig> of the  <dig> contigs are over-expressed at specific time points during cold acclimation . expression of the cbf genes in arabidopsis was shown to be regulated by members of the bhlh family  <cit> . we have identified  <dig> contigs encoding bhlh members that are over-represented by two-fold, with two of them being over-represented more than 5-fold . however, the genes encoding the bhlh ice proteins in arabidopsis are not cold-induced. although the expression pattern with regards to cold inducibility of the ice genes could be different between wheat and arabidopsis, the isolation of the full length genes, phylogenetic analysis and expression studies are required to determine if any of the over-represented bhlh encode ice homologs. in addition to the cbfs and bhlh families, several other tf families may be part of other stress components associated with abiotic stress such as drought, salinity, oxidative, etc. interestingly, several genes that control flowering have also been identified . these genes are most likely associated with the vernalization response in wheat as was recently shown for tavrt <dig> and tavrt <dig>  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the large number of ests annotated from fgas and nsf-dupont datasets represents an important resource for the wheat community. digital expression analyses of these datasets provide an overview of metabolic changes and specific pathways that are regulated under stress conditions in wheat and other cereals. the information generated will help construct network models of abiotic stress responses that will facilitate computational predictions and direct future experimental work like the development of models such as the "metabolic pathways of the diseased potato"  <cit>  or mapman for the analysis of gene expression data in arabidopsis  <cit> . the results could facilitate the understanding of cellular mechanisms involving groups of gene products that act in coordination in response to environmental stimuli.

