BACKGROUND
in the past decades, legumes have been established as important model systems to discover the molecular and physiological background of the root nodule and arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis. analysis of gene function during root endosymbioses requires reverse genetics approaches based on expression perturbation experiments. in the past, rna interference  or virus induced gene silencing  has been widely applied to produce plant knock-down mutants. both systems exploit endogenous posttranscriptional gene silencing  pathways of eukaryotes  <cit> .

an efficient vigs system has not yet been established for m. truncatula, hence rnai approaches have been widely applied to elucidate gene functions in agrobacterium rhizogenes transformed roots. however, previous knock-down approaches in this system using rnai constructs often did not lead to consistent results due off-target effects of rnai approaches. rnai is based on a hairpin construct with short inverted sequence fragments of the gene of interest separated by an intron and is processed via the ir-ptgs pathway. the expressed rna folds into a perfect matched double strand and is processed by dcl <dig> to short interfering rnas . however, in some cases the approach is limited by inefficient knock down of the target gene in legumes due to unknown causes  <cit> . additionally, the rnai approach leads to heterogeneous accumulation of sirna products, derived from the expressed hairpin which can lead to unspecific downregulation of related genes , especially in large gene families with high sequence similarity  <cit> . also, a mechanism called transitivity leads to an amplification and spreading of the sirna species, yielding secondary sirnas independent of the primary sirna signal  <cit> . these secondary sirnas cover sequence information outside of the designed rnai construct, thus enhancing off-target effects. there is precedent for artificial mirnas to be more specific as rnai constructs  <cit> , here we suggest artificial mirnas as an alternative tool for gene knock down approaches. however, we do not provide a direct comparison of both approaches with regard to efficiency and target specificity.

analyzing gene functions by gene knock out approaches in a. rhizogenes transformed root systems is also hampered by a high variability within the experimental system with independent transformation events being present in a root system after a. rhizogenes transformation. hence, to facilitate investigating gene functions in non-uniformly transformed root systems, a strong expression strength of the gene knock down constructs is required. however, the widely applied 35s promoter for driving knock down constructs mediates a rather weak expression strength in m. truncatula roots  <cit> , with particularly weak expression in arbuscule-containing cells of mycorrhizal roots  <cit> . we therefore developed a vector series with three different promoters for knock down construct expression, either the 35s promoter or the ubiquitin  <dig> promoter of arabidopsis thaliana or the mtpt <dig> promoter of m. truncatula. the latter is mediating a particular strong expression in arbuscule-containing cells  <cit> .

arbuscules are intracellular fungal structures formed in the plant’s inner cortical cell layers. the development of arbuscules requires a profound reprogramming of the root cell  <cit> , and a wide number of genes which are specifically expressed in arbuscule containing cells have been identified  <cit> . however, an analysis of the precise role of these genes during arbuscule development and function is often hampered by the previously mentioned inconveniences regarding expression perturbation experiments in mycorrhizal m. truncatula roots.

here we demonstrate that mtr-mir159b is effectively processed from its precursor molecule and thus represents a highly suitable backbone for the expression of amirs in m. truncatula. efficient target gene knock-down could be validated by an amir against a visible marker in an heterologous system and in m. truncatula. additionally, we used the mtpt <dig> promoter, which mediates a strong expression in mycorrhizal roots  <cit>  for driving the expression of an amir against a previously identified putative transcription factor . knock-down of mterf <dig> expression resulted in reduced expression of levels of rhizophagus irregularis genes indicating reduced mycorrhizal colonization. moreover, mterf <dig> seemed to be required for arbuscule development, since only truncated, non-fully branched arbuscules were present in roots with amir-silenced mterf <dig> expression.

RESULTS
mir159b represents a suitable backbone for artificial microrna  expression in m. truncatula
expression of artificial mirnas requires a mirna backbone sequence, of which the mature mirna is replaced by an artificial mirna , which binds and cleaves its target sequence. one prerequisite for amir constructs is that star sequences and other small rnas deriving from these constructs do not accumulate, and therefore could not regulate other off-targets. for correct processing of the amir, the endogenous mirna backbone must have a non-canonical loop-to-base processing type, with the first cleavage step, which seems to be most critical for mirna processing occurring in the top region of the precursor independent of the mirna sequence itself  <cit> . it is assumed that a clear physical separation of the first cleavage position and the mirna sequence provides a high flexibility for manipulation of amir sequences  <cit> . a previous study employed the a. thaliana loop-to-base processed mir <dig> as precursor for amir expression in m. truncatula, which led to a significant downregulation of flottilin gene expression in roots  <cit> . however, in order to optimize expression of amirs in m. truncatula, we decided to use an endogenous mirna molecule as precursor. for this purpose, we screened our recent mirna and degradome data of m. truncatula roots  <cit>  for amir backbone sequences and selected mtr-mir159b as a suitable precursor  since it showed all the necessary features mentioned above. the distribution of degradome tags across the mir159b precursor sequence confirmed the loop to base processing for this mir <dig> family member in m. truncatula. the mir159b primary transcript sequence was cloned in the pbluescript ii sk+ vector flanked by restriction sites, which allow a directed cloning of the amir sequences in the appropriate binary vectors for plant transformation 

a vector system for expression perturbation experiments by a. rhizogenes mediated root transformation
for reverse genetic approaches in m. truncatula roots, we developed a vector series , where a constitutively expressed dsred gene allows the easy detection of transformed roots . we have developed expression vectors  and vectors for rnai . both types of vectors are available with three different promoters for expression of the gene or rnai construct, namely the 2×35s promoter, the ubi <dig> promoter of arabidopsis thaliana and the mtpt <dig> promoter of m. truncatula <cit> .

the mir159b-mediated amir expression mediates strong silencing in tobacco leaves
to test the functionality of the mtr-mir159b backbone system, we first generated amirs targeting dsred and tested them in a heterologous system using dsred fluorescence as visible marker for gene silencing. an amir against dsred was designed using the wmd <dig> web microrna designer. constructs were generated using an overlapping pcr strategy as recently described  <cit> , where the mature mir159b sequence was replaced by sequences complementary to a selected region of the target gene. the novel star sequence was designed in a way that the secondary structures of the mir159b backbone were conserved. in a first attempt to test the mtr-mir159b-mediated amir expression, we introduced 35spro::amir-dsred constructs by agroinfiltration in tobacco . since the vector used for transformation  carried a constitutively expressed dsredvisible marker for transformation, we expected that the amir-dsred expression from the same vector will mediate a silencing of the dsred. as a control we transformed the same leaves with an empty pred-35spro vector. as expected, infiltration sites of the empty vector control showed a dsred fluorescence, whereas infiltration of the pred-35spro::amir-dsred construct led to only weak fluorescence . analysis of the mrna levels isolated from the infiltration sites confirmed gene silencing by the amir-dsred. the abundance of dsred mrna was significantly lower in all three amir-infiltrated leaves as compared to the vector controls . also a western blot confirmed the significantly lower accumulation of dsred proteins in amir-infiltrated leaves as compared to the vector controls .

the mir159b backbone driven amir constructs lead to efficient knock-down in m. truncatula roots
next, we tested the functionality of mir159b-mediated amir expression in roots of m. truncatula. stably transformed m. truncatula plants, which constitutively expressed dsred  were used for this purpose. we expected a loss of dsred expression in roots after transformation with amir-dsred construct, which would indicate that the mir159b backbone-driven amir system works in m. truncatula roots. dsred-specific amirs were cloned behind the pore-e <dig> vector  <cit> . as control, empty vectors were used. as expected, root transformation with the amir-dsred construct led to the growth of non-fluorescent roots, whereas in the vector controls all of the roots kept the dsred fluorescence .

mtpt <dig> promoter driven amir silencing of mterf <dig> points to a role of this tf in arbuscule-development
finally we wanted to confirm that amir-mediated gene silencing also works efficiently in arbuscule-containing cells. since the 35s promoter seems to be only weakly active in arbuscule-containing cells  <cit> , we used the mtpt <dig> promoter of m. truncatula <cit> , to enable a strong and specific expression of the amirs. mtpt <dig> encodes for a phosphate transporter, which is strongly induced in arbuscule-containing cells  <cit> .

as a candidate gene for the proof of concept experiment we selected mterf <dig>  a putative member of the ap <dig> -erebp  transcription factor family. mterf <dig>  was found to be strongly and specifically expressed in arbuscule-containing cells . the gene was previously identified by m. truncatula transcription factor  profiling  <cit>  in order to identify tfs, which are induced in mycorrhizal roots . mterf <dig> consists of  <dig> amino acids with two ap <dig> domains in the n-terminal part of the protein. hence, mterf <dig> belongs to the subfamily of ap <dig> genes within the ap2-erebp family. this is in contrast to previously described m. truncatula erf transcription factors required for nod factor signal transduction  <cit> . it is worth mentioning, that the c-terminal part of the mterf <dig> amino acid sequence seems to be only weakly conserved. however, homologous sequences were found in several plant species but not in the non-mycorrhizal plant a. thaliana  supporting the assumption that mterf <dig> might have specific functions in arbuscule development or functioning. to test this assumption, an mterf1-specifc amir was designed as described before and cloned behind the mtpt <dig> promoter of pred. as a control, a mtpt4pro::uida construct was used in the same vector. roots that were transformed with the amir construct, showed a significantly decreased expression of mterf <dig> transcripts . in addition, transcript levels of two diagnostic markers of a functional am symbiosis, mtpt <dig> and r. irregularis elongation factor, were also clearly reduced in roots after amir expression. this indicates that the mtpt <dig> promoter mediated an efficient amir-silencing in arbuscule-containing cells. moreover, reduced mterf <dig> transcripts levels led to reduced expression of genes related to a functional mycorrhizal colonization and thus a lower level of mycorrhizal colonization. we next investigated the arbuscule morphology in vector control and amir-mterf <dig> roots. arbuscule morphology was strongly impaired in amir-mterf <dig> roots with only small, truncated arbuscules being present in these roots . this points to a function of this putative tf in arbuscule development and indicates the mterf <dig> seems to be required for a full maturation of arbuscules.

CONCLUSIONS
the endogenous amir-mediated gene silencing system presented here provides a useful tool to investigate the function of genes involved in root endosymbioses. in addition, we showed that the mtpt <dig> promoter provides a strong expression of amir constructs in mycorrhizal roots. amir-silencing of a putative transcription factor mrerf <dig> indicated a putative function of this gene during arbuscule development, since only defective arbuscules were observed in roots with reduced mterf <dig> expression due to amir-mediated gene silencing.

