BACKGROUND
sexual reproduction is present in nearly all multicellular eukaryotes  <cit> . in all cases, males and females have identical genetic information across most of their genomes, but harbor many distinct sex-specific characteristics. for example, mammalian offspring depend on maternal lactation in their early life. lactation is thus a key factor in mammalian reproduction, and its associated genetic system is expected to be under tight selection. however, genes involved in lactation are also carried by males, who do not express this trait  <cit> . different selection constraints are thus expected on these genes in males and females. such cases can lead to reduced purifying selection on genes that otherwise are expected to be highly conserved  <cit> . in the same manner, many genes that are associated with sexually dimorphic traits might undergo differential selection, which will likely impact reproduction, evolution, and even speciation events  <cit> . human sexual dimorphism has been demonstrated for diverse traits, such as brain anatomy and development , behavior  <cit> , mortality, longevity and morbidity  <cit> , and distribution and metabolism of fat biogenesis  <cit> . physical performance capabilities and pain response have also been shown to differ between men and women . previous work found that about 15% of the expression quantitative trait loci  identified in b-lymphocytes have a sex-biased impact on gene expression  <cit> . that work also reported an overlap of eqtls and genome-wide association study single nucleotide polymorphisms that are associated with sex-biased diseases. moreover, a recent work reported sex-specific genetic architecture in complex traits  <cit> . it is therefore not surprising that men and women differ in their predisposition to many diseases, in disease courses, and in drug response  <cit> . manifestations of all these differences are likely associated with the biology of sexual reproduction.

sexual dimorphism was suggested to evolve due to differential selection on equally expressed traits that become sexually dimorphic and even sex-limited traits  <cit> . this can lead to the accumulation of genes with different effects on males and females. it is thus expected that the vast majority of sexually dimorphic traits are due to differential expression of genes that are present in both sexes  <cit> . while carried by both males and females, such genes are expected to undergo sex-biased selection. this can lead to diverse selection patterns, including sexual antagonism where alleles increasing the fitness in one sex reduce it in the other  <cit> . in population genetics terms, the cost of sexual dimorphisms might be reflected in the elevated frequency of an allele with deleterious effects only on one sex. hence, a mutation causing congenital disease in only one sex can propagate to a high population frequency due to reduced selective constraints or neutrality in half of the population . this might contribute to sex specificity in the susceptibility to common diseases, and provide a partial explanation to the phenomenon of “missing heritability”  <cit> . indeed, differential selection due to sexual dimorphism was suggested and modeled as a mechanism that contributes to the propagation of deleterious mutations in the population  <cit> . we recently showed first evidence that this occurs in humans. we found that deleterious mutations in testis-exclusive genes tended to accumulate more than expected, likely due to reduced selective constraints in women  <cit> . however, a more general demonstration of the association between sex-differential gene expression and sex-differential selection is limited to model organisms  <cit> , mainly due to poor mapping of the sex genetic architecture and the unavailability of large-scale transcriptome sequencing in humans  <cit> .

mapping sex-differential selection and gene expression are fundamental for understanding human evolution and biology, in health and disease. recent advances in dna sequencing technologies with steadily dropping costs have made such aims feasible. the release of the genotype-tissue expression  project data, which currently includes  <dig> tissue samples from  <dig> donors  <cit> , has paved the way for such progress, and preliminary results for sex-differential gene expression are already available  <cit> .

here, by rigorous analysis of rna-sequencing  data from the gtex project  <cit> , we have comprehensively mapped, for the first time, human adults sex-differential gene expression over  <dig> tissues common to both sexes. we then identified highly and moderately sex-specific genes while considering the complete panel of  <dig> tissues. such genes are expected to have general sex-differential roles, thus suggesting differential selection. we thus hypothesized that deleterious mutations in these genes will propagate in the population more than expected by chance, due to the reduced impact of purifying selection  <cit> . by analyzing the signature of selection in these genes, we have found, for the first time, reduced selective constraints and differential rates of accumulation of deleterious mutations in both men and women sex-specific genes. the expression and function of these genes are associated with several tissues and biological pathways, including ones common to both sexes, suggesting a general phenomenon that directly arises from sex-differential selection. moreover, many of these sex-differentially expressed genes were enriched in sexually dimorphic systems. finally, some of these genes suggest new insights into the pathophysiology of several human diseases.

RESULTS
we examined human gene expression from rna-seq data of the gtex project version  <dig> , including  <dig> samples comprising  <dig> tissues from  <dig> men and  <dig> women post-mortem donors aged 20– <dig> years old  <cit> . gene expression data for each tissue was grouped by sex. this created  <dig> sets with  <dig> tissues common to men and women and eight tissues specific to one of the sexes.

sex-differentially expressed genes
sex-differential expression  was tested in each of the  <dig> common tissues by comparing the individual expression values of  <dig>  out of  <dig>  informative protein-coding genes in men versus women. to identify sde we used the noiseqbio method  <cit>  to compare gene expression in the common tissues between men and women. the results were further analyzed to produce a relative sde score for each gene in each common tissue using a metric we devised .

on the background of similar expression in most tissues of most genes , there are over  <dig> protein-coding genes with significant sde in at least one tissue. most of these genes have sde in just one tissue, but about  <dig> have sde in two or more tissues,  <dig> have sde in more than five tissues, and  <dig> have sde in nine or more tissues . as expected, y-linked genes that are normally carried only by men show sde in many tissues. nevertheless,  <dig> out of the  <dig> x-linked sde genes also have widespread sde  in either men or women. we found that three of these x-linked genes are located at pseudo-autosomal region  <dig> , which undergoes relatively frequent recombination between the x and y chromosomes and is known to escape x-inactivation  <cit>  . it is noteworthy that these par <dig> genes have men-biased expression.

the most sex-differentiated tissue, with  <dig> sde protein-coding genes, is the breast mammary glands , as previously noted  <cit> . this suggests major differences in the physiology and sex genetic architecture of this tissue. we found  <dig> genes to be sde in non-mammary gland tissues. the most differentiated of these tissues, with over  <dig> sde genes, are the skeletal muscle, two skin tissues, subcutaneous adipose, anterior cingulate cortex, and heart left ventricle . most gtex tissues  have more than seventy samples . this sample-size variation can affect the number of identified sde genes per tissue. the pearson correlation coefficient between the sample size and the number of identified sde genes is  <dig>  for the  <dig> analyzed tissues common to men and women, and  <dig>  when the mammary glands tissue is excluded. this suggests that sample size contributes to the differences in the number of identified sde genes per tissue, although several tissues noticeably deviate from this trend . besides the number of sde genes, the tissues can also be clustered by the patterns of gene sde scores. this analysis found the two skin, adipose-subcutaneous, and stomach tissues to deviate the most from all other tissues, and that seven of the thirteen brain tissues clustered together   <cit> .fig.  <dig> box plot of  sex-differential expression  scores of all protein-coding genes, and  the number of sde genes in  <dig> tissues common to men and women. most genes are not differentially expressed, and have an sde score of zero. positive and negative values denote women- and men-biased expression, respectively, colored according to their organs or their biological-system affiliation


fig.  <dig> heatmap of sex-differential expression  scores of all genes with at least one sde in non-mammary gland tissue. red denotes women specificity and blue denotes men specificity. the genes are grouped according to principal component analysis clusters . tissues are grouped using hierarchical clustering




clustering genes by their sde patterns across tissues revealed  <dig> groups , nine of which can be described as follows:three groups of men-biased expression in the skin, skeletal muscle, or cingulate cortex tissues .fig.  <dig> examples of various patterns of differential expression. expression of genes tchh, cpz, page <dig>  myh <dig>  nppb, and zfx in  <dig> human tissues. reads per kilobase of transcript per million values of these genes were retrieved from the gtex project data  <cit> . red bars denote women samples and blue bars denote men samples; pink bars denote women reproductive tissues and light blue bars denote men reproductive tissues




five groups of women-biased expression in the liver, heart left ventricle, skin, skeletal muscle, or adipose subcutaneous tissues .

a group of mostly x-linked genes with sde in various tissues, mainly with women-biased expression .




other genes, such as tshb, show tissue-specific expression bias , and a few genes present an alternating pattern of expression biases, such as mucl <dig> that is overexpressed in men skin tissue and in women mammary glands . to detect differential expression in genes with complex modes of expression we used an additional analysis approach, which is more sensitive to such cases. this analysis uncovered  <dig> additional genes in non-mammary gland tissues that were clearly not detected in the first approach . for instance, we found a likely age-related gene overexpression in women brain tissue .

genes found to have sde were analyzed for gene enrichment in different types of terms  terms, pathways  <cit> ). genes with women-biased expression were associated with obesity, muscular diseases, and cardiomyopathy. in addition, overexpressed women-biased genes were enriched in glucose metabolism and adipogenesis pathways . interestingly,  <dig> out of  <dig> genes found to be associated with cardiomyopathy also showed a women overexpression bias in heart tissue, as in the natriuretic peptide b-secreted cardiac hormone gene nppb , supporting previous evidence on its involvement in sex-differential cardiovascular phenotypes  <cit> . genes with men-biased expression also showed enrichment in glucose metabolism pathways, but the gene sets differed, suggesting alternative pathways in glucose metabolism between men and women . a muscle-contraction pathway was also associated with genes overexpressed in men . this might be related to the physiological differences in muscle tissues and in physical features between men and women  <cit> .

identification of sex-specific genes
beyond genes that have sde in one or several tissues are more extreme cases of genes with overall exclusive or high expression-specificity in one sex  <cit> . such sex-specific genes are more likely to have global sex-differential functional roles, and are thus expected to present measurable sex-differential selection that can be reflected by a reduction in purifying selection  <cit> . a gene was considered sex specific if its maximal expression value in one sex was significantly higher from its expression values in all tissues of the other sex. in addition, genes were considered as non-sde if their maximal expression values in men and women differed by no more than 10% . we identified  <dig> sex-specific and moderately sex-specific genes. of these genes,  <dig>  were men-specific and overexpressed in the testis . aside from these  <dig> genes, we found  <dig> women-specific and  <dig> moderately women-specific genes, and  <dig> non-testis men-specific and  <dig> moderately men-specific genes . over  <dig> genes were identified as non-sde .fig.  <dig> heatmap of sex-differential expression  scores of the sex-specific and moderately sex-specific genes, colored as in fig.  <dig>  red, blue, and purple boxes denote major women, men, and combined gene clusters, respectively




the sex-specific and moderately sex-specific genes could be grouped by their expression patterns into six major categories :testis overexpressed genes in men 

prostate overexpressed genes in men 

reproductive system overexpressed genes in women 

skin-specific overexpressed genes in men 

brain tissue overexpressed genes in women

mainly gland and brain tissue overexpressed genes, in men or women .




overall, sex-specific genes are mainly expressed in the reproductive system, emphasizing the notable physiological distinction between men and women. however, scores of genes that are not known to directly associate with reproduction were also found to have sex-specific expression .

selection analysis
we calculated the numbers of observed  and possible deleterious non-synonymous , stop-gain, and synonymous  single-nucleotide variants  for each gene. this allowed us to quantify the selection pressure and its direction by ddns/ds and dstop/ds ratios. similar to dn/ds, these ratios are selection indicators  <cit> . ratios close to  <dig> indicate neutral selection, lower ratios indicate purifying  selection, and significantly higher ratios suggest adaptive  selection .

natural gene variants have different frequencies, with most of the variation due to alleles with rare to low minor allele frequencies   <cit> . however, selection is expected to have only a slight effect on the propagation of very rare variations because they are predominantly new while selection is mainly a long-term process  <cit> . in addition, most phenotypes result from allele and gene interplay, and are thus highly unlikely  for rare variations, as in recessive and epistatic models of inheritance  <cit> . we hence studied the population genetics of the ddns/ds and dstop/ds to find the proper maf threshold in which the selection efficiency is maximal. higher ddns/ds ratios are more abundant for snvs with rare mafs , indicating that negative selection predominantly affects the propagation of deleterious snvs for mafs > <dig> , as previously shown  <cit> . however, dstop/ds ratios are sharply decreased for very rare snvs . we thus further analyzed the effect of selection on dns and stop-gain using maf thresholds of > <dig>  and > <dig> , respectively.fig.  <dig> population genetics of selection pressures. population distribution frequencies  of protein-coding gene  dstop/ds and  ddns/ds values in the  <dig> genome project, phase  <dig>  for different minor allele frequency  ranges . different dstop/ds and ddns/ds ratio ranges are denoted by different colors . ddns deleterious non-synonymous, ds deleterious synonymous, dstop deleterious stop-gain




selection analyses of sex-specific and moderately sex-specific genes
we have previously shown that human testis-exclusive genes are under reduced selection  <cit> . all  <dig> of  <dig> men testis-overexpressed genes identified here that are covered in the  <dig> genomes project were also found to have significantly higher ddns/ds and dstop/ds ratios . this gene set includes  <dig> out of  <dig> of the genes we previously identified as testis exclusive  <cit> . the other  <dig> out of  <dig> genes that we previously found to be specifically expressed in testis tissues might not be identified here because these tissues are not present in the gtex samples. the non-testis men-specific and moderately women-specific genes also had significantly higher ddns/ds ratios . the significantly higher ddns/ds ratio of these men-specific genes did not depend on the presence of the  <dig> keratin genes . women-specific genes too had a significantly higher ddns/ds ratio . moderately women-specific genes had a higher, yet not significant, ddns/ds ratio . however, when comparing the moderately women-specific genes to non sex-specific genes, we found the ddns ratios to be significantly higher for the moderately women-specific genes  but the ds ratios showed no significant change . thus, moderately women-specific genes have significantly reduced selection relative to non sex-specific genes. the same analysis for dstop/ds of men- and women-specific genes also found significantly reduced selection . a significant reduction in purifying selection on sex-specific genes was hence found by independent analyses of selection on dns and stop-gain mutations on diverse sets of sex-specific genes from both women and men, including sets from non-reproduction-related tissues. it is also notable that although reduced selection was observed for both men- and women-specific genes, it was higher in men-specific genes compared to women-specific genes .table  <dig> selection analysis summary

n

ddns deleterious non-synonymous, ds deleterious synonymous, dstop deleterious stop-gain, maf minor allele frequency


fig.  <dig> sex-specific expression and purifying selection. a ddns/ds ratios of different groups of genes  and the mean  and standard deviations  of  <dig>  random control sets with the corresponding number of genes. b inverse correlation between sex specificity and selection efficiency. ddns deleterious non-synonymous, ds deleterious synonymous




discussion
mapping sex-differential gene expression we found more than  <dig> protein-coding genes with significant sde in one tissue or more. the most differentiated tissue was the breast mammary gland, with more than  <dig> genes having significant sde . this remarkable sex-biased gene expression is likely due to the distinct physiologic properties of this tissue between men and women  <cit> . in evolutionary terms, differential selection between the sexes of so many genes that are likely involved in lactation, an essential reproductive trait, might inhibit optimal adaptation of this trait due to its distinct importance in men and women.

almost all sde genes are sex differentiated in one or just a few tissues. thirty-one genes have sde in six or more tissues. besides y-linked genes that have men-specific expression,  <dig> of the other genes are x-linked, with multiple-tissue sde in either men or women. three of these x-linked genes are located in the par <dig> region , which includes genes that undergo recombination with the y chromosome and also escape x-inactivation  <cit> . these par <dig> genes have identical sequences in their x and y copies , but are only classified as x-linked in the gtex data. while this should have led to similar expression in men and women , these genes have men-biased expression in multiple tissues. it is possible that although the copies are identical, the regulation of their expression is distinct between the x and y-chromosomes. besides the par <dig> genes, x-linked sde genes in multiple tissues were found to only have women-biased expression . in several cases we found that such genes have an active paralog on the y chromosome and it is therefore likely that these genes escape x-inactivation and both x alleles are expressed in women, while men have only one x-linked allele.

aside from the mammary glands, the adipose, skeletal muscle, skin, and heart tissues have over a one hundred sde genes. this indicates substantial differences in the physiology, or alternate biological pathways, in these tissues between adult men and women. however, the differences in the number of sde genes per tissue should be carefully assessed because the variability in tissue sample sizes could contribute to the number of sde genes per tissue that we can identify. functional terms analysis of sde genes suggests sexual dimorphism in fat biogenesis, muscle contraction, and cardiomyopathy . tissues with few identified sde genes might have overall similar function between men and women, yet even very few sde genes can have extensive physiological impacts on the organism. for instance, the pituitary gland has only  <dig> identified sde genes , but two of them are the fshb  and tshb  gonadotropin hormones that have wide-ranging roles in human reproduction and metabolism  <cit> . another example is the cyp3a <dig> and cyp2b <dig> cytochrome p <dig> enzymes, which have women-biased expression in liver. cytochrome p <dig>  enzymes are associated with drug metabolism and other essential catabolic processes  <cit> , and might be involved in sex-differential drug responses, as previously reported  <cit> . other identified specific genes might shed new light on the pathophysiology of human diseases. for instance, the nppb gene, which is mainly overexpressed in young women’s hearts , is related to cardiovascular homeostasis  <cit> . variations in this gene are associated with postmenopausal osteoporosis, a health condition mainly affecting women  <cit> . thus, a sexually dimorphic effect of this gene on both phenotypes would be interesting to assess.

to evaluate the association between sde and selection we identified sex-specific genes. such genes are likely to possess different roles between the sexes and therefore are likely to undergo different selection pressures in each sex. the vast majority of sex-specific genes we found are overexpressed in the testis. we previously showed reduced selection and accumulation of damaging mutation in such genes. here we confirmed our previous findings, extended them to many more testis-overexpressed genes, and to sex-specific genes of other men and women tissues. many of the non-testis sex-specific genes are also related to the reproductive system, including genes expressed in tissues common to both sexes, such as gonadotropin hormones expressed in the pituitary . dozens of genes with no direct association to reproduction were also identified as sex specific. many of these genes are expressed in skin tissues, are linked to hairiness , and are likely involved in hair dimorphism in women and men. other non-reproductive genes do not seem to share common features with each other, but are each interesting on their own, for example, the moderately men-specific growth hormone ghrh and the men-specific calcitonin-related polypeptide alpha  . the latter is involved in calcium regulation and functions as a vasodilator  <cit> . the genes fro both seem specific to adult men, although they are related to apparently general biological processes.

analyzing selection on highly and moderately men- and women-specific genes, we found a significant association with reduced selection efficiency, as reflected in their ddns/ds and dstop/ds ratios . the reduced purifying selection efficiency was also correlated with the level of sex specificity. this suggests that higher sex specificity indicates greater distinction in the functional importance for each sex, and reduced selection efficiency. this in turn enables the propagation of damaging alleles through the non-expressing sex lineages. the resulting relatively high population frequencies of these alleles can enhance the prevalence of different human diseases.

although we found reduced selection on both men- and women-specific genes, it is notable that reduced selection was more prevalent in men-specific genes . this supports our previous expectations to find men-specific genes to be under less selection than women-specific genes  <cit> . we suggest that the basis for this could be the practically unlimited numbers of available male gametes compared to the restricted number of available women gametes, as suggested in the bateman principle  <cit> . thus, the ability of women to pass on alleles that cause men-specific lethality will less affect the number of fertile men required to sustain the population, but not vice versa.

in this work we focused on protein-coding genes, because currently there is a broad functional knowledge on these genes and extensive experience in analyzing and quantifying the selection trends these genes have undergone. however, the importance of non-coding rna genes for the regulation and execution of sexual dimorphism was not ignored. for instance, the function of the xist long non-coding rna gene in the sex-specific x-inactivation process is well documented   <cit> . our preliminary observations of the rna gene differential transcriptome support a global role of these genes in the sex genetic architecture . hence, this work and the data it provides might trigger further in-depth studies on the contribution of rna genes to sexual dimorphism.

finally, the vast majority of sex-specific genes we found are associated with the reproductive system. damaging mutations in many reproductive genes can hence propagate to high population frequencies. we suggest that sex-specific genes are major contributors to the high incidence of infertility in men and women.

our results are delimited by the scope of the data in the gtex study. this study includes  <dig> tissues from adult humans. all tissues are composed of several cell types and a few are represented in fewer than  <dig> men or women donors. we believe our statistical and analysis measures excluded most false-positive results. however, the distinct age limits of the samples are acutely pertinent to sexual dimorphism and we do not know how much of our findings can be extended beyond adults. examining comparable data from puberty and during embryonic stages of sex determination will likely augment the genes and phenomena described here.

after submitting this work for review, two studies on sexual dimorphism in human gene expression were made public. kassam et al. examined the sex-specific genetic architecture of autosomal gene expression in whole blood samples from about one thousand men and one thousand women using dna arrays  <cit> . no differences between men and women were found in autosomal genetic control of gene expression. we too did not identify autosomal genes with different expression between men and women in the gtex whole blood tissue . chen et al. posted to biorxiv a non-peer-reviewed preprint analyzing the gtex data for gene expression sexual dimorphism and regulatory networks  <cit> . they report sexually dimorphic patterns of gene expression involving as many as 60% of autosomal genes. similar to our findings, they reported breast, skin, adipose, heart, and skeletal muscle as the most sexually dimorphic tissues. the studies vary in their analyses procedures and emphasize different contexts of sde. these studies are complementary works with different insights.

the mode of gene expression is very complex, depending on the gene’s genomic and chromatin contexts, activity of other genes, expressing tissue, the individual’s developmental stage, and external factors such as exposure to pathogens, diet, and temperature. the expression level of genes thus varies temporally  and across tissues, and is a multidimensional system. this is the key challenge in evaluating differential gene expression between populations.

sde between men and women stems from any deviations of gene activity in place  and time . the overall distribution of gene expression values in two populations could be highly similar, and distinct in only a minor subset of samples that represents a genuine biological difference in time and/or place. for instance, a gene can have similar basal expression in men and women, but upon sex-specific induction its expression will be altered only in one sex. thus, only a small fraction of one population in any one time might differentially express this gene. identifying differential expression is thus a challenging problem. in addition, sex-specific expression is a particular case of sde, in which genes present a global bias in their mode of expression in one sex compared to the other.

we applied several approaches to identify sde and sex-specific expression. besides analyzing differences according to the population variance , we also used an approach that gave weight to a subset of samples that notably deviated from all other samples . the deseq <dig> method was also used to validate the results in selected datasets. in addition we used a new normalized measure for gene differential expression between pairs of sample populations. this differential expression measure takes into account the expression difference between the sexes and the maximal expression of the gene in all tissues, placing the difference in specific tissues in the context of the gene overall mode of expression. this measure is general and can be used in other population-based differential gene expression studies . combining these approaches increased our ability to identify differential expression from various modes of gene expression. accumulation of many more samples from different donors and conditions will uncover the full spectra of gene modes of expression and improve the resolution of differential expression analyses.

CONCLUSIONS
this work comprehensively mapped for the first time the sex-specific genetic architecture of human adults. we identified hundreds of genes with women and men sde, and showed the relation of these genes to several sexually dimorphic features, to human diseases, and to human evolution. our results can facilitate the understanding of diverse biological characteristics in the context of sex. we also demonstrated the increased propagation of deleterious mutations in many men- and women-specific genes and thus the likely contribution of sde genes to the occurrence of common human diseases.

