BACKGROUND
public-health problems caused by the impact of dogs on humans are both direct and indirect, e.g. environmental pollution, contact injuries, and zoonosis  <cit> . dogs are associated with more than  <dig> zoonotic diseases  <cit>  among which, parasitosis and, in particular, helminthosis, can pose serious public-health concerns worldwide  <cit> . many canine gastrointestinal parasites eliminate their dispersion elements  by the faecal route. the quantity of canine faeces deposited on public and private property in cities worldwide is both, a perennial nuisance and an important health issue  <cit> . public sites such as playgrounds, parks, gardens, public squares, sandpits may be an important source of human infection  <cit> .

our aim was to evaluate the extent of both, canine faecal contamination in the city of naples , and the consequent presence of canine parasitic elements , with particular regard to those which are potential agents of zoonosis. a geographical information system  was used in order to plan the study and to display the results  <cit> .

RESULTS
out of the  <dig> studied sub-areas,  <dig>  contained canine faeces. the total number of canine faeces counted was  <dig>  . fig.  <dig> is a choroplethic map showing the total number of faeces counted along each  <dig> km transect of each sub-area.

the results by both the negative binomial and the gaussian linear random effects models were highly consistent, showing a significant contribution of the between neighbourhoods variability . the percentage of variability accounted by neighbourhoods was estimated around 48%  by the gaussian linear random effect model. the results of the negative binomial regression model showed a positive association between the number of canine faeces and the human population density . no improvement in goodness-of-fit was observed by using either male or female human population density instead of the total.

out of the  <dig> sub-areas,  <dig>  were positive for parasitic elements. the estimated association between positivity to parasite elements and the number of canine faeces in the neighbourhoods was not statistically significant .

fig.  <dig> is a point map showing the locations of all the collected faeces. seventy  samples among the total  were positive for parasitic elements. eggs of zoonotic parasites  were found, as well as parasitic elements of non-zoonotic parasites .

the most frequent parasite species found in the examined faecal samples were t. vulpis , followed by i. canis , a. caninum , t. leonina  and t. canis . other zoonotic parasites such as giardia, cryptosporidium and echinococcus were not investigated in this phase of the study.

discussion
the findings of the present study show a widespread distribution of canine faeces throughout the city of naples. however, there was a strong spatial gradient with 48% of the total variability accounted by between neighbourhood variability. the highest significant contamination was found in high density residential neighbourhoods in the south-western part of the city. this can be explained by the fact that these neighbourhoods generally have a large number of dogs  that contaminate the environment with their faeces. the positive association between the number of canine faeces and the human density is important to draw the attention of community administratives to the regular cleaning of the streets in areas of highest human population.

a limitation of the present study is that we included in the analysis simply human density and gender. evaluation of more demographics than these latter, as well as socioeconomic factors, for association with faecal contamination may have uncovered new insights. in addition, other findings that would have been of interest in naples include evaluation of the association of specific environments  with the presence of faeces and possibly risk behaviours of humans . unfortunately, we did not have such data at our disposal.

the parasitological results showed the presence of eggs of t. canis, t. leonina, a. caninum and t. vulpis, as well as oocysts of i. canis, in the faecal samples examined. other studies which were conducted in various locations around the world have produced results similar to ours regarding the presence of parasitic elements in urban areas  <cit> . in italy, the presence of these parasites has been recently reported in a study of canine faecal contamination in five urban areas   <cit> , and in a study conducted in the city of bari  <cit> .

although it is not possible to compare the present study directly with other surveys because of the different sampling and detection methods used, however the percentage of samples positive to parasites reported in the present study  is lower than the values reported in similar studies in argentina   <cit>  as well as in the five italian urban areas aforementioned   <cit>  but higher than those reported in public green areas from bari  <cit> .

most other studies have involved collection of samples per rectum or from dogs at necropsy; however, our aim was to study canine faecal contamination as well as parasitic risk.

it is important to note that we found parasitic elements which are widely known as potential agents of zoonosis, i.e. t. canis and a. caninum.

with respect to t. canis, that human infection occurs in italy is revealed by serological findings; antibodies prevalence ranged between  <dig> % and  <dig> % in healthy people from northern and central italy  <cit> , whereas it was  <dig> % in symptomatic individuals from the urban area of ancona   <cit> .

concerning a. caninum, a noteworthy outbreak of cutaneous larva migrans involving  <dig> people in naples has been recently described by galanti et al.  <cit> ; the infection was contracted via contact with material used for floral arrangements which was probably contaminated with dog faeces.

in addition, the presence of t. vulpis eggs in 10% of the faecal samples examined should not be neglected given the zoonotic role of this whipworm  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the results of the present study, conducted using gis both for planning and sampling and for evaluation and presentation of findings, showed the presence and intensity of canine faecal contamination in the city of naples, and the occurrence of canine parasitic elements, some of which are potential agents of zoonosis. the presence of canine faeces and their contamination with parasitic elements are neither unusual nor unexpected findings in urban areas worldwide . however, our results presented per sub-area of the city are of considerable value to local public health and sanitation administratives to target prevention strategies. it is imperative that dog owners are informed about the potential risk posed by canine faeces in order to better prevent the transmission of zoonotic diseases.

