BACKGROUND
cellular signaling events affect the regulation of transcription factor  activation  <cit> . tfs in turn regulate the expression of specific target genes. microarrays can provide dynamic information on the phenomenological responses induced by this underlying regulatory network. such datasets are either analyzed by approaches explicitly modeling regulatory interactions  <cit>  or are clustered into co-expressed groups of genes, which potentially capture genes under the same regulatory control  <cit> . both approaches have been extended to integrate homogeneous  <cit>  or heterogeneous  <cit>  information potentially leading to more expressive models. in this work we concentrate on the clustering paradigm in order to devise an integrative approach for application to homogeneous datasets.

the majority of dna microarray assays monitor the expression of genes over several time-points or conditions, providing a two-dimensional dataset. such datasets are often processed by full-space clustering approaches, such as k-means clustering  <cit> , hierarchical clustering  <cit> , and spectral clustering  <cit> . in  <dig>  the biclustering approach was introduced by cheng et al.  <cit> . further publications followed  <cit> . these biclustering methods aim at finding subsets of genes and conditions by clustering them simultaneously.

for an integrative analysis of 3d gene-condition-time datasets with standard clustering or biclustering approaches, these datasets have often been projected onto a single gene-condition matrix, with each time-point labeled as a separate condition  <cit> . however, these approaches ignore the time-dependent structure of the dataset, directly comparing expression values from different experiments. hence, the variation within the dataset and the number of potential modules increase. to analyze multiple time-series datasets without disrupting their structure, zhao and zaki  <cit>  recently proposed the tricluster approach. this approach extends the concept of biclustering by an additional dimension. daxin et al.  <cit>  introduced two algorithms extending the idea of a full-space clustering approach. these methods mine for genes that have coherent patterns across both the condition and time dimension, hence coherent modules. such modules impose a strong constraint on the dataset, which has to be equidistant in its time-steps, and onthe biological response trajectory, which has to follow the same shape under every condition.

an important prerequisite for such approaches is the availability and composition of three-dimensional gene-condition-time datasets. such datasets could be composed as an accumulation of different experiments from microarray databases  <cit> , leading to a heterogeneous dataset. here, however, we concentrate on homogeneous datasets generated within one study. for our analysis, we used a multiple sclerosis dataset from homo sapiens and two datasets from arabidopsis thaliana. in  <dig> a 3d dataset from multiple sclerosis patients  <cit>  has been published. the condition dimension consisted of  <dig> multiple sclerosis patients, monitored over  <dig> time-points after ifn-β injection. the arabidopsis thaliana datasets were composed of different abiotic stress stimulus experiments conducted in the root and shoot tissue  <cit> . this dataset has been previously analyzed by methods which cluster each condition separately  <cit>  and by other approaches  <cit>  employing different standard methodologies to provide a comprehensive biological interpretation of the datasets.

in order to mine 3d gene-condition-time datasets with different module definitions we established the edisa , which is based on the iterative signature algorithm  proposed by bergman et al.  <cit>  in  <dig>  we chose to extend the isa algorithm because it was successfully applied to saccharomyces cerevisiae microarray data  <cit> , ranked among the best biclustering algorithms in a comparative study  <cit> , and was flexible enough to be extended by a further dimension and novel module definitions. however, a acknowledged problem of the isa lies in its predilection for strong signals, which are found hundreds of times before weaker signals are, if at all, detected. in cases where genes with a strong signal have been selected into the initial sample, they dominate the average, driving the module towards their signal. lazzeroni and owen  <cit>  address a similar problem by subtracting signals which are contained in the already detected modules. kloster et al.  <cit>  extend the isa, stipulating that the condition vector of each new module be orthogonal to the condition vectors of the previously identified modules.

we borrowed the idea of iteratively refining the genes and conditions contained in a module from the isa. however, the module definitions as well as the pre- and postprocessing steps were redesigned and further module definitions were added. the preprocessing was redesigned to compensate for the predilection of the isa approach for strong signals, whereas the postprocessing was designed to generate a comprehensive set of distinct modules.

RESULTS
approach
the method proposed in this work is the extended dimension iterative signature algorithm . it is an extension of the isa approach  <cit> . while the isa operates on two-dimensional datasets, the edisa is capable of mining gene modules in the three-dimensional datasets used throughout this work.

commonly, two-dimensional gene expression datasets comprise a gene and a condition dimension. thus, to extract modules, biclustering algorithms mine for subsets of genes and conditions within a permutable matrix of expression values. in the case of a three-dimensional dataset, the gene-condition matrix contains time-series of gene expression values, rather than scalar values.

for each module type, a mathematical definition is provided in the methods section, specifying the set of all modules of a particular type contained in a dataset. to mine for all modules, one could, in principle, enumerate all the subsets of genes and conditions. this, however, is intractable as the number of possible subsets grows exponentially with the genes and conditions. nonetheless, we want to mine the datasets for all modules contained therein in reasonable time. to accomplish this, several steps are taken. we introduce a simple probabilistic preprocessing method to sample subsets of genes potentially containing a module. typically, the number of conditions is small compared to the number of genes. thus, we can include all the conditions into the initial module and only sample the genes. starting from initial samples, the edisa algorithm refines sets of genes and conditions at each iteration step. this is achieved by removing genes and conditions not sufficiently aligned with the average expression pattern of the module. the iteration formulas are repeated until convergence is reached. convergence is reached if the module definition is satisfied for all genes and conditions. if a module is found, it is stored and the procedure is repeated, leading to a redundant set of modules. the postprocessing step merges these modules into a non-redundant set. this reduction is accomplished by removing modules that are a subset of a larger module. finally, for every remaining module, two extension steps are applied, ensuring gene and condition maximality. a schematic overview of the edisa algorithm is given in figure  <dig> 

gene modules
our definitions of gene modules are designed to fulfill several conditions, that enable us to capture the modular structure of transcriptional control  <cit> . the modules are non-exhaustive, since some genes might be unaffected under the conducted experiment. they are non-exclusive, since a gene might be regulated by different mechanisms under different conditions. to account for this, it is possible to assign a gene to multiple modules. apart from the general concept of a gene module, each module definition provided here is derived from a particular biological intuition. single response modules associate genes with one condition, uncovering very specific response mechanisms that may help biologists to find marker genes for certain stresses. coherent modules, on the other hand, reveal co-expression under multiple conditions and display a more general response. the genes involved in both the single response and coherent modules are potentially controlled by the same transcription factors. independent response modules allow for a more complex type of modular co-expression, i.e. they hint at the existence of stress responses specific for every condition alongside with a common transcriptional control. the introduction of independent response modules extends previous approaches by a novel module type  <cit> .

parameter settings
in order to obtain correlated biclusters on biological datasets, it is essential to find the threshold which is able to distinguish different signals while separating them from noise. edisa has two main parameters, τg and τc. the τg parameter specifies how well each gene has to be aligned with the average trajectory of the module. respectively, parameter τc specifies how well each condition has to be aligned with the average trajectory of the module. conceptually, τg can be related to the intra-condition variance of different genes under the same regulatory control, and τc can be related to the inter-condition variance of a gene.

a common strategy for adjusting these parameters, which is already known from the isa  <cit> , requires several passes over the data at different resolutions. low values of τ will create modules containing highly correlated gene expression profiles. hence, increasing the value of τ will result in modules containing an increasing number of genes, that display a reduced correlation. here, we adjust parameters τg and τc during the process of extracting the modules. the adjustment is based on a clustering step which separates the signals from noise . in a postprocessing step the obtained modules are matched against their module definition, for which fixed τg and τc parameters are applied.

thus, the user can specify three parameters τg, τc and the number of iterations performed, i.e. the number of samples drawn from the dataset.

testing
in order to evaluate its performance, the edisa was applied to a randomly generated synthetic dataset. therefore, the number of samples was set to  <dig> , τg to  <dig>  and τc to  <dig> , for the noise levels σ ∈ . for the noise level σ =  <dig>  the parameter τg was set to  <dig>  and for the noise level σ =  <dig>  the parameter τg was set to  <dig> . the synthetic dataset contains three overlapping modules and one exclusive module.

apparently, edisa is robust against noise applied to the modules and the variance of the results from separate runs is fairly small , given the probabilistic nature of the method. a direct comparison of the edisa to the methods of zhao and zaki  <cit>  and daxin et al.  <cit>  is not provided here, since such a comparison could only be carried out for coherent modules.

application to biological datasets
edisa has been applied to the biological datasets to mine for coherent and independent response modules. we did not explicitly mine single response modules, since they are conceptually contained in independent response modules . on the biological datasets the edisa was applied with  <dig>  iterations and the threshold settings τg =  <dig>  and τc =  <dig> . an overview of the obtained modules is given in table  <dig> 

number of modules and module types found in each dataset after searching for coherent modules and independent response modules separately. the single response modules are a subset of the independent response modules. in each case  <dig>  edisa iterations were performed with τg =  <dig>  and τc =  <dig> .

to gain insight into the ability of the edisa to produce biological relevant models, we related the obtained modules to their biological process, by mapping the respective genes to the gene ontology   <cit> . this mapping was performed with david  <cit> . david calculates p-values by employing a modified fisher exact test   <cit> , which is based on the hypergeometric distribution. additionally, for the arabidopsis thaliana dataset we performed an enrichment analysis for cis-regulatory motifs.

evaluation on the homo sapiens multiple sclerosis dataset
the homo sapiens multiple sclerosis dataset was obtained from multiple sclerosis patients after injection of  <dig> μg of ifn-β, with genefilters gf <dig> dna arrays. after applying the edisa to this dataset, we received  <dig> independent response modules ,  <dig> coherent modules  but no single response modules  . these modules capture  <dig>  different genes responding to the ifn-β treatment  <cit> . several modules cover responses in which the genes of patients i-l are down-regulated  or up-regulated , respectively. another group of modules exists which captures peaked responses affecting the genes of patients e-h . analysis with the functional gene ontology annotation often showed an enrichment for the regulation of cellular processes such as the regulation of the nucleic acid and protein metabolism. as ifn-β is known to inhibit proliferative activities  <cit> , the functional enrichment of cell growth and/or maintenance is plausible. the extracted modules often reveal striking differences between the patients of this study. for instance the patients a-c are associated with the modules m3co, m4co, and m7co. whereas, the patients i-l are associated with the modules m8co and m9ir-m11ir.

this grouping allows a phenomenological classification of patients with respect to their stress responses. for instance, only patients e-h are associated with module m6co with a functional enrichment of "cell cycle"  and "organic acid metabolism" . whereas, only patients i-l are associated with the module m10ir, with a functional enrichment of "response to stress" . these response characteristics can be related to independent differences in disease history or progression.

single response modules were not observed as could be expected since the external stimulus is identical for all patients. surprisingly, this did not result in a high number of coherent modules. instead, we observed a rather high number of independent response modules.

evaluation on the arabidopsis thaliana abiotic stress dataset
to analyze the response to several abiotic stresses, a comprehensive arabidopsis thaliana transcript expression study was performed for the tissues root and shoot  <cit> . these measurements were performed in parallel on affymetrix ath <dig> microarrays. some time-points in this dataset were not consistently measured under all conditions, and have therefore, been removed when mining for coherent modules.

employing the edisa, we extracted  <dig> independent response modules from the shoot  and  <dig> independent response modules from the root dataset . from  <dig>  genes, which meet the fold-change criteria,  <dig>  were included into at least one module. the modules can be grouped into four components, explaining most of the variation in gene expression. these four components are: the circadian rhythm, the heat shock response, a general stress response and specific stress responses.

circadian rhythm
the circadian rhythm in the shoot tissue is an excellent example of a coherent response, displayed by the modules s10ir and s46ir . the genes of module s46ir are up-regulated at daytime, and the genes of s10ir are down-regulated at daytime. unlike the genes of other modules, the circadian clock genes do not respond to the applied stress, since the pattern of s46ir can also be observed in the control measurement of the shoot tissue. under cold stress, however, this oscillation is disrupted. gould et al.  <cit>  describe how the arabidopsis thaliana circadian clock usually compensates for temperature differences. they cover a temperature range from  <dig> to 27°, whereas a cold stress of 4° was applied here. ramos et al.  <cit>  discovered that two chestnut proteins , which are homologous to two proteins of the circadian rhythm in arabidopsis thaliana, fail to oscillate during winter dormancy. this supports the finding of a clock disruption under cold stress.

for the s46ir module we could identify two cis-regulatory elements that are highly enriched in the upstream regulatory sequences, a gccac motif  and the consensus for the well known g-box, cacgtg . although the first motif is of low significance, it is noteworthy that both motifs have already been discovered in two publications on phytochrome mediated light signaling cascades  <cit> . the g-box is bound by specific g-box-binding transcription factors of the bzip-transcription factor family and has already been shown to constitute an essential regulatory element in several promoters of light regulated genes.

heat shock response
a clear example of an independent response module can be observed in the module r34ir consisting of  <dig> genes . of these,  <dig> map to "response to heat" ,  <dig> to "response to abiotic stimulus"  and  <dig> map to "protein folding" . apparently, this module is mainly composed of heat shock proteins which have already been described to be co-regulated by the heat shock transcription factors hsf <dig> and hsf <dig>  <cit> . both factors bind to the spaced dyad palindrome gaattc. indeed, this motif occurs frequently in the upstream sequences of the genes in this module .

cold, osmotic, and salt stress response
the most prevalent signals appear under the cold, osmotic and salt conditions . kreps et al.  <cit>  found about one third of the arabidopsis genome to be sensitive to these three conditions. edisa detects several modules taking part in the response to these stresses. several distinct shapes can be observed, which are similar for salt and osmotic stress. this suggests that genes are co-regulated under osmotic and salt stress, or, more likely, that the plant does not distinguish between salt and osmotic stress most of the time. overall, these modules seem to be the result of an underlying general stress response mechanism, which is activated by different stresses. module s7ir is significant for "response to water deprivation"  and is pronounced under "response to cold" . module s16ir is assigned to "response to cold" , "response to salt stress"  and " response to osmotic stress"  confirming the cold, osmotic and salt component of this module. in the promoters of the genes contained within this module we found the drought and cold responsive element accgac enriched, which is the dreb transcription factor binding site. this cis-regulatory element was found several times with varying flanking nucleotide sequences at p-values ranging from  <dig>  × 10- <dig> to  <dig>  × 10- <dig> 

specific stress responses
very pronounced responses can be found under exposure to oxidative stress in the shoot or salt stress in the root . one of the most striking patterns in this respect is the single response module s23ir which reacts to oxidative stress in the shoot tissue. a functional analysis of this cluster reveals an enrichment of the pyrimidine  and purine  metabolism. all mapped enzymes catalyze different deoxynucleotides, hence precursors necessary for dna synthesis . this finding is in accordance with the fact that module s23ir is a single response module, and thus only genotoxic stress has a significant effect on the dna synthesis. another single response module  specifically responding under salt stress in the root is depicted in figure  <dig>  this is an especially interesting module, as the antisense of the w-box motif  has been detected several times in the promoters. this is noteworthy, as the wrky-transcription factors that bind to this element are already known to play a role in various abiotic and biotic stress responses. two representatives of this class are contained within r11ir. the w-box motif agtcaa has been found  <dig> times more frequently in the promoters of this dataset  than one would expect at random.

overall, the arabidopsis thaliana dataset contains coherent, independent response and single response modules . the independent response modules are the most numerous. the coherent modules occur less frequently. in the shoot tissue, these modules often contain cyclic genes which do not respond to the applied stresses. the single response modules occur several times, however not all the stresses could be related to such a module.

CONCLUSIONS
cells co-regulate the expression of their genes to respond appropriately to the sensed stimulus. they orchestrate these genes into general stress responses , some with different profiles , and into specific stress responses . this modular response organization can only be observed in the light of multiple time-series microarray datasets. edisa is capable of capturing such complex response patterns with manifold trajectories.

we evaluated the capability of edisa to extract these response patterns from different datasets. using a synthetic dataset, we showed that the algorithm is robust against noise and, despite its randomized nature, the results are rather stable. the edisa could be applied to different biological datasets with the same parameter setting for τg, τc, and the number of iterations. the edisa is capable of auto-adjusting the sensitive parameters during the iteration procedure. the predilection of the isa approach for strong signals could be compensated for through the pre- and postprocessing procedures. this leads to a comprehensive set of distinct modules, covering a large variety of stress responses.

the subsequent analysis of these modules revealed interesting aspects of stress responses. this allowed the generation of hypotheses regarding the underlying regulatory system. for instance, observing general stress responses hints at a common regulatory control independent of the specific stress stimulus, while a regulatory mechanism responding to specific stress stimuli can be supported by single response modules. such single response modules could also be captured by standard clustering methods. however, one can only distinguish between general and specific responses by finding these modules within 3d datasets. in the arabidopsis thaliana dataset we have a strong indication of a common transcriptional control for osmotic and salt stress, whereas the single response genotoxic module hints at a specific response mechanism. in contrast, there has been only one stimulus applied to the homo sapiens multiple sclerosis dataset. therefore, differences in the response patterns of individual patients can be investigated, rather than differences in stimuli. the homo sapiens multiple sclerosis modules exhibit a clear separation of patients into distinct groups, which respond differently to the same stimulus. these differences can be informative regarding disease states, disease progression and the respective regulatory mechanisms. the separation of the mathematical definition of a module and the mining algorithm allows for a flexible adaptation of both. the provided definition of the independent response modules captures several interesting responses, while remaining flexible with respect to the biological patterns and the structure of the dataset. biological response patterns are allowed to be time-shifted or have completely different profiles. the dataset is not required to have the same number of measurements for every condition, or equal time-steps. even the normalization protocol is not required to be equal. hence, independent response modules can be used to analyze datasets from different experiments which cannot be compared directly. it is, however, important to stress that the biological validity of exploring this flexibility should be further addressed. overall, the edisa allows for a flexible, integrative analysis resulting in informative and dense modules, which can be subject to further downstream functional analysis.

