BACKGROUND
since proteins provide some of the most fundamental information about many processes in almost all organisms, the ability to predict protein structure and function has become one of the most important goals in bioinformatics research  <cit> . protein domains represent one of the most useful avenues for the understanding of protein function and domain family-based analysis, and are of great importance in the study of individual proteins  <cit> . they have been described as units of compact structure  <cit> , function and evolution  <cit>  and folding  <cit> . in nature, several domains can be formed together with a vast number of possibilities leading to multi-domain and multi-functional proteins  <cit> . each domain in a multi-domain protein has its own functions and jointly works with its neighbours. they serve as modules to form large assemblies like viral particles or provide specific catalytic and binding sites such as those found in enzymes or regulatory proteins.

over the last three decade, a large number of methods using the three dimensional coordinates of the protein structure have been proposed for more accurate delineation of domains boundaries  <cit> . recently, several methods developed to identify domains in globular proteins from one dimensional atomic coordinates and have been gaining much attention. these methods are based on the assumption that a domain has relatively more contacts within itself than with residues in the remainder of the structure  <cit> . the most recent sequence based methods have been built on the basis of various machine learners.

dompro  <cit>  uses evolutionary information , secondary structure and solvent accessibility information with a recursive neural network; chopnet  <cit>  utilises evolutionary information, amino acid composition and amino acid flexibility analysed with a neural network; snapdragon  <cit>  predicts domain by using an ab initio protein folding method; domssea  <cit>  uses predicted secondary structure; the nagarajan and yona's  <cit>  method is based on analysing multiple sequence alignments from database searches, position specific physio-chemical properties of amino acids and predicted secondary structures analysed with a neural network; galzitskaya and melnik  <cit>  use side chain entropy of a region to predict domain boundaries; ssepdomain  <cit>  predicts domains by combining information of secondary structure element alignments, profile-profile alignments and pattern searches; armidillo  <cit>  uses the amino acids composition to predict domain boundaries; domcut  <cit>  uses a linker index deduced from a set of domain/linker segments; prodo  <cit>  uses a neural network method and finally domaindiscovery  <cit>  uses support vector machines from sequence information including domain linker index. many of these methods focus exclusively on predicting boundaries for two-domain chains. the overall accuracy of sequence-based methods has been reported in the range of  <dig> to 70% for single domain proteins and considerably less  when limited to multi-domain proteins  <cit> .

although a large number of machine learning based methods have showed their superior performance in domain boundary prediction, several important issues that can degrade the performance of machine learning or statistical-based methods have largely been ignored. it has been widely recognised that high dimensionality of protein sequence data not only causes a dynamic increase in computational complexity but also can be induced into the generalisation problem of non-parametric methods. with machine learning models, better generalisation and faster training  can be achieved when they have fewer weights to be adjusted by fewer inputs.

this study aims to develop an accurate and reliable protein domain boundary prediction model using state-of-the-art machine learning techniques. in this paper, we propose a new semi-parametric method where a linear dimensionality reduction method and a non-parametric model are integrated, and show great performance in terms of prediction bias, variance and computational requirements. in the prediction, we use inter domain linker regions with position-specific scoring matrix  generated from psi-blast  <cit> , secondary structural information and relative solvent accessibility data. domain linkers have shown to be useful in cooperative inter-domain interactions  <cit>  function regulation  <cit> , protein stability  <cit> , folding rates  <cit>  and domain-domain orientation  <cit> . the others were adopted based on the assumption that secondary structure elements and the level of solvent accessibility in the boundary regions are different from those found in the rest of the protein. the novel features of this research are the use of a new semi-parametric model and importantly, a unique training set  built on the consensus of various experts in protein structure. in the literature, as the word "protein domain" is used in various contexts, we adopt the casp <dig> definition of protein domain in this study. domains in casp <dig> should fall somewhere in the middle of following three definitions.  conserved structural entities with a hydrophobic core.  regions that share a common fold, have some functional similarity, and may be evolutionarily related.  a subunit of a polypeptide chain that can fold into a stable tertiary structure independently of any other domain. however, predictors are only able to evaluate predictions made for the first two definitions.

RESULTS
a fair and precise comparison of domain boundary predictors is complicated by the fact that the existence of various domain datasets/databases which may conflict and are biased in some cases  <cit> . for a fair comparison of the proposed model to other current methods, we have tested each model with benchmark_ <dig> dataset, a new comprehensive dataset that was developed for the purpose of benchmarking structure-based domain identification methods  <cit>  and casp <dig> dataset, the most widely known benchmark in protein structure prediction.

the objectives of this study are two-fold. the first is to show the effectiveness of the proposed model by accurately comparing it with state-of-the-art machine learning models in terms of prediction ability, stableness/robustness, and computational efficiency. at the same time, we find the most suitable window size for the given datasets. second, by using the best window size, we compare the predictive performance of the proposed model with existing and widely known domain boundary predictors on casp <dig> benchmark dataset.

with the first objective, we use the benchmark_ <dig> dataset and adopt a seven fold cross-validation scheme for our model evaluation. we evaluate the performance of each model by looking at the average prediction accuracy, the variance of the accuracy, the average training and testing time obtained over our four different datasets constructed based on different window sizes . the performance of our proposed model are compared with other general artificial neural network  models such as multi-layered perceptron , radial basis function network  and general regression neural network .

in order to validate the effectiveness of our proposed model, the model should be able to achieve a good trade-off between the model bias and generalisation variance . table  <dig> presents the average prediction accuracy, the variance of prediction accuracy of each prediction model on the seven testing samples for four different window sizes as well as the average training and testing time of each model. as observed, igrn produced the comparable predictive performance, the overall prediction accuracy of  <dig> % and the smallest variance  than that of grnn, rbfn and mlp. in the experiment results above, the semi-parametric approach of igrn was demonstrated to be effective for stable prediction. although our semi-parametric approach , the incorporation of reduced dimension of input vectors into pure non-parametric model has brought better generalisation and less computational requirements, the prediction accuracy of the proposed model is slightly less accurate  than original model, grnn  on the benchmark_ <dig> dataset.

in order to reduce the learning bias of the igrn, we adopted a boosting algorithm into the igrn and it eventually showed much better trade-off between learning bias and generalisation variance that that of igrn. igrn ii  achieved the best prediction accuracy as well as comparably low variance among different neural network models. as for the computational efficiency, igrn and igrn ii both showed comparable performance over other three machine learners. it means our semi-parametric approach of proposed model not only has more stable prediction capability than other ann models but also demands less computation requirements.

in table  <dig>  we can observe that the highest accuracy was found in the window size of seven for all models and gradually became less as the size of window got longer. this is in some way an expected result as amino acid residues residing closer to the linker residue contain more structural information which involves stronger short-range interaction signals than others.

with the result obtained from above experiment, the predictive performance of the proposed model is now compared with the most widely known domain boundary predictors, namely, dompro, dompred, domssea, domcut and domaindiscovery. dompro  <cit>  uses machine learning algorithms, in the form of recursive neural networks and predicts protein domains using a combination of evolutionary information in the form of profiles, predicted secondary structure, and predicted relative solvent accessibility. dompred uses a combined homology and fold recognition-based approach. the sequence homology approach simply attempts to distinguish domain boundaries from overlapping edges in psi-blast multiple sequence alignments. the fold recognition approach relies on secondary structure element alignments, using the domssea method  <cit> , in order to find domain boundaries in more distant homologs. the method has an accuracy of 49% at predicting the domain boundary location within  <dig> residues using a representative set of two domain chains. domcut  <cit>  predicts linker regions based on sequence alone, relies solely on amino acid propensity. this method simply defines a linker region to be one that has lower linker index values than a specified threshold value. the linker index of amino acids are computed from a database of about  <dig> non-redundant  protein sequences. only the continuous domain  segments of size  <dig> to  <dig> are chosen provided the linker region between them is of the size  <dig> to  <dig> residues. linker index of an amino acid is the log ratio of its frequency of being present in a linker region and the frequency presence in a domain region. as used in domcut, igrn will also employ domain linker index to model linker regions. finally, domaindiscovery  <cit>  is newly developed machine learning based domain predictor. it uses support vector machines  and additional sequence-based information, domain linker index during its training. it has shown its comparable predictive performance to other widely known domain predictors in the prediction of domain boundary.

discussion
although various machine learning based domain predictors have been developed, their limited stability/generalisation ability has revealed their inadequacy for domain boundary prediction. our proposed semi-parametric approach was seemed to provide a good trade-off with both low bias and low variance. the experimental results confirmed our hypothesis that the igrn produces improved generalisation while it is preserving the accurate data modelling in domain boundary prediction. however, as the prediction accuracy of our proposed model was slightly less  than that of original model  on two benchmark datasets, this issue should be taken into account.

from our extensive analysis, it may be caused by the linear nature of the embedded dimensionality reduction method, principal components analysis . most of the classical methods perform a linear transformation of the original feature vectors. pca is the most widely known linear feature extraction techniques. however, it has been shown that its effectiveness is limited by the fact that it is globally linear methods. in other words, the data sets may contain essential non-linear structures that are invisible to pca. it is generally believed that protein sequence data contains non-linear relationships which may be generated from long-range interactions. thus, a new igrn incorporated with an efficient non-linear dimensionality reduction method should be tested in the prediction of domain boundary.

one issue with current protein encoding methods used as input to the predictors is that they may provide insufficient structural information involving various interactions . the formation of protein secondary structure, especially the regions of β-sheets, involves long-range interactions between amino acids  <cit> . with current methods, the prediction accuracy for β-strands is less than that for α-helix or coil. the β-sheet formation is seen as a tertiary structure interaction which brings two or more strands together by hydrogen bonds. however, they can be situated far apart in the amino acids sequence. in this case, the residues that are close in three dimensional space occupy distant positions in one dimensional sequence  <cit> . for statistical or machine learners, it is therefore crucial that the model should be further modified or tuned up to efficiently tackle the problem of long-range interaction or an efficient sequence encoding method that effectively represents various interactions should be developed for more accurate prediction of protein domain boundary.

another considerable issue is that in general the prediction accuracy of sequence-based methods has been far less  for multi-domain proteins. for example, liu and rost's  <cit>  experiments on cath and scop assigned domains to random subsets of  <dig> proteins of known high-resolution structure and less than 10% sequence homology, showed correct prediction of the number of domains  in 69% cases. this accuracy for multi-domain case alone was however, only 38%. for the two-continuous domains proteins, average-accuracy of dbp prediction in different validation runs is 46% to 51% considering a prediction to be correct if it were in ± <dig> residues interval of the cath and scop assigned boundaries. our experiments on casp <dig> dataset showed corresponding results as above.

joshi  <cit>  discussed the main reasons for the problems in deciphering the multi-domain protein structures and its possible solutions. with experimental data, although the structure within a domain is fixed, the relative positioning of two domains within the same chain can vary. for this reason, and for the fact that protein structural domains are independent folding units, it is unusual to find single crystal structures containing more than one domain. for similar reasons, protein modelling by database searching, sequence alignment and/or phylogenic analysis and etc is also better performed on a single domain, rather than a multi-domain polypeptide. hence, in most cases, the number of domain in a protein should be firstly identified to determine the locations of such domains on the primary chain before embarking on any standard method of protein structure/function determination. the identification of linker regions connecting two distinct domains is also useful in finding domain boundary locations accordingly, several domain boundary predictors such as domcut and domaindiscovery employing domain linker information showed reasonably better predictive performance in domain boundary prediction.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper identified the effectiveness and utility of the newly proposed machine learning model, namely improved general regression network  for protein domain boundary prediction. for a given set of high dimensional protein data, the combination of a linear principal component local model with a non-parametric global model provided a way of fine-tuning the model by the adjustment of a single smoothing parameter σ as well as providing efficient semi-parametric approximation. this was demonstrated by the two consecutive experiments. the semi-parametric approach used in igrn was shown to be effective by finding an optimal trade-off between parametric and non-parametric models with less computational requirements. finally, with the casp <dig> benchmark dataset, igrn ii achieved the best prediction accuracy amongst the contemporary domain boundary predictors by showing its usefulness especially in multi-domain chains. however, as the prediction accuracy of igrn is still limited to less than 70% for multi-domain protein datasets, there are still large rooms for further improvement. as discussed, the mid and long-term dependencies of amino acids play key roles for more accurate delineation of domain boundaries. hence, further research will be carried out on the development of an efficient algorithm to rapidly sift through huge amounts of protein data with the strong capability to capture the mid and long-term information that reside in amino acids.

