BACKGROUND
recent breakthroughs in high-throughput techniques lead experimental data deluges in genomics, proteomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics and interactomics. these data can be represented as networks, in which the nodes as surrogates for proteins, metabolites, or transcripts, are connected by edges to show the interactions, reactions, or regulations among nodes. network analysis can help us understand the function of an individual node and the collaboration between other nodes. for example, network centralities rank nodes of a biological network according to a given importance concept, and jeong et al. applied this method on a protein-protein interaction network of baker's yeast   <cit> . they found that the degree of a protein correlates with the essentiality of its gene; in other word, proteins with higher degrees are more likely to be essential proteins.

cytoscape  <cit>  is an open platform with many plugins to expand both the visualization options and the network analysis power. via cytoscape, the graphical view of a network is easy accessed, and multiple layers of information including large-scale, genome-wise experiments, and protein function annotations can be granted on the interactome. several cytoscape plugins can score and rank the nodes by network features. for example, networkanalyzer  <cit>  and centiscape  <cit>  computes various topological network parameters for undirected and/ or directed networks. these plugins provide more centrality measures than other commonly used, but some other important features and recent developed methods are not included. different methods focus on different topological features, or similar features with different scoring strategies. to make the network analysis easier for biologists to utilize more network features, we compose cytohubba plugin to execute our newly developed algorithms and several popular algorithms. the enhanced node retrieving function in cytohubba control panel helps researchers to search and explore the network and to extract user interesting subnetwork.

RESULTS
the usage of cytohubba
cytohubba provides a simple interface to analyze a network with eleven scoring methods. first, scores from all eleven methods are granted to each node in a preloaded ppi network by executing "compute hubba result" function in the cytohubba options in cytoscape menu bar . next, top-ranked nodes of a particular scoring method are retrieved from the cytohubba tab in cytoscape control panel, listed in the result panel, and the sub-graph of these selected nodes are shown in the main window with a color scheme from highly essential  to essential . the sub-graph of essential nodes is extendable to include nodes that directly interact with these top-ranked nodes by the option of "check first stage node" in control panel | hubba. network topological features of nodes are retrievable in the data panel as options of node attributes. tutorials and demo video are available in the website . an example of cytohubba result using the cytoscape example dataset galfiltered.cys is shown in figure  <dig> 

cytohubba control panel is also a handy tool to retrieve subnetwork from the whole big ppi set. a list of nodes can be extracted by an id list from the whole hubba-computed network. this manipulation can be extended to include direct linking partners , saved, and re-submitted to cytohubba to evaluate the node essentiality on the selected sub-network. for those nodes with no direct link in between, cytohubba provides a shortest path detection tool . all connectible but not direct connected node pairs in a network, retrieved either by id search or by top-ranked in topological feature score, are connected by dotted-lines with number of the smallest edge number  to make this link. the stepping-stone nodes and edges composing the shortest path will be expanded by a mouse right-click action. comparing with the other cytoscape plugin shortestpath which sketches the path between two nodes  <cit> , cytohubba fetches the shortest path among a group of nodes. this abstractive view provides the distance among essential nodes.

the performance
the studies of protein-protein interactions will be more powerful when the interactome coverage increases. however, the complexity of the network will also increase, that always hampers computation tasks. after the optimization on the programs, cytohubba is able to complete all eleven analysis of a small network , a middle size one  and a large set  in few seconds, around  <dig> seconds and few minutes, respectively, on a common desktop/ notebook . cytohubba has been updated several times since  <dig> . it is freely accessible in cytoscape app store . the accumulated downloading number is around  <dig>  . and it is used widely to analyze cancer metabolic network <cit> , innate immune network <cit> , complex biofilm communities <cit>  and so on.

validation by predict yeast essential proteins
we use cytohubba to score all proteins in the yeast protein interaction network by the eleven methods. dip database  is composed of  <dig>  proteins and  <dig>  interactions after removing self-interactions and redundant records. the essential protein lists are collected from saccharomyces genome deletion project  and saccharomyces genome database . there are  <dig>  and  <dig>  proteins defined as essential proteins by sgdp and sgd respectively. we use the union set  for verifying the performance of the predictions.

the statistics of yeast ppis are shown in table  <dig>  twenty three percent  of the proteins in this network are defined as essential proteins in the dataset. we call a node is high-degree if the number of its neighbors is greater than a threshold; otherwise we call it a low-degree node, where the threshold is the maximum integer such that 2×∑v∈v,degv>tdeg>∑v∈vdeg. the threshold of the ppi network  used in this paper is  <dig>  as shown as table  <dig>  there are  <dig>  proteins in low-degree category and  <dig> proteins in high-degree category, in which  <dig> proteins and  <dig> proteins are essential proteins.

as shown as table  <dig>  in the yeast ppis, 21% of proteins in low-degree category are essential proteins and 42% of proteins are essential proteins in high-degree category. accordingly, if we pick a protein randomly from the high-degree pool, the probability that an essential protein being chosen is  <dig> , and  <dig>  from a low-degree protein pool respectively. table  <dig> is the number of essential proteins found in the top × list with low-degree feature. for example, among the top  <dig> protein ranked by dmnc,  <dig> proteins are in the low-degree category, in which  <dig> out of  <dig> proteins are essential proteins. methods except dmnc, mcc and eccentricity tend to assign higher scores to a node when it owns more neighbors while almost no any low-degree proteins are found in their top × list. in other word, these methods cannot find low-degree essential proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we implement our network scoring methods, mcc, mnc and dmnc, and eight other popular methods into a cytoscape plugin, cytohubba. through the extendable, flexible and modulated properties of cytoscape, cytohubba can work together with other plugins. the computing processes had been optimized and can complete all eleven analysis on a common desktop/ notebook in a reasonable time cost. we also improve the network retrieving function in cytohubba control panel. therefore, users can utilize a ppis network from public domain and extract sub-networks based on users' domain-knowledge.

among the  <dig> methods, the newly proposed method mcc performs better than the others. mcc captures more essential proteins in the top ranked list in both high-degree and low-degree proteins. another method, dmnc, catches different set of essential proteins suggesting it scores the network in different way. since the biological network is heterogeneous, it is reasonable to use more than one method for catching essential proteins. we hope this handy tool can serve as good starting points to new therapies and novel insights in understanding basic mechanisms controlling normal cellular processes and disease pathologies.

