BACKGROUND
insects pose large problems for human health and agriculture; several major global diseases are transmitted by insect vectors, and huge losses in food production occur due to insect pests.

current strategies for insect control have a number of disadvantages, such as effects on non-target species and development of resistance to insecticides  <cit> . alternative synthetic biology approaches are being developed in which the control agent is a modified version of the pest insect itself. these modified insects carry a genetic system that results in the death of some or all of their descendants, so that when released modified insects mate with wild counterparts, population suppression occurs. such strategies require characterised modular components that can direct appropriate expression of effector sequences – protein-coding sequences or functional rnas, for example. conserved components that can be used across multiple species are particularly useful. however, for many applications there are few if any such components available. the goal of this study was to identify genes that could provide potential components for manipulation of the male germline in two major pest species, the mosquito aedes aegypti  and the tephritid fruit fly ceratitis capitata .

these species were selected because of their importance to public health and agriculture, respectively. ae. aegypti vectors a number of viral diseases including dengue fever  <cit> , the most prevalent mosquito-borne viral disease, with an estimated  <dig> million infections per year  <cit> . there is no specific therapeutic or prophylactic treatment, and no licensed vaccine, meaning vector control is currently the only option for prevention. c. capitata , is a widespread, economically important agricultural insect pest, affecting over  <dig> types of crop  <cit> . the choice of these two distantly related species also allowed us to search for genes that may be conserved across multiple species.

genetic insect control systems require expression of the effector transgene in a particular tissue and/or at a particular developmental stage, and usually require that the transgene not be expressed elsewhere or at another time. while some genetic control methods and strains have been successfully developed based on ubiquitous or targeted expression in somatic tissues , for several potential strategies, germline-specific transgene expression is required, male germline-specific expression being of particular interest. these include sex-ratio distortion systems, which involve the release of males carrying a transgene whose product selectively destroys sperm that would result in female offspring. the resultant skewing of the sex ratio towards males would lead to population suppression . other approaches would eliminate sperm production  <cit> , or lead to the death of embryos fertilised by sperm from modified males  <cit> .

though many types of regulatory element might in principle be used, in practice expression is usually controlled by the choice of promoter. alternative splicing cassettes may also be used, either with a non-specific or specific promoter. for example, sex-specific alternative splicing has been used to achieve female-specific expression in c. capitata  <cit> , olive fly  <cit> , pink bollworm and diamondback moth  <cit> , and to add additional specificity to an already sex-biased promoter in ae. aegypti  <cit> , ae. albopictus  <cit>  and anopheles stephensi  <cit> . analogous components to drive germline-specific expression, particularly in males, would be useful for the applications described above.

several insect genes with testis-specific expression have been identified, often first in drosophila melanogaster , for example β2-tubulin  <cit> . homologues of β2-tubulin have been identified and the promoters found to drive testis-specific expression in other species, including anopheles gambiae  <cit> , ae. aegypti  <cit>  and c. capitata  <cit> . however, studies on d. melanogaster suggest that expression timing in male germline cells must be taken into consideration. in d. melanogaster, transcription is repressed with the onset of the meiotic divisions  <cit> . barring a few exceptions , genes whose protein product is required after this transcriptional repression are transcribed in primary spermatocytes, before the meiotic divisions; the transcripts are then stored and translated as required  <cit> . though not studied in detail for other insects, the major changes to chromatin structure at meiosis and subsequently suggest this may be a general phenomenon. testis-specific bipartite synthetic genetic systems involving transcription factors  would therefore require regulatory regions  that drive pre-meiotic protein expression, otherwise the transcription factor would not be translated early enough to drive transcription of its target . while promoters may control tissue specificity, it is likely that timing of translation is controlled by utrs , so identification of both promoters and utrs is likely to be important.fig.  <dig> importance of pre-meiotic protein expression in bipartite synthetic genetic systems. if transcription is repressed from meiosis onwards, post-meiotic translation of the transcription factor in a bipartite expression system is not adequate for expression of the target transgene . expression of the transgene requires translation of the transcription factor before meiosis such that the target transgene is transcribed before transcriptional repression at meiosis 




high-throughput transcriptional profiling  <cit>  and subtractive hybridisation  <cit>  studies have recently yielded several potential testis-specific transcripts in ae. aegypti. however, to our knowledge, no studies have been performed with sufficient time resolution to determine the activity of regulatory regions at different stages of spermatogenesis. information on insect testis-specific splicing is even more sparse; testis-specific splice forms of the genes achi and vis have been discovered in d. melanogaster  <cit> , but no testis-specific splice forms have been identified, to our knowledge, in ae. aegypti, c. capitata or any other pest insect.

in this study we performed rna-seq on staged testis samples from ae. aegypti and c. capitata, to identify genes with testis-specific expression peaking early in spermatogenesis, whose regulatory regions are therefore candidates for driving pre-meiotic protein expression. we also developed a novel computational pipeline to identify testis-specific splice forms that could potentially provide additional tools for germline-specific genetic systems. by comparing results from the two species, we have attempted to identify conserved components that may function in constructs across multiple species. in addition to their use in applied synthetic biology, these elements are also interesting from a basic biology perspective.

RESULTS
rna sequencing and read alignment
rna sequencing was performed on eight samples, two ae. aegypti and four c. capitata dissected testis samples representing different spermatogenesis stages, an ae. aegypti gonadectomised male sample, and a c. capitata ovary sample. the two ae. aegypti testis samples were generated by bisecting testes and will be referred to as “early” and “late”. the four c. capitata testis samples constituted early spermatocytes, late spermatocytes, round spermatids and elongated spermatids, respectively. sequencing was performed using the illumina genome analyzer ii platform with single reads of  <dig> nucleotides. in total  <dig> , <dig> reads were generated for the eight samples, corresponding to  <dig>  gb of data, with  <dig> % of ae. aegypti reads and  <dig> % of c. capitata reads aligning to the corresponding genome .

data from c. capitata female and ae. aegypti female and ovary samples from other experiments were downloaded from the sequence read archive   <cit> . the ae. aegypti female sample was gonadectomised; an ovary sample was therefore used in addition so that data from all female tissues were present. the c. capitata female sample was not gonadectomised, but an ovary sample was still sequenced and included in the analysis, as many genes expressed in the testis could potentially also be expressed in the ovary, and their detection may be impeded by the large amount of other tissue in a whole female sample. the ae. aegypti ovary and female samples were from recently fed females , as these will include transcripts expressed during oogenesis, thus enabling elimination of genes expressed in both male and female gametogenesis. the number of reads in these samples and the proportion aligning to the corresponding genome are shown in additional file  <dig> 

identification of candidate testis-specifically expressed genes
candidate testis-specifically expressed genes were identified from the total set of predicted genes by running a custom python script on the output of the standard tophat-cufflinks-cuffdiff rna-seq analysis pipeline, and applying various filtering steps  to maximise sensitivity whilst removing unsuitable genes and minimising false positives.

an expression level of  <dig> fpkm  in the early sample for ae. aegypti and the early spermatocytes sample for c. capitata was chosen as a threshold for candidates. a threshold was set as predicted genes with low expression are more likely to be false positives, and also regulatory elements associated with relatively strong expression are desired for use in synthetic constructs;  <dig> fpkm is the boundary between low and moderate expression for d. melanogaster rna-seq data on flybase  <cit> . the threshold for expression in samples other than testis  was not set at zero, to allow for some noise in the data, but rather at  <dig> fpkm, based on quantification of the known testis-specifically expressed genes can, comr, nht and taf12l in d. melanogaster .

many potential candidates appeared to be short non-coding rnas. quantification of short non-coding rnas is likely to be inaccurate in a protocol using polya selection. therefore the only genes taken forward for further analysis were those that either coincided with a locus already annotated as a protein-coding gene, or novel predicted genes that were over  <dig> kb in length.

after application of the filtering steps above, predicted testis-specifically expressed genes with higher expression in early spermatogenesis than in late spermatogenesis were identified. for ae. aegypti,  <dig> candidate early genes were identified, out of a total of  <dig> predicted testis-specifically expressed genes with expression above  <dig> fpkm in the early sample. for c. capitata,  <dig> candidate early genes were identified, out of a total of  <dig> predicted testis-specifically expressed genes with expression above  <dig> fpkm in early spermatocytes.

for each species, the top ten candidates in order of expression level in the earliest testis sample were taken forward for experimental testing. genes encoding proteins associated with transposable elements were excluded, as there are likely to be multiple copies of these in the genome, and it would be difficult to design pcr primers that would target only one. for ae. aegypti, one additional candidate was also taken forward, as a homologue of the gene was identified as a candidate in c. capitata; candidates that are conserved between species may simplify construct generation in different species. lists of the candidate genes tested, and the annotated loci that they correspond to, if any, can be seen in additional file  <dig> 

experimental testing of candidate testis-specifically expressed genes
rt-pcr
reverse transcriptase pcr  for the selected candidates was performed on total rna derived from testis, gonadectomised male, ovary and gonadectomised female samples, to confirm that the candidates were testis-specifically expressed in adults. for some candidates, the rt-pcr results suggested that there was also expression of the gene in other tissues, mostly ovary and one candidate failed to produce a positive result in the testis sample. however, the results supported the prediction of testis-specific expression for several candidates , discussed below.fig.  <dig> gels showing pcr results for ae. aegypti expression candidates. a candidates for which no band of the expected size for the testis sample could be seen in non-testis samples. b candidates for which a band of the expected size for the testis sample could be seen in a non-testis sample, but it was faint and in the cases indicated by asterisks, could have resulted from contaminating gdna. expected pcr product sizes are indicated with arrows. in some cases bands of other sizes are of the expected size for products amplified from contaminating gdna. other bands of unexpected sizes may represent isoforms that were not predicted, or non-specific amplification


fig.  <dig> gels showing pcr results for c. capitata expression candidates. presented as for fig. 2





three candidate ae. aegypti genes , corresponding to the annotated loci aael <dig>  aael <dig> and aael <dig> and three candidate c. capitata genes , corresponding to the annotated loci loc <dig>  loc <dig> and loc <dig>  displayed the expected outcome of rt-pcr amplification from testis and no amplification from other samples, and were taken forward for further testing. four additional candidate ae. aegypti genes , corresponding to the annotated loci aael <dig>  aael <dig>  aael <dig> and aael <dig> and four additional candidate c. capitata genes , corresponding to the annotated loci loc <dig>  loc <dig>  loc <dig> and loc <dig>  were also taken forward despite some amplification in non-testis samples. in these cases the quantity of product from the non-testis samples was low, and in some cases the product could have resulted from amplification of contaminating gdna.

qrt-pcr
quantitative rt-pcr  for the candidate genes taken forward for further testing was performed on staged testis samples , to confirm that the candidate genes displayed the desired expression pattern of higher expression early in spermatogenesis . gonadectomised male, ovary and gonadectomised female samples were also used in the qrt-pcr to quantify the level of expression in these tissues, if any. candidates with a low level of non-testis expression may still be usable for restricting expression to the testis, particularly in combination with other strategies, such as use of testis-specific splicing.fig.  <dig> relative expression levels in different tissues for ae. aegypti expression candidates, determined using qrt-pcr. results for aael <dig> are shown inset, as the expression level for this gene was too low to view at the same scale as for the other genes. * primers could also have amplified from gdna, so apparent low expression in non-testis tissues could be a result of gdna contamination


fig.  <dig> relative expression levels in different tissues for c. capitata expression candidates, determined using qrt-pcr




the timing was confirmed for all ae. aegypti candidates  except aael <dig>  for which the qrt-pcr failed, and for four of the c. capitata candidates . for the other three c. capitata candidates, loc <dig>  loc <dig> and loc <dig>  no expression was detected in spermatocytes. the results for all the ae. aegypti candidates except aael <dig> suggested some expression in non-testis tissues, but this was at a low level compared to that in testis, and in four of the five cases amplification could have resulted from contaminating gdna. for all the c. capitata candidates, no expression was detected in non-testis samples.

identification of candidate testis-specifically spliced genes
similarly to the candidate testis-specifically expressed genes, analysis was performed on rna-seq data from two staged testis samples in ae. aegypti and four staged testis samples in c. capitata, along with gonadectomised male, ovary and female samples to identify genes with testis-specific splice forms.

candidate testis-specifically spliced genes were identified from the total set of predicted genes by running a custom python script on the output of the standard tophat-cufflinks-cuffdiff rna-seq analysis pipeline, and applying various filtering steps  to maximise sensitivity whilst removing unsuitable genes and minimising false positives. these filtering steps may exclude some valid genes, but for the intended downstream application it is not necessary to identify all testis-specifically spliced genes; it was more important to minimise false positives.

an expression level of  <dig> fpkm  was chosen as a threshold for the predicted testis-specific splice forms, using the same rationale as discussed for the candidate testis-specifically expressed genes. the threshold for expression of predicted testis-specific splice forms in tissues other than testis was not set at zero, to allow for some noise in the data, but rather at  <dig>  fpkm, based on quantification of the known testis-specifically spliced transcripts from the genes achi and vis in a d. melanogaster dataset . it was also required that at least one other splice form of the gene was expressed in at least one other sample  at a level of  <dig> fpkm or above, to distinguish testis-specific splicing from testis-specific expression.

in addition to the above expression thresholds, a threshold for exon-exon junction coverage was set to minimise false positives; only introns with more than  <dig> reads spanning the exon-exon junction were taken forward. false positives may also arise due to low coverage in a particular sample, causing incorrect assembly of a transcript in this sample, for example with a few nucleotides missing at the end, and giving the appearance of alternative splicing. to minimise this source of error, the only introns taken forward were those differing by more than 20 bp at one end at least from introns in other transcripts from the same gene. finally, only candidates for which the predicted testis-specific intron was within an annotated gene were taken forward, to avoid false positives that are in fact intergenic regions but predicted as introns due to incorrect merging of transcripts during assembly. using these parameters,  <dig> and  <dig> candidate testis-specifically spliced genes were identified for ae. aegypti and c. capitata respectively.

experimental validation of testis-specific splicing required distinguishing between splice forms using rt-pcr. the primer design strategy used is illustrated in fig.  <dig>  the specificity of the predicted testis-specific splice forms was tested using primers spanning the predicted testis-specific exon-exon junction. candidates for which primers could also be designed common to both predicted testis-specific and other splice forms were preferred; these allowed additional testing of testis-specificity of the predicted testis-specific splice form, as they should yield products of different sizes in testis and other tissues . there were only a small number of these, so all were taken forward for experimental testing. there were further candidates for which primers common to both predicted testis-specific and other splice forms could not be designed ; for each species the top five of these candidates in order of ascending intron size were taken forward for experimental validation. for c. capitata, one additional candidate was also taken forward, as a homologue of the gene was identified as a candidate in ae. aegypti; as mentioned above, candidates that are conserved between species may simplify construct generation in different species. lists of the candidate genes tested, and the annotated loci that they correspond to, if any, can be seen in additional file  <dig> fig.  <dig> rt-pcr testing of candidate testis-specifically spliced genes. expression of the predicted testis-specific splice form was assessed using primers designed to span the predicted testis-specific exon-exon junction. expression of other splice forms was assessed using additional primers targeting either multiple splice forms – both the predicted testis-specific splice form and other splice forms – but yielding products of different sizes , or other splice forms only . note that primers amplifying splice forms other than the predicted testis-specific splice form may still yield a product in testis samples, as these splice forms may be expressed in the testis in addition to the testis-specific splice form. the splice forms illustrated here are simplified examples




experimental testing of candidate testis-specifically spliced genes
rt-pcr
rt-pcr for the selected candidates was performed on testis, gonadectomised male, ovary and gonadectomised female samples, to confirm that the candidates were testis-specifically spliced. the primer design strategy used is illustrated in fig.  <dig> 

the pcr results varied between candidate genes. for some candidates the predicted testis-specific splice form was not detected, for others it was detected in samples other than testis, and for others no splice forms at all were detected in samples other than testis, suggesting that the gene is testis-specifically expressed rather than differentially spliced. however, the results supported the prediction of testis-specific splicing for some candidates , discussed below.fig.  <dig> gels showing pcr results for ae. aegypti splicing candidates. a candidates for which no band of the expected size for the predicted testis-specific splice form could be seen in non-testis samples. b candidates for which a band of the expected size for the predicted testis-specific splice form could be seen in a non-testis sample, but it was only faint. expected pcr product sizes are indicated with arrows. bands of unexpected sizes may represent other splice forms that were not predicted, or non-specific amplification


fig.  <dig> gels showing pcr results for c. capitata splicing candidates. presented as for fig. 7





five ae. aegypti candidate introns , within the annotated loci aael <dig>  aael <dig>  aael <dig>  aael <dig> and aael <dig>  and four c. capitata candidate introns , within the annotated loci loc <dig>  loc <dig>  loc <dig> and loc <dig>  displayed the expected outcome of a positive pcr result for the predicted testis-specific splice form in testis only, and a positive pcr result for other splice forms in other tissues. these nine candidates were taken forward for further testing. two additional ae. aegypti candidate introns , within the annotated loci aael <dig> and aael <dig>  and three additional c. capitata candidate introns , within the annotated loci loc <dig>  loc <dig> and loc <dig>  were also taken forward despite positive pcr results for the predicted testis-specific splice form in non-testis samples, as the quantity of product from the non-testis samples was low. candidates with a low expression in non-testis tissues of the putative testis-specific splice form relative to other splice forms could potentially still be useful for the intended application.

qrt-pcr
the suitability of a testis-specific intron for use in a synthetic construct as discussed above will be affected by the proportions of different splice forms for the corresponding gene in the testis. there may be other splice forms expressed in the testis in addition to the testis-specific splice form. if used to direct testis-specific expression of a coding region, the higher the proportion of the testis-specific splice form compared to other splice forms, the higher the proportion of primary transcripts processed into the splice variant of interest . if most transcripts are not of the testis-specific splice form and retain the testis-specific intron, there may be insufficient production of functional transgene product. in order to determine splice form proportions in the testis for the candidates taken forward for further testing, qrt- pcr was performed . gonadectomised male, ovary and gonadectomised female samples were also used in the qrt-pcr to determine the expression level of the predicted testis-specific splice form in these tissues, if any, relative to the expression level of other splice forms. while complete absence of expression of the predicted testis-specific splice form in non-testis tissues would be preferred, candidates with a low level of non-testis expression of the predicted testis-specific splice form relative to other splice forms may still be usable for synthetic biology applications, particularly in combination with other strategies, such as use of testis-specific regulatory regions, for restricting expression to the testis.fig.  <dig> relative expression levels in different tissues for predicted testis-specific and other splice forms of ae. aegypti splicing candidates, determined using qrt-pcr. where expression levels in the testis are too low to view at the same scale as for the other splice forms, results for testis are shown inset. the relative expression value of the testis-specific splice form is set at  <dig> in all cases. error bars show +/− standard error of the mean for two technical replicates


fig.  <dig> relative expression levels in different tissues for predicted testis-specific and other splice forms of c. capitata splicing candidates, determined using qrt-pcr. presented as for fig. 9





the qrt-pcr for the c. capitata candidate introns within the annotated locus loc <dig> failed to produce meaningful results, with calculations suggesting negative expression of some splice forms, so these introns were excluded. based on the qrt-pcr results for the other candidates, the estimated proportion of the testis-specific splice form out of all splice forms in the testis ranged from  <dig>  to 95% in ae. aegypti  and  <dig> –69% in c. capitata . candidates at the lower ends of these ranges are unlikely to be suitable for use in a synthetic construct. for example, the results suggest that for aael <dig>  only  <dig> % of mature transcripts in the testis would retain the intron, and thus only  <dig> % of transcripts would be of the desired form if this intron were used to direct testis-specific expression of a coding region. however, candidates at the higher ends of the ranges are more likely to be suitable, and will be taken forward for testing in synthetic constructs. in some cases the qrt-pcr results suggested expression of the testis-specific splice form in non-testis samples, but this was mostly at a very low level  relative to the expression of other splice forms in these tissues. for the c. capitata candidates loc <dig> and loc <dig> the results suggested that 17–100% of the splice forms in non-testis samples were actually the predicted testis-specific splice form. however, the expression of all splice forms in these non-testis samples was low compared to expression in the testis, so relative errors in quantification are likely to be higher.

inter-species conservation
to determine whether any of the candidates we identified were conserved between species, tblastx searches were performed, using the candidate sequences from one species as queries and all transcripts predicted by cufflinks from the other species as a database. a d. melanogaster dataset was also used as a database, to provide further confidence in conservation, and also because more supporting information is available on d. melanogaster genes.

these blast searches revealed one set of homologous testis-specifically expressed candidates and one set of homologous testis-specifically spliced candidates, with conservation between all three species in each case. the ae. aegypti testis-specifically expressed candidate corresponding to the annotated locus aael <dig> and the c. capitata testis-specifically expressed candidate corresponding to the annotated locus loc <dig> are homologous, and both show homology to a d. melanogaster gene, cg <dig>  that was also identified as testis-specifically expressed, with higher expression early in spermatogenesis. aael <dig> is annotated as a hypothetical protein, while loc <dig> and cg <dig> are predicted zinc finger proteins. the expression timing of aael <dig> could not be confirmed due to a failed qrt-pcr, but higher expression of loc <dig> in early spermatogenesis was confirmed. the ae. aegypti testis-specifically spliced candidate corresponding to the annotated locus aael <dig>  and the c. capitata testis-specifically spliced candidate corresponding to the annotated locus loc <dig>  are homologous, and both show homology to the d. melanogaster gene for centrosomin, which is involved in centrosome assembly and is known to have a role in spermatogenesis and display testis-specific splicing in this species  <cit> . however, it should be noted that qrt-pcr results suggested low abundance in testis of the predicted testis-specific splice form compared to other splice forms for both aael <dig> and loc <dig>  and thus they may not be suitable for use in synthetic constructs for the reasons discussed above.

discussion
in this study, we have used rna-seq data to identify testis-specifically expressed and spliced genes in the disease vector ae. aegypti and the agricultural pest c. capitata. this genome-wide approach represents an advance on previous efforts to find regions for use in insect control constructs, which attempted to identify candidates on an individual basis, often based on distant homology to d. melanogaster genes. using testis samples corresponding to different developmental stages gave sufficient resolution to select testis-specifically expressed genes with expression levels highest in early spermatogenesis, likely to be useful for pre-meiotic protein expression in bipartite synthetic genetic systems such as those involving gal4-uas or tta-teto.

to identify testis-specific splicing, we have developed a novel computational pipeline for this type of analysis. whilst the majority of the work is performed by the pre-existing tuxedo suite of programs, these do not produce finished analyses with regards to alternative splicing, but rather an intermediate output that requires further computation to produce user-friendly candidate lists and sequences. our pipeline combines this software with custom-written python scripts to achieve this. unlike other methods for identifying differential splicing from rna-seq data  <cit> , it identifies splice forms generated by all types of splice event, not only exon skipping. the outputs are particularly tailored for subsequent experimental testing, containing intron flanking sequences along with numbered exon-exon junction positions to facilitate pcr primer design, and alignments for all transcripts of each gene. in addition to its application here to identify testis-specific splicing, the pipeline could be applied to other sample sets, for example to identify splice forms specific to other tissues, developmental stages, disease states or external conditions.

based on rna-seq analysis, we identified a number of candidate testis-specifically expressed genes with expression highest in early spermatogenesis –  <dig> in ae. aegypti and  <dig> in c. capitata. these comprised a minority of the total number of testis-specifically expressed genes with expression in early spermatogenesis –  <dig> for ae. aegypti and  <dig> for c. capitata, suggesting that most testis-specifically expressed genes do not exhibit suitable expression timing, and so using samples with sufficient time resolution as we have done is important in identifying suitable candidates for some types of synthetic control systems. we also identified a number of candidate testis-specifically spliced genes –  <dig> in ae. aegypti and  <dig> in c. capitata. testing the top candidates with rt-pcr validated the expression profiles of six ae. aegypti and four c. capitata testis-specifically expressed genes, and seven ae. aegypti and five c. capitata testis-specifically spliced genes, although the testis-specifically spliced genes may not all have suitable splice form ratios. the suitability of these candidates for any particular application should be confirmed with functional testing.

our findings complement those of akbari et al.  <cit> , who identified regulatory regions specific to the female germline in ae. aegypti. these regions could be used to direct ovary-specific expression in strategies such as medea and udmel, which have been shown to be capable of driving population replacement in drosophila  <cit> , while the testis-specific regulatory regions that we have identified could be used in alternative strategies such as sex distortion and paternal effect systems. testis-specific expression could also be achieved with the testis-specific introns that we have identified. these could be used to achieve testis-specific expression on their own or in combination with testis-specific regulatory elements, or even with regulatory elements active in the testis but not testis-specific. this would allow a wider choice of regulatory elements. the genes that we have identified would also provide a choice of expression levels in a synthetic construct, given the varying expression levels for the testis-specifically expressed genes and varying splice form ratios for the testis-specifically spliced genes. this may be useful as different applications utilising testis-specific expression may require different expression levels.

some of the genes display testis-specific expression or splicing that is consistent between ae. aegypti, c. capitata and d. melanogaster. conserved genes such as this can be particularly useful; they can simplify construct generation across different species, as it is possible that the same or similar sequences may be used for multiple species. conservation of a regulatory element does not necessarily imply that it will function in the same way across species; there are examples where regulatory elements from one species have failed to drive transgene expression with the same strength or specificity in another species as in the native species, despite the presence of orthologous elements in the non-native species. for example, the d. melanogaster actin-5c promoter was much less active in a transient expression assay in the cricket g. bimaculatus than the native actin promoter  <cit> , and displayed a more restricted tissue distribution in transformed ae. aegypti than in d. melanogaster  <cit> . regulatory elements from the d. melanogaster gene sry-α failed to drive expression in c. capitata  <cit> , and in an example of attempted testis-specific expression, regulatory elements from the vasa gene in an. gambiae failed to drive expression in ae. aegypti  <cit> . however, there are many cases of successful inter-species function of regulatory elements for driving targeted transgene expression in insect control systems. for example, the ae. aegypti and ae. albopictus actin- <dig> promoters have been used interchangeably to generate a female-specific flightless phenotype in both species  <cit> , and the an. gambiae β2-tubulin promoter has been used to drive testis-specific expression in an an. stephensi transgenic sexing strain  <cit> . inter-species functionality of alternative splicing has also been demonstrated; female-specific lethality was achieved in olive fly and d. melanogaster using the c. capitata sex-specifically spliced tra intron  <cit>  and in diamondback moth using the pink bollworm sex-specifically spliced dsx intron  <cit> . even if inter-species function is not conserved, identifying conserved genes that share a feature of interest facilitates a candidate gene approach to isolating an endogenous element with the desired characteristics.

a potential disadvantage of conserved sequences is that they might also function in non-target species. transfer to non-target species could theoretically occur by hybridisation or horizontal gene transfer, though for insect species to be able to form fertile hybrids they would need to be very closely related, and most molecular elements from one would likely function to some degree in the other. horizontal gene transfer between divergent insect species is extremely rare, though detectable over evolutionary timescales for transposons, for example. the consequences of such hypothetical transfer would vary considerably by application, being potentially more significant for highly invasive gene drive systems, much less so for self-limiting strategies such as male-sterile systems. our approach allows the isolation of both more- and less-conserved sequences from a species of interest, as appropriate.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have used rna-seq data to identify a number of genes with testis-specific expression or splicing potentially suitable to provide molecular components for use in synthetic control systems involving manipulation of the male germline. some genes displayed conservation of expression or splicing behaviour across species; these may be particularly promising candidates for further investigation. overall, our findings provide the beginnings of a comprehensive toolkit for male germline expression in synthetic control systems for pest insects.

