BACKGROUND
the structure of metazoan mitochondrial  genomes is generally highly conserved as a single compact circle, most commonly between  <dig> and 20 kb  <cit> . almost all metazoan mt genomes are composed of the same  <dig> to  <dig> electron transport chain  protein-coding genes, and the two ribosomal rna  and  <dig> transfer rna  genes used for the synthesis of those proteins. the order of these genes, however, is highly variable and sometimes even radically different between species in the same genus  <cit> . nonetheless, individual genes must remain functionally intact for effective energy production by mitochondria. both small  and large abnormalities  in mt genomes are known contributors to various human diseases, such as maternally-inherited leigh syndrome and kearns-sayre syndrome  <cit> . despite the small size of metazoan mt genomes relative to nuclear genomes, much remains unknown regarding the processes of mt genome replication, transcription, and maintenance. there are two leading theories to explain the mode of mtdna replication in animals: an asynchronous strand displacement model and a strand-coupled bidirectional replication model  <cit> . more recently, other methods of replication have been proposed, including bootlace and rolling circle models  <cit> . by investigating cases of unusual metazoan mtdna structure, we may gain insight into the maintenance of normal mtdna and factors leading to disease associated abnormalities.

despite the highly conserved single circle mt genome structure throughout metazoa, structural variants have been discovered in a diverse set of species. the genomes of an isopod  and several genera of cnidarians have become linearized, sometimes then forming dimeric circles  <cit> . for some organisms, with either linear or circular mtdna, the genome has become multipartite, divided into two or more chromosomes. shao et al.  <cit>  introduced the terminology “mitochondrial karyotype” to describe the gene arrangement, topology , and number of chromosomes in multipartite mt genomes. a mt karyotype of a genome with two distinct circles has been reported in a small set of metazoans: thrips, booklice, rotifers, and nematodes. within the thrip scirtothrips dorsalis cryptic species complex, a south asian species has two very different sized circles,  <dig>  and  <dig>  kb, whereas an east asian species has just a single complete circle  <cit> . booklice in the genus liposcelis, rotifers in the genus brachionus, and a nematode in the genus rhabditophanes have mt genomes with two circles of similar size, ~ <dig> to 13 kb . the most highly studied group of organisms with multipartite circles are the mammalian blood-sucking lice in the suborder anoplura, which have from nine to  <dig> circles of relatively similar sizes ranging from ~ <dig> to 5 kb . recently, a similar multipartite arrangement was found in the closely related chewing lice suborder rhynchophthirina  <cit> . the first metazoan circular multipartite genome to be reported was in a potato cyst nematode , globodera pallida, which was shown to have at least six mtdna circles ranging in size from ~ <dig> to 9 kb  <cit> . later the other known pcn, g. rostochiensis, was also reported to have multiple circles of a similar size range  <cit> .

recently a new species of globodera  was described, g. ellingtonae, that is phylogenetically intermediate between these two pcn species  <cit> . given that pcn causes damage to potato crops throughout the world  <cit> , the biology of this new pcn-like species is of considerable economic interest. it has a life cycle of approximately 70 days, with developmental rate dependent on temperature, and reproduces very successfully on potato  <cit> . investigations into its pathogenicity to potato  are ongoing . although multipartite mt genomes are not unique to parasites, and most reported parasite mt genomes are not multipartite, a large proportion of the reported multipartite circular genomes in bilateria are in parasites . given this, a focal question is how multipartite mt genomes might interplay with the biology and evolution of pathogenicity in globodera. to begin to address that question, and as part of a broader genomic analysis of g. ellingtonae, we investigated the structure of the mt genome of this nematode.

we found g. ellingtonae has a multipartite mt genome of two extraordinarily large circles that occur at different copy numbers and with segregated gene content. we compare the mt genome structure of g. ellingtonae with that of other metazoans with multipartite circular genomes. however, we exclude from analysis comparisons with the gene order and non-coding sequence of the mt genomes of g. pallida and g. rostochiensis. those comparisons, along with substantial corrections to published sequences, will be made in a subsequent publication . nonetheless, data presented here uncovers a unique feature in the evolution of multipartite mt genomes in the genus globodera: this single genus has species with mt genomes consisting of both two and several mt circles.

RESULTS
initial assembly, pcr, and southern blot indicate two mtdna circles
we began by examining an initial assembly of genomic  illumina miseq reads for mtdna. using individual heterodera glycines and globodera pallida nucleotide mt protein-coding gene sequences in tblastx searches of the assembly, two potential mt contigs of  <dig>  and  <dig>  kb  were identified. these two contigs shared ~800 bp of high identity sequence. two sets of primers were designed for both contigs to amplify products in ‘inward’ and ‘outward’ directions relative to the assembled contig sequence. amplification with the inward facing primers yielded single amplicons of the expected sizes of ~ <dig>  and  <dig>  kb for contigs i and ii, respectively . amplification with the outward facing primers yielded single amplicons of ~ <dig> and 7 kb for contigs i and ii, respectively. the products for contig i overlapped by  <dig> and 351 bp. the amplicons for contig ii only overlapped on one side by 1928 bp; a section of 429 bp in a region of high confidence miseq assembly was not originally included in the two amplifications. a third primer set for contig ii was later designed to confirm the miseq assembly sequence in that region, with a product size of 1092 bp overlapping the larger two amplicons by  <dig> and 445 bp. if the two originally assembled contigs were parts of a single circle mt genome, that circle size would need to be at least ~25 kb. however, combined sizes of the inward and outward amplicons were only ~ <dig> and 15 kb for contigs i and ii, respectively, indicating they were two separate circles.fig.  <dig> mitochondrial  genome organization in globodera ellingtonae. a pcr amplification products of mtdna used in cloning and sequencing: amplicons of 1) ‘outward’ amplicon of mtdna-i, 2) ‘inward’ amplicon of mtdna-i, 3) ‘outward’ amplicon of mtdna-ii, 4) ‘inward’ amplicon of mtdna-ii, and 5) 1 kb plus dna ladder . b southern blots confirm the size and organization of the two circles. symbols above each lane correspond to those in panel c and represent the restriction enzymes used to digest total dna: a star for ecori, a triangle for kpni, and a circle for paci. blots hybridized with  probe to shared sequence, exposure 1 min;  probe to mtdna-i specific sequence, exposure 4 min;  probe to mtdna-ii specific sequence, exposure 30 s; and  image of 1 kb plus ladder from ethidium bromide stained gel aligned to x-ray images. c organization of g. ellingtonae mitochondrial genome. protein-coding, rrna, and pseudo- gene abbreviations are located next to arced arrows showing their location and direction. single letter abbreviations of amino acids denote locations of associated trna genes. locations of pcr products used in cloning and sequencing the circles and of probes used in southern hybridizations are shown. locations of nucleotides  <dig> and  <dig> are noted on each circle for size reference. the star, triangle, and square indicate restriction enzyme sites as denoted above



southern blots further supported the size and existence of the two circles . when hybridized with restriction digested genomic dna, a probe designed to hybridize to a segment of the shared sequence resulted in two visible bands of the predicted sizes for each of three different restriction enzymes. congruently, hybridization of probes designed to sequences specific to each circle resulted in a single visible band of the predicted size for each circle and each of three different restriction enzymes. no additional bands were observed in any of the blots, even after extended exposure. cloning and sanger sequencing of the above described pcr products yielded the final complete circle sequences .

mitochondrial dna genome structure and gene content of the two circles
the larger circle, denoted mtdna-i , was  <dig>  bp and contained complete open reading frames for ten proteins, cox1- <dig>  nad2- <dig>  nad4l and cob, as well as sequences for trnr and trnt . the smaller circle, denoted mtdna-ii , was  <dig>  bp and contained complete open reading frames for two proteins, atp <dig> and nad <dig>  the 12s and 16s rrnas , and the  <dig> remaining trna genes. all genes were coded on the same strand in both circles, and appropriate three dimensional structures were found for all trnas with the possible exception of trns <dig> .

both mt circles had non-coding sequence  between most genes, which may have impacted annotation precision. in mammals most mt genes are abutting or have just a few intergenic bases, assisting in the determination of initiation and termination codons, particularly in cases where the abbreviated stop codons t-- or ta- are used  <cit> . the stop codons for three g. ellingtonae genes  were not located with certainty as the open reading frame either continued beyond the conserved end of other tylenchid peptide sequences or into the next gene . for genes with a clear stop codon, tag was used seven times and taa was used twice. the initiation codons ttg and tta were used in eight and two genes, respectively, and the codons ata and att were each used once. due to open reading frames in the 5′ direction extending beyond conserved peptide start sites and multiple nearby potential initiation codons, the start codons for cox <dig>  nad <dig> and nad <dig> are uncertain. for mtdna-i, the ncs between genes in the non-shared region ranged from  <dig> to 325 bp, with an average of 109 bp for the ten intergenic ncs . for the  <dig> ncs in mtdna-ii, nine were less than 10 bp in length . there was a 670 bp sequence between trnp and trni that contained a 366 bp nad <dig> pseudogene. a 1686 bp ncs between trnv and trnp contained a 1404 bp open reading frame that yielded no hits  in a blastp search of genbank non-redundant proteins. clustering of trna genes was evident in mtdna-ii, with sections containing  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> consecutive  trna genes.table  <dig> start and stop codons and mtdna gene lengths for globodera ellingtonae and two tylenchid nematodes

globodera ellingtonae
heterodera glycines
a
meloidogyne arenaria
b

atp6

cob

cox1

cox2

cox3

nad1

nad2

nad3

nad4

nad4l

nad5

nad6

rrnl

rrns

agenbank accession number hm640930


bgenbank accession number nc_026554

asterisks  indicate uncertainties



the circles shared a high sequence identity ~ <dig>  kb region, hereafter denoted “shared region”, in their longest ncs. there were 98 % identical sites in the ~ <dig>  kb shared sequence region from mtdna-ii position  <dig> to  <dig>  however, a 986 bp alignment of the start of the shared region  had higher sequence divergence, with 87 % identical sites and several short alignment gaps totaling 13 % of the aligned sequence length . the alignment of sequences from mt-dna-ii positions  <dig> to  <dig> had 99 % identity and was followed by a 224 bp gap in mtdna-i relative to mtdna-ii positions 1174– <dig>  a section of sequence rich in pseudogenes occurred at mtdna-ii positions  <dig> to  <dig>  it contained three different cox <dig> pseudogenes, sizes  <dig>   <dig>  and 597 bp as well as pseudogene sequences of nad <dig>  and cox <dig>  . one other pseudogene , for nad <dig>  was identified only in a unique region of mtdna-ii. the pseudogenes present in the shared region were  <dig> to 100 % identical between the two circles, with the exception of a 24 bp deletion in the mtdna-i p-cox2; however, they had much lower identity with the functional copies of the genes, from  <dig> to 98 % identity in non-gapped sequence . additionally, the three p-cox <dig> pseudogenes were not in consecutive order relative to their homologous positions in the functional genes . the total ncs of each circle had lower at content than the coding sequence, with  <dig>  and  <dig>  % at in the ncs versus  <dig>  and  <dig>  % at for the coding sequences of mtdna-i and mtdna-ii, respectively . in total, mtdna-i had 8452 bp  ncs, 696 bp  pseudogene sequence, and 8610 bp  functional gene sequence; mtdna-ii had 9259 bp  ncs, 1085 bp  pseudogene sequence, and 4018 bp  functional gene sequence.table  <dig> characteristics of globodera ellingtonae mitochondrial pseudogenes


p-cox1-a

p-cox1-b

p-cox1-c

p-cox2

p-nad4

p-nad5

athe position given is the nucleotide of the functional gene at which the pseudogene sequence begins. bdue to gaps in the sequences, the length of the pseudogenes and the span of the functional gene with which they align are both listed. cpercent sequence identities are for non-gapped aligned sequence. dpercent gaps are for the entire length of the alignment. ewhere two values are separated by a comma, the first value is for mtdna-i and the second for mtdna-ii

fig.  <dig> alignments of pseudogene  and functional gene sequences. amino acid translations were used to guide alignment of the nucleotide sequences. positions that are identical between >50 % of sequences have a grey background. the nucleotide of the functional gene at which the alignment begins is given at the start of each alignment. a
p-cox1-a;  p-cox1-b*;  p-cox1-c;  p-cox2;  p-nad4;  p-nad5*. *the final  <dig> and 9 bp of alignments for p-cox1-b and p-nad <dig> were removed for space considerations
globodera ellingtonae mitochondrial dna characteristics compared with other tylenchid nematodes




radopholus similis nc_013253d




athe longest single stretch of non-coding sequence


ball non-coding sequence combined


c the combined  <dig> mt genes


dgenbank accession numbers follow species names



gene order conservation with relatives
the gene order in the circles of g. ellingtonae shows little conservation with that of tylenchid relatives outside the genus. we omit gene order comparisons within the genus globodera as the mt genomes of both g. pallida and g. rostochiensis are undergoing considerable revision . five pairs of genes consistently adjacent to each other in the currently available mt genomes of heterodera, radopholus, pratylenchus, and meloidogyne are not adjacent in g. ellingtonae . to the contrary, there is a series of five trna genes whose order is conserved between g. ellingtonae and h. glycines but not with the other genera. an additional curiosity is the reversal of order of two pairs of adjacent genes  in g. ellingtonae mtdna-i compared to h. glycines. partial mt genome sequences are available for h. cardiolata and punctodera chalcoensis, spanning six and seven protein-coding genes, respectively. the partial mt sequences of these two species have 100 % synteny with h. glycines, exhibiting the same relative reversal compared with g. ellingtonae of cox <dig> and nad <dig> and cox <dig> and nad <dig> fig.  <dig> comparison of globodera ellingtonae and heterodera glycines mt genome organization. gene order is shown, with protein-coding and rrna gene names inside boxes  and trna gene abbreviations and pseudogene names given outside the boxes. grey boxes represent non-coding sequence . grey bars under h. glycines  genes indicate gene order conservation between h. glycines, radopholus similis, pratylenchus vulnus, meloidogyne chitwoodi, and m. incognita, not necessarily including intermediate ncs or trna genes. black lines indicate genes adjacent in both g. ellingtonae and h. glycines




differential copy numbers of the two mtdna circles
differential copy numbers of the two mt circles was supported by three different methods of quantification. densitometry of southern hybridization bands in the blot probed by shared sequence indicated bands of mtdna-ii were stronger than mtdna-i, with a ratio of  <dig> : <dig> for the paci digest and  <dig> : <dig> for the ecori digest . the mapping of miseq reads to unique sections of each circle yielded a mean coverage of 787× for mtdna-ii and 149× for mtdna-i, a  <dig> : <dig> ratio. to test whether there was a similar ratio at the individual level and whether the ratio changed with developmental stage, we performed quantitative pcr  on individual nematodes. there was a pattern of increasing ratio of mtdna-ii:mtdna-i copies as nematodes progressed to later developmental stages . although there was wide variation within individual stages, a tukeyhsd test indicated that individual fourth-stage juveniles  had a significantly higher mtdna-ii:mtdna-i copy ratio than second-stage juveniles , mean  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s.e. vs.  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , while the ratio for third-stage juveniles  ratio was intermediate between the two,  <dig>  ±  <dig> .fig.  <dig> ratio of mtdna-ii:mtdna-i copy number in individual nematodes. absolute copy numbers of each mtdna circle were determined by qpcr using individual nematodes of different developmental stages, and the ratio of mtdna-ii to mtdna-i copy number was calculated. the bold bars within the boxes indicate sample means, the edges of the boxes indicate first and third quantiles, and the whisker bars indicate minimum and maximum values 



discussion
mt genomes in nematodes
our discovery and description of the mt genome of g. ellingtonae, composed of two large circles, provides new insight into a phenomenon rare in the metazoa: the division of mt genomes into multiple circles. the context of this discovery is especially intriguing as g. ellingtonae is phylogenetically intermediate between g. pallida and g. rostochiensis, both of which have at least five mini-circles, ranging in size from ~ <dig> to 9 kb   <cit> . at the structural level, the finding of species with such different circle numbers and sizes is a pattern as yet unseen within any other metazoan genera. of interest is the as yet unknown karyotype of the unsequenced mt genome of the tobacco cyst nematode, g. tabacum, sister to g. rostochiensis. there are very few complete mt genomes available for nematodes closely related to the globodera, i.e. in the monophyletic clade of the infraorder tylenchomorpha that includes globodera. there are complete mt genomes available for radopholus similis and pratylenchus vulnus  <cit>  showing single circles in these species. recent comparative studies have yielded single circle mt genomes for five species of meloidogyne  <cit> . there is one nearly complete heterodera mt genome available , missing a section of presumable ncs, but pcr evidence indicates it too is a single circle mt genome  <cit> . there is pcr evidence of a mini-circle containing only a subset of mt genes in a close globodera relative, punctodera chalcoensis, indicating it likely has a multipartite genome; however, the partial mt sequence available for it has 100 % synteny with the mt genome of h. glycines  <cit> . further investigation of the mt genome karyotype in p. chalcoensis and other basal relatives within the genus globodera will be key in determining when the multipartite condition in this lineage first formed.fig.  <dig> mitochodrial genome characteristics of select tylenchid nematodes. the number and size of circles in the genomes of tylenchid species closely related to globodera ellingtonae with outgroups  are shown. the + following g. rostochiensis and g. pallida circles indicates that each has at least  <dig>  but potentially more circles. a schematic of well-supported relationships among the species is shown based on previously published phylogenies  <cit> 



the single mt circles in these tylenchid relatives are among the largest mt genomes reported in nematodes, which most commonly are under 16 kb, defying the usual conservation of mt genome compactness in the metazoa . as mt genome size increases in these tylenchids so does the length of their ncs, with p. vulnus having the largest circle,  <dig>  kb, and longest ncs,  <dig>  kb. yet the two circles of g. ellingtonae, individually smaller than the mt genome of p. vulnus, have even longer single stretches of ncs,  <dig>  and  <dig>  kb. despite the exceptionally long stretches of ncs in tylenchid nematodes, no high identity sequence regions  were found between the ncs of g. ellingtonae and that of p. vulnus, r. similis, or any of the five sequenced species of meloidogyne . a highly unusual feature of the ncs in g. ellingtonae is its reduced percent at composition compared to its own coding sequence and to the ncs of its tylenchid relatives: ~62 % at in the g. ellingtonae ncs as compared to  <dig> to 87 % in the other genera. nowhere in the ncs was there a long stretch of extremely high at content as seen in the model nematode c. elegans. this is of particular note as “at-rich region” is often used as a synonymous term for the non-coding region and/or control region in mammalian and other mt genomes.

functional convergence in multipartite mt genomes
given that a multipartite genome organization has appeared independently in such disparate metazoan taxa as rotifers, nematodes, and insects, the question arises of whether this state is mildly deleterious, neutral, or of benefit. a possible functional advantage of having the mt genome in multiple circles is the localization of genes to different transcriptional units. ojala et al.  <cit>  proposed that human mtdna is transcribed as a single polycistronic molecule, which is then further processed to produce separate trnas, rrnas, and mrnas for individual genes. although others have shown that transcription may have multiple sites of origin and termination, the transcripts are generally polycistronic  <cit> . it therefore seems advantageous for genes coding for proteins for the same etc enzyme complex to be on the same transcriptional unit, yielding more efficient co-regulation of their expression  <cit> . by dividing the genome into separate circles, separate transcriptional units are created. the most extreme example of this is observed in several species of blood-sucking lice for which each protein-coding gene is on a separate circle  <cit> .

consistent with this model of segregation of transcriptional units, gene types were highly partitioned between the two g. ellingtonae mt circles, with  <dig> of  <dig> protein-coding genes on mtdna-i and both rrna genes, atp <dig> and nad <dig>  and  <dig> of  <dig> trna genes on mtdna-ii . in two other metazoan genera reported to have a mt genome split into two similarly sized circles, liposcelis and brachionus, gene types  also are distributed unevenly between the two circles, although not to the same extreme. the brachionus mt genomes, which are structurally similar in the two species with complete sequences, have moderately segregated distribution of gene types, with the mtdna-i having four protein-coding , both rrna, and  <dig> trna genes, and mtdna-ii having eight protein-coding and nine trna genes  <cit> . the mt genes of l. paeta and l. entomophila exhibit greater segregation, although the full complement of  <dig> mt genes were not all identified in either species  <cit> . chromosome i of l. paeta has ten protein-coding, one rrna, and three trna genes, while chromosome ii has three protein-coding, one rrna, and  <dig> trna genes. chromosome i of l. entomophila has  <dig> protein-coding but no rrna or trna genes; while chromosome ii has one protein-coding, both rrna, and  <dig> trna genes. the gene types are more evenly distributed in l. bostrychophila, with seven protein-coding, one rrna, and  <dig> trna genes on chromosome i, and six protein-coding, one rrna, and nine trna genes on chromosome ii  <cit> . nonetheless, potential bias in the genes for the different etc complexes is evident, as chromosome ii contains both atp genes and four nad genes, whereas chromosome i has all cox genes, cob and the other three nad genes. the convergent characteristic of gene type segregation between the two circles in these three very disparate genera is consistent with the hypothesis of a functional benefit to such an organization. although the mt genome of the nematode rhabditophanes sp. kr <dig> is divided into two circles, the gene order is highly conserved with the conventional order found in several genera of related nematodes including bursaphalenchus, caenorhabditis, and ascaris, suggesting either recent genesis of the multipartite structure or strong selection pressure for conservation in that lineage  <cit> .

differential copy numbers of each circle found in two-circle genomes further supports a possible functional role for a multipartite structure. that mtdna-ii of g. ellingtonae is in higher relative copy number may relate to a greater requirement for the “building blocks”  of the protein-coding genes than for the mrna templates of those proteins. differential copy numbers were found in liposcelis and brachionus as well; in b. plicatilis there was a 4: <dig> ratio of mtdna-i to mtdna-ii and in l. bostrychophila mt chromosome i was twice as numerous as mt chromosome ii. although the differentiation in gene composition of those mt circles was not as great as in g. ellingtonae, the commonality among all three taxa is that the higher copy number circle contained more trna genes. additionally, for both g. ellingtonae and brachionus the higher copy circle contained atp <dig>  nad <dig>  and both rrna genes. it is uncertain whether the increasing mt copy differential corresponding to developmental stage in g. ellingtonae serves a direct function or is a byproduct of some other force. for example, one functional explanation is that increased replication is associated with increased transcription of mtdna-ii. however, a possible non-functional explanation is that smaller mt circles may have a replicative advantage, resulting in differential copy numbers  <cit> ; in other words, mtdna-ii may be at higher copy number as a byproduct of a “selfish” dna process. the circle size and copy ratio relationship in brachionus fits such a model, but in l. bostrychophila it is the slightly larger circle that has the higher copy number. experiments with the nematode c. elegans indicate that the majority of its mt genome replication occurs in the gonads, with much of the mtdna of somatic cells simply derived from mtdna dispersed during embryonic development  <cit> . if this is also the case in g. ellingtonae, just a small increase in replication or slightly lower degradation rate of mtdna-ii in somatic tissue could generate the mtdna-ii:mtdna-i ratio increase with age.

formation of multipartite mt genomes
the mechanism by which the multipartite genome in globodera and other lineages arose is uncertain. movement of stretches of mtdna can occur by various mechanisms including slipped-strand mispairing and recombination, resulting in rearrangements such as duplications, deletions, and inversions  <cit> . if rearrangements exist in a subset of the mtdna creating a heteroplasmic population of mtdna, further differentiation of the two  types of mtdna could eventually lead to circles with distinct gene structure and/or segregated gene content. some have proposed multipartite mt genome formation via tandem duplication followed by random loss  <cit> . a particularly rapid path to such differentiation would be an initial duplication of the entire genome followed by degradation of distinct gene sets on or recombination between initially heteroplasmic circles. evidence was recently reported supporting mtdna replication by a rolling circle mechanism in c. elegans  <cit> . if rolling circle replication of mtdna is conserved among nematodes, an ancestral duplication of the mt genome in the globodera lineage is easily envisioned. whole genome duplication followed by gene loss has resulted in higher rates of evolution in yeast  <cit> . following such duplication, selection pressure could favor maintaining operational copies of gene functional groups on the same transcriptional units and thus causing segregation between circles. given the unusual pattern of mt karyotypes in the three sequenced globodera species, it is unclear whether the formation of the ancestral multipartite structure involved a single split into two circles or a “shattering” of the genome into multiple circles that were subsequently re-joined to form one or both large circles of g. ellingtonae. future investigation of potentially multipartite mt genomes of nematode species basal to this group is needed.

as remnants of reorganization, the structure of the g. ellingtonae pseudogenes may provide insight into the etiology of the divided genome. curiously, the pseudogenes of each circle are more similar to each other than they are to the respective functional gene. three different hypotheses could explain this pattern. 1) all the pseudogenes were created when there was still a single  circle, they differentiated from the functional genes, and then they were copied into both circles when the circles formed. 2) two circles were formed and only one had the pseudogenes or different pseudogene segments were on different circles. following pseudogene differentiation from functional sequence, recombination resulted in duplication of the pseudogene into the other circle. 3) the process by which the two circles formed resulted in duplicate pseudogenes on both circles that were then subject to strong homogenization pressure. differences in the divergence of the pseudogenes provide other clues. the longest evident pseudogene, p-cox1-b, is also the most differentiated from the functional gene, with both high deletion levels and high sequence divergence in the ungapped sequence. preceding it in the ncs is p-cox <dig>  which is the only pseudogene with a deletion between the copies on the different circles. this suggests the possibility that the ancestral creation of this p-cox <dig> to p-cox1-b region yielded a recombination hot spot, creating the peripheral more identical pseudogenes during recombination events while facilitating rearrangement of the genome. such analysis of pseudogene structure may be hindered by the incomplete detection of highly degraded pseudogenes. a high rate of pseudogenization is also found in liposcelis, with four, eight, and  <dig> pseudogenes in l. bostrychophila, l. paeta and l. entomophila, respectively, while no pseudogenes were reported in brachionus.

the  <dig>  kb of sequential pseudogenes in the mtdna of g. ellingtonae is a subset of the  <dig>  kb stretch of sequence with 98 % identity between the two circles. we did not identify a functional control region on the circles, although it is most likely located either in the  <dig>  kb region with 98 % pairwise identity or in the upstream 1 kb sequence with 87 % pairwise identity. the control region presumably would have been necessary in both/all progenitors of the current two circles for their continued replication. however, if the control region is not in the 98 % identity region, then the latter may have been recently derived from a ncs region that diverged in just one of the circles but then was duplicated into the second circle. if that sequence region was always on both circles, its high conservation could be explained either by concerted evolution creating homogenization of the ncs on both circles, as seen in the two ncs regions in some snakes  <cit> , or by the two-circle state being very recently derived and rates of evolution much higher in the protein-coding region than in the large ncs.

there are intriguing similarities and differences in the distribution of ncs in the other genera with two-circle multipartite genomes. both g. ellingtonae and brachionus spp. have long stretches of highly similar ncs shared between circles, ~ <dig>  and  <dig>  kb, respectively  <cit> . however derived, long stretches of homologous sequence between otherwise different circles provides a region of increased recombinational potential. although the mt genomes of both l. paeta and l. entomophila have a higher than usual proportion of ncs, it is highly dispersed between coding genes, particularly between trna genes; it is very unequally distributed between circles with much more on chromosome ii; and little ncs is shared between circles, with just three stretches of shared sequence, each less than 400 bp  <cit> .

maintenance and inheritance of multipartite mt genomes
once differentiated mt circles have formed, regardless of the cause, organisms must have a mechanism to maintain function of all circles to preserve mitochondrial function. to date, there has been little discussion in the literature of how multipartite genomes are partitioned in nucleoids. generally, mtdna is packaged with proteins into nucleoids, each containing from one to ten copies of the mt genome, that are evenly distributed on the mitochondrial inner membrane  <cit> . an interesting line of inquiry is whether all circles of a multipartite genome are contained within individual nucleoids, and if so whether the copy ratio of the different circles is consistent between nucleoids. in single circle genomes with heteroplasmic variants, there is evidence both for random distribution of heteroplasmic types and for within-nucleoid purifying selection  <cit> . additionally, the mechanism by which the full complement of circles of a multipartite genome is faithfully transmitted to the next generation is unknown, but certainly involves nucleoid organization. it is of note that in the case of g. ellingtonae, where the circle copy number ratio changes with development, there must exist a mechanism by which the ratio is maintained within the germ line or reset during gametogenesis or embryogenesis. the multipartite mt genome in g. ellingtonae could provide a model system for deconstructing mechanisms of nucleoid based regulation of mtdna both in somatic cells and during germline development.

CONCLUSIONS
the complete mt genome of the nematode g. ellingtonae is unique and distinct from other multipartite mt genomes. its circles are larger and show more segregation of gene repertoire than any other multipartite metazoan mt genome recorded to date. its structure is particularly interesting in the context of the mt genome structure of its sibling species, g. pallida and g. rostochiensis, which consist of several much smaller circles. this is the only metazoan genus reported to contain species with both two circle and several circle genomes. it is likely the several pseudogenes and the large shared non-coding region are factors in the rapid evolution of these circles. differential copy numbers of the mt circles, with the more abundant circle encoding rrna genes and the majority of trna genes, is congruent with a model of functional differentiation of the circles. the change in the copy number ratio of the two circles as nematode development progresses and its reset in the next generation provides a potentially rewarding experimental system for studying mtdna regulation.

