BACKGROUND
adult hypopituitarism and untreated growth hormone  deficiency  is associated with endothelial dysfunction  <cit> , decreased systemic formation of nitric oxide   <cit>  and increased risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality  <cit>  as compared to the normal population  <cit> . there are disparate reports on the effect on blood pressure  in this condition; different studies have found normotension, hypotension or hypertension in ghd-patients . growth hormone replacement has been shown to reverse many of the adverse cardiovascular risk factors associated with ghd, including decreased systolic and diastolic bp, decreased vascular resistance  <cit> , increased cardiac output , increased heart rate   <cit> , improved endothelial function  <cit>  and increased no formation  <cit> .

hypophysectomized  rats express decreased systolic bp and mean arterial blood pressure , co and hr compared with intact rats  <cit> . as in human adult ghd, these rats show endothelial dysfunction and impaired vascular reactivity  <cit> , while aortic endothelial nitric oxide synthase  expression is not affected  <cit> . furthermore, these rats also display decreased heart weights  <cit> , and reduced vasculature mass in the muscle vascular bed suggesting an hypotropic remodelling of the cardiovascular system  <cit> . one week of gh substitution in hx rats does not result in a change in systolic bp measured by the tail-cuff technique, whereas hr, heart weight and aortic enos expression are increased  <cit> . the resistance vessels  still demonstrate endothelial dysfunction  <cit> . previous studies on bp regulation in hx rats  <cit>  have used less precise techniques to measure bp i.e. tail-cuff technique and therefore showed imprecise gh effect on acute and continuous bp regulation.

in the present study we aimed to investigate the acute and continuous  effect of growth hormone substitution on blood pressure regulation. in order to measure the true, unstressed bp, we used a telemetry technique with implantable transmitters. we were also interested in investigating the interplay between gh, no and bp. in order to do this we used a specific nos blocker and measured the aortic enos expression, basal plasma and urine nitrate levels. in addition, baroreceptor activity was examined both early and late after onset of gh treatment. at the end of the study, endothelial function and the vascular structural properties in the hindquarter were studied using an in vivo constant-flow preparation.

RESULTS
growth hormone causes a transient decrease in mean arterial blood pressure and a transient increase in heart rate, fig  <dig> and 2
hypophysectomy per se, caused a 17% decrease in map and hr before onset of hormonal treatment . neither map nor hr changed when the hx rats were treated with  compared with pre-treatment levels or with intact rats . growth hormone caused an immediate drop in map by approx 14%  with a concomitant increase in hr by approx. 16% . after  <dig> days of gh therapy, the map returned to pre-treatment levels , indicating that gh had a transient effect on bp regulation. similarly, hr returned to pre-treatment levels . mean arterial pressure was unchanged in both hx and intact rats during the treatment period . in addition, no change in hr was detected in hx and intact rats during the treatment period . at day  <dig>  the hr, but not map, was significantly changed between the groups .

growth hormone decreasing effect on blood pressure was no dependent, fig  <dig> and 4
early l-name treatment
both intact and hx rats had a similar bp response to l-name with an increase of approx 45% . growth hormone treatment caused a significantly greater bp response of approx 56% .

late l-name treatment
there was no difference in the response of map to l-name between the groups .

aortic enos expression was unaffected after  <dig> days of gh substitution
hypophysectomy per se, had no effect on aortic enos protein levels . there was no significant change in aortic enos expression after gh treatment compared with both hx and intact rats .

growth hormone effects on basal urine and plasma nitrate and nitrate clearance
the urine nitrate was lower, but not significantly decreased in the hx group compared to gh and intact . both hx and gh rats had significantly higher levels of plasma nitrate compared with intact rats . the nitrate clearance was calculated in all groups, demonstrating that gh had an increased clearance compared with hx rats, but similar with intact rats .

growth hormone caused a blunted baroreceptor activity, fig 5
the baroreceptor activity, tested by phenylephrine, was similar in intact and hx rats . in contrast, gh resulted in a blunted baroreceptor activity . when the rats were pre-treated with l-name, none of the groups differed in baroreceptor activity .

growth hormone increases body weight
the bw of the hx group did not change over time, indicating a complete hypophysectomy . after  <dig> days of treatment, the  group did not change in bw compared to pre-treated weight . the intact group increased by approx. 2% in bw during this period . the gh group increased in bw by 5% during the treatment period .

growth hormone caused a increased plasma igf-i
plasma igf-i decreased in hx rats by approx. 85% compared with intact rats . there was a substantial increase in plasma igf-i after  <dig> days of gh therapy by approx. 8-fold increase . growth hormone treated rats displayed a significant decrease in plasma igf-i compared with intact rats .

growth hormone effect on heart weight and structural parameters of the resistance vessels, table  <dig> and fig 6
the relative lv weight was not changed between hx and intact animals. surprisingly, there was a significant loss of weight in the lv after gh therapy by approx. 2% . the rv weight was not changed between the groups .

the skeletal muscle vascular bed in hx rats showed an increased sensitivity  to administered na by approx. 22% compared with intact rats , indicating an increased sensitivity of the vascular รก-adrenoceptors. treatment with gh resulted in a normalisation of the na sensitivity  . the perfusion resistance  obtained at maximal dilation was decreased by approx. 19% in both gh and hx group compared with intact rats . when vasoconstriction was induced by means of na or with angiotensin ii+phenylephrine, both hx and gh group showed approx. 42% and 40%, respectively, decreased resistance response compared with intact rats . similar resistance changes were obtained in gh, hx and intact rats after maximal constriction was induced by bacl <dig> . the average slope calculated from individual pressure-flow curves, also obtained during full vascular relaxation, showed similar magnitude of structural changes between hx, gh and intact rats . both the gh treated and hx rats showed endothelial dysfunction compared with intact rats, demonstrated by decreased dilation after a single dose of acetylcholine .

discussion
the major findings in this study are;  hypophysectomy per se, caused a decrease in map and hr, endothelial dysfunction and reduced vasculature mass in the hindquarter vascular bed.  supplementation with  did not change any of the studied parameters.  gh substitution resulted in a transient decrease in map and a transient increase in hr.  gh substituted rats had an increased map response after administration of early l-name compared with intact and hx rats, indicating a transient activation of no by gh.  long-term gh treatment resulted in an impaired baroreceptor activity.   <dig> days of gh therapy to hx rats neither improved the endothelial function nor restored the vascular structure. taken together, gh substitution seems to have a short lasting effect on lowering blood pressure via activation of the no-system. the transient increase in hr is most likely mediated by a baroreceptor activation. these data also suggest that a longer period of gh therapy is required to improve endothelial function and to restore the morphology of the vasculature. finally, there is interplay between gh, no-system and blood pressure regulation.

the effect of gh on blood pressure
growth hormone therapy to hx rats caused an immediate and transient decrease in map. this reduction in map appears to be no-dependent since l-name treatment caused a greater map response than it did in both hx and intact rats. we speculate that this finding may reflect an increase in enos activity and/or expression, resulting in enhanced no bioavailability. this may in turn lead to decreased total peripheral resistance  <cit> , resulting in reduced map. growth hormone and igf-i has been shown to increase enos in vitro  <cit>  as well as to increase enos expression  <cit>  and no formation  <cit> in vivo.

it has been suggested that gh treatment can be associated with an increase in extra cellular volume   <cit> . an increased volume load may theoretically lead to an increase in bp. however, a previous published study showed that increased body sodium concentration and increased ecv after gh substitution to ghd patients were not associated with an increase in bp  <cit> . taken together, this suggests that the load of ecv seems to be of minor importance for the bp regulation at least in gh treated ghd patients.

the gh activated no-dependent decrease in map appears to be transient since  <dig> days of gh therapy, results in a similar increase in map after a single dose of l-name as it did in both intact and hx animals. this result is supported by unchanged aortic enos expression in all groups and the return of map to pre-treatment levels in gh treated rats. the present study showed increases of urine nitrate after  <dig> days of gh treatment, which may suggest that there is still some gh stimulated no production left, although this increase appears to be of minor importance for the bp regulation. the level of map in gh rats did not return to the level in intact rats. it is possible that the observed reduction of the resistance vessels mass in the hindquarters vascular bed could be the explanation. folkow et al  <cit>  have shown that  <dig> weeks of treatment with both gh and t <dig> results in normalisation of bp as well as an enhanced vascular mass in the hindquarter vascular bed. in gh over-expressed mice, increased vascular mass has also been described  <cit> . these mice displayed either hypertension  <cit>  or normotension  <cit> . thus, it seems that a longer supplementation period is required to give an effect of vascular morphology on the resistance vessels as well as to normalise bp. however, hgh treatment to hx rats for longer periods than two to three weeks have been reported to result in antibodies against gh  <cit> . guided by this information, we decided to limit the study to two weeks.

growth hormone effect on heart rate and the baroreceptor activity
in the present study, gh substitution results in an immediate and transient increase in hr, which is partly in accordance with other studies  <cit> . this direct effect in hr can probably be explained by an increased sympathetic activity that could originate from increased firing of baroreceptors in response to decreased map. two weeks of gh therapy resulted in a normalisation of hr. this transient change in hr might be explained by deactivation of baroreceptors due to increased bp. after twelve days of gh therapy, baroreceptor activity was blunted. the blunted effect of the baroreceptors can most likely be explained in two ways; by loss of structure or by "resetting". both gh and hx rats showed reduced vasculature mass in the hindquarter vascular bed, but only gh treated rats exhibit impaired function of the baroreceptors, suggesting that the blunted function of the baroreceptors could not be due to loss of structure in the baroreceptors in gh rats. therefore, our data suggest that the impaired function of the baroreceptors seems to be related to "resetting". it has been suggested that no appears to act as a sympatholytic agent to modulate the central sympathetic outflow  <cit> . the impaired baroreceptor activity appears not to be no-dependent, since the blunted effect of the baroreceptors was unchanged after l-name treatment.

growth hormone effect on adreno-receptor sensitivity and endothelial function
growth hormone treated hx rats showed a right shift and/or normalisation of the noradrenalin ed <dig> value in the hindquarters vascular bed, which is in accordance with other studies  <cit> . long-term gh replacement in ghd patients has been shown to decrease sympathetic activity to the muscular vascular bed  <cit> , whereas heart rate variability displays increased ratio of sympato-vagal tone, decreased vagal tone and increased sympathetic tone  <cit> . this might suggest that the rightward shift and/or normalisation of the noradrenalin ed <dig> value in the hindquarter vascular bed is caused by increased sympathetic tone and changed ratio between the sympato-vagal and the vagal tone.

it is well known that ghd patients exhibit endothelial dysfunction  <cit> . this phenomenon has been detected in both conduit  <cit>  and resistance vessels in hx rats  <cit> . accordingly, in this study the resistance vessels in the hindquarter vascular bed also exhibit endothelial dysfunction in hx rats. neither one week  <cit>  nor two weeks of gh therapy resulted in improved endothelial function in the resistance vessels. in contrast, both gh supplemented ghd patients  <cit>  as well as gh treated hx rats  <cit>  show improved endothelial function in the conduit vessels. this suggests that longer treatment is required to enhance the endothelial function in the resistance vessels.

CONCLUSIONS
hypophysectomy per se, is associated with decreased map, hr and loss of vascular structure. growth hormone substitution to hx rats results in a transient decrease in map and a transient increase in hr. this transient decrease of map was no dependent. growth hormone treatment caused an impaired baroreceptor activity. two weeks of gh therapy neither improved the endothelial function nor restored vascular parameters. to summarize, gh substitution seems to have a short lasting effect on lowering blood pressure via activation of the no-system. these data also suggest that a longer period of gh therapy is required to improve endothelial function and to restore the morphology of the vasculature. finally, there is an interplay between gh, blood pressure and no-system.

