BACKGROUND
the order rodentia is the most diverse among placental mammals: extant rodent species represent half of the placental diversity   <cit> . morphological phylogenetic approaches have identified characters supporting a common origin  of rodents, and clustered rodents and lagomorphs  in a clade called glires  <cit> . morphological studies also generally agree on the number and content of rodent families  <cit> . however, the description of the relationships among rodent families has been confounded by rampant convergent evolution of morphological characters  <cit> . based on morphological characters, rodents have been divided into either two or three suborders. the first system, suggested by brandt, divides rodents into three suborders, myomorpha, sciuromorpha, and hystricomorpha, based on the position of masticatory muscles   <cit> . however, it has since been proven that this character is homoplasic and that this classification does not reflect evolutionary relationships  <cit> . the second system, proposed by tullberg, divides rodents into two suborders, sciurognathi and hystricognathi, based on the position of the incisors and the angle of the jaw  <cit> . the monophyly of hystricognathi has been accepted, based on the identification of additional morphological synapomorphies, but the sciurognathi are usually considered to be paraphyletic  <cit> . debates on the relationships within sciurognathi and their relationships with hystricognathi are the subject of numerous morphological papers . molecular studies were expected to clarify the relationships among rodents. however, early studies based on molecular data complicated the understanding of rodent evolution by suggesting that rodents are paraphyletic  <cit> . these results initiated lively debates concerning evolutionary relationships among rodents and their place among placental mammals  <cit> . phylogenetic conclusions supporting rodent paraphyly have been criticized, because they were based on a very limited taxonomic sampling. it has been suggested that increasing the sampling of rodent diversity  <cit>  and/or mammalian diversity  <cit>  would have supported rodent monophyly. additionally, over-simplified models have been shown to erroneously support rodent paraphyly  <cit> . recent analyses based on a representative sampling of rodent taxonomic diversity and using model-based methods of sequence analysis have strongly supported the monophyly of rodents  <cit> .

within rodentia, molecular analyses suggest that rodents are divided into seven well-supported clades: 1-anomaluromorpha , 2-castoridae , 3-ctenohystrica , 4-geomyoidea , 5-gliridae , 6-myodonta , and 7-sciuroidea   <cit> . however, several evolutionary relationships within rodentia are still debated. recent studies have suggested that these seven clades are clustered into three main lineages:  <dig> – anomaluromorpha, castoridae, geomyoidea, and myodonta together form the "mouse-related clade";  <dig> – sciuriodea and gliridae form the "squirrel-related clade"; and  <dig> – ctenohystrica forms the third lineage  <cit> . however, most studies have not been able to solve the relationships among these three clades. recently, montgelard et al.  <cit>  analyzed mitochondrial genes as well as nuclear exonic and intronic sequences, and found significant support in favor of a basal position of the "mouse-related clade". this result was dependent on the removal of the fastest evolving characters from the dataset, suggesting that mutational saturation might explain the inconclusive placement of the rodent root.

more generally, rodriguez-ezpeleta et al.  <cit>  have shown that weakly supported nodes can sometimes be explained by the presence of conflicting phylogenetic and non-phylogenetic signal in a dataset. three methods to reduce the non-phylogenetic information have been suggested: identification and removal of fast-evolving positions, character-recoding , and the use of a site-heterogenous mixture model   <cit> .

here, we aimed to resolve rodent relationships at the family level and above. we established a comprehensive dataset including six nuclear gene fragments from  <dig> rodent species together with eight outgroup species. we were able to solve most evolutionary relationships among rodent families. in order to minimize conflicting signals and thus solve the debated basal rodent relationships, we applied the three methods suggested by rodriguez-ezpeleta et al.  <cit> . we show that none of these methods, nor the use of more complex evolutionary models, can significantly solve basal rodent relationships. additionally, some of our analyses, surprisingly, suggest a basal position of the squirrel-related clade and significantly reject the basal position of the "mouse-related clade" supported by montgelard et al.  <cit> . we thus propose that the lack of resolution at the base of the rodent tree may reflect rapid rodent radiation, rather than conflicting phylogenetic signals.

RESULTS
the rodent phylogeny
maximum likelihood  and bayesian phylogenetic analyses, based on the combined nucleotide datasets, result in a well-resolved phylogeny , in agreement with the division of rodents into three major clades: the mouse-related clade  =  <dig>  posterior probability  =  <dig> ), the squirrel-related clade  and the ctenohystrica .

the mouse-related clade
the mouse-related clade comprises three main lineages: myodonta, anomaluromorpha , and castorimorpha . the monophyly of this clade was first found in molecular studies  <cit>  and later corroborated by a morphological analysis of extant and fossil taxa  <cit> . however, two recent molecular analyses cast doubt on the validity of the mouse-related clade. first, analysis of complete mitochondrial protein-coding genomes placed anomalurus as a sister taxon of the hystricognathi  <cit> . second, structural analysis of b <dig> retroposon elements suggested that castoridae could be an early diverging family within rodents  <cit> . our analysis strongly rejects both of these possibilities. the best alternative to monophyly of the mouse-related clade is significantly less likely than the ml tree, based on the approximately unbiased  test . analyses using ry coding or removal of third-codon positions, as well as partitioned analyses strongly support the monophyly of the mouse-related clade . when protein sequences are analyzed, the monophyly of the mouse-related clade is still supported, albeit with lower bootstrap support . it is likely that the disagreement between our analysis and that of horner et al.  <cit>  stems from the fact that the latter was based on only six non-muroid species. with regard to the b <dig> retroposon study, the position of castoridae presented by veniaminova et al.  <cit>  may be an artifact, because analysis of sine insertion loci in rodents supports the monophyly of the mouse-related clade  <cit> .

diff -ln l: observed log-likelihood difference between the ml topology and the alternative. au: p-values of the approximately unbiased test. kh: p-values of the kishino-hasegawa test. wsh: p-values of the weighted shimodaira – hasegawa test. significant p-values are indicated in bold.

coding 
model
/node
codon 
positions
codon positions
 and third codon
codon positions 
only
sequences

per gene 

 codon position 

codon position  
per gene
previous phylogenetic reconstructions were unable to solve the relationships among the three main lineages of the mouse-related clade , and all three possible evolutionary relationships have been suggested  <cit> . our phylogenetic inference based on the full nucleotide dataset suggests the grouping of anomaluromorpha with myodonda . however, bootstrap and bayesian support is at best moderate across the analyses considered . in agreement with the bootstrap analysis, an au test does not reject either alternative hypotheses . additional data are thus needed to resolve the relationships at the base of the mouse-related clade. all other nodes within the mouse-related clade are well supported and alternatives are rejected based on an au test .

the squirrel-related clade
the grouping of gliridae and sciuridae has been recognized in morphological studies based on middle ear features  <cit> , arterial pattern  <cit> , and by most molecular analyses. nevertheless, high support values have seldom been obtained to support this relationship  <cit> . this node is well supported in our study . it is also supported in our analyses using different coding and partitions approaches . however, alternatives to the monophyly of this clade are not rejected according to the au test .

the ctenohystrica
the clustering of ctenodactylidae and hystricognathi is highly supported . previous knowledge of relationships within hystricognaths has been based either on a single gene  for many hystricognath species   <cit>  or on multiple genes  for fewer species   <cit> . the present dataset expands that of huchon et al.  <cit>  by the addition of two nuclear gene fragments and four hystricognath taxa . this expanded dataset allows us to solve the debated relationships within hystricognathi. we find strong support for a basal position of hystricidae within hystricognathi , while this position was previously only weakly supported  <cit> . however, au tests do not reject alternative positions of hystricidae .

phylogenetic relationships among south-american hystricognaths  have long been debated. caviomorphs have been found to comprise four distinct lineages   <cit> . our results confirm that chinchilla rats  are not related to chinchilla but rather belong to the octodontoidea   <cit> . previous molecular trees did not resolve the relationships among the four caviomorph lineages with high bootstrap support, and various alternative topologies have been suggested  <cit> . our data support a sister clade relationship between cavioidea and erethizontoidea , and a sister clade relationship between chinchilloidea and octodontoidea . in spite of these high support values, au tests indicate that the best alternatives to these arrangements within caviomorpha cannot be rejected . similarly, analyses using ry coding or removal of third codon positions, as well as protein sequence analysis, support other relationships within caviomorpha . this suggests that additional species sampling is needed in order to robustly solve caviomorph relationships at the superfamily level.

solving the base of the rodent tree
the most important unresolved relationship in rodent systematics is the one at the base of the rodent tree. to date, no phylogenetic analysis has been able to resolve this question with strong support, whether based on nucleotide sequence data  <cit> , sine data  <cit> , or morphological data  <cit> . the only exception is the analysis of montgelard et al.  <cit> , which supports a basal position of the mouse-related clade after removal of fast-evolving nucleotide positions. our nucleotide-based ml and bayesian analyses  place the squirrel-related clade at the base of the rodent tree. our bayesian analysis with the data partitioned by gene and partially partitioned by codon position  appears to provide strong support for this relationship , but the partitioned ml bootstrap support values are much lower . it is possible for bayesian pp values to be artificially inflated under circumstances of a near-trichotomy  <cit> . with this single bayesian analysis being the only suggestion of strong support, and with the corresponding ml bootstrap support being so low, we hesitate to give much weight to the partitioned bayesian result at the present time.

recently, rodriguez-ezpeleta et al.  <cit>  have shown that the presence of conflicting phylogenetic and non-phylogenetic signal in a dataset may result in weakly supported nodes. they suggested various approaches to remove the non-phylogenetic signal and thus increase the ability to resolve difficult phylogenetic relationships. to evaluate whether the resolution of the basal relationships among rodents could be improved by reducing non-phylogenetic signal in our dataset, we tested all the approaches suggested by rodriguez-ezpeleta et al.  <cit> .

character recoding
third codon-position sites evolve the fastest, and are thus the most likely source of non-phylogenetic signal. in an attempt to reduce the non-phylogenetic signal, we performed analyses using ry coding for these positions. we also explored the extreme solution of removing all third codon-position sites. however, none of the three possible basal branching topologies was highly supported under these alternatives . the only signal that can be seen is that a basal position of the mouse-related clade is not supported by the analysis of either the nucleotide dataset with only the first two codon positions, or the protein sequence dataset .

removal of fast-evolving positions
nine datasets were delimited by retaining sites based on their inferred site-specific rates:  all sites ; rates range from - <dig>  to  <dig> );  sites with rate ≤  <dig>  ;  sites with rate ≤  <dig>  ;  sites with rate ≤  <dig>  ;  sites with rate ≤  <dig>  ;  sites with rate ≤  <dig>  ;  sites with rate ≤  <dig> ;  sites with rate ≤  <dig>  ; and  sites with rate ≤  <dig>  . the bootstrap support as a function of the maximal evolutionary rate of site retained is presented in figure  <dig>  removal of the fastest evolving sites  improves the support in favor of a basal position of the squirrel-related from 30% to 59% while support for alternative topology remains below 25%. however, no clear trend can be found as bootstrap support remains below 60% in all analyses. it is worth noting that the topology supporting a basal position of the mouse-related clade is again the least supported, except for the dataset with maximum rate ≤  <dig> . we do not believe that this result effectively supports an early divergence of the mouse-related clade, because slight modification of the rate cutoff substantially changes the topology. for example, while the dataset with maximum rate ≤  <dig>  supports a basal position of the mouse-related clade, the dataset with maximum rate ≤  <dig>  supports a basal position of the ctenohystrica. note that montgelard et al. did not study the effect of varying their cut-off value. finally, the support for all three topologies drops when sites with rate higher than zero are removed, possibly reflecting the fact that only  <dig> out of  <dig>  informative characters remained in this dataset.

similarly, seven datasets were considered by retaining sites based on their consistency index :  all sites ;  sites with ci >  <dig>  ;  sites with ci >  <dig>  ;  sites with ci >  <dig>  ;  sites with ci >  <dig>  ;  sites with ci >  <dig>  ; and  sites with ci >  <dig>  . when retaining sites according to their maximal ci value , we observe an increase in the bootstrap support in favor of a basal position of the squirrel-related clade from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, which might suggest that this represents the phylogenetic signal. this support drops when sites with ci ≤  <dig>  are removed, which might come from the fact that only  <dig> informative characters remain in this dataset.

use of site-heterogenous mixture model
the phylogenetic trees obtained under the cat model did not help resolving the basal rodent relationships. the cat analysis suggests that the squirrel-related clade is the first rodent lineage to diverge. however, no strong support in favor of this relationship is found, whether reconstructions are based on nucleotide or protein sequences .

use of complex evolutionary models for protein sequences
the use of more complex evolutionary models did not completely solve basal rodent relationships. again, a basal position of the mouse-related clade is generally the least likely, and this hypothesis is even rejected using au tests under either the jtt+Γ model or the rate-shift model . however, a basal position of the ctenohystrica cannot be excluded. this finding is in agreement with both the nucleotide analysis based on the first two codon positions and the nucleotide analysis with fast-evolving sites removed.

significant p-values are indicated in bold. the log-likelihood value of the best tree is indicated between brackets.

the nucleotide sequences were also analyzed using codon models. no support for positive selection was found, and hence, we only report the results obtained using the m8a model, which does not allow sites to evolve under positive selection. under this model, a basal position of the ctenohystrica is the most likely. however, the fit of the data to this topology is not significantly better than alternative topologies . the three possible rootings of the rodent tree are thus not statistically different based on au tests .

CONCLUSIONS
our phylogenetic reconstructions provide a well-resolved rodent tree, except for a few nodes and the basal relationships among the main rodent clades. unlike montgelard et al.  <cit> , removing fast evolving characters did not improve the resolution at the base of the rodent tree. this lack of resolution remained when all the other methods suggested by rodriguez-ezpeleta et al.  <cit>  to increase tree resolution were applied. surprisingly, using the jtt and the rate-shift models, we were able to reject a basal position of the mouse-related clade supported by montgelard et al.  <cit>  and support instead a basal position of the squirrel-related clade . this suggests that removing fast evolving positions is not a panacea to solve phylogenetic conflicts, since different datasets can lead to significantly different results when using this approach.

more generally, our results suggest that the low support at the base of the rodent tree cannot be attributed only to the presence of conflicting non-phylogenetic signal, since removing such non-phylogenetic signal failed to significantly increase the tree resolution. we thus hypothesize that this lack of resolution reflects rapid radiation at the base of the rodent tree and possibly incomplete lineage sorting. indeed, rodents were already highly diversified in the paleocene and early eocene. many extinct families are identified in these geological periods . according to recent phylogenetic work based on fossils and extant taxa  <cit> , some of these ancient families are sister clades of extant clades. in particular, theridomorpha might be related to sciuroidea, sciuravidae to the mouse-related clade, and yuomyidae to the ctenohystrica  <cit> . this supports the idea that the divergences among ctenohystrica, the mouse-related clade, and the squirrel-related clade occurred during the explosive radiation of rodents in the paleocene.

our results further suggest that a basal position of the mouse-related clade is the least likely, while a basal position of the squirrel-related clade may be the most likely. interestingly, structural analysis of b <dig> retroposon elements also provides additional support in favor of an early divergence of the squirrel-related clade  <cit> . the basal position of the squirrel-related clade may further be supported by the fact that the earliest fossils representative of the gliridae, aplodontidae, and sciuridae families are protrogomorphous, while most early ctenohystrica and most early representatives of the mouse-related clade are hystricomorphous . consequently, an early divergence of the squirrel-related clade appears to be the most parsimonious evolutionary scenario, given our current knowledge.

