BACKGROUND
the circadian clocks, or oscillators, that influence a variety of activities of an organism are regulated by a range of external environmental factors, such as light, temperature, humidity, food and social interactions  <cit> . genetic and molecular analyses in a range of evolutionary distant organisms, including the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster, have revealed a striking degree of conservation of these oscillators and their underlying molecular mechanisms, many of which involve transcriptional feedback loops  <cit> . timeless  is one of the crucial factors that connects the endogenous clock with the external environment such as light  <cit> . when light pulses are applied early in the subjective night  a phase delay is produced. conversely, when light pulses are applied just before lights would have come on, a phase advance is produced  <cit> . food is another potent clock-entraining cue, and the d. melanogaster takeout  gene has been shown to act as a molecular link between the circadian rhythm and feeding behavior  <cit> .

despite the essential role of circadian clocks in the regulation of vector behaviors that enable disease transmission, little is known about the molecular control of the host-seeking and feeding behavior of mosquitoes. it has been shown that the a. gambiae flight activity peaks during the night time and during the twilight  <cit> . light has also been shown to inhibit a. gambiae flight activity and to re-set the rhythm by delaying it; however if the light phase begins early, it has a phase-advancing effect  <cit> . the host-seeking and feeding behaviors of many hematophagous insects exhibit rhythmic biting activity  <cit> ; reaching peak levels in mid-night and are largely controlled by several circadian and chemosensory systems  <cit>  involving a variety of odorant binding proteins  and odorant receptors  that are linked to downstream signaling cascades  <cit> . in d. melanogaster antennae, the chemosensory components have been shown to be regulated by peripheral circadian oscillators  <cit> .

here we have initiated a detailed dissection of the delicate interactions that occur between the mosquito's light-sensing system, the circadian oscillators and the host seeking and feeding systems. several studies have reported the influence of light on the flight activity of mosquitoes  <cit> , while there is no comprehensive information available on the regulation of the mosquito's blood-feeding behavior by light, at least at the molecular level. we show that light pulses can induce changes in a. gambiae blood-feeding behavior and in the mosquito's global transcriptome, including transcripts that are regulated by blood feeding. we have functionally characterized selected genes that respond to the light stimulus by rnai mediated gene silencing and have shown that they can moderately influence the mosquitoes' blood feeding behavior. we show that this modulation of the mosquitoes' blood feeding behavior is dependent on light pulse duration and occurs both through clock entrainment mechanisms and by clock independent masking effects  <cit>  that may occur in a phase dependent or independent manner  <cit> . the light pulse stimulated alteration of mosquito feeding propensity implicates circadian factors that appear to down-regulate components of the chemosensory system.

RESULTS
the blood feeding behavior of a. gambiae is under circadian control
to test whether a. gambiae blood feeding behavior is under circadian control we performed a time-course analysis of blood feeding propensity during a normal ld 12: <dig> light/dark cycle  and during a dd  cycle to see whether the blood feeding propensity pattern would persist in absence of light . we were interested in assessing the blood-feeding behavior of mosquitoes when kept in dd for  <dig> consecutive hours. in ld conditions, blood feeding propensity peaked during late night, at around 5– <dig> h after the light-off transition, and was low during the daytime. the persistence of this pattern even after a  <dig> h dd condition suggests that blood feeding propensity of mosquitoes is under circadian control. we also performed an experiment where mosquitoes were maintained in a dd condition for  <dig> days prior to feeding at a day and night time, to assess whether a free-run condition could be reached. these mosquitoes showed feeding behavior that did not correlate with the zeitgeber time-points  and displayed a similar feeding propensity at both zt <dig>  and  <dig>  hours, suggesting a free-run condition ; this finding further validates the circadian nature of blood-feeding behavior  <cit> .

light pulse-induced alteration of a. gambiae blood-feeding behavior
a series of assays were performed to address the effect of long and short light pulses on the mosquito's blood feeding propensity. we investigated the effects of short  and long  light pulses, applied during the dark phase at  <dig>  hours, on the blood-feeding pattern of mosquitoes in both ld and dd conditions . a short light pulse of  <dig> min resulted in a transient inhibition  of blood feeding propensity in mosquitoes, in both ld and dd conditions . this observation suggests that the shorter light pulse did not evoke a behavioral phase shift, and the inhibition of feeding propensity is likely to reflect a masking effect  <cit> . on the contrary, a longer  <dig> h light pulse resulted in an immediate inhibition  of the blood feeding propensity along with a phase-advance  in mosquitoes that were maintained at both the ld and dd conditions , compared to the non-light pulse stimulated mosquitoes . earlier studies have shown that an early initiation of the light phase results in a phase-advancing effect on mosquito flight activity  <cit> .

we then performed a series of assays to better understand the mechanism mediating the inhibition of blood feeding propensity by shorter light pulses. light pulses of equal duration  were applied at different durations  prior to blood provision and light onset  . in separate assays, light pulses of different duration  were applied at a constant duration  prior to blood provision and light onset  . the first set of assays  showed a negative correlation between the duration prior to feeding and the behavioral change as a measure of feeding propensity; the shorter the time between the light pulses and blood provision, the larger the decrease in feeding propensity. mosquitoes maintained in constant light for  <dig> h prior to blood provision displayed the same degree of blood feeding inhibition to those exposed to a  <dig> min light pulse at  <dig> min prior to blood provision  . interestingly, even a  <dig> min light pulse at  <dig> min prior to the light phase significantly decreased the mosquitoes' feeding propensity when compared to those not exposed to light. the second set of assays  to examine the influence of the light pulse duration on feeding behavior showed that the light pulse duration was positively correlated with the induced behavioral change: the longer the light pulses, the larger the decrease in feeding propensity. a more detailed figure  is presented in additional file  <dig> and their corresponding values, standard error and the p-values  are shown in additional file  <dig> . the light dosage and phase dependent fashion of blood feeding propensity modulation further supports the implication of a phase dependent masking effect rather than a phase advance when mosquitoes are subjected to the two minute short light pulses  <cit> .

the table shows the list of cir and csr genes that were differentially regulated after either light pulse-treatment  or blood-feeding . the log2-transformed fold-differential expression  from the eight  arrays are shown. the significant ones  are shown in bold. the transcript ids have been shortened by deleting the first  <dig> alphabets "agap0" and only the last  <dig> characters are shown. .

for these blood feeding studies we chose an experimental design involving an artificial membrane feeding system  with commercial human blood because of the difficulty in standardization and replication of parameters associated with the use of a mouse or a human arm, as it will be subjective to different individuals. similar artificial membrane-feeding assays were also performed with close proximity  to human hands and continuous human exhalations. these results showed an apparent insensitivity of the mosquitoes to the applied light pulse; the mosquitoes' feeding propensity was largely unaffected by light pulse after this chemosensory over-stimulation . however this does not mean that the mosquitoes' feeding behavior upon direct stimulation with a human is not regulated by circadian oscillators that can be manipulated through environmental cues. the exposure of mosquitoes to a human arm or hand and exhalations at a 1- to  <dig> cm distance is an extreme condition providing maximal concentrations of chemosensory and heat stimulants, while in nature mosquitoes have to sense the human host at a distance of few hundreds to a couple of yards, at conditions that are very likely to be better simulated by a membrane feeding system that only allows for limited chemosensory stimulation  <cit> .

it has been shown that the taste receptors in mosquitoes can be induced by phagostimulants such as adenine nucleotides  <cit> ; thus the blood feeding behavior in mosquitoes is a complex process that is regulated by a variety of factors. host seeking, and hence the blood-feeding propensity of mosquitoes, has also been shown to be stimulated by various cues emitted by the host, such as co <dig>  lactic acid,  <dig> octen-3-ol, heat and color  <cit> . in order to better understand the basis of the mosquitoes' attraction to the blood in the membrane feeding system, which may be regulated by the blood-specific odor, temperature and color, we designed a series of experiments that suggested that the mosquitoes were mainly attracted to a blood-specific chemosensory stimulant through the membrane feeding system , and thereby supports the validity of our experimental design.

relationships between the light pulse and blood feeding – induced transcriptomes
to identify candidate components of the molecular circuits that mediate the interactions between the light stimulus and the mosquito's host seeking and feeding machinery, we used a microarray-based genome expression approach to assay differences in the mrna abundance of genes under different light-stimulation  and feeding conditions in whole mosquitoes and the head of both male and female mosquitoes . an earlier observation that the a. gambiae host-seeking is inhibited for at least 24– <dig> h after a blood meal  <cit>  was confirmed in our experimental system  and was used as a basis for the selection of a 6-h post-blood-feeding time point for global gene expression analysis of blood feeding-induced gene regulation. a complete list of genes showing regulation after a light pulse and blood feeding are listed in additional file  <dig> 

a light pulse stimulation for  <dig> min at  <dig> min prior to rna harvest , resulted in the regulation of  <dig> genes in the total mosquito  and  <dig> genes in the head  of females . mosquitoes exposed to continuous light for  <dig> h  showed regulation of  <dig> genes  in whole female mosquitoes. the regulated genes represented a variety of functional classes, of which the most abundant were metabolism, immunity, oxidoreductive processes, and transporters . of particular interest were the genes with predicted functions related to the mosquito's circadian clock, chemosensory and blood-digestive systems . the robustness of the microarray data was validated by qrt-pcr .

circadian clock-related genes
light pulse regulated six circadian genes in the head or total mosquito: a casein kinase and the tim genes were up-regulated in the total mosquito, while the transcript abundance of two putative to homologs and two circadian controlled precursor genes were down regulated in the head . casein kinase and tim have previously been shown to be involved in regulating the circadian rhythm in response to light pulse stimulation in various organisms  <cit> . the mrna abundance of the four major circadian genes: period , clock , cycle  and cryptochrome  <dig>  was below threshold detection levels for microarray analyses  at the assayed conditions .

the to gene is involved in regulating the feeding behavior of d. melanogaster and has been shown to be up-regulated upon starvation  <cit> . a similar study in a. gambiae with sugar feeding has shown up-regulation upon sugar starvation . the down-regulation of two putative to transcripts  by light pulse stimulation, which may account for the decreased feeding propensity , is intriguing when related to the rnai gene silencing of to genes that results in an increased feeding propensity . this is likely to reflect other functions of these genes, as has been found in d. melanogaster  <cit> . a detailed phylogenetic study of the a. gambiae to genes with other homologues is discussed below. two to transcripts  were up-regulated in the carcass compartment after blood-feeding.

chemosensory genes
as many as twelve genes with putative chemosensory functions were exclusively regulated by light pulse stimulation; three were exclusively regulated by blood feeding, and three by both stimuli . nine obps were down-regulated after light pulse stimulation in the female head; this pattern is likely to be related to the lower blood-feeding propensity of the mosquitoes after light pulse stimulation . the obp <dig> gene showed significant up-regulation in female mosquito head after blood feeding; this increased activity may indicate a specialized function for this gene, such as mate seeking or oviposition site finding. another interesting feature was the significantly lower expression of several obps  in light pulse-stimulated female versus male heads, while a direct comparison between the gene expression in non-stimulated female and male heads showed a higher expression of three obps  in the male heads. female obps play major role in host seeking and blood feeding, while the male obps are involved in pheromone binding for mating and nectar feeding and may not be regulated by light-entrainable host-seeking behavior in the same way as the female genes. a specific obp can play multiple roles in sensing different types of complex odors, since the odor sensing is dependent on several obps that are part of a specific odor code  <cit> .

a d <dig> related  <dig> protein which is distantly related to obps, was up-regulated in the head by both light pulse stimulation and blood feeding, and was down-regulated in the carcass after blood feeding . proteins belonging to the d <dig> family has been shown to be expressed in the salivary glands and were injected into the host with saliva during blood feeding  <cit> . among the other genes that showed regulation after light pulse stimulation includes a putative gustatory receptor, which was up-regulated in the female head when compared to the male head; and two pheromone binding proteins, of which one was up-regulated and the other was down-regulated in the female head .

blood digestive enzymes
as many as  <dig> genes involved in proteolytic digestion were regulated by blood feeding and  <dig> genes by light pulse stimulation, while  <dig> genes were regulated by both the stimuli . the majority of these genes  were up-regulated upon blood feeding; a finding that is consistent with the fact that this functional class plays a role in blood meal digestion. the carboxypeptidase genes were shown to follow a cyclical blood-inducible expression pattern with a peak every  <dig> h post blood meal  <cit> , and in our assay two carboxypeptidase genes  were up-regulated in the carcass after blood feeding, however agap <dig> was down regulated in female head after a light pulse. two chymotrypsin genes  have been shown to be induced in the midgut epithelium after blood feeding  <cit> , and in our assay one chymotrypsin gene  was similarly induced with feeding in female body, though it was down-regulated in female head after light pulse. in agreement with the down-regulation of two serine proteases in female body after blood feeding in our analysis, the gut-specific serine protease  has been earlier shown to be down-regulated during the peak hours of digestion  after a blood meal  <cit> , although one of the serine protease  showed up-regulation with light pulse in female head. an angiotensin converting enzyme and two aminopeptidase genes were down-regulated after blood feeding in the rest of the female body; however they were not regulated with light pulse. this finding is particularly interesting in light of a study that showed that a. gambiae aminopeptidase n  was involved in blocking the development of plasmodium ookinetes in several mosquito species  <cit> .

other functional gene groups
in d. melanogaster, a variety of physiological processes have been shown to be under circadian control and to be associated with periodic oscillations in gene expression patterns  <cit> . a. gambiae genes regulated by light pulse and blood feeding which are involved in other functional groups like immunity, oxidative stress and redox, cytoskeletal and structural, metabolism and other housekeeping genes  are discussed below. a larger number of genes were regulated by light pulse: immunity , metabolism , cytoskeletal and structural , redox/stress , rtt  and trp  functional groups, compared to those regulated by blood feeding . in the "diverse" functional category, there were  <dig> genes that were regulated exclusively by light pulse stimulation,  <dig> exclusively by blood feeding and  <dig> by both stimuli. of the genes whose functions were unknown,  <dig> genes were regulated exclusively by a light pulse,  <dig> exclusively after blood feeding and  <dig> by both stimuli . a significant number of light pulse- and blood feeding-regulated genes were most likely not identified in these assays because of limitations of the microarray methodology to detect mrna of lower abundance. these major changes in gene expression are indicative of the highly significant impact that a light pulse can have on mosquito physiology, at least partly by modulating circadian oscillators.

immunity-related genes
as many as  <dig> genes with putative roles in the mosquito's innate immune system were found to be regulated by light pulse stimulation and  <dig> genes with blood-feeding exclusively. thirty genes were regulated by both stimuli  which adds up to  <dig> immune genes being regulated by the two stimuli . these included genes encoding pattern recognition receptors , serine protease cascade components , immune signaling pathway factors , antimicrobial peptides , and other functionally diverse proteins  <cit> . it was recently shown in drosophila that disruption of the circadian rhythm is often correlated with increased susceptibility to infection  <cit> . the circadian regulation of the mosquito's innate immunity factors is particularly intriguing, since many of these molecules can modulate resistance to the malaria parasite plasmodium  <cit> . interestingly, blood feeding alone up-regulated several immunity genes such as cecropin, fibrinogen immunolectins, leucine rich repeat protein, peroxidase precursor, thioester containing proteins as well as toll precursors and serpins. bacterial proliferation occurs in the gut after a blood meal and this is likely to result in immune gene induction  <cit> . several immune genes were also down-regulated after blood-feeding and those includes among others; c-type lectin  <dig>  fibrinogen immunolectin  <dig>  a scavenger receptor protein and spaetzle  <dig>  <cit> .

oxidative stress and redox genes
a variety of oxidoreductive and stress-related genes were found to be regulated upon light pulse stimulation . genes in this group included those encoding cytochromes, glutathione s-transferases , oxidoreductases, dehydrogenases and heat shock proteins. most of the detoxification-related genes ; such as the cytochrome p <dig>  gst and dnaj genes, were down-regulated after light pulse stimulation in the female whole mosquito and head. these genes have been linked to insecticide resistance  <cit> . light pulse stimulation can change the redox state by generating several ions/molecules, resulting in up-regulation of several of these genes, including those for oxidoreductases, mitochondrial carrier proteins, heat shock proteins, and several dehydrogenases  <cit> . it has been shown earlier that several detoxification enzymes are up-regulated after blood feeding, as a result of the release of reactive oxygen species during the digestion of heme  <cit> ; a similar pattern observed in our assay, with most enzymes being up-regulated after blood feeding.

cytoskeletal and structural genes
thirty two genes encoding components of the cytoskeleton and those involved in structural maintenance, such as those encoding actin, myosin, tubulin, kinesin, tropomyosin, cuticle proteins and dynein, were mainly up-regulated  by light pulse stimulation in both head and whole mosquitoes . six genes were regulated with blood-feeding exclusively and  <dig> genes were regulated by both stimuli ; hence  <dig> genes were regulated by both stimuli . many of these genes have previously been shown to be differentially expressed after blood feeding  <cit> , and some play a role in the plasmodium parasite's traversal of the midgut epithelial cells and the repair of the midgut epithelium after this invasion  <cit> . of particular interest are the peritrophin precursor gene, which is up-regulated in female head after both light pulse stimulation and blood feeding, and an annexin gene which was down-regulated in female head after light pulse stimulation. an annexin protein has been previously shown to be up-regulated by light pulse stimulation and serotonin in the eye circadian system of aplysia species  <cit> .

metabolism and other housekeeping genes
as many as  <dig> genes encoding a variety of enzymes involved in a range of different metabolic pathways were differentially regulated upon light pulse stimulation;  <dig> were up-regulated and the remaining  <dig> were down-regulated in both whole female mosquitoes and in their heads . a variety of replication-, transcription-, and translation-related genes  were regulated by light pulse stimulation and to a lesser extent after blood feeding , in both the head and whole mosquito additional file  <dig>  a variety of metabolic processes are tightly controlled by circadian oscillators, since these processes need to exhibit different activity levels during the day and night phases  <cit> . genes related to transport processes  were also regulated  with light stimuli; this finding is consistent with reports that light entrainment is associated with adjustments in several photoreceptor molecules, and several ions, solute factors, and bio-molecules may need to be transported to other cellular compartments  <cit> .

circadian expression of the clock and chemosensory genes in a. gambiae
the regulation of several clock and chemosensory genes by a short light pulse stimulation  which, however, was not capable of inducing a phase advance was intriguing , and we pursued further characterization of selected genes  with regard to their mrna abundance at successive time points over a ld 12: <dig> cycle to test for their circadian regulation . this analysis showed some interesting features that may suggest that the circadian system of hematophagous insects share certain commonalities. all seven genes showed a higher expression pattern in female head at the night-dark phase , similarly to what has been observed in d. melanogaster  <cit> . the expression pattern of these genes  showed a quite different expression pattern in the rest of the body where their mrna abundance displayed the lowest level during the night-dark phase . a similar observation has been shown for the blood sucking sandfly lutzomyia longipalpis, where several clock regulated genes were regulated in an opposite manner in female head and body  <cit> .

determination of rnai knockdown efficiency and expression analysis of selected circadian and chemosensory genes
to identify putative components of the molecular interactions between the mosquito's light sensing system, light pulse-entrained circadian oscillators and its host-seeking and feeding systems, we selected  <dig> genes for rnai gene silencing assays in adult female mosquitoes to assess their potential influence on the mosquito's blood-feeding behavior. seven of these genes  were selected on the basis of their expression patterns , and the remaining three  were included as representative of previously identified circadian clock factors. a series of assays were first carried out to determine the silencing efficiencies tissue specific expression specificities of the targeted genes.

rnai-mediated gene silencing assays in adult mosquitoes depend on direct injection of dsrnas into the hemolymph, which resides in the insect's open circulatory system. the dsrnas are then taken up by various tissues and cell types. it is reasonable to expect that some tissues, such as the antennae, are less accessible to this dsrna and would be less susceptible to rnai-mediated gene silencing because it is more difficult for the double-stranded rna to diffuse into these body parts from the thoracic hemolymph. some of these genes are known to be expressed in specific tissues, where they are most likely regulated by peripheral circadian oscillators; others would be expected to display a more general mrna abundance in multiple tissues. for instance, the obps are known to be mainly localized in the antennae, proboscis, maxillary palps and head  <cit> . the rnai-mediated gene-silencing efficiency was highest in the remaining body parts for the majority of the tested genes , while the head and antennae displayed lower silencing efficiencies  . however, even a relatively low gene-silencing efficiency, as determined by a decreased abundance of mrna, may still produce a significantly altered gene knockodown phenotype, as has been shown previously in a. gambiae  <cit> .

the transcript abundance of these genes was assessed in the antennae , the head, and the remaining body of 4-day-old female mosquitoes . since the circadian clock components have a rhythmic cyclical expression, rna samples were collected at  <dig> hr intervals over a 24-h period  and then pooled for analysis of tissue-specific expression. the tim and per transcripts and all three putative to transcripts were detected at equal levels in all body parts, while cry  <dig> and clk showed slightly lower expression in the antennae than in the other body parts . the three obps obp <dig>  obp <dig>  and obp <dig> were expressed only in the head and antennae and not in the rest of the body, consistent with previous reports  <cit> .

modulation of blood-feeding behavior through gene silencing of light-pulse regulated circadian and chemosensory factors
we used an rnai-based gene silencing approach to test some of the light pulse regulated genes for implication in the molecular interactions between the mosquito's light cue sensing systems and its host-seeking and feeding systems. the feeding propensity of the tim, clk, cry  <dig> and putative to gene-silenced mosquitoes was increased by ~ <dig> – 20%, whereas silencing of obp <dig> decreased the feeding propensity by ~20%, and silencing of per, obp <dig>  or obp <dig> had no apparent effect on the feeding phenotype when compared to the gfp dsrna-treated control mosquitoes . the statistical analysis  showed that tim, clk, cry  <dig>  three putative to and the obp <dig> gene-silenced mosquitoes had a significantly increased feeding propensity  compared to the gfp dsrna treated control mosquitoes. the mrna abundance of all ten circadian genes used for rnai gene silencing assay are shown at some of the light on/off time-zone assayed conditions by both microarray and qrt-pcr assay . the increased feeding propensity in tim-cry1- and clk-silenced mosquitoes may be explained by an effect on the circadian clock, causing a delay in reaching the light-onset phase when feeding propensity is normally low . the increased blood feeding propensity in to silenced mosquitoes suggest that these genes influence feeding behavior in the mosquito, similarly to what has been observed in the fruit fly  <cit> . the decreased blood-feeding propensity of obp4-silenced mosquitoes supports a role for this chemosensory factor in host seeking. the low level of feeding inhibition that was produced by depletion of two other obps  is likely a result of the inefficient rnai silencing of these genes in the antennae. the fold difference in feeding inhibition  is shown in figure 5b.

phylogenetic analysis of the takeout homologs of a. gambiae and their regulation in response to starvation
the d. melanogaster to transcript has been shown to be induced by starvation and been proposed to participate in a novel circadian output pathway that translates temporal and food status-related information into feeding-relevant metabolism and activity  <cit> . two a. gambiae takeout genes  identified earlier in the antennae,  <cit>  and one aedes aegypti to gene  have been shown to be orthologs of the d. melanogaster takeout protein  <cit> . in a separate study, based on sequence similarity searches using the aedes takeout protein sequence , another  <dig> drosophila and  <dig> anopheles homologs have been identified  <cit> . of these, only two drosophila proteins  and one anopheles protein  displayed all the conserved features of a takeout protein; the others contained only the conserved secretory juvenile hormone binding protein  domain. we used the a. gambiae putative takeout  protein sequence in blast searches to identify two additional members, agap <dig> and agap <dig>  both of which also showed differential regulation by light pulse and blood feeding in the microarray analysis . we have designated the three genes agap <dig>  agap <dig>  and agap <dig> as putative takeout <dig>  takeout  <dig>  and takeout <dig>  respectively. the three a. gambiae putative to genes were analyzed in terms of their potential sugar starvation-dependent regulation and showed a  <dig> - to  <dig> -fold up-regulation after a 24-h sugar starvation . these transcripts returned to the pre-starvation levels of abundance after a 10% sugar solution was provided; as previously shown with re-feeding in d. melanogaster  <cit> . phylogenetic analysis of the six insect protein sequences  indicated that a. gambiae agap <dig> is more closely related to aedes aael <dig> and drosophila takeout proteins  than are the other two a. gambiae takeout proteins  . the down-regulation of three putative to genes in the head and up-regulation in the rest of the body with blood feeding , further support differential functions of these factors in different parts of the mosquito in response to assorted kind of feeding .

CONCLUSIONS
our study has established an important role for the light modulated circadian and chemosensory oscillators in the regulation of the mosquito's blood feeding behavior, and consequently its capacity to transmit blood-borne pathogens. while previous studies have described the a. gambiae flight activity during the night time and during the twilight  <cit> , here we provide insight into the molecular components and mechanisms that regulate the blood feeding behavior. we have shown that the mosquito's blood feeding behavior is under circadian control, with a peak during the late night . a short  <dig> minute light pulses can momentarily decrease the mosquito's blood-feeding propensity in a non-circadian fashion, while a longer light pulse of  <dig> hours can induce a phase advance phenomenon in the mosquito's feeding behavior, similarly to what has been shown for the circadian regulation on flight activity  <cit> . the short 2-min light pulse can cause a profound change in the mosquito's transcriptome that reflected a modulation of a variety of physiological systems, including those that regulate the mosquito's vectorial capacity. we have mainly focused on transcripts that influence mosquito's feeding behavior; future studies are needed to more clearly define the specific ways in which light can contribute to the regulation of the mosquito's anti-plasmodium defense system and its resistance to infection. the overlap between the light pulse- and blood feeding-induced transcriptomes encompassed a variety of genes, some of which represent molecular links between the mosquito's light sensing and feeding systems. the dosage dependent effect of the short 2-minute light pulse on feeding propensity  over time suggests it may represent a masking effect which however involves several clock factors . further detailed studies are required to better understand the impact of a masking mechanism on the mosquito's blood-feeding behavior, and whether this is a phase dependent or independent system. the circadian expression pattern and down-regulation of several obp transcripts after light pulse stimulation , in conjunction with the gene-silencing phenotypes observed for these genes , establishes them as essential factors in the mosquito's host-seeking system and further supports an important role of the mosquito's chemosensory oscillators in the regulation of host seeking and feeding behavior  <cit> . future work should focus on the characterization of these links since a detailed understanding of these interactions can lead to the development of novel malaria control strategies based on interference with the mosquito's host-seeking behavior.

