BACKGROUND
grapevine  is one of the most cultivated fruit plants worldwide with an important economic impact due to the high value of its derivative products such as grapes and juice, wine and liquors. since the availability of its genome sequence, grapevine was established as a non-climacteric model plant  <cit> .

the apoplast is defined as the total extracellular space external to the plasma membrane  <cit> . the fluid moving in the extracellular space is usually named apoplastic fluid . it contains a large variety of molecules that are known to be involved in various processes, including  growth regulation,  cell wall maintenance,  protection against desiccation and environmental stresses,  transportation route for a broad range of molecules,  homeostasis,  cell to cell adhesions and  gas exchanges . it plays a crucial role in plant defence mechanisms because it provides a continuous network in plants, representing the interface between the plant and its environment  <cit> . despite their biological significance, investigations on apoplastic proteins are hampered due to their low abundance compared to intracellular protein concentrations. moreover, the af extraction from in planta systems is far from easy and remains challenging. the limited number of studies that have been performed on in planta secretomes is explained by the requisite optimization of existing protocols for each plant species. this is particularly true for a recalcitrant plant like grapevine regarding its polyphenols and polysaccharides contents. the most commonly used method for af extraction is the vacuum-infiltration-centrifugation  method involving two critical steps: vacuum-infiltration with appropriate extraction buffer and centrifugation  <cit> . the vic method has been used for af protein recovery and shown to be suitable for proteomic analyses. 2d-page is known to be a robust global approach to obtain a snapshot of the secretome  <cit> . since the accomplishment of the v. vinifera genome sequencing, genome scanning using dedicated software allowed numerous protein predictions  <cit> . however, their presence has still to be confirmed and the use of the public databases improved considerably the potential of grapevine proteome analysis  <cit> .

the present work aimed at evaluating the potential of subcellular proteomics for identifying proteins in the apoplastic compartment of grapevine leaf. subcellular proteomics has the advantage not only of relating proteins to a functional compartment of eukaryotic cells, but also of reducing the complexity of the tissue protein extracts, which often prevents a satisfactory proteomic analysis. indeed, as the resolution of analytical separation methods is too limited to dissect the total proteome of a cell or tissue, less abundant proteins are often masked by those expressed at higher levels  <cit> . in this study, we present an optimized vic method to extract soluble proteins from af of grapevine leaves and a well-defined interactive map of these proteins. improvement of this method was carried out by comparing apoplastic to whole leaf soluble protein extracts. large-scale analysis of the grape af revealed that stress-related proteins and cell wall modifying enzymes are predominately present in this cellular compartment.

RESULTS
apoplastic fluid recovery and protein extraction optimization
in order to obtain a large overview of the proteins naturally present in the af of non-stressed grapevine, a large-scale proteomic study by 2d-page analyses has been realized. in grapevine, like most plants, the large amount of intracellular proteins, among which the rubisco is most highly represented, doesn’t allow to specifically identify af proteins from total protein extracts. a vic method  has been optimized from results obtained in barley  <cit>  and tomato  <cit>  to recover the af of grapevine leaf and to obtain a protein sample enriched in apoplastic proteins. the af of grapevine leaf was difficult to recover by centrifugation. to enhance af outflow, a major modification of the usual vic method was to increase centrifugation speed up to  <dig>  g. such centrifugation may cause damage to cell walls and membranes leading to contamination of the af by inner cell components  <cit> . however, neither malate dehydrogenase nor nh4+, both cytoplasmic markers, have been reported in the brassica napus leaf af, which was recovered after a  <dig>  g centrifugation step  <cit> . protein contaminants from other subcellular compartments are often found in af and, depending on the extraction method, slightly different results on recovered proteins are expected  <cit> .

during protein extraction with tca/acetone buffer, the precipitation of sugars present in the af sample leads to a viscous extract not suitable for ief. to clean up proteins from leaf af before further processing, a procedure with tca/acetone combined to a phenol extraction step was performed. denatured proteins and other hydrophobic proteins are soluble in phenol or agglomerate at the phenol-water interface, unlike the small molecules and nucleic acids, which are soluble in the aqueous phase. the combined use of tca/acetone precipitation and phenol-based extraction improved sample quality, resulting in a better spot resolution, as reflected in reduced background and streaking on 2-d electrophoresis gels and leading to a high number of detected spots .

protein identifications
protein separation by 2d-page and ms identification were performed in order to compare the protein profiles obtained from whole leaf  and af , as reported by previous work  <cit> . two clearly different protein patterns were obtained by 2d-page, demonstrating an apparent subfractionation of the af. comparative analysis of the acquired gel images from  <dig> biological replicates was carried out using the delta2d software. the analyses revealed a total of  <dig> spots in the whole leaf extract and  <dig> spots in the af extract over a non-linear ph range of 3– <dig> and a size range of 15–120 kda. respectively  <dig> and  <dig> spots were analyzed by ms and ms/ms in order to construct whole leaf and apoplast 2d maps of v. vinifera. ms analyses yielded respectively  <dig> and  <dig> different positive identifications of proteins and their respective isoforms.

data arising from gel analyses are deposited in the public database world-2dpage   <cit> . the corresponding proteins are also listed in the additional file  <dig> for whole leaf proteins and in additional file  <dig> for apoplastic proteins. although the v. vinifera genome was recently sequenced  <cit> , little is known about the protein profiles of grapevine. numerous identifications were based on homology to proteins characterized in other species by blast-p search of the ncbi non-redundant database  <cit> . these identifications lead to the in planta detection of 66 v. vinifera predicted proteins, confirming their presence in grapevine leaf af .

a the protein distribution according to their biological process.

b the protein group.

c the number that identifies protein spots on 2-d apoplastic map.

d the accession number from genbank assigned to the peptide after ms/ms analysis.

e the predicted localisation of the peptide according to the presence of a n-terminal signal peptide , non-classical signal peptide , transmembrane helices , chloroplast , mitochondria  and unclassified  location.

f the peptide identification based on homology to proteins characterized in other species by blast-p search on ncbi database.

g the relative homology percentage of protein obtained by blast-p.

shared proteins identified in both af sample and total leaf sample are highlighted in bold.

protein pi and mr values were experimentally determined and compared to their theoretical values obtained from primary structure analysis . some theoretical mr/pi values did not match well compared to their experimental values on 2d maps. such differences could be explained by possible post-translational modifications  that cause the covalent addition of chemical groups to the polypeptide backbone  <cit> . the pi and mr shifts might also be due to the removal of n-terminal signal peptides of secreted proteins, which leads to smaller mr and pi modifications compared to the predicted sequences. numerous spots matched the same protein accession. peptide redundancies in different spots were probably due to ptms. moreover, in some spots, peptide mixtures could occur due to co-migration of proteins sharing the same pi and mr.

quality of the af sample enrichment
the cytoplasmic localization of malate dehydrogenase leads to its activity being used as a common marker of af quality: the absence of activity in the af argues for no or little cytoplasmic contamination  <cit> . since the extraction buffer contains chaps denaturing agent, enzymatic activities could not be performed on the af sample. however, no malate dehydrogenase was found among the analyzed spots in the af in contrast to the whole leaf proteome where malate dehydrogenase is frequently detected . the lack of the malate dehydrogenase in the af sample suggests an enrichment in apoplastic proteins putatively without any contamination by cytoplasmic proteins. nevertheless, western-blot analysis has been performed on both af and whole leaf samples to check the contamination level by other compartment proteins and to confirm the sample enrichment in af proteins . the soluble proteins extraction yield reached approximately 6 μg and  <dig>  μg per gram of fresh weight for af sample and whole leaf sample, respectively. by loading the same amount of proteins, the loaded amount in equivalent fresh weight is around  <dig>  times higher for af sample than whole leaf sample . specific antibodies of rubisco, the most abundant protein found in plant leaves, mainly localised in cytoplasmic and chloroplastic compartments  <cit>  and h+-atpase, a plasma membrane protein  <cit> , have been used as markers of the af quality to detect the contamination level. the rubisco large subunit and the h+-atpase are present in the whole leaf protein sample as expected but are not detected in the af protein sample . even by loading  <dig>  times more sample in equivalent fresh weight, neither the rubisco large subunit  nor the h+-atpase  could be detected by western-blot analysis in the af sample. however, the detection by 2d-gel analysis of the rubisco subunit  and the atpase  in af sample indicates a very low level of symplastic contamination . this contamination can be detected by the proteomic approach since 250 μg of protein is loaded onto the 2d-gels compared to the 20 μg loaded onto the western-blot analysis. some other cytoplasmic proteins have been extracted from the af, as revealed by the presence of the chloroplastic sedoheptulose- <dig>  bisphophatase  and suggesting a partial cell membrane breakdown. this recurrent and unavoidable cytoplasmic contamination has already been highlighted by several previous studies  <cit> . however, in such conditions, only  <dig> proteins highlighted in table  <dig> could be identified in the whole leaf extract. this redundancy could be due to  cell component contamination as mentioned previously, such as the rubisco large subunit or atpase,  the high content of some of these apoplastic proteins, which can be significantly recovered by whole leaf extraction, such as the germin-like protein or cucumisin precursor. these data confirm that the vic technique seems to be a suitable method allowing the recovery of a highly enriched af protein sample from grapevine leaf.

global analysis of whole leaf and apoplast proteomes
identified proteins in both apoplastic and whole leaf protein extracts were classified according to their molecular function . the go database  provides a useful tool to annotate and analyze the functions of a large number of proteins. categories were based on go classification using agbase, a unified resource for functional analysis in agriculture  <cit> . proteins were grouped according to plant go-slim categories obtained for molecular functions. some of the go classes were merged in order to simplify the classification.

the molecular function classification covered a higher proportion of peptides with hydrolase activity  and carbohydrate binding pattern  in the af extract compared to the whole leaf extract . the latter showed predominantly peptides annotated to catalytic activity  and nucleic acid related . the high rate of peptides with hydrolase activity and/or involved in carbohydrate binding could be linked to the numerous glycosyl hydrolase and pathogenesis-related  proteins found in the af . the higher proportion of peptides in the whole leaf protein extracts that could interact with nucleic acids supports the conclusion that they are localized in the cytoplasm, therefore suggesting the quality of the af enrichment process.

protein secretion
from the af proteins, 66% were predicted with a signal peptide sequence using the targetp software  <cit> , compared to 5% for the whole leaf proteins . a similar percentage of proteins with a predicted signal peptide sequence was found in soybean , but lower amounts were found in arabidopsis  and rice   <cit> . predicted cleavage sites within the n-terminal region of most proteins identified in the af are additional support for the quality of the af extraction. in the classical secretory pathway, proteins are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum before passing through the dictyosomes to be inserted by vesicles in the plasma membrane or secreted into the extracellular space. among the secreted proteins, some can be linked to the cell membrane. an analysis with the tmhmm algorithm  <cit>  confirmed that 29% of the proteins in the af extract harbour at least one α-helical transmembrane domain compared to the whole leaf extract in which only 2% of identified proteins are transmembrane proteins . this difference could suggest either a putative rupture of the cytoplasmic membrane leading to the release of these proteins in the apoplast and to a cytoplasmic contamination of the af sample or the secretion of these proteins through the cytoplasmic membrane. indeed, proteins identified in the af and lacking a signal peptide, named leaderless secreted proteins , could be secreted by a non-classical secretory mechanism as described in yeast and bacteria  <cit> . inventories of plant secretome reveal that lsps may account for up to 50% of the whole leaf proteins identified in the extracellular fluid  <cit> . lsps potentially possess dual functions depending on the localization inside or outside plant cells. part of the predicted cytoplasmic proteins found in the af could be in fact actively translocated into the extracellular space. they could have another function such as the heat shock protein  <dig> , which is thought to be secreted in maize after pathogen elicitation  <cit> . the presence of lsps can be predicted by a secretomep analysis  <cit> . data analyses revealed that the protein sample recovered by the vic method contains 15% of lsps . such a low level could be explained by the fact that analyses were performed on unstressed leaves. the secretome of plants submitted to stresses usually contains more lsps than unstressed plants. indeed, the analysis of arabidopsis salicylic acid-treated cells reveals that more than 55% of the secreted proteins were lsps  <cit> .

altogether the chloroplastic, mitochondrial and transmembrane proteins represent 52% of the whole leaf extract and only 12% of the af extract . the amount of contamination in the af by cellular components can be observed especially with the minimal content of chloroplastic and mitochondrial proteins. these intracellular protein contaminations have already been described in previous reports and are consistent with the proposed occurrence of non-classical secretory pathways  <cit> . notably, the prediction of cellular localization and signal peptide content enabled us to conclude that the vic method developed here was suitable for an enrichment of af proteins.

apoplastic fluid proteins analysis reveals mainly stress-related proteins, proteases and cell wall modifying enzymes
apoplastic proteins were classified in functional groups according to their identification . most of the proteins found in the af can be related to plant defence mechanisms or cell wall metabolism. among the analysed proteins listed in table  <dig>   <dig> different pr proteins and  <dig> cell wall metabolism proteins were identified representing respectively 28% and 18% of classified proteins in grapevine leaf af. this protein distribution is quite similar to those observed in oilseed rape, rice, alfalfa or poplar  <cit> . however, in the af of maize, the proteins related to cell wall metabolism seem to be over represented with 58% of identified proteins compared to the 22% of defence-related proteins  <cit> . in contrast, the defence-related proteins in af of tobacco reach 45% of total identified proteins  <cit> .

the number of protein identification does not represent the relative quantity of the proteins. we estimated the quantity of each identified protein from the respective spot area on the 2d gel. the spot volume averages from the  <dig> biological repetitions were reported for each functional group. if co-migrations and multiple identifications were found in one spot, then peptides arbitrarily shared the spot quantity. figure  <dig> displays the distribution by relative quantity of each functional group of af proteins. thus, pr proteins represent  <dig> % overall of the apoplastic protein contents on 2-d gels; proteases, 16%; cell wall modifying enzymes,  <dig> %; peroxidases  <dig> % and 1% could also be linked to a stress response. the remaining  <dig> % of the apoplast proteins, in terms of relative protein content on 2-d gel, were not analyzed. these figures emphasize even more the part of defence related proteins in the grapevine leaf af, as it can be observed in tobacco  <cit>  whereas it is rather the cell wall metabolism related proteins that are the most represented in poplar or maize  <cit> .

pathogenesis-related proteins
pr proteins have a crucial role in plant defences  and were found in the grapevine apoplast, as previously described for other species after stress perception  <cit> . however in this study, plants were not challenged with pathogens. in such context, the function of identified pr proteins could be attributed to a preformed defence, creating an environment in the apoplast that is harmful to pathogens.

among all identified pr proteins, osmotin-like proteins  and thaumatin-like proteins , due to their redundancy and their relative spot intensities, were the major pr proteins found in the af, representing  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, of the overall af proteins detected on gels. they both belong to the pr- <dig> family  <cit> . osmotins have also been identified in the rice af but not in the af of alfalfa, poplar or maize  <cit> . osmotin-like proteins, representing at least one fifth of the proteome in the af, may play a crucial role in the grapevine apoplast without any pathogen attacks as it has been shown for drought stress  <cit> .

chitinases  and glucanases  are also highly present in the af, respectively  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the overall af proteins detected on gels. they are well characterized for their role in plant defences by degrading fungal cell walls  <cit> . identification redundancies among all these spots suggest a high rate of ptm in chitinases and glucanases, as it has been shown in wine in which several chitinases were found to be glycosylated  <cit> . presence of ptm on apoplastic chitinases and thaumatin-like proteins has also been suggested for tobacco and alfalfa  <cit>  and phosphorylation sites have been described on poplar apolastic thaumatin-like proteins  <cit> . moreover, pechanova et al. have shown that 30% of poplar af proteins are putatively glycosylated  <cit> . glucanases, chitinases and thaumatin-like proteins are also the pr proteins most commonly found in af of other plant species. moreover, no changes in pr protein levels were reported in the af proteomic analyses from stressed plants such as oligogalacturonide-treated arabidopsis or pathogen-infected soybean  <cit> . these studies suggest that a large amount of pr proteins are already constitutively expressed in the af.

other less common pr proteins have been identified in the af of other plant species but not systemically in all of them. for example the homologous ntprp <dig> protein from tobacco found in grapevine af with 82% homology  was also identified in poplar with 72% homology  <cit>  and in alfalfa  <cit> . pr <dig> proteins were also found in alfalfa but not in poplar, rice or maize  <cit> . interestingly, to our knowledge, the pr <dig> protein has been related to biotic or abiotic stress responses but never identified in af of unstressed leaves from other plant species. all together these data suggest that the spectrum of pr proteins identified in the grapevine af is larger that those previously observed in the af of other various plant species.

proteases
various proteases were identified in the af and they represented the second largest listed group with 16% of the overall af proteins in grapevine leaf . although this protein family is systematically found in other af plant species, this large amount of proteases in af grapevine could be related to the absence of protease inhibitors. indeed no protease inhibitors have been found in grapevine af while some protease inhibitors are found in maize, poplar or tobacco af  <cit> .

proteases exhibit a broad spectrum of physiological roles, and increasing evidence indicates that they play a key role in response to stress, leading to a harmful environment for pathogens  <cit> . among the proteases,  <dig> classes could be distinguished  subtilisin-like serine proteases  and  aspartic proteases.

subtilisin-like serine proteases  are known to activate plant defence related genes and could participate in building physical barriers against pathogens  <cit> . subtilisin-like proteases have been found in v. vinifera xylem sap  <cit>  and v. vinifera cell culture secretome  <cit> .

aspartic proteases  have also been proposed to be involved in the direct defence against pathogens and in signalling processes by releasing systemic signal molecules after fungal protein degradation  <cit> .

cell wall metabolism and remodelling enzymes
many glycoside hydrolases were found in the grapevine af and classified as cell wall metabolism proteins in table  <dig>  the proteins involved in the cell wall metabolism are consistently found in the af of other species studied so far. quantitatively, proteins involved in the cell wall metabolism represent 12% of the total amount of grapevine af proteins which is similar to the amount found in tobacco  but lower than those found in rice , poplar  or maize   <cit> . however, these values have to be considered with caution because according to different studies, some protein families are sometimes also included in the cell wall metabolism, like oxidases in rice or peroxidases in poplar and maize  <cit> . glycoside hydrolases are involved in metabolizing various carbohydrate compounds present in plant cell wall polysaccharides. they could also participate in glycan and glycolipid metabolism, energy mobilization, defence, symbiosis, signalling, as well as secondary plant metabolism and plant development  <cit> . glycoside hydrolase genes have been reported to be induced during viral infection and development in grapevine  <cit> . they interact with hemicellulases and pectic enzymes to hydrolyze hemicelluloses and pectins and participate in cell wall structural modifications  <cit> . moreover, it should be noted that in grapevine, glucosidases and galactosidases are the two most represented protein families in cell wall metabolism, as shown in almost all previous studied af proteomes.

other proteins with possible functions in plant defences
further proteins related to plant defence reactions against biotic and abiotic stresses were identified in the grapevine af. peroxidases  found in the af are ubiquitous proteins, which could participate in broad functions in plants such as lignification, auxin catabolism, wound healing and defence against pathogen infection  <cit> . peroxidases are commonly found in af and are related to cell wall metabolism in poplar and maize, oxidoreduction in alfalfa  <cit>  or stress in oilseed rape, poplar and maize  <cit> . superoxide dismutase  shown to be secreted  <cit>  is involved in the production of h2o <dig>  one of the first lines of plant defence  <cit> . serpin-like proteins  are able to inhibit serine protease targets and thus could interact with other proteins found in the apoplast  <cit> . their function in plant defence processes could be linked to a protective effect against exogenous proteolytic attack . heparanase  already found in poplar and maize af  <cit>  is indirectly involved in h2o <dig> degradation. at the same time, it generates phenolic compounds that may be used for cell wall fortification  <cit> . to our knowledge it is the first time that a heparanase homolog and a serpin-like protein are reported in grapevine.

CONCLUSIONS
the vic method has been optimized to allow protein recovery from grapevine af suitable for 2d-page analyses. the large-scale proteomic analysis presented in this study established a well-defined proteomic map of whole leaf and leaf apoplastic soluble proteins. these two proteomic maps have been released in the public world-2dpage database to be used as interactive reference maps. to our knowledge, this is the first detailed proteome study of the grapevine apoplastic fluid providing a comprehensive overview of the most abundant proteins present in the grapevine apoplast. this proteome map of the leaf af of vitis vinifera should represent an essential complement to available genomic tools and should prove useful for systemic high-throughput studies on molecular processes in the apoplast such as molecular interaction between grapevine and its natural pathogens. indeed, most of proteins found in the grapevine af could have a clear role in stress responses, in cell wall metabolism and remodelling. such data confirm that the apoplast has a major role in grapevine preformed defences.

