BACKGROUND
mycobacterium genus is constituted of several pathogenic species, including the m. tuberculosis complex  responsible for tuberculosis , m. leprae responsible for leprosy, and non-tuberculous mycobacteria , which are environmental potentially pathogenic species causing mycobacteriosis  <cit> . detection of mycobacteria by bacteriological tools is generally time-consuming and difficult because most pathogenic mycobacteria are slow growing, such that other microorganisms overgrow ntm colonies  <cit> . identification of mycobacteria based on metabolic criteria is also problematic as current methods do not allow for proper identification of mycobacterial species and sub-species. consequently, molecular tools have been developed using rrs, gyra, gyrb, hsp <dig>  reca, rpob, soda genes and 16s-23s internal transcribed spacer  genes, to detect and/or identify mycobacteria species by sequence analysis  <cit> . in order to detect mycobacterium genus in clinical and environmental samples, several studies have proposed targeting different loci of the 16s rrna gene  <cit> , or other housekeeping genes such as gyrb  <cit> , rpob <cit> , and hsp <dig> <cit> . nevertheless, in a recent study comparing several primers commonly used for mycobacterial detection or identification, we demonstrated that most of these primers present either a high specificity  but a low sensitivity , or conversely a high sensitivity but a low specificity  <cit> . indeed, some of these methods fail to detect several mycobacterial species by pcr, while other primers lead to detection of closely related genera  <cit>  which also belong to the corynebacterium, nocardia, rhodococcus, mycobacterium  group  <cit>  and which are commonly present in water and soil samples. consequently, new strategies must be used in order to design mycobacterium genus targets with high levels of specificity and sensitivity that will be useful for studying mycobacteria in their habitat.

as new mycobacterial sequences are added into genetic databases, our knowledge of mycobacterial genomes is increasing and this may help to design new primers and probes that will be both specific and sensitive. since the whole sequencing of the first mycobacterial genome in  <dig>  <cit>  by sanger sequencing method , the number of mycobacterial sequences has considerably increased due to advances in sequencing capacity and the appearance of high throughput sequencing techniques  <cit> . today, genbank database provides access to whole genomes of seven other strains of the mtc , two strains of m. leprae, and eleven species and subspecies of pathogenic  and non-pathogenic  ntm: m. abscessus , m. avium , m. avium subsp. paratuberculosis , m. gilvum , m. marinum , m. smegmatis , mycobacterium sp. jls , mycobacterium sp. kms , mycobacterium sp. mcs , m. ulcerans , m. vanbaalenii ,  <cit> . moreover, three whole genomes of other ntm species were sequenced and are currently assembled . this increasing number of completely sequenced mycobacterial genomes led to the development of the mycohit software, which permits gene- and protein-level comparisons across mycobacteria species,  <cit> . this software was originally developed to detect horizontal gene transfers and mutations among whole mycobacterial genomes  <cit> . however, mycohit should also be useful for developing new primers and probes for mycobacteria detection and quantification in environmental and clinical samples.

in this paper, we used this tool for screening sensitive and specific targets of mycobacterium spp.. we compared in silico proteins of whole mycobacterial genomes with those of non-mycobacterial genomes using the mycohit software, in order to find conserved sequences among mycobacteria that will not be shared with non-mycobacterial species. based on the screening results a primer pair and a probe targeting the atpe gene were designed and tested by real-time pcr. this novel target proved to be totally specific and sensitive. it also offers the advantage of targeting a gene present as a single copy in the genome. thus this new real-time pcr method appears promising for water quality survey, and should be useful for studying the ecology of mycobacteria in aquatic, terrestrial and urban environments.

RESULTS
specificity of genes commonly used for mycobacterial detection/identification
excluding rrs gene and its , and according to our strategy of genome comparison  most of the genes commonly used for mycobacterial species identification  code for proteins which present similar conformations in non-mycobacterial studied genomes . indeed, protein similarity levels of these genes, in comparison with m. tuberculosis h37rv genome, were higher than 80% for the other  <dig> mycobacterial genomes studied , and also for the  <dig> non-mycobacterial genomes studied .

selection of exclusively conserved proteins in mycobacterium spp. genomes
among the  <dig> predicted proteins of m. tuberculosis h37rv genome , about  <dig> %  presented protein similarities above 50% with the other studied mycobacterial genomes , and only  <dig> % of these hypothetical conserved mycobacterial proteins  displayed similarities less than 50% with the studied non-mycobacterial genomes . consequently, almost half of the m. tuberculosis h37rv predicted proteins are potentially present in the  <dig> studied genomes of cnm group members. we chose to decrease the number of candidate proteins by restricting the panel of studied proteins to those exclusively conserved in the mycobacterial genomes, focusing on m. tuberculosis h37rv proteins with similarity levels between 80% and 100% in comparison with other mycobacterial genomes , and less than 50% similarity levels in comparison with genomes  of the other cnm group genera. as a result, among the  <dig> predicted proteins of m. tuberculosis h37rv genome , we selected  <dig> proteins . among the  <dig> predicted proteins of m. tuberculosis h37rv proteins , the selected candidate proteins , were the subunits c  and a  of the atp synthase, the cyclopropane mycolic acid synthase  coded by the cmaa <dig> gene in m. tuberculosis h37rv , hypothetical pe or ppe family proteins , proteins coded by esxg, esxh and esxr genes in m. tuberculosis h37rv , and proteins such as a lipoprotein coding by lppm gene , an oxidoreductase , and a small secreted protein .
mycobacterium 
spp., 
corynebacterium 
spp., 
nocardia 
spp. and 
rhodococcus 
spp. genomes, in comparison with 
m. tuberculosis 
h37rv genome

atpe
-
-
lppm
esxg
esxh
esxr
pe5
ppe48
atpb
cmaa1
protein similarities were sorted  according to the strategy of genome comparison . only proteins presenting more than 80% of similarity with mycobacterium spp. genomes, and less than 50% of similarity with non-mycobacterial genomes, are shown.

mycobacterial molecular target design
among the  <dig> selected mycobacterial proteins, protein alignments revealed that the atp synthase subunit c , the oxidoreductase , and the small secreted protein , are the less polymorphous among the  <dig> ntm species studied  and even absent in other bacteria genus and thus seemed very promising for primers and probes design. the remaining  <dig> proteins that were selected, namely atp synthase subunit a, cmas coded by the cmaa <dig> gene, lipoprotein coding by lppm gene, as well as pe, ppe and proteins coded by esx genes esxg, esxh and esxr, were highly conserved in studies mtc species  but very polymorphous in the  <dig> ntm species studied , which did not allow us to design specific mycobacterial primers and probes, according to the rules of primer and probe design .

dna sequence alignment of the oxidoreductase and of the small secreted protein did not allow design of pcr primers with a minimal length of  <dig> oligonucleotides . only the dna sequence alignment of the atp synthase subunits c allowed designing a pcr primer pair and a probe. we designed the following primers and probe: forward primer fatpe 5′-cggygccggtatcggyga-3′ , with the probe patpe 5′-acsgtgatgaagaacggbgtraa-3′  which might be hydrolyzed by the reverse primer ratpe 5′-cgaagacgaacarsgccat-3′ .

real-time pcr validation
based on standard curve comparisons, our results showed reproducible amplification signals with similar ct values for each genome equivalents of tested mycobacterial strains: m. avium, m. fortuitum, m. intracellulare, m. gordonae, and m. chelonae . detection limit was estimated at about  <dig> genome equivalents for m. chelonae by real-time pcr reaction by testing repetition of dilution limits  whereas quantification limits were estimated at about  <dig> genome equivalents. in the positive collection all  <dig> mycobacteria species were positively detected by the real-time pcr method. this collection includes ntm species, leprae species and mtc species as tuberculosis and bovis . none of the non-mycobacterial environmental strains and none of the cnm collection strains  <cit> , were detected before the end of the  <dig> pcr cycles . these results indicate a sensibility of 100%  and a specificity of 100% .
mycobacterium avium
, 
m. fortuitum
, 
m. intracellulare
, and 
m. chelonae 
dna amplification using real-time pcr targeting 
atpe 
gene 

m. avium
m. fortuitum
m. intracellulare
m. gordonae
m. chelonae
ct  set at  <dig> . nd stands for not determined, ql for quantification limit, and dl for detection limit.
atpe 
gene  in different 
mycobacterium 
species  and non-mycobacterial microorganisms 

a
taqman® real-time pcr amplification was performed using forward primer fatpe, reverse primer ratpe and probe patpe in duplicate assays. nd stands for not detected sigmoidal curve.

aatcc: american type culture collection; cps: collection de la pitié-salpêtrière, paris, france; t: type strain; cip: collection de l′institut pasteur, paris, france; cmr: collection de microorganismes de radomski et al.  <dig>  <cit> , paris, france; dsm: dsmz-deutsche sammlung von mikroorganismen und zellkulturen, braunschweig, germany; ifm: culture collection of the research centre for pathogenic fungi and microbial toxicoses, chiba, japan.

environmental analyses
in order to compare with culture-based method   <cit> , and evaluate the impact of extraction methods on the quantification process by the new real-time pcr, we used two dna extraction procedures  on water distribution samples: a commercial kit  and a published phenol-chloroform extraction   <cit> . dna extraction from tap water significantly influenced the result of mycobacteria detection by atpe real-time pcr . detection levels from dna extracted by the kit  were significantly higher  than those from dna extracted by phenol/chloroform procedure . the percentage of positive samples was significantly higher  when performing the real-time pcr with the dna extracted by method b , compared to method c . in order to evaluate the new real-time pcr method, we compared the levels of mycobacteria detected in water distribution samples with a published culture method called method a  <cit> . using the method a, mycobacterium spp. colonies were obtained from 76% of tap water samples.

mycobacteria quantification in lake samples by real-time pcr targeting atpe gene, shows a vast diversity of mycobacteria concentration, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> ge/l in water column and neuston samples, and  <dig> to  <dig> ge/g dw  in sediment samples. comparison with the previously published methods targeting 16s rrna  <cit>  shows a high correlation between the results .

discussion
although gyra, gyrb, hsp <dig>  reca, rpob, and soda genes are appropriate for identification purposes  <cit> , our results emphasized that these genes seem inappropriate for specific detection of mycobacteria. indeed, their high similarities with non-mycobacterial genes make specific target design delicate. these new results are in accordance with our previous observations that the molecular targets which were designed based on gyrb  <cit> , rpob <cit>  or hsp <dig> <cit>  genes, had low specificity  <cit> . for example, the non-related helicobacter pylori show positive amplification with several mycobacterium specific primer pairs  <cit> . prospection for more specific targets in mycobacterial genomes seems consequently necessary in order to improve current detection tools based on proteins and/or dna. the new atpe real-time pcr method that we propose is just as specific, but more sensitive than the previously proposed rrs real-time pcr method which cannot detect some mycobacterial species  <cit> .

the proposed strategy is aimed at comparing mycobacterial and non-mycobacterial genomic proteins to reference genomic dna of m. tuberculosis h37rv, sorting proteins according to similarity requests and listing candidate proteins . we chose to perform protein-level comparisons in order to identify exclusively conserved proteins in mycobacterium spp. because non-coding regions, as intergenic regions and insertion sequences, are known to be less conserved than coding regions in m. tuberculosis genomes  <cit> . according to literature, our results emphasized that almost half of the m. tuberculosis h37rv predicted proteins are potentially present in the genomes of cnm group members. more precisely, mycobacteria belong to actinobacteria which may explain the presence of  <dig> to 73% shared genes among high g + c content microorganisms  <cit> . in addition, horizontal gene transfers from different bacteria widely present in soil or water, especially rhodococcus sp., nocardia sp. and streptomyces sp. were previously considered to have happened in the mycobacterium genus which may also explain the shared proteins with non-mycobacterial species  <cit> . these observations show that cnm group members must be taken into account in order to develop highly specific mycobacterial targets, considering that these bacteria are commonly found in aquatic and terrestrial environments  <cit> .

our study showed that  <dig> proteins exclusively conserved in the  <dig> mycobacterial genomes studied could be selected using our genome comparison strategy . only the apte gene could be used to design primers and a probe for mycobacteria detection. concerning the other genes, the sequence polymorphism among ntm species did not allow designing molecular targets for mycobacterium spp. detection. however, these genes could be of immunological or pathogenic importance. indeed, pe and ppe family proteins represent  <dig>  to  <dig> % of the genome coding capacity of several mycobacteria  <cit> , and are suspected to play a major antigenic role in immune response  <cit> . pe and ppe family proteins are often associated with mycobacterial esx gene clusters, which encode atp dependent specific secretion system  <cit>  and are required to export specific members of the 6-kda early secreted antigenic target  protein family  <cit> . together, atp dependent specific secretion system and esat- <dig> protein family play a major role in the virulence and life cycle of mycobacteria  <cit> . nevertheless, pe and ppe family proteins, and proteins coded by esx gene clusters are very small and polymorphous among genomes of the  <dig> ntm species compared . mycobacterial cell wall is also important in pathology, and could procure interesting pcr targets. for instance, several studies emphasized that cyclopropanation of the mycolic acids is common among pathogenic mycobacteria but rare among saprophytic species  <cit> . although having sufficient length, proteins cmas coded by the cmaa <dig> gene and lipoprotein coded by lppm gene in m. tuberculosis h37rv, were also polymorphous among genomes of the  <dig> ntm species compared  and thus could not be used to design a primer pair and a probe . nevertheless, polymorphism of mycobacterial mycolic acids is useful for mycobacteria identification  <cit> .

the atpe gene which codes atp synthase subunit c in m. tuberculosis h37rv genome  is exclusively conserved in the genomes of the  <dig> mycobacterial species studied , and its length and relative conservation among mycobacteria make it an adequate molecular target in order to detect mycobacterium genus. it is remarkable to see that the protein coded by atpe gene was also the target of the new antimycobacterial compound recently described: diarylquinoline r <dig>  <cit> . this compound shows a specific bactericidal effect on mycobacteria and none in other genera  <cit> . in addition, our in vitro results demonstrated the specificity of the atpe gene , which codes for the atp synthase protein subunit c. these results also showed that our strategy of target design based on mycohit software  gave very useful results for designing highly specific primers and might be applied to other microorganism clusters.

in vitro validation of the real-time pcr targeting the atpe gene showed a very high specificity and sensitivity, as well as reproducible quantification of different mycobacteria species. the new real-time method was tested on a realistic number of mycobacterial species including several slow and rapid growing ntm, although not all the described mycobacterial species were tested. in addition, application of this real-time pcr method to environmental samples showed that mycobacterium was detected in tap water samples. the discrepancy between the cultural and molecular techniques was previously described for other pathogens, and the lower level of prevalence obtained by the pcr methods was probably due to our concentration and extraction procedures. these protocol steps must be improved to detect low level of ntm even if the used spin column seemed more appropriate for dna extraction from environmental samples compared to classical phenol-chloroform extraction. moreover, culture method did not detect higher level of mycobacterial cells compared to the molecular one. both methods have advantages and drawbacks, and it may explain the differences observed. for instance, molecular methods could detect dead bacteria, or viable but uncultivable bacteria. however, the real-time pcr targeting the atpe gene allows more accurate mycobacterium spp. quantification, contrary to culture based method which is subjected to many drawbacks such as decontamination artifact , slow mycobacteria growth, clumping of mycobacterial cells, high hydrophobicity of mycobacteria and contamination of culture media by other fast growing environmental microorganisms  <cit> .

comparison of the method targeting atpe with previously described method targeting 16s rrna,  <cit> , showed a high correlation. moreover the method targeting atpe gene presents two major advantages over the method targeting rrs gene. first, the new method detects all the tested mycobacterial strains, while the method targeting rrs gene cannot detect isolates of m. celatum, m. heckeshornense, and m. leprae <cit> . second, the atpe gene is present in a single copy in the mycobacterium genomes, while the 16s rrna gene is present either in  <dig> or  <dig> copies in the genome  <cit> . when comparing samples it will be simpler to interpret the data with a stable gene copy number, and probably give a better accuracy of the mycobacterial concentration.

one of the limitations of this study is that only  <dig> mycobacterial species were tested in vitro as positive controls whereas more than  <dig> mycobacterial species have been described so far  <cit> . to date, we have confirmed the sensitivity of the atpe real-time pcr method using a large representative collection of mycobacterial species , including members of mtc , m. leprae species , slow growing ntm , and rapid growing ntm . given the broad diversity of mycobacterial species we have tested in this study, we expect the method to be applicable to all species within the mycobacterium genus. in addition, it is the first time that a sensitive and specific molecular target has been identified based on an in silico comparison of  <dig> mycobacterial  and  <dig> non-mycobacterial genomes .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, although our strategy did not take into account non-coding regions, such as insertion sequences, repetitive units, non-functional rna, and structural ribosomal rnas, the comparison of whole bacterial genomes for design of specific primers is a promising approach not only for mycobacteria but also for other cultured bacterial or archaeal groups for which whole sequenced genomes are accumulating in databases. metagenomic libraries from environmental samples which are increasingly performed in microbial ecology studies  <cit>  could also provide useful data for the design of specific targets toward uncultured bacteria and archaea. using these databases, mycohit, or other new software, may then be used to design new primers for real-time pcr detection or quantification, for in situ hybridization and other molecular tools. with this approach we were able to design primer pairs and a probe that target specific mycobacterial atpe gene, and could be used to detect and quantify very specifically mycobacteria in environmental samples. although the atpe gene may not be appropriate for microdiversity studies, it appeared to be very useful for specific detection of the genus mycobacterium in environmental samples. more generally, genome comparison used here showed its utility to identify specific genera’s targets, and could be used to identify specific proteins for antimicrobial design as previously emphasized  <cit> .

