BACKGROUND
proteins do not exist within a vacuum. much of the startling diversity of living organisms emerges only with the aggregate combinatorial complexity of protein-protein interactions 
 <cit> . as such, the discovery of physical interactions between proteins is often an essential step in the characterization of protein functions, providing insights into diverse cellular processes such as the fluxes of metabolic pathways, the logic of transcriptional activation, and the kinetics of signal transduction. this in turn forms the basis of understanding biological functions at the organismal scale, including mechanisms of environmental responses and the etiology of disease states.

despite the biological importance of ppis and the availability of high-throughput screening methods in recent years, experimentally-verified ppi networks remain sparsely populated, especially with respect to the amount of sequence data currently available. high throughput approaches such as automated yeast two-hybrid screens and tandem affinity purification/mass spectrometry have detected thousands of binary ppis in animal and fungal model organisms such as homo sapiens <cit> , saccharomyces cerevisiae <cit> , and drosophila melanogaster <cit> , yet the current size of the interactome belonging to the experimental workhorse of the plant kingdom, arabidopsis thaliana, only constitutes approximately 3% of its expected size
 <cit> . moreover, the lack of significant numbers of ppis for non-model species hinders the development of evolutionary studies concerning rewiring within the interactome
 <cit> .

the demand for additional ppis has led to the development of several methods for computational ppi prediction over the past decade. several groups have attempted to expand the a. thaliana interactome using statistical learning methodology and/or transfer of interaction annotation based on homology 
 <cit> . similar methods have been used to expand the number of network connections in the s. cerevisiae and h. sapiens proteomes. though each of these methods does have the potential to provide useful network information, each approach carries distinct disadvantages limiting its use on non-model species. the interolog-based approaches are limited to discovering ppis for only the most conserved proteins, as reflected by their relatively low discovery rates in a. thaliana <cit> . other methods rely on an ensemble of functional data, such as genome-wide measures of co-expression and co-localization, which is often not available for non-model organisms.

although many homologous proteins may evolve to become highly dissimilar at the primary sequence level, they often retain conserved structural and/or functional units known as domains. these domains may directly mediate interactions between proteins, as demonstrated by databases of domain-domain interactions such as domine
 <cit> . however, even in the absence of direct interaction, certain pairwise combinations of domains suggest a high probability of interaction. thus, domain-based approaches of ppi prediction have the potential to provide the advantages of the interolog-based approaches while maintaining utility for less-conserved proteins, especially if the approach also includes features more sensitive to fine-scale differences in amino acid content. there have been several recent attempts to infer ppis based on pairwise domain information. for example, singhal et al. used a genetic algorithm to discover domain-domain interactions that could be used as predictors of ppis
 <cit> . chen and liu used a domain-driven random forest classifier to predict ppis for s. cerevisiae <cit> . however, feature representation for the algorithm required vectors with several thousand entries, making its use computationally expensive for full-genome prediction. although these approaches are initially promising, there is a lack of publicly-available software that would enable domain-based ppi prediction on a genome-wide scale for non-model organisms lacking large experimental data sets.

here we present “elucidating network topology with sequence” , a binary ppi classifier that uses a random forest framework. ents is capable of efficiently and exhaustively evaluating all potential protein-protein pairs in a large eukaryotic genome using parallelization. we show that the method provides comparable or better predictions on recently experimentally-determined ppis than several existing methods and that such predictions are biologically plausible using the predicted interactomes of a. thaliana, p. trichocarpa, m. musculus, h. sapiens, and s. cerevisiae. scripts, instructions for use, and predicted ppis for several organisms are available at
http://ents.as.wvu.edu.

RESULTS
ents performance relative to experimental predictions
we assessed the performance of ents by calculating the area underneath the roc curve  for testing data consisting of no overlap with the training data at the level of protein interaction and no overlap with any protein pairs used to calculate pairwise domain lod scores . auc scores ranged from  <dig>  and  <dig>  in the yeast and human-trained classifiers, respectively, to a high of  <dig>  in the a. thaliana-trained classifier . the most important features for the classifier included those derived from the analysis of domain pairs and the output from the subcellular localization prediction program multiloc <dig> that measures the extent to which the amino acid contents and phylogenetic profiles of the query proteins matched particular cellular compartments .

ents performance relative to other classifiers
we obtained whole-genome predictions of ppis for the organisms on which the classifiers were trained , as well as for species that were not used in training the predictors. we find that the numbers of predicted interactions are highly similar between the training and prediction species, although the training species do have an enrichment of genes at the high confidence levels .

protein-protein interactions predicted using ents at several confidence cutoffs. the number of genes involved in the predicted interactions is shown in parentheses.

although most alternative classifiers performed similarly to ents on the testing data set , this set included interactions that were used to train the alternatives and could thereby inflate their sensitivities at a given specificity value. therefore, in order to assess the performance of ents on whole genome data relative to several alternative classifiers, we examined the frequency of positive predictions among sets of experimentally-determined ppis that were not used for training, testing, or calculation of pairwise domain odds in ents or used for training in the alternative classifiers. we obtained genome-wide predicted ppi datasets in s. cerevisiae <cit> , h. sapiens <cit> , m. musculus <cit> , and a. thaliana <cit> . the sizes of the predicted datasets varied greatly, so when making comparisons we reduced the sizes of the ents predictions to those of the alternative datasets following removal of predictions that corresponded to data used for ents training or calculation of pairwise domain odds in order to place bounds on the possible number of positive predictions and thereby provide fair comparisons.

for a. thaliana, we compared predictions to  <dig>  novel yeast two-hybrid and literature-curated ppis from a large-scale study of interactome evolution
 <cit> . we found that ents predicted more of these interactions than  <dig> of the  <dig> alternative classifiers . this included more than twice as many predicted interactions as the geisler-lee  and de bodt  sets, each of which used interolog approaches to make their predictions
 <cit> . by contrast, ents made a similar number of positive predictions to the atpid classifier  and less positive predictions than the pair classifier . those two approaches used machine learning techniques - naive bayes and svm, respectively - to combine interolog data with domain content and functional data such as co-expression, gene ontology similarity, and co-localization
 <cit> . strikingly, each classifier shared relatively few of its positive predictions with the ents predictor, with the highest number of interactions shared between the ents and pair classifiers, at  <dig> % of the ents predictions. due to the high number of novel interactions discovered within this single y2h experiment, we also used this to assess the frequency of experimentally-supported novel interactions among all interactions that were predicted between proteins within this set . we find that the ratio of experimentally-supported interactions to all positive predictions is higher for ents than all alternative classifiers except atpid. however, the actual true and false positive rates within this set are not possible to obtain due to the low sensitivity  of the y2h assay
 <cit> .

we find that the number of novel interactions predicted by ents is similar to those predicted by the pitre et al. pipe <dig> classifier  in s. cerevisiae and the pips classifier  in human
 <cit>  , as found through comparisons to a high-throughput yeast two-hybrid dataset in s. cerevisiae <cit>   and high-confidence interactions from two large-scale studies of human ppis 
 <cit> . again, relatively few predictions were shared between each pair of classifiers. the alternative classifiers differed substantially in their prediction methods. the pitre et al. classifier based its predictions on the pairwise-occurrence of short sequence motifs
 <cit> , while the pips classifier used naive bayes to combine sequence-derived features such as orthology and pairwise domain content with functional data such as gene co-expression, post-translational modifications, and co-localization
 <cit> . in mouse, we find that ents predicted many fewer novel interactions from a high-confidence set of literature-curated interactions  relative to the interolog-based predictor of yellaboina et al.  . the high number of mouse interologs inferred directly from human interactions is responsible for most of this disparity, as ents predicts more of the novel interactions  when the human-derived interologs are filtered out of the yellaboina et al. dataset.

although training was performed with the response defined as the presence of an interaction between two proteins, we also repeated the comparisons after restricting to a protein set that did not occur within the data used for calculation of domain odds or training the classifier. we did this in order to assess the ability of ents to predict beyond the scope of proteins for which there is interaction data currently available. for the species in which there were large numbers of these proteins among the novel interactions - a. thaliana  and m. musculus , we observe a decline in the relative number of novel interactions predicted relative to other classifiers , although the predicted interactions shared between ents and the alternatives remain low. the remaining two species contained relatively few proteins with novel interactions that were never used for calculation of domain odds . neither the truncated ents set nor the pipe <dig> classifier predicted any interactions within this s. cerevisiae set. ents did predict two of the novel interactions within the h. sapiens set, while the pips classifier failed to predict any novel interactions within this set.

biological plausibility of ppi predictions
the majority of predicted interactions for each organism are not experimentally verified, so we required indirect means of assessing their plausibility. this led us to assess the similarity of annotations and expression profiles among predicted interactors, excluding self-interactions to avoid upward bias. we find that ents-predicted interactors share kegg pathways significantly more often than expected by chance for all species . moreover, kegg and go similarity for the organisms with the largest experimentally-determined interactomes - h. sapiens and s. cerevisiae - matches or exceeds those of the experimentally-verified networks . m. musculus kegg similarity closely matches that observed for h. sapiens, while the measures for p. trichocarpa actually exceed those of a. thaliana at higher confidence levels . we also find that the mean semantic similarities between predicted interactors for go biological process , go cellular component , and go molecular function  are significantly greater than expected by chance . however, even though go categories were not included as predictors during random forest prediction, they were used during subcellular localization prediction, so their use as a verification criterion is somewhat circular.

lastly, we find that the distributions of pearson gene expression correlations between ents-predicted interactors are significantly enriched for co-expressed genes  in all organisms . the extent of enrichment varies by organism, with all confidence levels yielding significant enrichment of co-expressed genes in s. cerevisiae, h. sapiens, and a. thaliana. ents produces a significant enrichment of co-expressed genes for m. musculus at  <dig>  and  <dig>  confidence levels and for p. trichocarpa at all confidence levels except  <dig> . notably, however, the m. musculus experimentally-verified network is not significantly enriched for co-expressed genes under the microarray experiment used. several alternative prediction methods yield networks with much higher co-expression than those predicted by ents. however, several of these - pair, atpid, and pips - used co-expression as a predictor of protein interaction
 <cit> .

metabolic pathway linkages in p. trichocarpa
the connectivity of ppi networks permits insight into higher-order structures that largely remain hidden under non network-based analyses. several studies have demonstrated that biological networks are organized into pathways or modules, each of which contain highly connected groups of genes that may act semi-autonomously with respect to the action of the network as a whole
 <cit> . we used the predicted p. trichocarpa ppi network to infer a network of p. trichocarpa metabolic pathways, which we then analyzed for higher order structures.

we produced a network of pathway-pathway associations between poplarcyc v.  <dig> metabolic pathways
 <cit>  by placing edges between pathways that share a significant number of predicted ppis between the proteins underlying the pathway, excluding predicted self-interactions. pathway linkages are considered significant if the number of inter-pathway interactions exceeds the number found in  <dig> % of randomized networks. using the ents  <dig>  p. trichocarpa network, we find  <dig> significant pathway linkages . all but  <dig> pairs of pathway linkages are joined within the largest connected component of the linkage graph, and the groups not connected to the primary component include one pair of sulfate metabolic pathways and one pair of heavy metal transporters. out of the  <dig> total linkages, we find  <dig> that share at least  <dig> compound, significantly more than expected by chance . seven out of the  <dig> most highly connected pathways are involved in the biosynthesis of carbohydrates, with the sucrose biosynthesis pathway having the highest degree with  <dig> pathway linkages. the major entry point of reduced nitrogen, the glutamine biosynthesis pathway, is the fifth most highly connected pathway with  <dig> linkages. the remaining  <dig> most highly connected pathways include the flavonoid biosynthesis pathway and glycolysis.

we then used the mcl algorithm to produce clusters of pathways, which we assessed for enrichment of specific pathway classes . we find  <dig> out of  <dig> clusters that are significantly enriched for specific classes at a family-wise error rate of  <dig> , following a bonferroni correction. the largest cluster is highly enriched for the biosynthesis of phenylpropanoid derivatives , which include a large variety of secondary metabolites important for structure, defense against pathogens, and defense from herbivory. a second cluster is highly enriched for the biosynthesis of fatty acids and lipids  . the fatty acid biosynthesis cluster includes not only pathways for the production of phospholipds - primarily phosphatidylcholine - but also biosynthetic pathways for hydrophobic electron carriers such as quinones and quinols. this cluster also contains the rubisco shunt, which acts as a bypass to the calvin cycle in order to decrease carbon loss during carbohydrate to lipid conversion by approximately 40%
 <cit> . the other pathways in this cluster include the two glycolysis pathways, which act as the other main sources of pyruvate prior to fatty acid synthesis. two additional clusters are highly enriched for nucleoside/nucleotide biosynthesis  and nucleoside/nucleotide degradation , respectively . interestingly, while the degradation cluster only contains purine and pyrimidine degradation pathways and a single pyrimidine salvage pathway, the biosynthesis cluster also contains arginine biosynthesis pathways. this non-intuitive grouping is supported by work in a. thaliana that demonstrates the coordination of arginine biosynthesis with the biosynthesis of pyrimidines
 <cit> . amino acid biosynthesis pathways are divided over several clusters and therefore do not consistently show up as enriched within their clusters. however, the groupings of several amino acid biosynthetic pathways do reflect their biochemical commonalities. the single cluster with significant enrichment of amino acid biosynthesis groups two of the three amino acids derived from 3-phosphoglycerate - serine and cysteine - together with threonine, the only other amino acid besides serine to carry a hydroxyl group. the  <dig> branched chain amino acid biosynthetic pathways are also grouped together within cluster  <dig>  while the two proline biosynthetic pathways are grouped with glutamine and glutamate biosynthesis in clusters  <dig> and  <dig>  reflecting their common origins from α-ketoglutarate .

classes of metabolic pathway that were significantly enriched in clusters at a  <dig>  family-wide type i error rate. the number of pathways present in each cluster is given in parentheses in the first column, while the number of the given class of pathway within each cluster is given by parentheses in the second column.

predictions of human disease associations
the analysis of ppi networks has great potential for aiding our understanding of heritable disease, as the manifestation of a given pathology may result from the perturbation of entire network modules rather than the abrogation of a single gene
 <cit> . in particular, the physical associations between disease-related genes within a protein interaction network may signify a functional relationship between the corresponding disease states, including co-morbidity or alternative routes to a disease due to disruption of a shared pathway.

as a demonstration of the potential for ents predictions to provide insights into human diseases, we created a network of associations between human diseases found in the omim database. edges are inferred between diseases if the corresponding disease genes are predicted to produce interacting proteins within the ents  <dig>  confidence human ppi network and if these interactions are more frequent than expected by random chance . this leads to  <dig> disease associations covering  <dig> distinct pathologies and divided into  <dig> connected components . overall, we find the disease network to be significantly enriched for similarity in the literature relative to random networks  . the network contains a variety of intuitive and non-intuitive relationships between pathologies, many of which are based on interactions absent from the public databases.

as an example of intuitive relationships, one of the connected components consists entirely of associations between  <dig> cataract disorders , all of which are based on predicted interactions between crystallin proteins without experimental support in public databases. we also find a number of non-intuitive relationships with anecdotal support in the literature. these include associations within one connected component containing several myopathies, including cardiomyopathy, limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, myotilinopathy, and spheroid body myopathy. these three latter disorders have overlapping symptoms and are known to co-occur with cardiomyopathy
 <cit> , as indicated by the network . a disease characterized by progressive extraocular muscle weakness - horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis - is also associated with both cardiomyopathy and limb-girdle muscular dystrophy based on a predicted interaction between tcap and robo <dig>  though limb-girdle muscle weakness is not directly associated with this disorder in the literature
 <cit> . the last condition within the component, vesicoureteral reflux , is characterized by developmental abnormalities of the kidney and urinary tract. its relationship to cardiomyopathy and limb-girdle muscular dystrophy is indicated by a predicted interaction between tcap and robo <dig>  interestingly, although vur is not associated with disorders of the striated or cardiac muscle, it has been observed to co-occur with visceral myopathy in cases of chronic intestinal pseudo obstruction and berdon syndrome
 <cit> .

network properties and duplicate gene evolution
recently, several authors have proposed a relationship between the properties of biological networks and the evolution of duplicate genes. studies of paleopolyploid plants have demonstrated that functional categories generally associated with higher network connectivity tend to be retained in duplicate following whole genome duplication 
 <cit> . these observations led to the development of the gene balance hypothesis, which predicts that more highly connected genes should tend to be retained following wgd because of purifying selection for stoichiometric balance among interaction proteins
 <cit> . unfortunately, the lack of large-scale ppi data for paleopolyploid plants has largely precluded a thorough network-based analysis of this phenomenon. here, we used the predicted a. thaliana and p. trichocarpa  <dig>  confidence ppi networks to conduct a preliminary analysis of the relationship between wgd duplicate retention and  <dig> properties of the predicted network: the fraction of genes to which a given gene is connected  and the fraction of neighbors retained following the same wgd . based on logistic regression, the fraction of duplicated neighbors and the interaction term with degree centrality was positively associated with the presence of a duplicate paralog . these results were highly consistent with those generated when we restricted the analysis to genes with at least  <dig> neighbors . therefore, the duplication state of a given gene’s neighbors has a strong effect on its probability of retention, and this effect is enhanced with a higher number of interactions. this fits the predictions of the gene balance hypothesis in that the dependence on connectedness strongly depends upon the dosage of the interacting genes. interestingly, the degree centrality main effect is negatively associated with the odds of retention once the interaction term is taken into account, although this effect is not significant for the a. thaliana β/γ wgd and inconsistently significant for the α wgd.

estimated coefficients and significance for the logistic regressions on wgd retention in p. trichocarpa and a. thaliana using network properties degree centrality  and duplicated neighbors  from the ents  <dig>  confidence networks. p-values are based on confidence intervals generated from fitting the model on resampled data  <dig>  times.

*p <  <dig> ; **p <  <dig> ; ***p <  <dig> .

discussion
ents performance
in this study we find that our random forest-based classifier, ents, can predict biologically meaningful ppis both within the species on which we trained the classifier and within species sharing a relatively distant common ancestor with the training species. these results are comparable or favorable to existing methods of protein interaction prediction, including several that used experimentally-obtained functional data as predictors. this demonstrates that researchers may generate a high quality set of probable ppis prior to performing extensive functional experimentation. therefore these predicted ppis may serve as a basis for the development of functional hypotheses in newly-sequence organisms. notably, even in the cases in which ents predictions were outperformed - the a. thaliana pair predictor and the m. musculus yellaboina interolog approach - the majority of interactions predicted by ents were not predicted by the alternative approach. this suggests the value of using ents as part of an ensemble rather than relying on any single classifier. this may be particularly effective when large amounts of functional data are available, as with pair, or an orthologous interactome is well-covered, as with the yellaboina interolog approach.

the performance of ents does vary significantly between organisms, with the auc ranging from a low of  <dig>  in s. cerevisiae to a high of  <dig>  in a. thaliana. these differences likely arise due to functional differences between the positive datasets. the contrast in performance between the a. thaliana and non-plant classifiers may be attributed to biases in the interaction data currently available for these organisms - particularly a. thaliana. with the exception of a recent high-throughput study that was not used for training
 <cit> , a. thaliana studies of ppis within the literature have focused on testing of specific hypotheses concerning proteins of high a priori importance. this can result in sets of highly clustered, high degree nodes within literature-curated ppi networks
 <cit> . such clusters have likely led to an enrichment of a. thaliana interacting pairs with high pairwise domain odds . it also explains the decline in relative performance for a. thaliana predictions on proteins that were never used for training or calculation of pairwise domain odds . in contrast, the multiple high throughput studies of binary ppis conducted on h. sapiens <cit> , s. cerevisiae <cit> , and d. melanogaster <cit>  contribute a more unbiased view of the interactome than for a. thaliana. the more comprehensive experimental datasets have yielded a number of interactions that are less amenable to ents detection due to either an absence of pfam domains in one or both of the proteins in the pair or because of the presence of domain pairs infrequently associated with physical interaction. testing performance based primarily on literature-curated sets may therefore give results that are inconsistent with the true global protein interaction network. this highlights a necessary caveat present for all statistical learning methods - the performance of the classifier on novel data depends on the scope of its training.

although the most important features for ents classification are based on domain composition, we also find subcellular localization information from multiloc <dig> to be highly important for prediction of ppis. interestingly, the most important multiloc <dig> features tend to be the svm amino acid scores, which indicate how well the total amino acid content of a protein matches a particular subcellular compartment
 <cit> . these measures provided ents with more sensitivity to subtle changes in amino acid content than the domain-based scores, which rely on the gain or loss of conserved pfam domains. for instance, the duplicated genes from the salicoid wgd in p. trichocarpa only share 56% of their predicted neighbors on average in the  <dig>  confidence network despite high pairwise similarity in domain content. this allows for the possibility that ents may predict rewiring of ppis within networks following duplication, although confirmation of this would require experimental validation.

interpretation of ents interactions
we trained ents using sets of known physically-interacting pairs of proteins. therefore, proteins predicted to interact by ents should be interpreted as having a high potential for physical interaction, given that they are present within the same location at the same time. each set of predicted interactions represents a more than 1000-fold reduction in the number of total possible interactions for the organism. however, because we want to permit the use of this classifier across a variety of organisms without broad functional data, we do not include expression or proteomics data as features in the set of predictor variables. as such, researchers should confirm all predictions with functional data. furthermore, ents has limited capability for predicting interactions between proteins that either lack conserved domains or that contain domains never before experimentally observed within physically interacting proteins. this precludes the detection of some novel interactions, although other researchers may wish to append functional data to the set of ents predictor variables for their organism in order to predict these interactions through a greater variety of evidence sources.

applications of ents networks
the elucidation of ppi networks permits tremendous insight into both cellular and evolutionary processes. in humans, several studies have used experimental ppi data to map relationships between human diseases based on causative similarity and infer causative disease genes within large implicated linkage regions
 <cit> . however, such studies have reported limitations due to the lack of detected interactions with shared disease etiology. here, we have shown that ents is capable of yielding novel predicted interactions with relevance to known co-occurring human diseases. we contend that these predicted interactions may be used by biomedical researchers to narrow the scope of regions implicated in genome-wide association studies in addition to providing predictions on which to base more targeted searches for candidate loci. the latter function may prove especially vital due to the increasingly visible role of rare de novo mutations, particularly cnvs, in the etiology of disease
 <cit> . furthermore, the generality of our approach across species allows the potential for yielding insight into a variety of agriculturally important diseases in non-model species that are currently only understood through large linkage regions based on qtl and relatively small gwas studies. we have also shown that ents is capable of revealing the higher-order structure of metabolic networks in a plant species without extensive experimental data, p. trichocarpa. ents-predicted physical interactions yield a significant enrichment of associations between pathways that share compounds and group sets of coordinated pathways such as pyrimidine and arginine biosynthesis
 <cit> . such insights may be used to inform targets of selection in breeding programs in order to increase the output flux from key pathways.

we have demonstrated that ents has great potential for yielding insight into network evolution in non-model species across the plant, animal, and fungal kingdoms. networks have come to play an increasingly central role in evolutionary studies
 <cit> , but a rigorous analysis of network evolution requires the development of whole-genome networks for many non-model species. here, we have shown that the topological properties of ents-predicted networks, including the first whole-genome interactome for p. trichocarpa, are related to the probability of wgd duplicate gene retention following independent duplication events in a manner consistent with the predictions of the gene balance hypothesis. specifically, we have shown that the duplication state of a gene’s neighbors has a strong impact on the probability of retention following wgd and that this effect is enhanced at higher connectivity, which is consistent with the hypothesis of a selective drive to maintain stoichiometric balance between interacting proteins. interestingly, the degree centrality main effect was only significant for the p. trichocarpa salicoid wgd and the a. thalianaα wgd. in the case of p. trichocarpa, the negative degree centrality coefficient leads to an inverse relationship between connectivity and the probability of duplicate retention in the presence of few duplicated neighbors. this decrease is, again, consistent with the gene balance hypothesis, as the effects of stoichiometric imbalance are likely to become more extreme at higher connectivity and would therefore favor a singleton state when interconnected genes are also singletons. intriguingly, this effect is also present in the a. thaliana duplications, though it is highly diminished with respect to p trichocarpa and shows inconsistent statistical significance. one explanation is that a. thaliana has undergone a greater degree of fractionation following its last two wgds than has p. trichocarpa following the salicoid wgd
 <cit> , so the influence of connectivity is more apparent in the latter. this suggests that the p. trichocarpa duplicate genes most at risk for future nonfunctionalization include those with low degree centrality and few duplicated neighbors.

CONCLUSIONS
we have introduced an efficient new approach that enables prediction of protein-protein interactions on a whole genome scale based entirely on information that can be derived from primary sequence data. this is a potentially groundbreaking addition to the standard toolbox for newly-sequence non-model genomes, which are rapidly proliferating. the networks derived from our protein-protein interaction predictions are realistic from the standpoint of consistency with co-expression and shared functional annotations of connected genes. furthermore, we have shown that our predictions can reveal supported relationships among emergent phenotypes such as human disease states and the coordination of metabolic pathways. finally, we have demonstrated that our inferred networks can reveal subtle details of genome-scale evolution. because the method can readily be applied on a large scale to phylogenetically-diverse organisms, we anticipate that large-scale comparative analyses will provide insights into the mechanisms of network structure evolution.

