BACKGROUND
the genus pinus, with approximately  <dig> extant species, is the largest genus of conifers and one of the most widely distributed tree genera in the northern hemisphere  <cit> . pines are an integral component of many northern hemisphere ecosystems, and they have a well-documented, rich fossil record  <cit>  stretching back as much as 130– <dig> million years  <cit> . many studies have focused on this genus, particularly with regard to its phylogenetic relationships , ecology  <cit> , biogeography  <cit> , and the timing of diversification events  <cit> . there exists a wealth of molecular, morphological and fossil data on the genus. however, no study has yet made full use of all existing data to generate both a fully resolved phylogenetic tree that includes all extant species and a time calibration of such a tree. such an extensively dated and comprehensive phylogenetic tree will allow us to fill significant gaps in our understanding of the evolutionary and ecological history in pines  <cit> .

the genus pinus has traditionally been divided into two major clades based on the number of vascular leaf bundles   <cit> , and previous studies had not been able to consistently resolve relationships within these major clades. in  <dig>  gernandt et al.  <cit>  proposed a new classification based on phylogenetic trees inferred from two chloroplast genes, dividing the pines into two subgenera , four sections  and  <dig> subsections . although taxonomically comprehensive and widely accepted, their study relied exclusively on sequences from the matk and rbcl genes, and was thus unable to resolve relationships within several of the subsections. subsequent studies have improved phylogenetic resolution, but have mostly focused on specific subclades . more recently, parks et al.  <cit>  analyzed the entire chloroplast genome for  <dig> pine species, which largely confirmed the structure proposed by gernandt et al.  <cit>  and provided better resolution for much of the tree. however, despite the detailed chloroplast data and the availability of potential fossil calibration points, comprehensive time-calibrated molecular phylogenetic trees remain lacking.

sound estimations of divergence times within phylogenetic trees benefit from using many fossils that are evenly distributed across the tree, a strategy that better accounts for rate variation when using relaxed molecular clock models . in addition, multiple calibrations can overcome negative effects from errors in dating and placement of single fossils  <cit> . in the genus pinus, a rich fossil record exists, with the first fossil appearing in the early cretaceous  <cit> . besides mesozoic pine fossils , numerous fossils have been described from the cenozoic era and were placed within various pine clades . despite a rich fossil record, most recent time calibrations of pine divergences have used very few  fossils  <cit>  . some of these fossils are controversial regarding their phylogenetic assignment and age , leading to inconsistent age estimates of the origin of pines and divergence times of subsections therein. there remains a great need to include a larger number of carefully evaluated fossil constraints, preferably evenly distributed across all major clades, in order to improve our understanding of pine evolution.

although bayesian methods using a relaxed molecular clock are widely accepted for time calibration of molecular trees, there is ongoing debate regarding the best strategy to convert fossil information into calibration information  and methods are still under development  <cit> . in the widely and commonly used node dating method  , the geological age of the oldest fossil of a specific clade is transformed into a calibration density  to assign a known age range to the stem node  of the respective clade in the phylogenetic tree  <cit> . the probabilistic calibration prior accounts for uncertainties underlying the age of the fossil and the likelihood that the true divergence occurred before its first appearance in the fossil record  <cit> . however, there is no objective way to define the calibration densities and researchers have used different approaches to define them  <cit> . recently, the fossilized birth-death  method has been introduced as a new approach for time calibration of molecular phylogenetic trees  <cit> . this method acknowledges that extant species and fossils are both part of the same evolutionary process  <cit> . no arbitrary calibration densities on internal nodes need to be defined and fbd allows all fossils to be included as ancestors or extinct tips within a clade   <cit> . the fbd method therefore overcomes some of the known shortcomings of the nd method  and is considered promising  <cit> . while fbd has the potential to be widely used in the future  <cit> , only a few studies have directly compared these two dating methods  <cit> . no conclusion has been reached to date as to whether estimated divergence times are in agreement between the two methods .

here, we build the first comprehensive phylogenetic tree of pinus calibrated with a large number of fossils across all major clades, using both the nd and the fbd method. more specifically, our objectives are to:  provide a revised and well-supported time-scale for the evolution of major subsections of pines;  test the sensitivity of age estimates to different dating methods and fossil sets; and  provide a revised list of fossils and their phylogenetic placement within the genus for use in further studies on pine evolution.

to achieve these goals we infer phylogenetic trees based on eight chloroplast sequences within a bayesian relaxed molecular clock framework using both the fbd and the nd method . in nd we apply two different approaches for assigning calibration densities on nodes. the first approach follows what was applied in previous pine studies  <cit>  and is presented for comparative purposes only. this approach is based on calibration densities that reflect the geological timescale of the layers in which the fossils were excavated. this approach is problematic because it constrains calibration densities on nodes too tightly, and does not reflect the uncertainty in our prior knowledge . we therefore defined an alternative approach where we constructed calibration densities of increasingly higher uncertainty with increasing age, which better accounts for uncertainty in the a priori information of calibration constraints. in both methods  we estimated the absolute age scale of the phylogenetic trees from two sets of fossils for each setting . the two fossil sets differ in our confidence regarding fossil ages and phylogenetic assignments. our study therefore provides improved estimates of divergence times in pines.fig.  <dig> flow chart illustrating the different dating methods applied. we used both the node dating  and the fossilized birth-death  method. in nd, we defined the calibration densities on calibration nodes either with narrower  or broader  log normal priors on age. ndu is the analog of ndb with uniform priors. in fbd, we defined the fossil age either using a minimum age  or an age range . each dating method was carried out with a smaller  or larger  fossil set . since node dating only uses the oldest fossil per node, this resulted in fewer fossils used in the small and the large fossil set in nd compared to fbd. a control run  was additionally executed for fbd in which exactly the same fossils as in nds/l were used




RESULTS
divergence times in pinus
our fbd analyses suggest a pinus crown lineage divergence in the early cretaceous , irrespective of whether the large fossil set  or the small fossil set  was used. the estimates from the nd method defined with broader calibration densities on nodes  support a late jurassic to late cretaceous age, with the highest probability in the early cretaceous, regardless of which fossil set was used. the ndb results favor a slightly younger age for crown pinus than fbd . in contrast, the nd approach based on the geological time scale defined with narrow calibration densities  estimates significantly younger, late cretaceous divergence ages with both fossil sets . in fbd, the ages of the crown nodes within the two subgenera  are dated similarly to the late cretaceous to eocene . in the nd method, the major split within subgenus strobus  is dated to the late cretaceous to eocene . while in nd, the major split within subgenus pinus is dated to the paleocene to eocene . fig. 3b illustrates the crown age estimates of sectional and subsectional nodes for the methods and approaches used. maximum clade credibility trees  of all dating methods, approaches and fossil sets are provided in the additional file  <dig>  most node age estimates in previous studies are younger than our fbd and ndb results, as well as many of our ndn results . one exception is the study of eckert and hall  <cit> , who estimated older ages for several deep divergences in pinus which lie outside of our estimated 95% cis . a number of other node estimates in eckert and hall  <cit>  are also older than our corresponding mean posterior ages, although they still overlap with the estimated 95% ci found in this study .fig.  <dig> inferred maximum clade credibility  tree from results of the fbdl method . nodes with red dots indicate bayesian posterior probabilities lower than  <dig> , while all other nodes have posterior probabilities higher than  <dig> . light blue lines on nodes represent the 95% highest posterior density  of the inferred phylogenetic trees. the node labels  indicate those nodes represented in fig.  <dig>  the geological timescale is in million years and the paleogeographic maps on top were redrawn from  <cit> 


fig.  <dig> comparison of estimated node ages of the  <dig> major clades of pinus across all applied dating approaches. a: densities of effect sizes originate from a mixed-effect model and illustrate to what degree the estimated node ages differ among dating approaches  and among fossil sets . the 95% confidence intervals of effect sizes are illustrated with a line below the density curves. non-overlap of these intervals indicates significant difference on node ages among all  <dig> nodes. b: boxplots illustrate the estimated node ages across dating approaches and fossil sets for the major clades . whiskers span the 95% highest probability density , while boxes span the 50% hpd, with the median node age indicated by a vertical bar. the x-axis indicates the geological time in million years. symbols represent average node ages as estimated in the following studies: gernandt et al.  <cit>  , illustrating estimates resulting from two different calibration scenarios; hao et al.  <cit>  ; willyard et al.  <cit>  , illustrating the estimates based on both the chloroplast and the nuclear sequence data, but only presenting results of their 85 ma calibration scenario as this was indicated to be more realistic; hernandez-leon et al.  <cit>  ; he et al.  <cit>  ; leslie et al.  <cit>  ; geada lopez  <cit>  ; eckert and hall.  <cit>  . the following abbreviations are used. fbd: fossilized birth-death method; nd: node dating method; l: analyses based on the large fossil set; s: analyses based on the small fossil set; n: narrow calibration priors in nd based on the geological age of the respective fossil; b: broad calibration priors in nd




comparison of dating methods
the confidence intervals of many of our node age estimates overlap regardless of the method used to estimate them, but posterior mean values are often significantly different among the various techniques. among the  <dig> nodes representing crown nodes of subsection and higher-level clades , a few consistent patterns stood out. first, the fbd method estimates significantly older ages than the nd method, irrespective of the specific calibration employed or fossil set used . second, ndn  estimates significantly younger ages than does ndb , particularly for the crown age . last, the fbdl analysis  provides significantly older estimates than does the fbds analysis . in both nd methods, in contrast, applying the large set of  <dig> fossils leads to slightly but significantly younger age estimates than the smaller set . control runs of the fbd method using the same  <dig> and  <dig> fossils as in nd reveal very similar node ages as in fbds  and fbdl  except at the crown node of pinus .

sensitivity of dating methods to prior settings
we examined the relative influence of the probabilistic calibration priors and sequence data on the bayesian age estimates in each method  by comparing the effective prior distributions to the posterior distributions of the calibration nodes. we found significant differences across dating methods: the calibration priors in the ndn method are very similar to the posterior age estimates, revealing the strong influence of the defined calibration priors on estimated node ages. in contrast, the ndb and fbd approaches show increasingly lower influences of the calibration priors, indicating a lower sensitivity of posterior age estimates to calibration priors. this pattern emerges irrespective of the fossil set used .

sensitivity of node age estimates to single fossil exclusions



discussion
divergence times in pinus
the early cretaceous crown age of pinus inferred in our study  is approximately  <dig> myr older than the age estimated in most previous studies  <cit>  . to our knowledge, only one other study estimated a similarly old crown age in pinus  <cit> , but that study incorporated the fossil p. belgica  <cit> , which was not used in this study because its exact phylogenetic assignment and age are uncertain  <cit> . our estimated crown age is consistent with the recent discovery of the oldest fossil attributed to the genus pinus , which has been dated to the early cretaceous   <cit>  but was not included in our study due to its disputed placement  <cit> . although our genus crown age estimates are similar to the one found in the study using p. belgica, the crown ages of subgenera and sections inferred in our study are clearly younger than their estimates  <cit>  .

in line with the early crown age of the genus pinus, we also found strong evidence for a late cretaceous to eocene origin of the crown of the two pinus subgenera , which is older than the eocene to oligocene origin suggested in most previous studies  <cit> . further, most subsections were thought to have emerged during the miocene  <cit> , but our results support this conclusion in only few of the subsections . other subsections date back to the oligocene or the eocene as supported by 95% ci, or even in some cases to the paleocene .

the generally older divergence times found in this study have consequences for our understanding of the evolution and biogeographic history of pinus, because splits among important clades may be relevant for understanding changing climates and tectonic configurations . for example, corridors for high latitude migration became increasingly reduced as the atlantic ocean widened and the climate started to fluctuate over the cenozoic  <cit> , which may have affected the origin and diversification of major clades. the divergence of section pinus and section trifoliae  may reflect the separation of laurasia into eurasia and laurentia  <cit> , which took place in the late cretaceous   <cit> . thus, an age older than ~66 ma for this node is consistent with this geologic scenario and appears to be reflected in our fbd ages.

our understanding of the biogeographic history of pines, and its relationship to climatic drivers and geographic constraints, requires accurately dated divergences. this is particularly true for the major crown clades that diversified over the cenozoic, and whose current diversity has been interpreted to relate to major climatic shifts over the late paleogene and neogene. it is worth noting that although our divergence ages are generally older than those inferred in most previous studies, the majority of extant pine diversity is still estimated to have diverged in the miocene or later. this may suggest that different drivers were important for the major sectional splits compared to the more recent burst of diversification.

possible reasons for older divergence times
several reasons are likely responsible for the discrepancies in estimated node ages between our study and previous work. our divergence estimates may differ from other studies because we have used  more fossils,  more extant taxa, and  different model settings, the effects of which we discuss in the following. dating methods based on only few fossils are very sensitive to the assignment of fossils and defined calibration priors, where assignments can lead to biased substitution rate estimates  <cit> . if the prior on divergence times derived from a single fossil is inaccurate, then the estimated ages of all nodes will be affected because there are no other calibration points that can mitigate the effects from this error  <cit> . even if the single used fossil is accurately placed in the phylogeny, age estimates of nodes distant from the calibration point may still be prone to inaccuracies  <cit> . the greater number and more even phylogenetic distribution of fossils used in this study is an important step towards a more reliable calibration of the molecular clock, and therefore age estimates, within pinus. our study also included more extant species than most previous studies, and it has been shown that taxon sampling can have an influence on divergence time inference  <cit> , especially under pronounced lineage rate variation  <cit> . for example, older age estimates were found with increasing taxon sampling in malagasy tenrecs  <cit> . finally, differences in models themselves relative to other studies may explain our older age estimates. for example, we applied different branching process priors  than previous pine studies   <cit> , which has been shown to result in older ages in cycads  <cit> . nevertheless, it has also been shown in pines that taxon sampling, clock constraints, the choice of specific sequences, and the selection of silent sites versus all sites had a less pronounced influence on mutation rate estimates  than the choice of fossils and their phylogenetic placement  <cit> .

effects on divergence time estimations in our study
in the following paragraphs, we discuss in more detail the differences in age estimates found among the different methods and fossil sets used in this study.

effect of dating method
the reasons for observed differences in age estimates between fbd and nd are potentially manifold, but are primarily due to fundamental differences between the models at the core of fbd and nd methods . the few existing analyses that have compared fbd and nd did not reveal a general trend towards over-or underestimation of node ages  <cit> . in our study the reason for observing significantly older age estimates in fbd than in nd is primarily due to differences in the placement of fossils within the methods and not to the larger fossil numbers used in fbd. indeed, fbd runs with exactly the same  <dig> or  <dig> fossils as in nd  revealed node ages very similar to those inferred when using the  <dig> or  <dig> fossils of the fbd runs presented here . in nd, we placed fossils at the stem node of the assigned clade, while in fbd we let the same fossil be placed anywhere along the branch descending from the stem node to the crown node, or even anywhere within the crown clade. the minimum age of the stem node in fbd will only be identical to nd if the fossil placement is exactly at the stem node. the farther the fossil is placed away from the stem towards the crown , the older the minimum age of the stem node will be. when using the “age-range” approach in fbd, the described effect will be even stronger, leading to even older ages, which is what we found . while the “tip dating” approach we used for fbd estimates only the minimum possible age range for the divergences, the “age range” approach in fbd reveals the full range of possible node ages, therefore extending these ages further back in time .

erroneous young age estimates in nd are possible if the fossils selected as calibrations do not represent the oldest member of its assigned clade, or if the probabilistic calibration priors, which should correct for this uncertainty, are too narrowly defined. the arbitrary assignment of probabilistic calibration priors is one of the major shortcomings in nd, and age estimates of nd are sensitive to the defined probabilistic calibration priors  <cit> . no objective approach has yet been suggested to define priors for divergence times, even though it has been shown that incorrect calibration constraints negatively affect divergence estimates  <cit> . there is a fundamental trade-off between defining priors that are too narrow  or too broad , and this sensitivity is visible in our study. first, we found significant differences in the age estimates between ndn and ndb , where different density shapes were used . second, the prior sensitivity analyses  revealed that posterior age estimates in ndn are significantly more sensitive to the effective priors of calibration constraints than in ndb, whereas fdb is least sensitive. unless one is certain about narrow prior densities, it seems more conservative to define them broadly and allow for a more balanced influence of both the molecular data and the priors of calibration densities. in our study, we have more confidence in the age estimates of ndb than of ndn, which is consistent with the older divergence times for pines compared to previous studies. the narrow distributions defined in ndn are regarded as problematic as they clearly do not reflect our prior knowledge about paleontological data in pines.

another known shortcoming in nd is the difficulty in specifying multiple node calibrations, especially when one node is ancestral to another  <cit> , which often occurs when many fossils are used within a clade. as the priors of these multiple constraints interact, the effective prior distributions may be quite different from the initially set prior distributions that were defined based on biological and paleontological knowledge  <cit> . this is also the case in our study , where some effective prior distributions of ages were slightly shifted compared to the initially set priors . one of the biggest differences was found in the prior on the calibration node of the fossil p. premassoniana. this may reflect the long branch of extant p. massoniana, which had probably already emerged during the oligocene, while the assigned fossil age is younger. the older posterior distribution suggests an older age should be assigned to this node, because the fossil likely does not represent the true age of the divergence in this lineage. another example where the specified and effective priors differ is in the case of the calibration constraint based on the fossil p. storeyana. here, it is possible that this fossil should be placed in the crown of the “attenuatae-group” within subsection australes .


effect of fossil choice and assignment
to use a fossil for calibration in the phylogeny, its phylogenetic placement should be unequivocally identified: a task that is not easy given the scarcity of comparable morphological data sets for extinct and extant taxa  <cit> . in pines in particular, we often encounter the “early but risky” or “safe but late” fossil dilemma  <cit> , where a fossil can either be assigned to a more exclusive clade where its affiliation is doubtful , or more conservatively to a more inclusive clade that could reliably contain the fossil but may lead to overly young age estimates   <cit> . despite the fact that gernandt et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that the combination of morphological and molecular data could improve divergence time estimates and phylogenetic relationships within pinaceae, we lack highly detailed morphological matrices for fossil and extant pinaceae. such matrices are rarely available  <cit>  or are difficult to apply to fragmentary plant remains that lack the full richness of morphological and anatomical information of completely reconstructed taxa . to overcome these problems but still use fossils, we assigned fossils to particular clades based on assumed synapomorphies derived from the distribution of traits among extant taxa. we explicitly tested two different hypotheses in our study: a small fossil set including only “safe” fossils based on traits that we assume to be clear synapomorphies for living clades, and a larger fossil set including additional “risky” fossils where we relaxed the criterion of unambiguous synapomorphies. for the taxonomic assignment of these two sets we relied on the original description and illustrations. because it is possible that some of these taxonomic assignments are incorrect, we also conducted experiments with alternative hypotheses of fossil placements . we found that the age estimates inferred in this study were robust against removing the most doubtful fossils . the 95% ci of the age distributions of the  <dig> major nodes  inferred by these alternative fossil sets overlap the 95% ci of the standard fossil sets used in the primary analyses in most cases . exceptions were found at the crown node of the genus pinus, where the 95% ci of ndb without the old fossils  and without an outgroup  resulted in unrealistic old ages. despite the overlapping 95% intervals between age estimates of different fossil sets, the alternative fossil hypotheses show a tendency towards slightly younger posterior mean age estimates for most of the  <dig> nodes compared to the primary fossil sets.

which fossil set?
some calibration points are more inevitably more reliable than others  <cit> , and adding many unreliable fossils could bias estimates of rates and dates. if the addition of the seven “riskier” fossils  to the smaller fossil set had considerably influenced age estimates, one could expect that the estimated ages would change noticeably when removing these fossils from the dating analyses. we would also expect that this effect would be more severe than when leaving out one of the  <dig> “conservative” fossils. including those additional seven fossils indeed led to significantly older  or significantly younger  posterior mean ages, but the differences were inconsistent between the methods as well as fairly small. the 95% credible intervals for most nodes were also overlapping between the small and the large fossil sets. more importantly, the fossils associated with the greatest node age sensitivity  did not include any of the seven “riskier” fossils.

in summary, our age estimates are robust towards single and multiple changes in the fossil set, and the distribution of the larger fossil set across the phylogenetic tree is defensible, as we find similar results regardless of the fossil set used. using the larger fossil set allows for the inclusion of all available information to calibrate the relaxed clock models for improved divergence time estimation in pines.

CONCLUSIONS
our study shows that the divergence time estimations depend on the dating method used, as well as the number of fossils and their phylogenetic placement. divergence time estimations are dependent on different assumptions inherent in the dating analyses, but are especially affected by the phylogenetic placement of fossils. we urge that future studies relying on dated phylogenetic hypotheses of pines embrace the uncertainty stemming from different calibration approaches, and that the implicit assumptions between dating approaches are considered. this will increase the robustness and confidence in tested hypotheses and improve our understanding of trait evolutionary processes and their ecological and evolutionary implications.

